1.1.1	The word "atha" means "immediately after". The authority of the injunction is after the study of the Samhita. We shall describe the injunctions of the Samhita, the rites of peace, prosperity, sorcery, miracles, etc. are described in the injunctions of Samhita. There are three kinds of rites: injunctions, non-injunctions, and rites of elevation. The injunction is of three kinds: perception, inference, and verbal testimony.
1.1.2	That injunction is based on the Veda and is established by the Gopath Brāhmaṇa.
1.1.3	What is meant by the term "scripture"? It is said here that the Mantras and Brāhmaṇas are called scripture.
1.1.4	Just as the rites are mentioned in the Samhitā injunctions, so also the Mantras have such indications, like "Born from the wind" (4.10), one ties the conch shell.
1.1.5	Mantras may also have other meanings, as in the case of Agniṃ brūmaḥ, Utamṛtāsuḥ, Śivāst, and the statement "He gives to one who is known by name" (KauśS 46.1).
1.1.6	The mantras are of the form of the former Brahmanas, such as "Brahma indeed was in the beginning" (Gobr. 1.1.1), and also of the form of Arthavadas, such as "Virat indeed was in the begining" (8.10.1).
1.1.7	Whatever is mentioned by name in the rules of the Samhita should be done according to the method of one's own branch, through the succession of tradition. Thus it is said by Bhatta: "The Mimamsakas go to the rites by the method of tradition." Thus the making of the altar with river sand and the altar made of the wood of the Shanta tree are done in the rites of peace. And in the Smriti Pada of Mimamsa, the validity of Smriti and conduct is stated.
1.1.8	The Brahmanas, which were forgotten in the matter of the rules of conduct, were preserved by the disciples. Upvarsa Acharya said in the Smriti Pada of the Kalpasutra of Mimansa, "The third is the Kalpa of the stars, the fourth is the Kalpa Angirasa, and the fifth is the Kalpa for peace." Thus it was stated by the revered Upvarsa Acharya that these Kalpas are equal to the Vedas. Other Kalpas are equal in status to Smriti.
1.1.9-10	The rites of cooking and offering of clarified butter are called Yajna. We shall explain them. The Yajna of the gods is for peace, prosperity etc. The Yajnas of the ancestors are the Pitryajna, the offering of balls of rice to the ancestors etc.
1.1.11	One should perform all rites facing the east. The rites are of three kinds: obligatory, occasional and optional. The rites are performed in a low voice. The second person listens to the sound of the rites. This is called 'upāṃśu'.
1.1.12-13	One should perform the obligatory, occasional and voluntary rites wearing the sacred thread. One should perform the rites for the ancestors, such as the offering of balls of rice, by turning the left side towards the east.
1.1.14-15	All rites in honour of the gods should be performed facing the east or north. Rites in honour of the manes should be performed facing south. Some say that rites in honour of manes should be done facing the southeast.
1.1.16-17	The completion of rites in honour of gods should be done facing east or north. The completion of rites in honor of manes should face west. Some say that the completion of rites in favour of manes should take place in the space between east and north.
1.1.18-19	In the rites of sipping water, sprinkling etc., one should perform the rite for the Pitrs once, and for the Devas four or three times. One should perform all rites, such as offering, covering, taking up of clarified butter etc.
1.1.20	One should perform the rite as recited, as in the text "We have surrounded thee, O Agni, with this verse" (KauS 2.10), one performs the rite of surrounding three times.
1.1.21-22	The rite of circumambulation is to be performed for the gods, and the rite of non-circumambulation for the manes.
1.1.23-24	The oblations to the gods are offered with the utterance of "svaha" or "vashat", and the offerings to the gods are made with the utterance of svadha and namaskara.
1.1.25-26	The grass of the Pitrs is cut with its roots. The grass of the gods is cut once. The grass of Pitrs is brought. One places the wood north of the fire and the grass north of the wood.
1.1.27	One recites the verses beginning with "Give the axe" and ending with "May we not be harmed."
1.1.28	Having strewn the sacrificial grass with the formula beginning with "Oṣadhayaṃ dantu parvan" and having brought it silently, he places it north of the fire. Some perform the strewing of the sacrificial grass after performing the rites up to the offering of the Vrata-food, because the rites are to be performed on two days.
1.1.29	One should not sit behind the fire, nor should one act in an anti-clockwise direction.
1.1.30	One should not go in between, and one should not create a gap between the fire, the sacrificial vessels, and the Brahmins.
1.1.31	At the time of performing the Homa ritual, one should kneel on the right knee and then perform the Homa.
1.1.32-33	In the Saṅkhyāyani Brāhmaṇa it is said, “There are two full-moon days and two new-moon days” (Śāmbara 4.4). The new-moon day is the first day of the month, and the full-moon day is also the first day of its respective month. Some say that the new-moon day should be observed as a fast, while others say that the full-moon and new-moon days should be observed as fasts. When there is a difference in the dates, the new-moon and full-moon days should also be observed as fast.
1.1.34	The principal full-moon day is the one that occurs on a particular date, and the one that occurs earlier on a different date is the one on which one should observe the fast. The fast is the eating of food at the time of the sacrifice. The sacrificer does not eat that food.
1.1.35	These things should not be eaten on the Upavasatha day. These substances are well-known. Having performed the rites up to the taking of the vow, then one takes the vow. One performs celibacy and other rites. There are three kinds of rites: prescribed rites, non-prescribed rites, and rites of elevation. The rites of generating intelligence, etc., up to the Pindapitryajna (KausS 10-89) are prescribed rites. The section on non-study (KausS_141) is non-prescribed. The rites from Madhuparka up to Indramahant (KausS _90-140) are non-prescribed, where having assigned the Sūkta, if the assignment of the verses is repeated, then it is a rite of elevation, such as "Udu ttamam" (7.88.3). The definitions in the first chapter are for all purposes, prescribed rites, and non-prescribed ones. The definitions of the remaining ones are for the purpose of definitions. The five kinds of rites are prescribed. In the case of miracles, the second definition is given. A village, a clan, or a country. There the king, the lord of the earth, should choose a learned Bhūgvaṅgiras. It is said there. The practice of performing the rites prescribed by Kausika for the benefit of the learned is undertaken. Having performed the sprinkling of the sacrificial grass, the installation of the northern altar, and the installation of the fire.
1.1.36-39	Having placed the kindling woods with the verse, "O Agni, my lustre," he offers the oblation with the verse, "O lord of vows, you are the fulfiller of vows." Having done this, he does this on the second day.
1.1.40-41	With the mantra "For your action" he washes his hands. Having spread darbha grass in front of the fire, he spreads the skin of a black antelope on them. He makes the darbha grass into a filter, having washed it with its ends uncut, he cleans it along the grain with the mantra "You are purified by Vishnu's mind".
1.2.1	The rites of the evening and morning oblations, the Vaiśvadeva sacrifice, the offering to the departed ancestors, etc., are to be performed on the fire that has been removed. Having placed the four handfuls on the skin that has been purified with the verse "You are the earth," he offers the fourth silently with the verse "For the god you." "I offer what is pleasing to Agni."
1.2.2	"The offering is made to Agni and Soma, to what is agreeable to them." This is the modification.
1.2.3-5	"I sprinkle you for Agni, for what is agreeable to him." The sprinkling is done to both Agni and Soma.
1.2.6	With the verse "Araatiyo" he grinds the pestle and mortar. With the verse "Yat tvā shikvah" he washes it. With the verse "Yat yat krishnah" he cleans it. Then he pours the rice into the mortar with the verse "Havishkrit adraveh" three times. Then he winnows the rice with a winnowing basket. Then he washes the rice three times.
1.2.7	With the verse, "O Agni, the oblation," he places the oblation.
1.2.8	With the verse, "Pure and purified," he sprinkles water.
1.2.9	With the verses, "Purified by Brahma" and "We have entered your pure abode," he pours the rice, covering it with a filter.
1.2.10	With the three verses, "We have entered the pure abode of Agni," he performs the circumambulation three times.
1.2.11-14	He places the kindling wood to the north of the fire and then the sacrificial grass.
1.2.15	"He sprinkles the kindling wood with the formula, "I sprinkle thee for Agni's liking."
1.2.16	He sprinkles the sacrificial grass with the formula, "I sprinkle thee for the liking of the earth."
1.2.17	Having sprinkled a handful of Darbha grass, he strews it behind the fire with the formula, “The soft wool.”
1.2.18	"The seat of the Brahman is placed to the right of the fire, with the words, 'O Lord of the Earth.' The Brahman's seat is prepared in this way. The Gobhila Brahmana says: One should place a seat made of darbha grass or a water pot in the place of the Brahman. Then the purification of the Brahman's seat."
1.2.19	Then the Brahman says, "The covering is placed in front of the fire."
1.2.20-21	Then he strews with the formula, "For the god thee."
1.2.22-23	He strews the paribhajanīya (cups).
1.2.24-29	This is the general rule.
1.2.30	They place the spoon and the vessel of clarified butter.
1.2.31-35	With the formula, "Thou art purified by the mind of Visnu."
1.2.36	He pours clarified butter over the cooked oblation with the formula, “Thou art united with honey."
1.2.37	He removes with the verse, "Thou removest Agni."
1.2.38	Then, having placed the clarified butter and having adorned it with clarified butter, he pours the oblation. He purifies it with the same (clarified butter).
1.2.39-40	He looks at the oblation.
1.3.1	"Agni on the earth, in the plants, Agni shines in heaven, Agni wears the garment of the earth, the white-robed, Agni, the upholder of the classes, to him, the fire-wood, this, I yoke thee," with these five verses he places the fire-wood. The second section is finished.
1.3.2	Having placed the pot of water and the pot of copper to the right of the fire, he consecrates them with the verse, "May the pot of water be held thus."
1.3.3	He sprinkles the pot of water continuously with two verses, "Here are the goddesses" and "May the goddesses be pleased."
1.3.4	Having sprinkled the oblations with the formula, "Truth thee with truth," and having offered the oblations with "Truth thee with Truth," he sips water thrice with the verses, "May the living be peaceful" (19.69-70). With the nine verses beginning with "Truth is great" (12.1.1-9) and the verse "May there be peace" (12,1.59), he rises with the two verses "With life" (3.31.10-11). He approaches with the Vedic verses, "Om, I approach the earth." With the verse "I approach..."
1.3.5-8	Having spread darbha-grass on the seat, he performs the sanctification of the seat with the verse, "O Agni, the son of Aditi, stand up."
1.3.9	Having wiped the ladle with darbha-grass, he heats the ladle with the verse, "The Rakshas is burnt out."
1.3.10-14	He takes the ladleful of ghee with the verse, "Om, earth, for prosperity, to you." With four verses.
1.3.15-19	The offerings are made in front of the fire, then behind the fire. The two portions of clarified butter are offered on the sides, north and south. All other offerings are made in the middle. The sprinkling is done in a vessel of water. The third section.
1.4.1-2	Having performed the Ajyabhāga with the verses, "To the great Vrishni," and "Thou art the divine Soma," he offers the cooked rice dedicated to Agni with three verses beginning with "Lead him upwards," and four oblations beginning with "O Prajapati, not thine."
1.4.3-10	Thus should be applied in every case.
1.4.11-18	In every case, the oblation is to be offered with four spoonfuls of clarified butter. It is said, "Oblation is to be made with four spoonfuls in every case."
1.4.19	He offers the cooked rice dedicated to Agni-Soma with the verse, "For him, the kingdom" (RV 1.1.1), "Agni-Soma, with knowledge" (RV 2.1.1) and three verses, the fourth section.
1.5.2-3	At the New Moon, the second (verse) is recited in the Iḍā-Agni fire, beginning with "Indra and Agni are the bright ones." There are four verses.
1.5.4-5	"The full one is behind" - this is the Parvan Homa at the Full Moon.
1.5.6	"Whatever the gods have done" - this is Parvan Homa on the New Moon.
1.5.7	With four verses beginning with "For inspiration thee" and with the verse "Stoma" he offers the Samṛddhi offerings. He brings the Sampaata offerings in a vessel of water.
1.5.8	With eight verses beginning with "On earth to Agni" he offers the Sannati offerings and with the verse, "O Prajapati, these are not thine."
1.5.9-11	He offers the Svishtakrit oblation with the verse, "O Agni, thou art the first among the gods."
1.5.12	With eleven verses beginning with "Svāhā to the desired ones" he offers the expiations. The fifth section ends with "May the power return to me."
1.6.1-2	He offers with two verses, "What has been spilled by me" and "What has been forgotten." In all cases of offering clarified butter, the offering is made with the ladle.
1.6.3	He offers the oblations at the conclusion of the sacrifice with the verse, "What today thou hast given me."
1.6.4	He offers with the verse, "O lord of mind," taking four spoonfuls.
1.6.5-5	He anoints the grass with clarified butter in the vessel with the verses, "For thee, O earth," for the root, "For thee O atmosphere," for the middle, "For thee the heaven," for the top. The mantra is repeated three times.
1.6.7-9	The oblations are poured into the vessel.
1.6.10	With the verse, "Thou art the ladle, not attached to the ghee," he places the ladle with the handle towards the east.
1.6.11	With the mantra, "I release," he places the kindling wood.
1.6.12-14	He steps in the steps of Vishnu with the three verses, "Thou art the step of Vishnu." He steps in the middle between Agni and Brahma, to the south of Agni.
1.6.15-16	He looks at the sun with two verses, "We have reached the heaven."
1.6.17	With the verse, "By the word of Indra" he raises the water-pot. Having sprinkled with the verse, "The waters have stood," on the barhis, the spoon and the strainer, he gives the water-pot to his wife in her cupped hands with the verse, “I send you to the ocean.”
1.6.18-20	Having sprinkled with the formula, "Truth is your friend," he places the remnants of the oblations towards the north.
1.6.21	Then he makes the Brahman recite the formula, "Rise, O Brahmanaspati" (19.63.1), and makes the Brahman rise.
1.6.22	Hence, the term Haviḥ does not mean the substances to be offered in sacrifice. The term Karmāstra means the act of offering. If one were to offer the substances to be sacrificed without the prescribed Dakṣiṇā, it would be a mere act of offering. In the Pañcavidha-tantra, the measure of the full vessel is mentioned as Prasṛti, Prāstha, Droṇa, Āḍhaka, etc. The full vessel depends on the capacity of the sacrificer. It is said in the ninth chapter that one should give Dakṣiṇās according to one's capacity, and not beyond one's capacity. In the Ajya-tantra, a cow is to be given everywhere.
1.6.23-25	At the conclusion of the rites, one should feed three, five, seven, twenty-one, one hundred, one thousand, or ten thousand Brahmins. The feeding of Brahmins should be done according to the capacity of the performer of the rites. Thus it is said in the Brahmana.
1.6.26-28	When the gods and the Brahmanas are satisfied, there is the fruit of sacrifice. So says Manu in the beginning of the section on the duties of the Brahmanas: "The Brahmana is not to be injured or deprived of his means of livelihood." Therefore, Brahmanas who have mastered the four Vedas should be fed at sacrifices according to one's ability.
1.6.29-30	The rites of the Darsha-Paurnamasa sacrifices have been explained in the section on the oblations of clarified butter. The rites of the section on the cooking of oblations are the same as those of the section on oblations of clarified butte. The rites of all the sections on cooking of oblations, beginning with the section on the Darsha-Purnamasa sacrifices and ending with the section on oblation of clarified butter, are called the rites of the section of the Atharvaveda.
1.6.31	Having performed the oblations of Clarified Butter.
1.6.32	The consecration is done with mantras.
1.6.33	The procedure of the entire sacrifice is to be followed. The procedure of the subsequent rites is to be followed in the Parvan sacrifices. The offering of the oblations is to be done in the middle of the oblations. The threads of the sacrifice are like the threads of a cloth. Just as a weaver weaves the threads of a garment, so too the threads of the sacrifice.
1.6.34-36	In the case of transgression of these two, one should recite the three verses beginning with "O Agni, you are the protector of vows." The verses beginning with "Kama is in front" are recited in that very same ritual. In the case when there is transgression of the Darsha and Pūrṇamāsa sacrifices, one should perform expiation. In the case of transgression in any ritual, one should perform the general expiation. In all cases, one should offer the general expiatory oblations. In that very same ritual, or in another ritual, all the offerings are made in the middle of the ritual. This is the opinion of Bhadra. The ritual is complete. The Pākayajñas have been explained in the Darsha and Paurnamāsa sacrifices. In the Ajyataṃtra, after discarding the oblations, the Āsāḍha rites are performed. This is because of the statement "In every ritual." The distinction between the Āsādha rites of the Ajyataṇtra and the Pākataṇtra has been made. The rest is common to both. The Mandapa of the Atharvaveda, characterized by the collection of materials, has been described. The materials have been mentioned there itself. The mantra "From the treasury" is used at the beginning of the ritual and at the end. This is the instruction of the teacher. One should offer oblations to the Lokapālas in the eight directions. One should perform with the Vasatkara or with the Namaskāra. The square gem is said to be the size of a thumb joint. The thread is attached and consecrated, and the barren one is consecrated with the recitation of auspicious verses. The kindling wood made of the Śāntivṛkṣa is used in the Śāntika rites. One should separately perform the cremation with the mantra and the rites for the carnivorous ones. The churning and the full oblation are also mentioned. Not in the hostile rites, not in the rites for all, not in the battle rites. The Mānḍapa and the Śāntiudaka are not mentioned there. The Prativarta vrata is performed everywhere. The beginning is with one night and so on. All the rites are performed on auspicious days and in auspicious lunar asterisms. These three times are mentioned for all rites: For all rites, the auspicious time is always. Now, all the general rules are explained. The rites for the purpose of rules, the rites for the purpose other than rules, and the rites for raising are explained. The rites from Medhajānanā to Piṇḍapitryajña (KauśS 10.89) are the rites for the rules. The rites from Madhuparka to Indramahānta (KauśS The rites other than the rules are the Pākayajña rites. Having determined the rules by means of the Sūktas, one should know the Sūktas. In all cases, the Homa with the Sruva is always the ritual. In the Homa with hands, the ritual is optional. In the Ājyataṇtra, the Dhenu is the Dakṣiṇā everywhere. The oblation, the remnant, and the authority are explained. The Ājyataṇṭra is explained. The mantra beginning with "From the treasury (19.72)" is used at the end. This is the Uttarataṇṭra. The Uttarataṇṭa is complete. This is the sixth section.
1.7.1	It should be done everywhere. As in the case of "Doṣa gāy" (6.1), one eats after reciting the Atharvaṇa verse. In all cases, the cooking is done at the end of the offering of ghee.
1.7.2	In the rites of nourishment, the Sārūpavatsa Sthālyapāka is eaten. If there is no instruction, one should know that it is eaten like the Haritabarhiṣa (offering). In the third chapter (of the Kauśītaki Brāhmaṇa), the rites of nourishment are mentioned.
1.7.3	He offers the clarified butter without being instructed. One should know the substance. As it is said, "To the earth, to the hearing" (KausS 12.3), he offers.
1.7.4	In the absence of a specific injunction, one should know that all the sticks are of the size of a span, all are smeared with ghee, and all are of Palasha and other trees.
1.7.5	In all cases, if there is no specific instruction, one should know as in the case of the seven boundaries (5.1.6), the three morning offerings (KausS 79.1). The option of substances etc. is applicable in all cases.
1.7.6	If there is no instruction, one should know as in the verse "You are our cloud" (6.108), "The sky and I" (12.1.53), "One eats" (KauśS 10.20). There is an option in the substance.
1.7.7	If there is no instruction, one should know as in the case of "O immortal one" (5.1.7), "May the auspicious ones" (7.43), one gives to one who is known by both names. The water with parched grains and the churned fire with two kinds of kindling wood is called "mantha". This is an option in the substance.
1.7.8	In the absence of a specific injunction, one should know that the rites are to be performed in the same manner as the rites of the previous day. For example, "May my learning be generated" (KauśS 10.1), "The rites of the student for the previous day" (KauśŚ 11.1), "O Agni, may my radiance" (5.3.1) (KauśS 12.10), "The rites for the previous day to frighten away enemies" (Kauśś 14.1), "On the previous full moon day" (KauŚS 18.1), "For the previous day, the variegated rites" (Kauśs 18. 19), "For the preceding day, with the water vessel" (Kauś Ś 25.4), "For the son-seeking rites of the previous and subsequent days" (Kauś S 32.28), "One should recite the Trisaptaya and the subsequent verses" (Kauś ś 139.10). In all cases, "Those who are Trisapta" (1.1).
1.7.9	As in the verse "He sprinkles with a bunch of darbha grass" (KauśS 27.7), a pot or a bell-metal vessel.
1.7.10	If there is no instruction, one should know that the materials such as darbha grass, samit wood, and vessels are required.
1.7.11-12	The materials from trees should be brought from a distant place at sunrise.
1.7.13	The performance of the rites of Nitya, Naimittika and Kamya is described in the Aranya section of the Śāntikalpa. Aranya is that place where the sound of a village is not heard.
1.7.14	All the rites of Homa are completed there. Then one should perform Avabhrtha. In all the rites of Pumsavana etc., the performance is in the house. The opinion of Rudrabhāṣya is that Avabhrtha is not performed.
1.7.15	In all these cases, the procedure is to be performed up to the Ājyabhāgas. In the case of the Ashis etc., one eats the cooked rice mixed with milk and ghee. One binds the eye-salve gem with the formula, "Come, O living one." One sprinkles with water. One goes by the vehicle. One eats on the new-moon day. In all cases of Ashis etc., the sprinkling and besprinkling are to be done with ghee.
1.7.16	All the articles should be consecrated as in the verse, "They yoke the ploughs" (3.17). The plough and the ploughshare should be consecrated as prescribed in the verse, "They yoke the plough" (KauśS 20.1).
1.7.17	A woman and a sick man, a sick woman and a man, both of them should be rubbed with a cloth after being sprinkled.
1.7.18	Having made that man go in front, and having brought him into the house, he gives him gruel and rice, as in the mantra, "May the gods be friendly to us. May the gods be friendly. May the gods who are friendly to us be friendly." (KauS 46.1) With the mantra.
1.7.19	Where he binds the garment, there it becomes on the thirteenth day, etc., as in the case of 'He binds the garment with a pair of black beans' (KauśS 11.19).
1.7.20	Having bound the gem, he places it in the curd and honey.
1.7.21	When the sacrificer has begun, the blessings should be done. The sacrificer, having gone to the north, begins with darbha grass.
1.7.22	As in the case of "One sows barley, wheat and sesamum" (KausS 7.5), so also in the case of the Ashtaka (KausS
1.7.23	The meaning is that a lump of cowdung is smeared with red cow-dung. As in the case "One should offer to the sun" (14.1.47), so also in "One places a stone in the lump of cowdung" (Kaus S 77.17).
1.7.24	The skin of a strong bull is placed behind the fire. The consecration of oblations is done on the skin of Agni.
1.7.25	One should know that the stone is placed down.
1.7.26	Where there is immersion and sprinkling, there is sipping and rubbing.
1.7.27	Having made the barren gem fall down, he binds it. He sprinkles it. He goes to it by means of a vehicle. He anoints the eyes. Whatever is sprinkled, he drinks it all and then binds it and so on.
1.7.28	The oblation of Samit, Purorasa, cooked rice, barley, wheat, and sesame are to be offered. The sacrificer eats the smoke. At the end of the rite,
1.7.29	One should perform the obligatory, occasional, and occasional rites after bathing. The meaning is "one should bathe." The seventh chapter is completed.
1.8.1	In those rites of the night, this is the rule. Some think that the general rule applies to all, as in the statement "One who has bathed and put on a new garment performs." The rites of the night are completed. Now the rules for the auspicious rites are stated.
1.8.2-4	He offers oblations in each direction reciting the verses beginning with "Ye are in this" (3.26). He stands in each direction reciting "The eastern direction" (3. 27). He offers oblations with the remaining portion of the oblation at the end of the rite. The rites for the attainment of welfare are concluded. Now the rites for all purposes are described.
1.8.5	The materials to be given to the performer are the remnants of the oblations, clarified butter, water pot, skin, darbha grass, sacrificial twigs, vessel for the water of peace, ladle, spoon, etc. In all cases, a cow is given as Dakṣiṇā. In the Jyotiṣṭoma sacrifice, the Dakṣiṇās are given in the form of a golden pot. In the Agnihotra sacrifice, the Dakșiṇā is given in the form a pot filled with ghee. In the Pañcāgnihotra sacrifice, the Daksina is given in the shape of a pot filled with water. In the Agniṣṭoma sacrifice the Dakṣiṇa is given in the following manner: The Dakṣiṇas are given in the shape a pot filled with clarified butter. In the Atirātra sacrifice, the Daksiṇā is given as follows: The Dakṣinās are given in a pot filled with cooked rice. In the Vājapeya sacrifice, the Daksinās are given in this way: The Dakṣinas are given in a golden pot. The Dakṣiṇa in the Rājasūya sacrifice is given in the manner: The Daksiṇās are given to the Brahmins in the shape of cows. In the horse sacrifice, the Dakxiṇās are given as follows: A golden pot is given to the Brahmanas. In the Sāmnāyana sacrifice, the Dakşinās are given as: A golden pot filled with ghee is given to the Brāhmaṇas. In the Vrata sacrifice, the Dakşiṇās are given thus: A golden pot full of water is given to the Brahmaṇas. In all the sacrifices, the Dakṣinās should be given in the manner mentioned above. In the case of the Nitya sacrifices, there is no Dakṣiṇī. In the case where the property of others is used, there is no need for Dakṣiṇīs. It is like the barber's fee.
1.8.6	The sprinkling, sipping, and sprinkling around should be done thrice, as in the verse "I sprinkle you with truth and truth." Having sprinkled around with the oblations, as in the text "Having sprinkled around with the truth and truth, having sprinkled around with the offerings, having sprinkled around the offerings, having offered the offerings, having made the offerings, having placed the offerings, having arranged the offerings, having prepared the offerings, having purified the offerings, having cleansed the offerings, having sanctified the offerings, having consecrated the offerings, having blessed the offerings, having praised the offerings, having worshipped the offerings, having honored the offerings, having saluted the offerings, having bowed to the offerings, having prostrated to the offerings, I sprinkle around the offerings."
1.8.7	The recitation of the same verses in succession is called samucchaya. For example, "May they not know us, the one who protects from hunger, the one who bestows well-being" (KauS 14.7) is samucchaya. The same applies to other cases as well.
1.8.8	In all peace rituals, the peaceful materials such as darbha grass and kindling wood are used. In black magic, the fierce materials of the Angirasa are used.
1.8.9	The ladle, the spoon, the sacrificial wood, the gems, and the wood should be made. Whatever substance is there, as in the verse "How shall I offer?" one eats cooked rice with milk obtained by churning. "In a pot made of a phala fruit, from the milk of a cow with a calf of the same color." The pot is also obtained by churning. After "How shall I make an offering?" one should perform the subsequent rites with this verse.
1.8.10	In case of doubt regarding the mantra and the substance, one should take it as present. Just as the hair is the hair of an elephant, just as one binds the binding of the disease by saying "We know the arrow" (KauśS 25.10).
1.8.11	With the verse, "Do thou give the axe," he gives the axe to the person who is to cut the grass. Having cut the grass above the joints with the verse, "May the plants be given to me," he silently brings it and places it north of the fire.
1.8.12	With the verse "Araatiyo" he cleans the wooden pestle and mortar. He cuts wood for kindling.
1.8.13	With the verse "Yat tvā shikvah" he washes the wood.
1.8.14	With the verses "Yadyat krishna" he cleans the pestle and other things with a cloth or with his hand. He cleans the vessels.
1.8.15	Now the trees of peace are mentioned. Palasha is well-known. Udumbara is well-known, Jambu is well-known; Kamphala is well-known in Malava; Malava is well-known as Malava; Vangha is well-known at Kannyakubja; Shirisha is well- known at Bhojapura; Vagaari is well-known near Avatika; Varana is well-known by the name Varana at Anandapura; Bilva is well-known ; Jangida is well-knownat Varanasi; Kutaka is well-knownin Malava; Garhya is well-known on the Himalayas; Galavala is well- known there itself; Vetasa is well-known , Shimbala is well-know; Sipuna is well-known for Kevanika and Syandana on the Himalayas and on the Narmada river; Aranika is well-known along the banks of the Narmada; Ashmayukta is well-knownas Ashmantka at Bhrigukaccha; Tuni is well-knownfor Tinduka; Putadaru is well-known asa Devadaru; Devadaru is well-knownasa Devadaru in Ayurveda. The trees of peace are completed. These are the trees of peace. The ladle, the spoon, the kindling wood, the fire-stirring stick, the kindling sticks, the fire-stirrer, the kindling woods of the size of a span, these are the vessels of these trees to be used in the rites of peace, nourishment, etc., in the Agnihotra, Asthila, Agnishtoma and other sacrifices.
1.8.16	Now the auspicious herbs are mentioned. Citī is well-known, Prāyashcittī is at every festival. It has three leaves. Śamī is well-established, Śamī is near the Vāpī well of Viśvāmitrī. Saṃśa is a jackal's lineage. Gharmolīka is a kind of grass. Śamyavāka is a kind-of-grass. Kakajāṅghāsadṛśa is a kind of plant. Talāśā is a kind of creeper. Palāśa is well-known. Vaśā is a plant. Vṛṣaka is a kind of gourd. Ātaruṣaka is a type of gourd. Śiṃśapā is well-known; Śiṃśala is well-known as a tree. Kari is a kind of darbha grass. Apāmarga is well-known grass. Ākṛtiloṣṭa is clay from a field. Valmīkavāpā is well-established. Dūrvā is well-renowned. It should be taken with the tip. Vrihi and barley are well-known. All these are auspicious herbs to be used in the Śānti water and other rituals. This is the combination of these. If these are not available, barley should be used as a substitute. This is the injunction of the auspicious herbs. It is finished.
1.8.17	Pramanda, Genda, Ushira, Shalali, Upadhana, Vidya Gandhuka, Shakadhuma, Brahmana - these are the old ones. They should be taken as they are mentioned in the following examples: "He gives the Pramanda ornaments along with the Sampata" (KausS 32.29), "I break the Ushira" (Kaus S 29.24), "One eats Shalali for three months" (Kaus 29.12), "With the Upadhana, the covering" (Kaus. 64.26), "He asks, 'What did Shakadhuma do today?'" (Kaus s 50.15). These are the examples.
1.8.18	Where there is lead, all these should be known. Lead is well-known. River lead, river foam, iron dust, mass of iron, lizard head are well-known. The collection of leads is like "Those who observe the new moon" (1.16). "Prepare lead powder and apply it to food and ornaments" (KauśS 47.23) is an example.
1.8.19	These Rasas are to be known in the Rasakarmaṇi in the manner of 'he performs the Rasakarmaṇa' (KauśS 21.22).
1.8.20	The well-known grains like rice, barley and wheat are mentioned. The Indrayava is a kind of barley. Sesame is well-known. Priyangu is a kind of grass. Shyamaka is a kind of grain. When the term 'misra-dhaniya' is used, these grains are to be understood. All these are misra-dhaniyas. For example, "One offers a cake made of misra-dhaiyas at the time of the new moon."
1.8.21	The second example is "I am with the Rudras" (4.30; KauS 10.16), which continues until the second example of "Brahman was born (4.6; KauS 28.1) as the giver of water (4.7)." The first example is "He who was not in the elements (4.8; KauS 7.1)," which is an example of the first example. "The giver of water" is also an example, although it is not an example of the second example.
1.8.22	The Anusanga is to be done in accordance with the truth, as in the Vedic text "We know the father of the arrow, the hundred-armed Parjanya" (1.3.1), it becomes worldly. "I release the best of the created, the Kankatama" Similarly, in the Mimamsa, the Anusanga is also applicable, as stated in the text "The completion of the sentence is due to the equality of all" (Jaisu 2.1.46). Anusanga means repetition. Now the four-fold group of Maha-Santi-Ganas is being recited.
1.8.23	Thus is the group of hymns to Vasat. The application is with the entire hymn everywhere, because of the statement in the Atharvaveda, "One should proceed from the hymn to the hymn." As in "With the hymns to Vasat, in the field sown by Kūlika" (KauśS 43.4).
1.8.24	Where there are names of mothers, they should be used here. The use of the sūktas is as follows: "One should offer with the names of mothers, 'The divine Gandharva' (KauśS 94.15)."
1.8.25	These are the names of the mothers. All the sūktas should be used here: "For the destruction of enemies" (2.18.3-5). The eighth chapter is concluded.
1.9.1	All the verses should be recited. Where there is the group of Śānti, here this group should be recited. "Oṃ, the waters are firm, the goddess is auspicious. (1.5-6) The use is in order. Similarly, in grammar, the short form is used. (Pa 2.2.34) The prefix is used in the compound 'hiranyavarṇāḥ', 'nisālāṃ'. The six verses are 'ye agnāḥ'. The seven verses are 'Brahma, the unborn'. The seven verses of the hymn 'Oṃ, the gods' are to be recited. The seven verses of 'Agneḥ manvāt' (4.23-29) are to be recited, except the first two (4.21-22) and the last one (4.30). The verse 'May Śam and Māyā be ours' is one. The verse 'May Indra return' is one. 'May Śiva be ours' is also one. The verse '(May) the wind blow for us' is one. All the remaining verses should be recited with this group of Śāntis. Where there is Śānti, all these should be recited."
1.9.2	Where the water for peace is performed, one should throw the water for peace in the middle of the water for peace with three verses beginning with "For the earth, for the hearing." The performer of this rite performs sprinkling, sipping, etc. with each verse.
1.9.3	Or with this group he performs the Śānti-water rite. Or with the Brhat-group or with the Catu-group he performs the Śāntyu-water rite. The remaining formulas are mentioned in the Śāntiatiya (Sutra). This is the Śāntiātiya group. Wherever there is a purpose for the Śāntiātiya, this should be employed everywhere. Just as one offers sesamum seeds with the Śānti Atiya.
1.9.4	Where there is the water of peace, everywhere the sprinkling is to be done. The performer of the sprinkling, sprinkling, sprinkling, and sipping, does it.
1.9.5	Here in the water of peace there is a combination of all the verses, elsewhere everywhere it is optional according to the stated principle. Here again it is the option of the group, not the option of the verses.
1.9.6	At the beginning and end of the recitation of the Śānti-group, the Śanno devī and Sāvitrī should be recited. At the end, Sāvitrī is followed by Śanno devī. The commentary says: The Śānti-collection with Sāvitrī has Śanno devī at the beginning and end. Now the procedure for Śānti-water is being told.
1.9.7	The performer, having put on a new garment, prepares Śānti-waters in a bronze vessel.
1.9.8	Having sprinkled water with the verse, "The bull of waters is released," he releases the Avakara. Having asked, "Are all these plants and waters?" the performer asks the Brahman. The Brahman says, "All." With all the plants and all the waters brought from the sacred places such as the Ganges, rivers, oceans, lakes, and wells, he performs the water for peace. The performer says, "I shall do it with the blessing of Brihaspati." Then the Brahman says, "May you do it with the blessings of Savitri." Permitted, he performs the peace water. With the verse, "May the goddess be auspicious to us," and with the Savitri and Ambayoyantigana, he performs the peaceful water. With the Laghaugana, Brihaugana, or Caturgana. Then Savitri and the goddess of the earth. Then he sprinkles three times with "For the earth, for the ear," in the peaceful water. He puts the peaceful water.
1.9.9	This is the water for peace. It is performed by the group of peace mentioned earlier. The following are the ones who perform the water for peace: Gārgya, Pārthashrava, Bhāgali, Aṅkāyana, Uparibhabrava, Kausika, Jāṭikāyana, and Kaurapathya.
1.9.10	The Acharya thinks that all of them are the performers. They think without any doubt. Where there is water in the rite, one should perform the Shanti water everywhere. All the purposes such as sipping, sprinkling, pouring, and bathing should be done with the Shanti water. Where it is read, one should do it. The three purposes of the Shanti water are read in the five Kalpas. The Sutra-makers have said that the sprinkling and sipping of the performer should always be done in the rites of the Vedas and Smritis. One should do the same with the fires. The second is for the rites of the Smritis. The sprinkling of the house is declared to be the third. The bathing and pouring are read as being done with the Shanti-water. One should always do it without any purpose. What is not seen in the Kalpa-sutras is never proper. Where the purpose of the water is read again, one should do the Shanti-water either in the middle of the rite or alone. Where there is the Shanti-water, the performer should always sip and sprinkle. The sprinkling of houses is also done. The rite of the Shanti-water is completed. The Paribhasa is finished. The ninth chapter. There, the Bhadra-shloka is the authority. In the Parvan, it is tested due to its naturalness. The Paribhasha is for all purposes in the first section of the Samhita.
2.1.1	We shall describe the method of generating intelligence.
2.1.2	Having performed the Ājyasaṃcara up to the Ābhyanānas, having besprinkled the parrot's tongue with the verse "Ye are the three-sworn ones" and having recited it, one ties it at the end of the Puṇyāha. One who desires wisdom performs the subsequent rites beginning with Ābhyanjana. Or, having performed the Ājyasancara up to the Abhyanānas and having besprinkled a tongue of a crow with the verse "You are the three-oath-sworn ones," and having recited it at the end, one ties it. One who desires knowledge performs the subsequent rites starting with Ābhyanaṇa. Having performed the Ājyāsancara up to the Abhiyanānas, having sprinkled a tongue of a jackal with the verse "Those who are three-oath sworn," and having recited, one ties it, performing the subsequent rites starting from Ābhyanana. One who desires wisdom follows the rites for each step. The rites are optional in all cases, from the rites for the student to the rites for the Sampadi.
2.1.3	Having performed the Ābhyatāna rite, one should consecrate and consume the tongue of a parrot with the verse "Those who are thrice-sworn," and then perform the subsequent rites. One who desires intelligence should perform the subsequent rites again, consecrate and consume a tongue of a crane with the verse "The three-sworn ones," and then perform further rites. One desiring intelligence should perform the Ābhyātana rite, consecrate and eat the tongue of a crane, with the verse "Ye trisaptāḥ," and then perform subsequent rites. A parrot is well-known. A crane is well-known, and a crane is well-called. A crane is Bharadvaja. Then the subsequent rites.
2.1.4	With the verse, "Those who are thrice-born," he offers Udumbara twigs. Due to being a hand-homa, there is an option of the procedure. With the verse, “Those who are thrice born,” he offers Palasa twigs. There is an option of procedure. With the verses, “Those who have three births,” he offers Karkandhu twigs. Karkandhu is a large jujube. There is an optional procedure.
2.1.5	With the verse, "Those who are thrice-born," he sows the rice. With the verse, “Those who are thrice born,” he sows the barley. With the verse “Those who are three times born,” he sows sesame.
2.1.6	Having performed the Ābhyatāna rites, one should consecrate and consume the milk-rice with the verse "Those who are thrice-sworn" and perform the subsequent rites. Having performed the rites, one should offer and consecrate the Purōdāsha with the verse "The three-sworn" (RV 5.2.3) and consume it, performing the subsequent rites. At the end of the Ābhyātana rites, one should sprinkle and consecrate the juices with the verse "Ye triṣaptāḥ" and consume them, performing the subsequent rite. The consumption of juices should be done everywhere with the verse "O Agni, thou art the knower of all" (RV 10.189.1).
2.1.7	After the Upanayana ceremony, he should collect a lot of almsfood, cooked or uncooked, every day for twelve nights, reciting the verse "Ye trisaptāḥ" and give it to the preceptor.
2.1.8	With the verse, "Those who are thrice-born," he recites over the ear of the sleeping preceptor. The preceptor or the father may recite over the ear of a student or a child.
2.1.9	The verse, "Those thrice-born," is recited by the student whenever he goes to the preceptor's house.
2.1.10	Having performed the Ābhyatāna rite, one offers Dhānas mixed with ghee, reciting the Sūkta "Ye trisaptāḥ" separately for each verse. The subsequent rites are as before.
2.1.11	Having performed the Ābhyaṭāna rite, one makes offerings mixed with sesame, reciting the Sūkta "Ye trisaptāh." Then one eats. The subsequent rites begin with the Ābhyātana rite.
2.1.12-15	Having placed the fire on a mound, having struck down a black stick in front of the fire, having placed the grains on a black antelope skin behind the fire, having recited the Sūkta "Ye trisaptāḥ" (RV 10.9.1), he gives the stick, grains and antelope skin to the preceptor. Having performed the rites up to the pouring of clarified butter, having struck down the black stick in front, having placed the grain on the black antelope skin behind, having offered once with the Sūkta “Ye trisaptāh", he gives the stick and grains to the preceptor, and then performs the remaining rites. The rite of birth is described.
2.1.16	The rite of birth is performed with the verse "I am with Rudras" by grinding white and green flowers, reciting the mantra, and feeding the child with a piece of gold before breastfeeding. The rite of birth with the verse "With Rudras" by pounding the conch shell and pepper and reciting the mantra, feeding the child with gold before breastfeeding.
2.1.17	Having performed the Āṣṭa-homa, one should place the boy on the lap of his mother and offer the Sampaata with the verse "I am with the Rudras". One who desires correct speech and intelligence should offer the Sampaatas for the first speaker. The procedure from Āṣṭahoma onwards is common.
2.1.18	Having performed the Āṣṭaśītihoma, having performed the Āṣaḍahoma, having performed Āṣṭāviṃśatihoma, having performed Prāṇāyāma, having performed the Prāṇāyama, having performed the Vyānapāna, having performed the Vāyuhoma, having performed Vyānapānahoma, having performed Vāyuhomahoma, having performed Pāṇḍarāhoma, having performed Śāntīhoma, having performed Sāntarāmahoma, having performed Pañcāgnihoma, having performed Saṃskārahoma, having performed Dhūmāgnihoma, having prepared the Āṣṭāśītihomahoma, having prepared Āṣṭāvidhahomahoma, having made the Āṣṭavidhahomahoma, one should perform the Āṣṭavidahomahoma. Having
2.1.19	Having performed the Ābhyanānas, he makes the student recite the Sūkta beginning with "I with the Rudras". Having given the staff, he makes him recite it daily at the Upa nayana. The one desiring longevity performs the five rites beginning with "White flowers" and ending with "I with Rudras". This is because of the statement "The rite lasting for a year".
2.1.20	Having performed the Ājyasaṃcara up to the Ājyādhāna, one offers the cooked rice with milk with the five-verse hymn beginning with "You are our wisdom." Having recited the mantra, one eats it. The subsequent rites are as before. Having performed the Ājyasamcara up to the Ajyadhana, one offers the Purōdāsha with the hymn beginning with "Thou art our wisdom." Having eaten it, one recites the mantra. The subsequent rites as before. Having done the previous rite, one offers the Rasas with the hymn beginning "Thou art our knowledge." Having eaten them, one recites "Thou art the sacrifice." The subsequent rites are performed. Having performed the Ajyasamcara up with the single verse "The sky and this earth are mine" (12.1.53), one offers the cooked milk rice. Having recited the mantra over it, one eats it, and the subsequent rites are as prescribed. Having performed the rite, one offers Purōdāshas with the verse "The sky is mine." Having recited the mantras over them, one eats them. The subsequent rites should be performed. Having performed Ājyasamchara up to Ājyādhānam, one offers Rasas with the verse “The sky is mine.” Having recited the mantrasa over them, one should eat them. The subsequent rite should be performed.
2.1.21	He worships the sun with the verse, "You are our wisdom." He worships the Sun with the verse, “The sky and me.” One who desires wisdom should do this everywhere.
2.1.22	Having performed the rite on the full-moon day of Āgrahāyaṇa, one should offer oblations with the two verses beginning with "O Agni, by your penance" and then consume them. The subsequent rites are as before. On the full-moon of Mārgaśīrṣa, having performed the rite, one should offer the Puronuvākyā with the two verses "O Agni, through your penance" and consume them. The later rites are as before.
2.1.23	"He worships Agni with the two verses, 'O Agni, by thy heat...' on the full-moon day of Margasirsa.
2.1.24	Having abandoned sleep with the verse "In the morning Agni," one rinses the mouth. With the verse "In front of the cows," having risen from sleep, one cleans the mouth. The rinsing is done with water. With the verses "Of heaven and earth" (9.1.1-10) and "Just as Soma at the morning pressing" (9. 1.11-24), having risen from sleep one cleans the mouth with the hand. One who desires radiance also performs the mouth rinsing. The sprinkling of water is done by oneself or by another. One should perform one rite for intelligence, or two, or all. In all cases there is an option of rites due to the abundance of rites. By repetition, there is also accomplishment of rites. The rites for intelligence are completed. The first section is concluded.
2.2.1	Having performed the rites of Nirriti on the full-moon day, he performs the Saṃpada rite on the next day.
2.2.2	With the verse, "Those who are thrice-born" (1.1), he offers Udumbara twigs. Due to being a hand-homa, there is an option of the sequence. Therefore, one who is a student and desires prosperity continues. With the verse, “Those who are thrice born” (1.1) he offers Palasa twigs. With the verse “Those who are three times born” (1,1) he offers twigs of the large Badari tree.
2.2.3	With the verse, "Those who are thrice-born," the student places grass from his house on the sacrificial grass.
2.2.4	With the verse, "The three-born ones," he offers these substances - fat, flesh, honey, shyamaka grass, cotton, and ghee - five times, repeating the verse.
2.2.5	Having offered five substances into the hole, and having collected them, he puts them in the vessel of ghee. Having come to the village, having performed the Ābhyatāna rite, he offers once from the vessel with the verse, "Those who are thrice-born." The subsequent rites are as before.
2.2.6	Having recited the verse "Ye trisaptāḥ" over the food, he should feed the Brahmachari students. When they have eaten, he gives them cooked barley mixed with sesamum, reciting the verse "Ye trisaaptāḥ". The Brahmachari Sampada rites are completed. The meaning is that the rites of the disciple are completed. In all cases, there is an option of rites. Now the rites for the village Sampada are mentioned.
2.2.7	Having performed the rites of Nirṛti on the previous day, the village-owners have authority.
2.2.8	With the verse, "Those who are thrice-born," he places the wooden pegs for the door-posts. One desiring prosperity of the village follows (the rite) till the end. For those desiring prosperity of everything, he places the wooden pins for the door-frames with the verse, "The three-born." With the verse, “Those who are thrice born,” he places the wooden posts for the door-frame. With the verse, "Those who are thriceborn," he places the wooden supports for the door-post. With the verse "Those who are three-born," he spreads the coverings for the assembly hall.
2.2.9	Having recited the Sūkta, "Ye are the three-seven", he gives food to the villagers.
2.2.10	Having recited the Sūkta, "Ye are the three-sealed ones", he gives Sura to those who drink Sura. The rites of village-saṃpada are completed. The option of rites is everywhere. There is no village everywhere. In every case, the Homa is performed with the hand. The word "village" means a group. A village, a town, a city, or a fortress - all are called by the word "village". When one desires a village, then one should perform the village-saṃpādanam. Now we shall describe the procedure of all saṃpādanas.
2.2.11	Having performed the rite of Nirṛti on the full-moon night, the rite is performed on the next day with the verse, "Those who are thrice-born." He offers Udumbara twigs with the verse, "Those who are thrice born." He continues with the desire for all prosperity until the rites of concord. With the verse, "Those who are thriceborn," he offers Palasa twigs. With the verse "Those who are three times born," he offers twigs of the large Badari tree. With the verse "Those who have been born three times," he sows barley. With the verse “Those who have been thrice born,” he sows wheat. With the verse "Those who have thrice been born," he sows sesame. Desiring all fruits, having performed the preliminaries, he offers milk rice with the verse "Ye trisaptāḥ," consecrates it, and eats it. The subsequent procedure is as before. Having performed the preliminaries with the verse "Ye trisaptāh," he offers a cake, consecrates it, eats it. The later procedure is as before." Having performed the preliminares with the verse "Ye trisaptā," he offers juices, consecrates them, and eats them. The verse "You are the sacrifice" is the juice-eating verse. The later procedure follows.
2.2.12	With the verse, "Those who are thrice-born," he kindles the fire in the middle for three days, desiring all (kinds of) desires.
2.2.13	With the verse, "The ones who are thrice-blessed," he attends the fire three times.
2.2.14	Having performed the Ājyabhāga and the Ājyādhāna rites, one should take blood mixed with juice from the left hand and eat it after consecrating it with the verse "Those who are thrice-born". Then the rest.
2.2.15	Having performed the Ājyabhaga and the Ājyaadhāna rites, one offers the Pṛṣṇimāntha oblation with the verse "Ye trisaptāḥ".
2.2.16-18	Having churned the mixture of grains and milk, he should eat it after reciting the mantra and sprinkling it with the mixture of grains, milk, curd, and honey. The procedure from the beginning is the same. The churning of grains is complete.
2.2.19	Having performed the Ājyatantra, having made a pair of black-gram coins and a golden gem, having anointed them with curd and honey on the thirteenth day, having sprinkled them with the mantra, one binds them. One eats the curd and honey. Then comes the Uttara Tantra. Having performed the Tantra, having made the pair of black-grams and a golden gem anointed with the mantra, having sprinkled them, one binds them at the end of the benediction. Eating of curd and honey. Then comes the Uttara-tantra. Having performed the tantra, having made the golden gem anointed with curd and honey with the mantra, and having sprinkled it, one binds it. Eating. The Uttara-tantras starting from the Ābhyātanas.
2.2.20	Having performed the rite with clarified butter, one should draw a figure of a man on a cake of wheat flour resembling a calf, and consecrate it daily for twelve nights with the verse "In this wealth", and on the twelfth day, having consecrated it, one should eat it facing away from the direction of the consecration. The rite is performed after the Anvārambhaṇī verses. On the first day, having performed the rite, one should consecrate the figure of a man resembling a calf with the verse "When binding", and eat it facing away. Then the subsequent rite. On the first date, having performed the ritual, one should consecrates the figure of a human body resembling a calf with Nav Prāṇāḥ, and eat it facing the opposite direction. Then the subsequent ritual. The second section ends here.
2.3.1	Having performed the Ābhyanjana rites, one should eat the cooked rice gruel prepared with Madhūka wood, consecrating it with the verse "How great is this," and then perform the subsequent rites.
2.3.2	Having performed the Āṣṭaśītihoma, having offered the oblations with the Sāvitrī verse, having performed the Āṣaḍhahoma, having performed the Prāṇāyāma, having performed the Abhijithoma, having performed all the rites, having performed the Homa of the eight directions, having performed the rites of the eight directions and having performed the Homam of the eight directions.
2.3.3	Having performed the rites, one offers clarified butter with the verse "To the earth, to the ear..." The rites from the Āṣṭamīhoma onwards are to be performed.
2.3.4	The oblation of rice is offered with the verse, "The calf of Viraj." Having performed the preliminary rites, the oblation of barley is offered with the same verse. The oblation of sesame is offered with the following verse, "The cow of Viraj." The oblation of cooked rice mixed with milk is offered with the above verse, and then eaten after reciting the same verse. Having performed the preliminary rite, the oblation is offered with the oblation of rice mixed with ghee, and then eaten. Having performed the preliminaries, the oblation consisting of the three kinds of rice is offered, and then eaten with the above verse. Having performed preliminaries, the offering of the three kinds is made, and then eaten, with the above verse.
2.3.5-6	Having performed the Ājyasaṃskāra along with the Ājyabhāga offerings, one should sprinkle the water pot with the verse "May there be harmony and concord," rotate it near the village, and place it in the center. Then perform the remaining rites. The rite of harmony extends up to the rites for the Varcasya deities. Having performed the rites up to the Ājyabhāra, one should sprinkle a pot with the verse, "That is yours," rotate it near a village, and place in the center. Perform the remaining rites. Having performed the Ājyasamskāra along with Ājyabhāgas, one should sprinkle water pot with the verses, "May you know" and "May your minds be united," take that pot, rotate it near a town, and place it at the center. Perform rites from Ājyabhāras onwards. Having performed the Ajyasamskāra, one should rotate the water pot with two verses, "May your minds" and "May we be united," rotate it near town, and place at the center. Then do the remaining rites.
2.3.7	Having performed the Ājyabhāgas, he makes the Surakulaja fall down with the verse, "With the heart," and then takes it around the village and places it in the middle. Then the subsequent procedure. Having performed the Ājyahoma, he makes the Surakulāja fall down with the verses, "That is your strength," and then takes the Surakulājā around the village and puts it in the middle, then the subsequent procedure. Having performed the Ājyadhāraṇā, he makes the Surākulājā fall down with the three verses, "Recognize each other," and then takes them around the village and lays them in the middle, and then the subsequent procedure.
2.3.8	Having performed the Ājyabhāga offerings, one should offer the flesh of a three-year-old calf, sprinkled with sour gruel, reciting the verse "O you who are kind to us." Having performed the Ājyahoma offerings, one should sprinkle the flesh with sour gruel and offer it, reciting the verse, "O you who have come to us." Having recited the verse, "May your minds be united," one should sprinkle the fresh meat and offer it. Having performed the Ārjyahoma offerings, having recited the verses, "Come to us" and "May your minds unite," one should sprinkle and offer the fresh meat of a three-day-old calf. Having performed the Ajyahoma offerings, reciting the verse beginning with "May your minds," one should sprinkle fresh meat and offer. Having performed the Ajjyahoma offerings, sprinkling fresh meat with the two verses beginning with "May our minds be united," and "May your thoughts be united," one offers it. Having performed all the rites, one should offer fresh meat of a calf that has been dead for three days.
2.3.9	Having performed the Ajyastra, one should offer the cooked rice with the verse "Sahṛdayaṃ," and then perform the subsequent rites. Having performed the rites, one should offer cooked rice with the single verse "Tadūṣu te," and then perform subsequent rites. Having done the Ajyastra and performed the rites, having offered cooked rice with the verses "Sam jānīdhvam," one should offer cooked food with the verses "Eha yātu" and "Sam vo pricyantām." Having performed the rites up to the Anvārambhaṇīya, one should offer wine with the three verses "Sam vo manasi," and then perform further rites. Having performed rites, one should perform the rites up to Anvārambhanīya, having offered wine with the verses "Sahṛdaya" and then perform further rituals. Having performed the Ajya-astra and performed the rituals, one should offer water with the verse "Tadū ṣu te" and then perform the further rites. Having done rites up to Anvärambhaniyâ, one should offer rice with the verses, "Eha yatu" and "Sam va pricyantām" and then perform subsequent rituals. Having performed rites up to Anvârambhaniyä, one should offer boiled rice with the three verses, "Sam va manasi" and then perform additional rites. Having performed rituals, one should perform rites up to Anvårambhaniyā, having offered boiled rice with the two verses, "Sam jānidhvam" and then perform rites. The rites of Saṁmanasyaka are complete. Now we will explain the method of Varcasya.
2.3.10-11	With the verse, "Those who are thrice-born" (1.1), he offers Udumbara kindling woods. Everywhere, one who desires radiance follows. From the royal rites up to... With the verse, “Those who are thrice born” (1.1) he offers Palasa kindling woods. One who desires radiance... With the verse "Those who are three times born" (1. 1) he offers Bhrngaradvari kindling woods. With the verse "Ye are thrice born" (1, 1) he sows Vrihi grains. With the verse, Ye are thrice born" he sows barley. With the verse Ye are thrice born he sows sesame. One who desires brilliance... Having performed the Āṣṭaśītihoma, he eats the milk-rice, having sprinkled and recited the verse, "Ye are thrice-born." The subsequent procedure is as before. Having performed the Āsṭaśīțihoma, he eats rice-cake, having sprinkled and reciting the verse, "Thou art thrice-born." Having performed the subsequent procedure, he eats the juices, having sprinkled and uttered the verse, "Thy brilliance is mine." With the verse, Thy brilliance is mine, he offers Udumbarasamitidha. With the verse Thy brilliance is mine he offers Palasa samitidha. With verse Thy brilliance is thine, he offers Bhringaradvari samitidha. With the verse Thy brilliance belongs to me, he sows Vrihi. With the verse Thou art thrice-born, he sows barley. With the same verse, he sows sesame. Having performed the Astaśītihoma he eats the milk rice, having sprinkled and muttered the verse, Thy radiance is mine. The subsequent procedure is the same. Having performed the subsequent Astaśītihotra, he eats the rice cake, having sprinkled and muttering the verse, Thy splendour is mine. Having performed the later procedure, he eats juices, having sprinkled them and muttering the verse Thy splendour is mine.
2.3.12	With the verse, "Those who are thrice-born," he recites over the right thigh of the maiden. With the verse, "O Agni, my radiance," he recites again over the right thigh. The maiden becomes beautiful, radiant, and foremost in her husband's house. This rite is performed for her.
2.3.13	Having performed the Ājyabhāgas, one brings the Vapa and offers it with the verse, "Those who are thrice-born." The subsequent rites are as before. Having performed the rites, one brings the Vapa and offers it with this verse, "O Agni, my radiance." The subsequent rites.
2.3.14	He worships Agni with the verse, "Those who are thrice-born" and with the verse, “O Agni, my radiance” for one desiring radiance.
2.3.15	Having performed the Ājyabhāga offerings, one should offer the Dadhi and Madhu with the verse, "In the morning Agni," sprinkling and reciting. Then perform the subsequent rites. Having performed the Ajyataṃtra rite, one should offer Dadhi and Madhūni together with the verse, “In the morning Agni,” sprinkling and reciting. Perform the subsequent rites. Having performed the Ājyabhagas, one should offer Momordica charantia and Madhu with "In the morning, Agni," sprinkling and chanting. Perform the subsequent rite. Now the procedure for obtaining the luster of a Kshatriya is described.
2.3.16	Having performed the Āṣṭa-homa, one should offer cooked rice mixed with honey and ghee, reciting the verse "In the morning Agni" and then consume it. One should perform the subsequent rites. Having performed the rites, one should offer food mixed with honey and curd, reciting the verse "In the morning Agni" and then consume it, reciting the verse. One should perform subsequent rites. One should perform the rites, and then offer food mixed with curd and honey, reciting the verse "In the morning Agni" and then consume it." One who desires speech should perform the subsequent rite. Now the rites for the Vaisyas, Sudras, etc. are mentioned. Having performed the Āsṭa-homa rites, one should consume cooked rice, reciting the verse “In the morning Agni” and then consume it.
2.4.1	One who desires brilliance should stand in front of an elephant reciting the verse "Hastīvarcasam".
2.4.2	Having performed the Āṣṭa-homa, one should bind the elephant's tusk gem after reciting the verse "Hastivarcasam" and reciting it. The authority for brilliance continues in all cases after the Āṣṭā-homa.
2.4.3	Having performed the Ābhyanjana rites, he binds the elephant's hair smeared with lac juice and wrapped in gold with the mantra "Hastīvarcasam" and then performs the subsequent rites.
2.4.4	Having performed the Āṣṭaśūla rite, one should bind the lion's navel hair, smeared with lac and gold, after reciting the two verses "In the lion and tiger" and "Glory is the oblation," and then perform the remaining rites. Having performed the rite, one should tie the lion's belly hair, smeared with lacquer and gold, after sprinkling and reciting the two verses, "In the lion, tiger" and "Yashō havis." Then perform the remaining rites... Having performed the rite... Having performed the rites, one should bind a goat's navel hair smeared with lac and golden, after sprinkling and chanting the two verses, “In the lion, in the tiger” and “Glory is the oblative offering.” Then perform the remaining rituals. Having performed the Āshtasūla rite, having taken the black navel hair, smeared it with jute and gold, sprinkled and recited the two verses, "In the lion, the tiger" and "Glory is the oblational offering," and then bound it. Then perform the remaining ritual. Having performed the Astaśūla rite and reciting the two mantras, "In the Lion and Tiger" and "Glory be to the oblation," one should bind the bull's navel hair after smearing it with lac and gold and sprinkling it. Then perform further rites. Having performed Astaśūla and reciting the two hymns, "In the Lyon and Tiger" and "Glory be to the Oblation," one should bind the king's navel hair by smearing it with lacquer and gold and sprinkling.
2.4.5	Having performed the Ājya-rite, he binds the pieces of wood of ten trees such as Palāśa, etc., after covering them with lac and gold, having sprinkled and recited the two Sūktas beginning with "Simhe vyagre" and "Yasha haviḥ". Then comes the subsequent rite. Some people think that there is an option in the choice of trees.
2.4.6	In place of these two verses, there is an option of reciting the verses beginning with "In the morning Agni" and ending with "In the waters" and "In the heaven and earth". Having offered the seven vital parts of the body of a graduate etc. in the Sthalipaka rite, one recites the mantra and eats it. The subsequent rites are also done. This rite is for Kshatriyas and others, not for Brahmins. One should not perform the Sthalipaga rite alone.
2.4.7-8	One desiring lustre, having performed the Ājyabhāgas, ties the Snataknabhī-gem, wrapped in lac and gold, having recited the Sūkta beginning with "Prātar agnim" and having sprinkled it. The procedure is the same as in the case of the Haviṣṭa-homa. Having performed the preliminary rites, one ties the Simharomā-gem, having recited the sūkta beginning with " Prātar agnim". Having performed the preliminary rite, one ties the Vyāghra-nabhī-roam-gem, having performed the preliminary rite and having recited the sūkṭa beginning with "Prātara agnim", one ties the Ajana-nabhīroam-gem wrapped in lac and goid, having performed the preliminaries and having recited the Sûkta beginning with "Pratara agnim", having performed the preliminary rites and having recited the Sükta beginning with " Pratara agnim", he ties the Kṛṣṇa-nabhīroma-gem wrapped in lach and gold, having performed the prelimiary rites and having recited " Pratara agniṃ" he ties the Vṛṣabha-nabhī roma-gem wrapped in lace and gold, having pertormed the preliminary rites and recited the Sūtta beginning with " Prātara agnim" he ties the Rajana-nabhî-roma-gem wrapped with lac and gold, and having performed the preliminary ritus and having recited the Sutra beginning with " Prätara agnim" one ties the Snataka-nabhī romam-gem wrapped in loc and gold, having sprinkled it. Having performed the preliminaries, one ties the Sīmharomā-gein, having sprinkled it and having recited the Arthasūkta beginning with “Divaspṛthivīḥ”. Having performed the preliminarics, one ties the Vyaghra-na bhī-roam gem, having sprinkled it, having performed the preliminarics and having recited the Artha-sūkta beginning with Divaspṛthivīs", one ties the Ajaromā-gem having sprinkled it and recited the Artha sūkta beginning with Divasprithivīs". Having performed the preliminaies and having recited the Arta-sūkta, one ties the Ajara-nabhī romā-gem, wrapped with lac and goid. Having performed the prelimiary rites and having recited Divaspṛthīvīs", one ties a gem made of the hair of a sheep, having sprinkled it with lac and gold. Having performed the preliminarics, one ties a gem of the hair of the king of beasts, having sprinkled it.
2.4.9	Having performed the Ābhyanjana rites, he sprinkles the pot of water with all these verses, beginning with "In the lion, in the tiger" and ending with "In the sky and on the earth", and then performs the subsequent rites. One who desires radiance should do this in daily, occasional, or desired baths. This is the procedure for bathing in spring.
2.4.10	With these verses, one sprinkles water with mantras.
2.4.11	Having obtained sandalwood and other fragrances, sprinkle water in the middle, stir with a four-finger-long darbha grass, and take that grass.
2.4.12	With the mantra "Shuni kila asamaje" he dismisses the southern direction. Anointing with sandalwood etc. with three verses "Yaste gandhah" (12.1.23-25), he anoints the kings. In all cases, there is an option due to the abundance of rituals. The abundance of fruits is due to the abundance in rituals. There is no restriction on caste. Everyone is eligible. Even horses and others become radiant. The word "varcas" means brilliance, splendor, radiance, and auspiciousness. These are synonyms. It occurs in the context of gain, honor, etc. These have been performed. The rites of Varcas are completed. The fourth section is concluded.
2.5.0	Now the rites of the king are described. We shall describe the procedure of the rites of war. With the verse "Indra may churn" he recites while churning the fire churned from the wood of the ashvattha tree. With the half-verse "The rotten rope" he places the rope of reeds at the place where the fire falls. With the half verse "Seeing the smoke and fire" he recites over the smoke. With the halfverse "Seeing the fire" he recitess over the fire that has arisen. This is the fire of the army. The procedure of the rites related to the army is described. The bringing forth of the fire of the Army, the seizing of the Grahas, and the taking of five spoonfuls of ghee, having performed up to the Anvähita, he plants a branch of the red ashvattha tree, surrounding it with red and blue threads, and then performs the main rite. After that, there is a special procedure in the northern direction. Having performed up to the offering to Sannitih, he offers ghee with the mantra "May these conquer, svāhā to them." Then he offers the Ingiḍa with the mantra "Parāmi jayantāṃ durāhāmi bhyaḥ" in the fire kindled with the wood of the one to be killed. Then he throws the branch towards the south with the mantra "With the blue and red." The Uttara Tantra beginning with the Svishtakrit is this procedure related to the army. In all rites related to the Army, the mantras are used loudly. The main mantras in the procedure are loud. We shall describe here the procedure of the acts of terrifying the hands of the enemy.
2.5.1-2	Having performed the rites of battle, having made the wheel of the chariot fall down with the verse, "Those who are thrice seven," he makes the chariot move towards the elephant. The rites from the Upasads onwards. One who desires to frighten elephants follows the rites of the king up to the rites of Nirriti.
2.5.3-4	Having performed the rite, he makes the elephant and other vehicles go towards the elephant, reciting the Sūkta "Ye trisaptāḥ". The horses and others go towards the elephant. The rite from the Ābhyātanā onwards is common.
2.5.5	With the verse, "Those who are thrice-sworn," he throws sand on the leather mat, recites it, and sends men facing the elephant. With the same verse, he throws sand into a leather bag and sends the elephants facing it.
2.5.6	Having recited the Sūkta, "Ye are the three-seven", and having recited the Velluka, he goes towards the place where the elephants are. The frightening of elephants is completed. By this rite, elephants flee. This is the rite for frightening the elephants of the enemy.
2.5.7-8	Having performed the Saṅgrāma rites up to the Ājyā, he offers clarified butter with the verse, "We know the father of the arrow, Parjanya, the giver of plenty." The subsequent rites are as before. The rites for victory continue until the rites for entering the kingdom. Having performed the rites up to the Prāṇāyāma, he offers clarified milk with the three verses, "May they not know us." The subsequent rites follow. Having performed the rite with clarified butter, he offers clarified ghee with the three verses (6.65-67), "May anger not be upon us." The subsequent rite follows. Having performed the Saṃgrāma rites, he offers clarified buttermilk with the three verses "The sacrifice is supreme" (6.97-99). The subsequent rite follows, having performed the rite with ghee, he offers cooked rice with the verse, “We know the father..." The subsequent rites are performed as before. One who desires victory performs the Saṃgrāya rites and offers cooked rice with three verses, "They may not know us." Having performed the rite, he offers cooked barley with the three verses “May anger not be..." The subsequent rite follows; having performed the rite, one offers cooked barley with three verses, “The sacrifice is supreme." The subsequent rite is performed.
2.5.9	At the place of arranging the sacrificial grass, he places the bow-grass. Having performed the preliminary rites, he places the sacrificial grass of the bow with the verse, "We know the arrow." Then the subsequent rites are related to war. Having made the bow-grass special in the preliminary rites related to war, he places the grass of the bow three times with the three verses, "May they not know us." Having performed the preparatory rites, he places three times the grass of the bows with the three verses beginning with "May anger not be ours." The one who desires victory, having performed the preparatory rites with the bow-grass, places the grass of bows of the size of a span with these three verses beginning with, "The sacrifice is supreme." Then the subsequent rites.
2.5.10	Having performed the Āgnīdhra rite, having placed the wooden sword on the fire, having sprinkled the wood with the formula, "O Agni, thou art the wood," having placed the wood on the fire with the formula, "Agni is on the earth," having performed the Āghāra rite, having placed a wooden sword on the ground, having performed the Āgnidhra rite, having placed wooden swords on the fire, one places wooden swords of the size of a span with the three verses, "We know the wooden sword," "May the wooden sword," and "May the wooden swords." Having performed the subsequent rites, having performed the rite with the wooden swords, one places wooden needles with the three verses beginning with "May they not know us." Having performed the rites with the wooden needles, one places wooden spears with the three verses "May not anger," "May not anger." Having performed the rite with wooden spears, one places wooden arrows with the three verses "The sacrifice is the most powerful." Having performed the Āghāras rite, one places wooden darts with the three verses "
2.5.11	Having performed the Saṅgrāmaka rite, he consecrates the bow with the verse "We know the arrow", and then wipes it and gives it to the king. The subsequent rite is as follows. Having performed the rite up to the Ābhyānana, he consecrates and wipes the bow with the three verses "May they not know us", and then gives it to the hand. Then the subsequent rite is as the Saṅgrāmika rite. Having performed the Saṃgrāmaka rite up to the Abhyānana, one consecrates and wipes a bow with the three Sūktas "May the anger be averted", and then hands it over to the king. Then the subsequent rites are as follows. Having completed the Saṅgrāraka rite up to the Abhiyanana, one consecates and wipes a bow by reciting the three Sūtras "The sacrifice is victorious", and then gives the bow to the king. The rites for victory are completed. In the case of seizing the field and seizing weapons, all Brahmins, Kṣatriyas, Vaiśyas, Śūdras, and others have authority. This applies to all. There is an option for all rites everywhere. If there is no fighting in battle, victory is achieved by these rites. Enemies flee upon merely seeing them. The method of rites for battle is completed. Now the rites for preventing arrows are described.
2.5.12-13	Having performed the Saṅgrāma rite up to the binding, he cuts the bowstring of the bow with the verse "We know the arrow", consecrates it with the verse "May the arrow", and binds it. Then he performs the Saṅgrâma rite further. Having performed the Saṃgrāma rite further, he binds the root of grass such as Dūrvā, etc., consecrated with the verse "Know the arrow". Then he performs the rite further. The binding is done at the wrist of the person who enters the battle, or if done for the king, it is done for all. The binding is performed at the end of every auspicious rite. By this rite, arrows do not fall on the body of a person. They go to the side. The rites of preventing arrows are completed. The meaning is that they prevent arrows during war. We shall describe the procedure of the rites of preventing all weapons.
2.5.14-15	With the verse "Are asau" he offers the chaff in the fire of the army. With the verse " Are asau" he makes offerings of husks. With the verse Are asau"he makes offerings of ashes. With the verse"Are asau"he offers pieces of wood.
2.5.16	The Sūkta "Āra sau" is recited when seeing an enemy. Due to being a hand-homa, it is an option in the Tantra. When performed in this way, there is success in preventing all weapons. Preventing all weapons such as swords and others is complete. Now we will explain the procedure of the rites of bewitching.
2.5.17-18	Having performed the Saṅgrāma rite, he offers the balls of rice made with the two Sūktas beginning with "Agni naḥ śatrūn" and "Agni no dūtaḥ" on the mortar. The subsequent rites are as in the Āyurveda.
2.5.19	Having performed the rites upto the Āṣṭaśūla, he offers the grains made into balls with the two verses beginning with "Agni is our protector" and the rice-gruel, on the grinding stone. Then follows the subsequent rites.
2.5.20	Having made twenty-one grains of sugar in a winnowing basket with the two verses "Agni is the protector of our enemies", he scatters them towards the enemies.
2.5.21	Having performed the rites upto the offering of the Ajya-portion, one should offer the cooked rice with the two verses beginning with "Agni, our enemy". The special rite is in the sprinkling and the offering of the sacrificial grass. The verses are "I offer what is dear to Apva", "I sprinkle what is dear to you", "May it go to Apva, svāhā". The subsequent rites are as in the Parvan. The rites for confusing the enemy army are complete. Now the rites for causing distress are described.
2.5.22-23	Having performed the rites of the Saṅgrāma rite upto the Ābhyanānas, he consecrates a white goat with the verse, "May it be sharp for me" and releases it towards the enemy army. Then the subsequent rites. The white-footed goat or the white-footed sheep are called by the name "white-footed". The rite of causing agitation is complete. "Delusion" means stupefaction. Those who are unconscious due to fainting are easily killed. It means that all elephants, horses, and infantry become unconscious due to delusion. All rites such as delusion etc. should be performed in the army fire. Delusion of the enemy army means stupefaction. Now we shall describe the rite of Homa in the Saṅgrām
2.5.24	Having performed the Saṅgrāma rites upto the Ājyabhāgas, he offers twice with the two verses beginning with "May my weapon be sharp" and "O Indra, this one". The subsequent rites are as prescribed. One who desires victory performs the rites upto the Ājyas, then offers parched grains with the two verses "May my weapon" and "O lord Indra, this one" respectively. The subsequent rites are prescribed. In the Ajya rites, the wood of bow is used. Having performed the rites upto the Ajyas, he offers the wood of bow with the two verses, "May my weapon", and "O lord, Indra, this one, may it increase the Kshatriya". The subsequent rites follow. In the rites of Ajya, the wood of arrow is used. Having done the rites upto the Agbhas, he offers the arrow wood with the two verses,"May my weapon"and "O lord Indra". The subsequent rites follows. Having performed the rites upto Ājyabhāga, he offers the bow with the two mantras, "May my weapons be sharp" and "O lord Indra, may it increase". The subsequent ritesfollow.
2.5.25	"He stands in each direction with the verses, 'Those who are in this' (3.26) and 'The eastern direction' (3. 27), for victory. With the three-verse verse, 'Salutations to the killers of gods,' he stands in each direction for his own army. The repetition of the six verses is for victory and protection in each direction. The rite of protecting one's own army is complete. The rite of inspiring one's own soldiers is described.
2.5.26-27	The Abhiyoga is enthusiasm. The enthusiasm in battle increases. The two hymns 'Tvayā Manyo' and 'Yas te Manyo' are recited while standing between the two armies, gazing.
2.5.28	Having performed the Saṅgrāma rite, he casts the Mānja and Mauñja nooses adorned with Ingiḍa, having recited the Sūktas beginning with "Tvayā manye" and "Yas te manye", and having consecrated them, into the enemy army. The rite from the Ābhyatāna onwards is to be performed. Having performed the rite, he casts Mānja and Mouñja nooses, adorned with IngiḌa, having recited them, and having consecrated them. The rite from Ābhyatana onwards is to be done. Having performed the rite, having recited the Mānja nooses, having consecrated them, and having recited them, he casts them into the enemy army, while breathing. Since the Grahas are not mentioned, it is said that they are recited while angry. He casts them into the movements of the enemy army. The rite from Ābhyaṭana onwards is to performed.
2.5.29	Having performed the Ājyabhāgas, he consecrates the vessels of water with the two verses beginning with "O Manas." He scatters them angrily in the marching order of the army. The subsequent procedure is as before. Now the knowledge of victory and defeat is mentioned.
2.5.30-31	Having sprinkled the grass of arrows with the two verses beginning with "O Mannu" and "O Mannu, who art thou", and having recited them, he lights them with the Angiras Agni. Having placed them between the two armies, where the smoke goes, there is victory. Thus the encouragement of one's own army is completed. Angiras Agni, Caṇḍāla Agni, Sūtika Agni, and the grass of one's rosary are the fifth chapter.
2.6.1	Having kindled the fire on the back of an elephant, facing the enemy, one offers clarified butter reciting the verses "Rddhiṃ mantra" and "Tadi das". One does not follow the procedure. Alternatively, having kindled the fire on a leaf of the ashvattha tree, in a vessel, in a triangular shape, on cow dung, facing the enemy and reciting the verses "Ṛddhiṃ mantra", "Tadi das", one offers clarified butter. Having approached that vessel, one throws it on the ground.
2.6.2	The kings make the altar of clay prescribed by Varaha.
2.6.3	Then having performed the Ājyabhāga offering with the two verses "Rddhi" and "Ta didāsa", one should perform the subsequent rites. One who desires victory, having performed the rites prescribed by Varāha, offers parched grains with the two verses, "Rddhi” and “Ta didāsa". Then one should perform the remaining rites. Having performed the rites prescribed earlier, one offers the bow and the bow-kindling wood with the two verses “Rddhi” etc. Then one should perform subsequent rites. In the rites prescribed by Varaha, one offers the arrow and the arrow-kindling wood, with the two verses Rddhi etc. Then one performs the subsequent rites. Having performed the rites prescribed in Varaha, one consecrates the bow with the two verses "Rddhi" and "Ta didāsa", wipes it, and gives it to the king. Then one performs subsequent rites.
2.6.4	The dead body of a person who has died in battle is not burnt. A bundle of wood is placed on it and a chariot wheel is placed on top of it. With a long-handled ladle, he offers clarified butter through the hole in the wheel, reciting the verses "Rddhi mantra" and "Ta idāsa". There is no ritual.
2.6.5	Having heard the words "Rise", "Arm yourself", "Strike", "Fight", "Engage", one should engage in battle with one's own army.
2.6.6	Having recited the verse, "If indeed you are the one," one should recite the verse for the enemy. Having recited the verse "Salutations to the killers of gods," one should recite it for the enemy. The rites for victory and war are completed. These rites, if performed, will certainly lead to victory. We shall now explain the method of war for the Vaishya.
2.6.7	Having performed the rites of the battle, such as churning fire, etc., he offers clarified butter with the verse, "If you have thought of me." Having performed the rites up to the Anvārambhaṇī verses, he offers parched grains with the verse, "If you have thought me for wealth." Then the subsequent rites. Having performed the rites, he places the bow-kindling wood and the bow-kindler with the verse, "If you have thought." Then the subsequent rites." Having performed the rites and placed the arrow-kindling wood, the arrow-kindler with this verse, "If thou hast thought." Then subsequent rites." He consecrates the bow with the verse, 'If thou hast thought,' touches it, wipes it, and gives it to a Vaishya. Then the subsequent rites." Having performed the rites with the verse, “Salutations to the killers of gods,” he offers clarified butter. Then the subsequent rite. Having performed the rite with the verse, ”Salutations to the killer of gods,” he makes an offering of parched grains. Then the subsequent ritual. Having performed the Anvārambhāṇī verses, and placed the bow-kindlers and the bow-kinds with the verse, Salutations to the killers of the gods, then the subsequent rites. Then having performed the rites, and placed the arrow kindlers and the arrow kindling wood with the verse, ‘Salutations to the gods who kill,’ then the subsequent rites, he consecrates the bow, touches it, wipes and gives it to the Vaishya. Having performed the subsequent rites, one who desires victory completes the rites of the Vaishya battle. Now we shall describe the rites of battle for the warrior and the village chief.
2.6.8	Having performed the Saṅgrāma rites upto the Ābhyatāna, he offers clarified butter with the verse, "By you we have conquered." Then the subsequent rites. Having performed the rites, he offers parched grains with the verse, “By you we have.” Then the subsequent rites Having performed the rite, he places the bow and arrow on the sacrificial grass with the verse, "By you we have." Then the subsequent rite. Having performed rites, he places the sacrificial grass and arrow on the bow with the verse, "By you we have." Then the subsequent rite." Having performed the Ābhyātana rites, he consecrates the bow with the mantra, "By you we have,", wipes it, and gives it to the commander-in-chief. Then the subsequent rite The rites of the commander-in chief, the leader of the army, the protector of the fort, the victory of one's own army, the defeat of one's army, the victory of the commander- in-chief, and the victory of other superior officers are completed. The knowledge of the victory of one’s own army, defeat of one’s army, and the fear of the death of men is stated.
2.6.9	Having recited the verse "Do not give it to him," and having recited the verse over the water vessel, then two warriors should be examined.
2.6.10	If the king does not see him, he should not fight or make others fight. The family priest should recite the mantra again and again over the water vessel. The recognition of the fighting men of one's own army is complete. Now, for the one who desires victory, the consecration of a new chariot is described.
2.6.11	Having recited the verse, "He who knows the truth," he makes the king ascend the new chariot with the charioteer. Having recited the verse "O Indra, the lord of the earth," he makes the new chariot ascend with the king and the charioteer, having recited the verse "The one who generates the earth," he causes the king to ascend the new chariot along with the chariotier, having recited the two verses "O Agni, and Indra, for the one who offers," he causes the new chariot to ascend with the king along with the charieteer, having recited two verses "The four directions," he causes the chariot to ascend with king and charioteer, desiring victory. The procedure for ascending the new chariot is complete. Now the procedure for health is explained.
2.6.12-13	Having recited the three verses beginning with "Brahma, the unborn" and ending with "Not attained", he recites the three verses beginning "Brahma, unborn" and ending "Not attained", and then places them on the embers.
2.6.14	If they rise up, then there is health. The knowledge of health is complete. Now the knowledge of victory in battle is explained.
2.6.15	Having recited the three verses, "Brahma is born," "Those who are not bound," "Having a thousand streams," one should make three ropes of grass and then contemplate: One rope is one's own army, the second rope in the middle is death, and the third rope is the enemy's army. Having contemplated thus, one should place them on the embers.
2.6.16	The army of the one over whom Death goes, does not win. The army of the person over whom Death falls, wins. The army of one who goes face to face with the enemy, also wins.
2.6.17	Having recited the second Sūkta, "Brahma is born" (5.6), he recites over the rope of the bathhouse once, then places it on the embers, then observes it. The chief ones are killed in the foremost ones, the western parts of the foremost ones, when they are raised. The middle ones in the middle ones, and the inferior ones in the eastern parts of the foremost.
2.6.18	Thus he makes the arrows, having bound them, and having recited the verse "Brahma, the unborn," he makes them. There are three rites: the rite of knowing health, the rite of knowing victory and defeat, and the rite of knowing the superiority, mediocrity, and inferiority of the arrows. These three rites should be performed after reciting the verse. The arrows should be made of wood or bamboo. The knowledge of warfare is complete. The sixth chapter is finished.
2.7.1	Having performed the Ābhyatāna rite, he cleanses the musical instruments such as the drum with the verse "Ucchairaghoṣaḥ", smears them with a paste of sulphur and resin, and consecrates them. Then the Purohita strikes them three times and gives them to the players. Then the subsequent rites. Having performed the Ābhīthāna rite, he washes the musical instruments, smears them with a mixture of sulphur and resin and consecrates them with the verse "Up śvasaya". Then the subsequent rites.
2.7.2	Having performed the Ābhyanjana rites, one should wash all musical instruments with the Sūkta beginning with "Viharedaṃ," smear them with a paste of sulphur and oil, offer them loudly, strike them three times while consecrating them, and then give them. The subsequent rites are as follows.
2.7.3	Having performed the Āṣṭa-homa, one should bind the Soma sprout and gem wrapped in a deer skin, having consecrated it with the mantra "Vihareda" and having sprinkled it. Then comes the subsequent procedure. The use of the mantra "Viharedam" is indicated everywhere with a high-pitched tone. The rite of causing enmity, terror, and destruction of enemies is concluded here.
2.7.4	The king, reciting the verse "May the paths be turned away from all sides," should thrice circumambulate the army. The king, reciting with the verse "Indra conquers," should thrice circumamulate the camp, desiring victory. The verse is repeated thrice.
2.7.5	Having performed the Ābhyanānas, he makes a Soma-gem wrapped in leather, consecrates it with the Parivarmanī Sūkta, and binds it to the king. The subsequent rites are for one who desires victory.
2.7.6	Having performed the Āṣṭaśītihoma, one should offer the Paśuhoma. Having performed the Āṭaśīțihoma, one should perform the Paśuhotra. Having performed the Aṣṭaśītīhoma, one should make the Paśu offering. Having performed the Astaśītihoma one should make the Pasu offering. Having recited the Astaśīțihoma one should make Pasu offerings. Having performed the Astashītihoma one makes the Pasu offerings. Having performed the Astaśītīhoma one makes the Paśu offerings. Having recited the Aṣṭāśītihoma he makes the Paśupuroḍāśa offering. Having performed Astaśīti-homa he makes the Pasupurodāśa offering.
2.7.7	Having recited the verse, "Thy vital parts," he makes the king put on the armour, desiring safety.
2.7.8	With the verse, "O heaven and earth, grant me freedom from fear" (6.40), he worships the seven sages in each direction of the army. With the verse, “O heaven and earth..." he stands facing each direction of the military. With the verse "You are the hawk, the Gayatri..." (6.48), he worships or stands facing the seven sages in the four directions of the army. One should perform this in the four directions while engaged in battle. With the verse “O heaven and Earth, grant me freedom..." (6.26), one who desires freedom from fear worships or stands in one place, performing the ritual action. With the verse option, "You are the Hawk..." (6.18), one stands facing the directions, remaining in one's own place, standing upright and facing the directions. One should perform in the four directions. The ritual action for freedom from fear of the army is complete.
2.7.9-13	The churning of fire has been mentioned at the beginning with the words, "Indra may churn." Now the rite for destroying enemies is mentioned.
2.7.14	One should perform the rite of destroying enemies in a forest, not in the middle of a village. The option of the rite is due to the offering of a hand-sized oblation. With the verse "Indra may churn," one offers sticks of ashvattha. The enemy is destroyed. With the verse "Indra may churn," one offers sticks of karimālaka. In the army fire, everywhere, with the verse "Indro manthatu," one offers eranda sticks. With the verse "Indro manthutu," one offers tiṇi sticks. With the "Indro manthu" verse, one offers khadira sticks. With the "Indra may churn" verse, one offers śara sticks. In the army-fire, the rite of destroying the enemy is completed. The enemy is defeated. The option of rites is concluded.
2.7.15	Having performed the Ābhyanānas, he consecrates the Bhaṅga-nooses with the verse "Indra may churn", and scatters them in the army's path. Everywhere, the consecration is done with anger. After that, the subsequent ritual is performed. Having performed the ritual, he consecrates Mouja nooses with the verse "Indra may churn" and scatters them on the army's route. The ritual is also performed.
2.7.16	Having performed the Ābhyanānas, he consecrates and scatters the Aśvattha-wood stakes with the verse "Indra may churn", in the places of the army. Having performed the rites one by one, he consecrates the Bhaṅga-wood nets with the verse "May Indra churn", and scatters them in the places of army. Then comes the subsequent rite.
2.7.17	Having performed the rite, he consecrates the sticks for striking with the verse "Indra may strike", and scatters them in the order of the army. Then the subsequent rite is completed. The rites for victory are finished.
2.7.18-20	"Svāhā to them" and so on, up to the branch of Nīla-Lohita, is used in all rites. The rites for success mentioned earlier are compulsory and are being mentioned.
2.7.21	The performer recites the Anuvāka "Ye bāhavah" during the time of battle.
2.7.22	Having performed the Ajyatra ritual, he offers clarified butter with the Anuvāaka "Ye bāhavah". Then the subsequent ritual with clarified butter.
2.7.23	Having performed the Ājyabhāga and Ājyādhāna, he offers parched grains with the Anuvāka beginning with "Ye bāhavah." Then the subsequent rites of the war-like rite. Having performed the subsequent rites of a war-like rite, he places arrows smeared with clarified butter on the fire in the form of a bow, with the Anuvaka beginning with "Ye vāhavah." Then subsequent rites. Having performed the previous rites, he places arrows in the fire in the shape of a bow, smeared with clarified butter, with the Anuvaaka beginning with "ye vāhavah." Then the subsequent rites. Having done the previous rites with clarified butter, he sprinkles the bow with clarified butter, recites the Anuvaka "ye vāhavāh," wipes it, and gives it to the warrior. Then the subsequent rites with clarified butter. Having done the preliminary rites with clarified butter and reciting the Anuvaka “ye vāhavāh,” he sprinkles the hempen nooses with clarified butter, angrily recites them, and casts them in the marching places of the army. Then the subsequent rite with clarified butter. In all cases, with the nooses, with the ashvattha trees, with the stakes, with the hemp, with the nets, with the striking sticks, and with the vajra-shaped vessels, one should perform the sprinkling and angry recitation. Having performed the rites with clarified butter with the Anuvākā beginning with "ye bāhavah," he sprinkles the muñja nooses with clarified ghee, recites them angrily, and casts them on the marching places of his army. Then the concluding rites with clarified butter.
2.7.24	Having performed the rite, he offers the iron-made images of the three deities, having sprinkled and recited the Anuvāka beginning with "Ye bahāvaḥ", in the places of the army. The subsequent rite. Having performed the rite with the Anuvākas beginning with "Ye Bahāvaḥ", he offers the images of the thunderbolt, having sprinkled and reciting them, in the places of army. Then the subsequent rite. Having done the rite with the anuvākas beginning "Ye Bahāvah", he offers the iron images of the thunderbolt and the images of the Arbuda, having sprinkled and chanted them, in the positions of the army. Then the later rite.
2.7.25	Having performed the Ājyabhāga offerings, having recited the Anuvāka beginning with "Ye bāhavāḥ," he consecrates the goat with the grass-rope and the stick, reciting the mantra, and anoints it with clarified butter. The subsequent rites are performed with clarified butter.
2.7.26	Having performed the Saṅgrāma rites, having placed the second Śitipadī with the Anuvāka "Ye bāhavāḥ", having sprinkled it with water, he throws it into the enemy army. The concluding rite is with ghee. Then there is the release of the army and fire. Having conquered the enemy, one performs the completion of the rite. In all cases, there is an option of rites. The Saṅgrāmaka rites are complete. There is an option of either of the two Śitipadī rites. By this rite, victory is certainly attained. Now we shall describe the rite for entering the country and approaching the king.
2.7.27	One who has gone out of his own country and wishes to enter it again, should perform this rite.
2.7.28	Having performed the Ājyatantra up to the Ānāhuka, he offers cooked rice with the Anūṣuka rice grains, cooked with Kāmpīla and Sārupvat, with the verse "In this wealth", and consecrates the king. The subsequent rites are as before. This rite is for the king who has been exiled from his kingdom and wishes to re-enter it. By this rite, he is allowed to re-enter his own kingdom. When the entire land has been plowed, if the king has been expelled, then he performs this rite when he wishes to re-establish himself in his kingdom. Anūṣuka means rice grains that have sprouted again. Avraṣka means those that have been cut and have sprouted again.
2.7.29	Having performed the Ābhyatāna rites, having made a wheel of a chariot, with spokes, rim, and axle, covered with lead, copper, silver, and bronze, with a golden hub, having smeared it thrice, having wound it with a thread, having placed it on the sacrificial grass, having sprinkled it with the verses, having recited the verses, he binds it with the two verses, "The sun has risen in the east" (1.29.5-6). Then one should proceed beyond the rites. If the kingdom is half destroyed, this rite should be performed. By this rite, the kingdom prospers.
2.7.30-31	Having recited the two Sūktas beginning with "Acikradat" and "Ā tvā gan", he offers the rice-cake shaped like a bed in water on Darbha grass. Then he fills it with clay. The rite up to the sprinkling is performed. Having recited the two sūktas beginning with "Acicradat" and "A tvā gan", having offered the rice cooked in milk in a pot, having recited the mantra, he places it in the king's stomach. Then the subsequent rites.
2.7.32	Therefore, the king departed from that place, taking the provisions.
2.7.33	When the three morning oblations have been consumed, the king again obtains entry into the country. For the purpose of knowing this oblation rite, the rites for entry into the country are completed. Entry is certainly obtained, or there is fear, or death, or obstruction, or harm from the gods, or from the enemy. Entry is certainly attained, this is the meaning. Only royal rites are performed. The rites for entry into one's own country are completed. The seventh chapter is concluded.
2.8.1	Having performed the Ābhyanānas, he performs the Śānti-water ritual according to the prescribed procedure. The water of the great rivers, the water of the forest ponds, the water of divine rain, and the divine water are the options or combinations of waters for the Śānti water ritual.
2.8.2	Then he cooks rice in the water of a river or the sea, and having spread darbha grass on the right side of the altar, the king stands above it and the Purohita consecrates him with the water of the pot of peace, reciting the verse "Bhūta is among the beings".
2.8.3	Having been consecrated and bathed, he spreads the skin of a black antelope on a wooden plank and makes the king sit on it with the verse, "Bhūta among the beings."
2.8.4-5	Both the king and the Brahman sprinkle each other with water from a pot, flowing in a stream.
2.8.6-7	The king says, "May we be together," and the Brahman says, "He who has done wrong"
2.8.8	Then he consecrates the cooked rice with the verse "Bhūto bhūteṣu" and keeps it aside.
2.8.9	Then he makes the horse ascend with the verse "Bhuto bhūteșu" and sends it out with the horse, returning to the house. The remaining rites are as before.
2.8.10	The fee is a thousand cows, a village, and the consecration.
2.8.11	The consecration of the Mandala-holder, the Samanta, the Yuvaraja, the Senapati, or any other person should be done according to this procedure. After the selection of the Purohita, the consecration should be performed. After the consecration, the offering of ghee, the night vigil, and the royal duties such as the grinding of grains should be performed daily according to the procedure. All gifts are given. The annual events such as the flower consecration, the Mahanaumi festival, the bull release, the birthday celebration, etc. are to be performed. The universal consecration is mentioned. We shall describe the procedure of the great consecration.
2.8.12	Then he performs the rite of sprinkling with water for peace, reciting the mantra for the four oceans, the hundred great rivers, and the water of the four directions. With that water, he performs the rite for peace. With the mantra prescribed for sprinkling, he cooks rice in water. Then he spreads a mat to the right of the Veda, as is customary in the world. He spreads darbha grass on that mat. When the king is seated there, he consecrates him with the water for peace, using the verse "May the unseen be peaceful to the seen."
2.8.13	Then he spreads a tiger skin on the lowest bed and makes the king ascend it on the couch, reciting the verse, "Bhūta is among the beings." The king sprinkles water from a pot and says, "May it be with us." The priest says, "He who has done wrong." Then the priest recites the verse.
2.8.14	The four princes, holding the feet of the king, place him in the middle of the assembly.
2.8.15	A servant washes the feet, a great Śūdra of the king gives the water for washing, the family priest recites the Sūkta "Abhūta bhūteṣu".
2.8.17	The king plays dice again. The priest recites the verse "Bhūto bhūteṣu" (The one who is in the beings). One share is for the four castes. Three shares are for the king. The king protects all castes everywhere.
2.8.18	The vaishya approaches the king with the mantra "Utsṛja āyuṣman" (Release, O one who has life).
2.8.19	Then the king gives permission to the Brahmana with these mantras.
2.8.20-21	Then, having sprinkled the cooked rice with the verse "Bhūto bhūteṣu", he consecrates it and offers it to the king.
2.8.22	Having consecrated the horse with the verse "Bhuto bhūteșu", he mounts it and makes it walk without defeat.
2.8.23	He then goes back to the assembly hall.
2.8.24	Then he feeds the Brahmanas with sweet food mixed with honey.
2.8.25	Having performed the rite, he consecrates the Rasas with the verse "Then there was the unseen in the beings" and then places them near the king. The rite from the beginning to the end is performed. The Dakshina is a thousand cows and the best village.
2.8.26	Then he goes to the house of women.
2.8.27	There the Madhuparka should be offered. The great consecration is completed. From now on, the duties of the king, such as supervising ghee, the Purohita's duties, the night vigil, the worship of the constellations, the worship of planets, etc., should be performed.
2.8.28-29	"Then the king should say, 'With me alone.' Then the priest should say, 'Whoever has done wrong.' Then the priest recites the Sūkta."
2.8.30	Then, with the verse "Savitar, the impeller of the moving," one who is going to be the Purohita (royal priest) places the kindling woods brought by a Shudra. It is said in the Gopath Brāhmaṇa that Atharva-Angiras is the Purohita. In royal rites, the fivefold ghee is used everywhere. The royal rites end with the consecration, starting with the striking of the hands.
2.8.31	The Upanayana is performed with two verses beginning with "Indra, the Kshatra". In the place of the verse "Vasur asmin", he recites the verse "Kshatriyo 'yam". If one performs the Upanayana of a Kshatriya, there is a special procedure for the Upanayana of Kshatriyas. The rest is the same.
2.8.32-34	Or, they think that it should be recited. The teachers have this option. The rite of Upanayana for a Kṣatriya is complete. Here is a verse: The rites of learning, prosperity, and harmony, and the radiance, and the royal rites in order, are described by the great sage in this second chapter. The eighth chapter is complete.
3.1.0	Now we will describe the rites of Nirṛti, up to the rites of Puṣṭi.
3.1.1	On the full-moon night, one should perform the rite of Nirriti. Wearing black garments, taking the fire, going to the water's edge, climbing onto a boat, lighting the fire, and reciting the Sūkta "Ye trisaptāḥ" (1.1), one should consecrate and eat the oblation. There is no ritual sequence.
3.1.2	One should dig a pit for the Śāpetan.
3.1.3	There, having bathed with the Sūktas of water,
3.1.4-5	Having put on a new garment and removed his sandals, he returns home.
3.1.6	Then he performs the Saṃpada or Pauṣṭika rite, or performs only the Saṃpada rite.
3.1.7-11	Having put on a black garment, having removed the old sandals, holding the old umbrella with the left hand, having placed the fire on the grass-mat with the right hand, having lit the fire on the old Vīrīṇa, having turned to the left, facing the direction of Nirṛti, he offers clarified butter once with the verse, "Those who are thrice-born".
3.1.12	He throws the umbrella and shoes into the fire. Then he performs the subsequent rites. At the end of the water rite, he digs a pit facing south with the Avya mantra. He sprinkles with the Apasukta mantras. He abandons the black (cow) in the water. Having put on new clothes and taken off the shoes, he returns home.
3.1.13	At the full moon of the preceding month, having put on a black garment, having taken the fire, having gone out, having kindled the fire at the foot of the Vīraṇa tree, he offers the Vrihi mixed with sugar once with the verse, "This is your birthplace."
3.1.14	He offers the Dhānas mixed with sugar once by the verse, "Do thou nourish us, do not forsake us."
3.1.15	With two verses, "This is your place," and "Do thou nourish us," he offers the third oblation with the basket. Then at the water's edge he digs a pit and sprinkles it with the verses of the water. He leaves the black (cow) in the water. Having put on new clothes and sandals, he goes to the place of the killer of living beings.
3.1.16	At the full moon of the autumn, having put on a black garment, he performs the rites of Nirṛti at sunset on the bank of water. Having bound a piece of iron with thorns on the Kakajangha, having made a cake on the thorns, facing Nirṛti, he releases a crow with the verse "Do not fall." He digs a hole in the sand on the right bank of a river. He sprinkles with the verses of water. He abandons the black (garment) in water. Having put on new garments and sandals, he then returns home.
3.1.17	At the full moon of the east, having put on a black garment, he performs the rites of Nirriti. The performer puts on a blue garment below and covers it with a red garment, and puts on a white garment as a turban, and with the verse "May that be prosperity" (7.115.2), he throws the turban into the water along with a piece of iron, with the left hand.
3.1.18	With the verse, "One hundred are the marks of Lakshmi," he throws the red garment along with the iron piece into the water with his left hand. With the verse, “These have been declared to me,” he throws the blue garment along with the metal piece into the water, with his left hand, and buries the pot. He sprinkles with the verses of the water. He leaves the black garment in the water. Having become one who wears fresh garments, wearing sandals, he comes home. Then he should perform rites, those for prosperity and those for mutual benefit. The rites for prosperity and mutual benefit are completed. The five principal rites are for prosperity and mutual benefits. Having performed the rites for prosperity and benefits, one is entitled to perform the rites for mutual benefits. One performs the rites for prosperity or mutual benefits, either collectively or individually, for the sake of destroying sins. There is no sequence among the five rites. Having performed one of them, one can then perform the rites for prosperity. The rites for mutual benefits are the rites for mutual benefit of a student, etc. The rites for the prosperity of the previous one are the rites for prosperity such as the Citra rite. These are mentioned. We shall now describe the procedure of the rites for prosperity, up to the rites for prosperity.
3.1.19-20	He spreads Darbha grass in the line of clarified butter. The rite is similar upto the recitation of the Vyāhata Sāmans. With the verse, "Those who are thrice-born" (1.1), he consecrates and eats the cooked rice of milk boiled in a pot, having performed the Sampāta rite. The performer of the rite eats it. The rite is to be performed as prescribed. This rite should be performed on the full moon day of the month of Caitra, or on the constellation Citra. The rite of Caitra is to be performed regularly.
3.1.21	With the verse, "Those who are thrice-seven," he offers Palasha and other kindling woods smeared with ghee. This is also a variegated rite, and it is always performed.
3.1.22	Having gone to the confluence of the rivers, having performed the Āṣṭa-homa, having sprinkled the cooked food with the Sūkta "Ye trisaptāḥ", having recited it, having placed it on the ground behind the fire, one eats like an animal, facing it, not with the hand. The Āṣṭahoma and the subsequent rites are as before.
3.1.23	The rite lasts for three nights, with the rites being performed daily.
3.1.24	One who desires brilliance and nourishment completes the Tejovrata.
3.1.25	Having performed the Ābhyatāna rites, one recites the verses beginning with "The waters have stood" (1.5), "The goddesses are auspicious" (1.6), "Brahma, the unborn" (5.6.2), the section beginning with "This is the left one", the two verses beginning with "Who is reddish", the section beginning with the verse "The signs of the sky", the two verses "I am the head", the section beginning "Resisting poison", one eats the milk-rice after reciting these verses and sprinkling it. The entire procedure is to be followed. In all cases, the group of verses beginning with "the waters have stood" should be known.
3.1.26	He offers oblations with water, with Udumbara wood, with Palasa wood, with Karkandhu wood, with Vrihi grains, with Yava grains, with Sesamum seeds. In the procedure, he eats the cooked rice mixed with water, having consecrated it with the mantra. In the procedure he eats the Purusa cake mixed with water, consecrated with the mantra. In the procedure, he consumes the juices mixed with water, consecrating them with the mantra. For three days, he kindles the fire with water. He approaches the fire three times with water. At the end of the Anvähita rite, he eats the blood mixed with water from his left hand and heart. The subsequent procedure is as follows. These are the rites ending with churning. Now the rites for prosperity are being described for one who is going on a journey.
3.1.27	"Brahma, the unborn," "Those who are not attained," with this verse, one offers clarified butter in the ritual. With the fourteenth verse, "Brahma, born," one offers Palasha and other kindling woods. With this verse, one makes an offering of Puronuvakya. With the second verse, "Brahmajyani," one offers milk, cooked rice, milk pudding, an animal, barley, sesame seeds, cooked barley, fermented rice gruel, and Shashkulyas. These are optional offerings. In hand-held offerings, there is an option of rituals. This is the beginning of the ritual.
3.1.28	When he comes, then he should do this rite.
3.1.29	When he goes to the village, then he should perform this rite.
3.1.30	If he asks for something according to his need, then he should offer this rite.
3.1.31	Or, even if he is not desirous, he performs it. Then the rite of the ocean is explained. We shall explain the rite of all fruits.
3.1.32-34	Having performed the Ābhyanana, then four bundles of Palāśa wood, four bundles of Darbha grass, he offers in alternation. One bundle of kindling wood, the second on top of it, a bundle of Darbha grass. Again in the same way. Having made eight layers one above the other, then he offers clarified butter with the fourteen-fold formula, "Brahma, the unborn."
3.1.35	Then he consumes the smoke.
3.1.36	He eats the paste. The subsequent ritual is as in the consecration.
3.1.37-38	Or he performs this rite at that place itself. He who desires wealth, grain, sons, prosperity, fame, intellect, dharma, heaven, life, strength, wisdom, prosperity, village, well, etc., wife, chief, safety, welfare, victory, best house, woman, gold, gems, etc., attains them. Because of the statement "It is called the ocean of rites," the first section is completed.
3.2.0	Now the peace for the diseases of cows and for the growth and reproduction of cows is described.
3.2.1	Having recited the verses "O Amba, they go", "O waters, you are the foundation", "O goddesses, may you be peaceful", he makes the cows drink salt. Having recited the verses beginning with "O cows, come", he makes the cow drink salt. Having made the cows drink salt with the verse "One and I", the cows give much milk. This rite is for diseases such as fever, swelling, and leprosy.
3.2.2	This rite is performed for the purpose of conception.
3.2.3	Having recited the three verses beginning with "O Amba, they go", "O waters, you are the foundation", and "O goddesses, may there be peace", one recites the verse beginning with "Brahma, the unborn" and makes the cows drink water. Having recited the verse beginning with "O cows, come", one recites the verses beginning with "One and me" and "O cows, come" and makes the cattle drink water. Having closed the pond with the verse beginning with “One and me”, one makes the cows drink. The rites for nourishing cattle are completed. All rites are said to be for nourishing.
3.2.4	Having brought water from two great rivers, he sprinkles it all around and throws the water from the well or pond there.
3.2.5	Having cooked the rice mixed with water, having performed the Prāṇāyāma, having sprinkled the rice mixed with the water with the verse "May the waters flow", having recited the mantra, he eats it. Then the subsequent rites are for one who desires prosperity.
3.2.6	Having performed the Ābhyatāna rites, one should prepare a gruel of barley flour with water from the great rivers, add curds and honey, and consecrate it with the verse "May it flow together," and eat it reciting the mantra. The subsequent rites are for prosperity. Now we shall explain the rite for Lakshmi.
3.2.7	Having performed the Āṣṭaśītihoma, one should take rice, ghee, and milk from the house of one who has Lakshmi, cook them, and consecrate them with the verse "May they flow together." One should eat them, reciting the verse. The subsequent rites are as before.
3.2.8	Having performed the Āṣṭaśīrṣa Homa, one should bring cow-dung from the house of a wealthy person, dry it, and cook rice with ghee in a three-layered cow-dung vessel. Then, having sprinkled and recited the mantra "Sam sam saravantu" (May they flow together), one eats it. Then, the subsequent ritual is completed. The rite for attaining Lakshmi is finished. When the rite for Lakshmi is performed, one becomes prosperous. Now, the rite for the ocean is performed. The rites for destroying poverty are mentioned.
3.2.9	Having smeared the Śerabhaka with clay, having bound it in water, having carried fire there, having offered oblation with the verse "O Śerabhaka", having recited the mantra, one eats it for the purpose of prosperity.
3.2.10-11	Having performed the Ābhyanana rite, one should offer parched barley grains with the verse "Sherabhaka" and then eat them after consecrating them with the verse and reciting it without interruption. Then perform the subsequent rites.
3.2.12	Having tied the grass into knots, one should take those knots and move away, going in the opposite direction.
3.2.13	With the verse "O Sherabhaka" he sprinkles water in the pot, reciting each verse separately. Having bathed with that pot of water, he rinses his mouth. We shall now describe the rites of the cowpen for prosperity.
3.2.14-15	Having performed the Tantrals, one eats the milk of a cow mixed with phlegm, consecrated with the verse "Come, let the cattle come", and sprinkled. The subsequent rites are as prescribed. One who desires prosperity, having performed the Tantrls up to the Anvähäryas, mixes the milk of a milch cow with phlegm and eats it, consecrated with the verses "May we be united with the cow-pen" and "May we be joined with the cow-shed". The subsequent rites are prescribed. Having performed the Tantrds up to the Anvāhāryas, one eats the cow's milk mixed with phlegms, consecrated with the two verses "May we have offspring" and "You know the path", and sprinkled. Then the subsequent rites are prescribed.
3.2.16	Having recited the verse "Come, O cattle," he gives the cow after reciting it. In all cases, one should follow the desire for prosperity. Having recited the verse, "May your cattle," he gives a cow after reciting it, for those who have offspring. Having recited the two verses, "You know the path," he gives a bull. Having recited the verses, "Prajapati and," he gives a heifer.
3.2.17-18	Having recited the verse "Come hither", he takes the water pot and places it in the middle of the cattle pen. Having made a heap of dust in the cattle pen with the left hand, he scatters half of it with the right hand. For prosperity, having recited the verse "May you be united with the cattle pen", he takes the pot of water and places it in front of the cattle pen, having made a heap of earth with the left hand and scattered half of it with his right hand. For the sake of prosperity, having recited two verses beginning with "Prajapatir and Parameṣṭhin", he takes the vessel of water and places in the cattle pen, making a heap of earth on the left side and scattering half of it with right hand. Having recited the verse beginning with "Prajāpati and Parameṣṭhi", he takes the container of water and places half of it in the cattle pen.
3.2.19	He places the lumps of dung and guggula and salt in the rice along with the Sarūpavatsa and then buries them in the fire.
3.2.20-21	Having dug out for three nights, having performed the Ājyabhāga rite upto the Ājyādhāna, having besprinkled with the verse "Come hither", one eats it after reciting the verse. The subsequent procedure is as before. On the fourth day, having performed the Ajyabhāga rite up to the Ājyādha-na, having besprinked with the verse "May we be united with the cow-pen", one eats it. The subsequent procedure as before. On fourth day, having done the Ājyabhāja rite up to the Ajyādhāna, having sprinkled with the two verses "Prajāvatīḥ" and "Prajāvatīm", one eats it, the subsequent procedure as before, having done the Ajyabhāja rite upto the Ajyādhānam, having sprinkled with verse "Prajāpatiśca", one eats it as before. On forth day, having done Ajyabhāja rites up to Ajyādhānan, having sprinkled with Sarūpavat-sam, one eats it. Subsequent procedure as before. The rites of cow-pen are completed. Thus the cow-pacification is completed. Now the pacification of the gem of all desires is being described.
3.2.22	Having performed the Āṭānāṭa rite, one ties the Palāśa gem, having been soaked three times with the verse "This is the gem of Parna, the moving one," having sprinkled it and recited it. Having soaked the Palāśādi gems on the thirteenth day, one ties them. This is stated in the commentary. One who desires prosperity, radiance, strength, longevity, and wealth is connected with the four gems, namely Palāśā, etc. Then comes the subsequent ritual. Having performed the Ātānāṭa ritual, one ties the Tilaka gem, having been steeped with the verse "Here is the gem of Pratihara," having sprinkled it with the verse "The gem of Prativara," having recited it. Then comes the later ritual. One who desires to remove the faults of sorcery, prosperity, wealth, Dharma, valour, longevity, the purpose of removing obstacles, fame, and one who desires to destroy enemies and also desires victory in diseases, and one who seeks strength and auspiciousness, having performed the Āṭanāṭa rite with the verse "May this be my gem of Varana," one ties the Varana gem, having been steepened, having sprinkled it and reciting it. Then comes subsequent ritual. One who seeks the destruction of enemies, one who seeks protection, one who desires victory in sorcery, one who desires fame, and one desiring prosperity.
3.2.23-25	Having performed the Āṣṭa-homa, having soaked the Khadira-wood-stick-gem three times, having wrapped it with gold, having placed the wood-stick with the verse "This is the wood-stick", having soaked the wood-stick and having taken it, having sprinkled it with the Arthasūkta "Arațiyoḥ", having bound it with the verse "Brahmaṇa tejasa" the Khadira-stick-gem, then the subsequent rites. The gem is for the accomplishment of all desires.
3.2.26	Having performed the rite of pouring clarified butter upto the end of the recitation, having thrice soaked the Palasa gem with the verse "Uttara is the best of plants", having sprinkled it and recited it, he ties it at the end of the benediction. The rite from the beginning upto the end is to be performed. This gem is for prosperity.
3.2.27	Having performed the rite of pouring clarified butter upto the end of the recitation, he makes the barley-gem thrice soaked and sprinkled with the verse "You are not exhausted", and binds it with the mantra. The rite from the end of the pouring of clarified butter onwards is completed. The authority for the one desiring prosperity continues till the end of the third chapter. The propitiation of gems is completed. The rites of Aṣṭaka are mentioned. One who desires prosperity or one who desires it always should perform the Aṣṭaka rite.
3.2.28-29	At the morning of the Magha-astaka, having put on the sacred thread, having eaten the food meant for one who is fasting, having bathed and put on fresh clothes, he performs (the rites). At night, the Vasa mantras, the rites of the Pakayajna, having cooked the Dhānas etc., having performed up to the Ajyabhāga, then he holds the cow facing west in front of the fire, sits facing east behind the fire, and performs the Śāntiudaka rite. Then he offers ghee with the entire Sūkta beginning with "Prathmah vyuvāsā sā". The Sūkta is repeated thrice. Then in the meat-offering, he offers three animal oblations with the entire Sūkta beginning with "Prathamah vyuvāsāsā". The Sūktā is repeated thrice. Then he offers the Sthālipāka with the entire Sükta beginning with "Prathamaḥ vyuvāsāsă". The Sūktas are repeated thrice. Then he should offer the oblations at the Astaka. Having mixed the oblations, Dhānas etc. with ghee, having made twenty balls, having washed the right arm of the animal, having its skin and hair, having performed up to Abhyātanā, it is known with five verses beginning with "Prāthamaḥ vyuvāsā" (3.10.1-5) and four verses beginning with "Ayam agan" (3. 10.8-11). With "Rtubhyaṣṭā" (3, 10.10) it is known as Astau. With "Indraputra" (3. 10.13) it is known with eighteen. With "Ahorātrābhyām" (6.128.3) it is with nineteen. With two verses beginning with "Idāyāspadam" (3. Translation: At the morning of Magha-astam, having put on sacred thread, having partaken of the food meant for fasting, having bathed, and wearing fresh clothes, he proceeds. At night, the Vasamantras, the rites for Pakayajna. Having cooked Dhānas etc, having performed up till Ajyabhāgas, then he holds a cow facing west in the front of the fire. Sitting facing east behind the tire, he performs the Santiudaka rite. Then he makes offerings of ghee with the entire Sukta beginning with " Prathmah vyuvāsa sā". The Sukta is repeated thrice. In the meat offering, he makes three animal offerings with the entire Sukla beginning with " Prathamah vyuvāsasā". The Sukta is repeated thrice. Then with the entire Sukia beginning with " Prāthamah vyuvāsāsä", he makes offerings of Sthālipäka. The Suktas are repeated thrice.
3.2.30	Then having offered the Ājyabhāgas, he offers three oblations with the entire Sūkta beginning with "Prathmahā vyuvāsa sā" (SBh 1.1.1.2). The Sūkta is repeated thrice. The procedure beginning with Ājyabhāga is to be followed. Then he retires to sleep silently behind the fire and gets up at dawn.
3.2.31	Then at dawn, he remembers the earth, water, fire, wind, and space. Then, desiring prosperity, he performs the Ashtaka rite, or regularly, with the words "May my mother be joyful." The second chapter on agriculture is concluded.
3.3.0	We shall describe the agricultural activities.
3.3.1	Going to the field, he binds the yoke and plow with the verse "They yoke the plows."
3.3.2	With the verse "The ploughmen yoke the ploughs" he yokes the bull to the right of the yoke.
3.3.3	With the verse "Come, O Full One" he yokes another bull to the left.
3.3.4	With the line "May the ploughmen follow the bulls" the ploughman yokes four other bulls. This is because of the statement "The plough is yoked with five bulls".
3.3.5-7	Having recited the verse "The Asvins are the plough," he recites the verse "You are the plough" and offers the cakes at the mouth of the plough. Then he ploughs with the plough reciting the verse "The furrows are being yoked."
3.3.8	Having completed the hymn, he then gives the plough to the ploughman.
3.3.9	The three Sitas are ploughing the eastern fields, and the ploughmen are uttering auspicious words.
3.3.10	The sacrificer recites the verse "We salute thee, O Sita" three times. After completing the rite of offering the oblation of ghee at the end of the verse "Sita", he offers a cake to Indra with the verse "They yoke the ploughs". The rites of rice-gruel are applicable to the cake offered to Indra, except those that are incompatible.
3.3.11	He offers the oblation to the deities Asvins with the verse, "They yoke the ploughs."
3.3.12	Having offered the Ājyabhāgas, he brings the Sampāta offerings in the northern trough with the verse, “They yoke the plough."
3.3.13-14	He brings the Sampātas in the water pot. Then he places the oblations, the tender barley grains and the cooked rice in the water pot.
3.3.15	With that water he anoints the entire plough.
3.3.16-19	From that place where the furrow is ploughed, the wife takes soil with her hand. Then another man asks, "What did you bring?" Then the wife says, "Wealth and prosperity."
3.3.20	Then the wife silently places soil on the middle furrow.
3.3.21	Then he anoints the iron ploughshare with ghee and places it in the same field. Then the subsequent rites up to the Prāṇāyāma.
3.3.22	Then having spread Darbha grass on the head of Sita, he places three each of Palasha and Udumbara bowls on the Darbha grass.
3.3.23	Having put the juices in the southern cups of each of the Sitās, having put the cooked rice in the middle ones, he puts the cake in the northern ones.
3.3.24	He places darbha-grass on the pot and then covers the pots with sand. He puts earth there. Then, in the morning, it is necessary to plough that field on the second day. This is the entire ritual of ploughing. Now the ritual of obtaining a bull is described.
3.3.25-26	Having performed the Ābhyanjana rites, one should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni, and having performed the rites up to the offering of the Anvāhārya portion, one should offer the cake to Agni. Having performed the rites up with the offering of the Ājyabhāgas, one should offer clarified butter to Agni. Having offered the clarified butter, one should offer Agni's share. Having offered Agni's share, one should offer to Agni. Having made the offerings to Agni, one should offer oblations to Agni. Having completed the offerings to Agni and having performed the Prāṇāyāma rites, one should perform the Prāṇāhuti rites. Having performed the Prāṇaāhutis, one should perform Prāṇāyāmāhutis. Having performed the Pranāyāmāhutīs, one should perform Pranāyāmāhuti. Having performed the Pranaayāmāhuti, one should perform Pranaayāmāhutis.
3.4.0	Now the rite of making a crystal is described.
3.4.1-2	The fruit of peace is finished. The shape of the clay is finished. The clay of an anthill. In that, the three ends of the three heaps are the last, and the tops are the best. Having made the middle Palasha wood, and having surrounded it with Darbha grass, and having recited the mantra with the verse "O Sarasvati, the giver of peace and nourishment," one makes it in the heaps of Palasha wood, below.
3.4.3-6	When the food is cooked, one should recite the verse "Payasvatīḥ" and then recite it again when it is given. When it is given, it should be recited in all cases, such as grinding, pounding, sifting, cutting, serving, and giving.
3.4.7-8	Having recited the verse "This is our lord of the sky", he places a stone on the threshing floor. On top of the stone, he places three handfuls of grain according to the verse. The grain becomes stable and inexhaustible. The rites of purification are completed. Now the rites of prosperity are being described. At dusk, he stands facing the cows coming towards him, reciting the verse "O cows".
3.4.9	When he desires to perform the first Homa, he performs this rite in accordance with the rules of the Pākayajña. Having cooked rice with milk as oblation to Indra, he should offer three Homas with two verses each, beginning with "O cows, come hither." The special rite is to be performed at the time of sprinkling and spreading the sacrificial grass, with the words "I offer what is agreeable to Indra."
3.4.10	"May the cows be fruitful, may they be well-fed," thus he recites while going to the forest, following the cows.
3.4.11	Having performed the Āṣṭaśītihoma, having recited the three verses beginning with "The rays of the sun" in the Dvādaśāmnāya, he ties the calf with "We tie the calf here" with the foot. He gives grass with "This is grass" with the foot, to the cows and calves. The concluding rite is the Āṣṭāpathika. The Gośānti is completed. Now the rites concerning the distribution of garments are described.
3.4.12-13	Having bound three balls of wool with the thread of the wool-ball, and having smeared them with ghee, he places them in the fire, reciting the mantra three times. By this rite, garments are produced.
3.4.14	With the verse, "That which is for thy sorrow," he places three pieces of muñja grass smeared with honey on the chick-pea seeds. The repetition of the mantra three times is completed. The rites of clothing are finished. We shall now describe the method of sharing with the eldest son.
3.4.15	One who desires prosperity should have the wood and bricks of the house consecrated with the verse "O son!" and then build the house. The son may bring prosperity or the father may.
3.4.16	With the verse, "May the son be born to me," he performs all the rites of prosperity. With the verse, "May the son be bom to me," he offers Udumbara twigs. With the verse "May the son he born to me," be offers Palasa twigs. With the verses "May the son bo born to me, " he offers Bhrngadvari twigs. He sows barley, wheat, and sesame. One who desires a village, cattle, son, wealth, and grain performs all the rites for prosperity. The son performs the rites for prosperity.
3.4.17-18	Having made his hands wet, the father, reciting the verse "Half with half," gives his son's share, having removed the eastern part, he binds the cattle and wealth in his son's house.
3.4.19	He makes the fire face him and makes the son's share.
3.4.20	When the next new moon comes, he cuts the branch with the verse, "Half with half," and places three kindling woods. The mantra is repeated three times. The sons and brothers also perform their share according to this procedure. The division of property is complete. For the prosperity of the son.
3.4.21-22	With the verse "Thou art the sacrifice" he performs the Rasakarma rites. Having sprinkled and consecrated the Rasas, he eats them. All the rites such as Medhajnanana and others are performed with this verse optionally. The desire and nourishment are performed with the verse "Thou are the sacrifice". The eating of Rasas is performed everywhere in all the Rasakarma rituals of the Atharvaveda.
3.4.23	Having cooked rice for Prajapati in accordance with the rules of the Pañcayajña, he offers it with the verse, "O Stuṣu, O Varṣman." Then follows the subsequent procedure. For prosperity, at dusk on the new moon day, having spread darbha grass on the top of an anthill, he places a lamp there and offers three oblations on the lamp with the verse, “O Stuṣu Varṣman.” The mantra is repeated three times.
3.4.24	He brings the handfuls of rice and cooks the food for the Upavasatha rite. Then, having sprinkled it with the juice, he eats it. There is no procedure.
3.4.25	Thus, at the full moon, when the sun has set, there is a threefold offering on the ant-hill with the verse "O Varṣman, you are the protector." There is no procedure, but the mantra is repeated three times. Having brought the handfuls of cooked rice, he sprinkles it with the juice and eats it. The fourth chapter is concluded.
3.5.0	Now the rites for nourishing many fruits are mentioned.
3.5.1	Having performed the preliminaries, one should eat the mixture of barley and wheat flour, mixed with meat and blood, and mixed with juice, after consecrating it with the two verses "Rddhi mantra" and "That is this". Then comes the subsequent ritual.
3.5.2-4	Having performed the Āṣṭa-homa, he places the three bowls of Mauḍumbarī wood in the east, south and west, and puts the rice-gruel in them, consecrates it with the three verses beginning with "Rddhi" and "Tadyadas" and eats it with the mantra. The mantras beginning with "The brilliance of the morning" are to be recited separately for each eating. Or in the Palāśa bowls, one bowl in the morning, one at midday and one in the afternoon. The three times are different. The Āṣṭahoma is the beginning and the Uttara Tantra.
3.5.5	Having performed the rite, one should mix the blood of a menstruating woman with the juice and sprinkle it with the two verses, "The Rddhi-mantra" and "That is this". Then, reciting the mantra, one should eat it with the index and middle fingers. The rite from the Āyatanas onwards is as follows: The rite for one desiring prosperity and a field is described.
3.5.6	If one desires a field, one should perform this rite in that field. Having performed the rite of ghee, sprinkling the sacrificial grass and salt, and concluding with the sprinkling, one should consecrate and eat the food mixed with curd and honey with the verses "The Rishis are the sages" and "That is the gift". Then the subsequent rites are completed. The rite for one who desires a field is finished.
3.5.7	Having performed celibacy for a year, then having intercourse, bringing the semen into a shell, mixing it with rice, and eating it after consecrating and reciting the mantras "Rddhi" and "Tade das", the subsequent ritual is from the beginning. This is said to be the rite for obtaining seven villages for one who desires prosperity.
3.5.8-9	On the twelfth day of the dark fortnight, he eats milk. On the new moon day, he eats curd and honey. Having performed the Pratipada Abhimantranta, with the verses "Rddhi mantra" and "Tada dasa", he mixes his urine, water, curd, honey, cow dung and cow urine together, consecrates them, and eats them. With the verse "Kravya dam nadi", he performs the Abhimantranta and the subsequent rites. The rite for obtaining seven villages is complete. Now the rite for prosperity is explained.
3.5.10-13	Having performed the third Āgrayana rite, having performed the Āṣṭamātrīka rite, having mixed together the Vrīhi and Yava grains, having cooked them in a Trivṛt mound of cowdung, having sprinkled them with water, having recited the mantra, one eats them. Then follows the subsequent procedure. One who desires all desires, prosperity, sons, cattle, wealth, etc. Now the ocean rite is described.
3.5.14	Having gone to the enemy's country, one should perform the rites in the Garhapatya, Dakshina Agni and Ahavaniya fires. Then having performed the Prāṇāyāma up to the Āsāḍha rite in the Garhapathya fire, one should offer the first portion of the Sārupāvatsa rice cooked in the Garhapaṭhya fire with the verse "O Agni, my radiance," and then perform the rites in Dakshina Agni, covering it with Putika and Kāśa grass. Then offering the same Sārupāvatsa rice, perform the rites in Ahavaniya fire, covering it with Bhaṅga grass. Then offering that same Sārupāvatsa rice, perform rites in the Ahavaniya fire. Then having performed rites in the Ahavanīya fire, one eats it with the same verse. One performs the rite of eating in the Garhapatra place. One should perform the rites starting from the Garhapatyā fire.
3.5.15	He performs the rites of taking up the vow etc. in the Dakṣiṇāgni, Āhavanīya and Gārhapatya fires respectively. Having performed the rites upto the Ābhyatāna, he cooks the Sarūpavatsa in the Dakṣina Agni and offers it with the verse "O Agni, my lustre". Then having mixed the Gārhapaty and Dakṣiṇya fires together, he eats them with the mantra. Then he performs the rites in the proper order. Similarly in the Āhavanīya, Gārhapatyā and Dakṣiṇa fires, he performs the rites upto the Abhyatāna, cooks the Sarūpāvatsa in the Āhavaneya, and offers it with "O Agni, may my lustre". Having mixed the Gārhapati and Āhavanīya fires together, then he eats them with a mantra. Then performs the rites in proper order. The Gārhapatyam is spread with Darbha grass, the Dakṣiṇa Agni with Putika grass, and the Āhavanīyam with Bhaṅga grass. This is the special spreading.
3.5.16	Having again performed the rites in the Garhapatya, Dakshina and Ahavaniya fires in due order, having prepared the Rasas in the Drona pot with the Sukta "Agne varcasya mama", then sprinkling them in due order, one should consecrate them once. Then one eats the Rasas in due order, starting from the Garhapaty. The concluding rites are as follows: Besmearing with Darbha grass, Putika and Bhaṅga in due order in the Garhaptya and other fires. The rite of Samudra is complete. The fifth chapter is concluded.
3.6.0	Now the rite of installation is described.
3.6.1	In a new house, whether it be in a fire-room, a cow-shed, a village, a town, or elsewhere, one who desires prosperity should perform this rite. Whether it be made of stone, wood, grass, or bricks, in all new houses, this rite is performed. Having performed the Abhimantrana rite, one offers ghee mixed with honey once, reciting the verse "The Yajus verses are in the sacrifice."
3.6.2	With the verse, "Doṣa is singing," he offers the second oblation.
3.6.3	With the verses, "The Yajus in the sacrifice" and "Doṣa sings," he offers the third oblation.
3.6.4	"Anumati is everything" (7.20.6), with this verse, he offers the fourth oblation.
3.6.5	Then having sprinkled the house with the fingers, he sits down silently at the request of the housewife, and offers the water pot silently.
3.6.6	The initial utterance is made silently with the words "May it be here only." The subsequent ritual is performed for one desiring prosperity in a new house and at the entrance to the house.
3.6.7	Having performed the Ābhyatāna rites, one offers clarified butter into the fire while reciting the verse "Ūrdhvā asya" and giving an Udumbara fruit. One controls the smoke and eats the paste. The subsequent rites are as prescribed. The authority on the desire for prosperity continues.
3.6.8	Having performed the Āṣṭa-homa, having placed the Sāṅkhyāta and Āsāṅkhyātā Śaṣkulī, having offered seven Śaṣkulīs in the fire with the verse "Ūrdhvā asya", he offers clarified butter. Then the subsequent rites. He gives the remaining Śaṣkulīn to the performer. One desiring prosperity should perform the division of inheritance among the heirs.
3.6.9	Having performed the Ājyabhāgas, one should cook the Sārupavat calf with the Sūkta "Tvaṣṭā me daivyaṃ vacaḥ" and eat it after consecrating it with the Sampāta. The subsequent procedure is as follows.
3.6.10	Having performed the Ābhyanjana rites, he binds the bowstring after reciting the Sūkta "Tvaṣṭā me daivyam" and reciting the mantra. Then he completes the remaining rites. The rites for the division of inheritance are completed.
3.6.11	Having performed the Ābhyanjana rites, he consecrates the staff with the verse "Tvashtā me", touches it, and then holds it. The staff of a flag, a colourful bow, a staff of a mountain spear, a royal staff, a bamboo staff, etc. are held for prosperity. Now the rites of painting are described under the constellation Citrā.
3.6.12	In the morning, wearing the sacrificial thread, one collects the materials for entering the hall. Having eaten the food meant for one who is fasting, having bathed and wearing fresh clothes, one performs the rite. At night, having performed the Ābhyatāna rites, one consecrates the materials with the two Sūktas "Tvaṣṭā me" and "Vāyurenaḥ". The materials are a branch of a tree, water, a piece of wood from an Udumbara tree, and a copper scraper. For each material, the Sūkta is repeated. The rites from Ābhyatana onwards are performed.
3.6.13	Then in the morning, this rite is performed with the verse "O Vayu, the wind god", sprinkling water on the cows with a bamboo pipe.
3.6.14	Cutting the calf's ear with a knife made of Udumbara wood, reciting the mantra "With blood", using a piece of sugarcane.
3.6.15-16	Having performed the Ājyabhāgas, one should mix the juice of sugarcane with the juice of the red-eared grass, consecrate it with the mantra "As they did," and eat it for prosperity. The subsequent procedure is as follows: Now the agricultural activities are mentioned.
3.6.17	He performs the agricultural work as mentioned in the verse "Whose dust is this, whose dust is this?" like the verse "They yoke the ploughs" (3.17). He performs the work of nourishing, placing the seeds for sowing. The sixth section is completed.
3.7.0	He performs the work of sowing seeds.
3.7.1-2	Having taken the seeds of barley, wheat, etc., mixed with ghee, and reciting the verse "Oṣadhīṣu", he scatters three handfuls of seeds in a ploughed field or in a field. Then he covers it with soil. The rite of scattering seeds in a field is complete.
3.7.3-4	Having gone to a high place, having performed the Ābhyātanā rite, and having sprinkled the water pot with the four-verse Sūkta beginning with "Abhi tyam," he sifts the Soma on a black antelope skin.
3.7.5	Having cooked the rice mixed with Soma juice in the pot, having sprinkled it with water, having recited the mantra, he eats it. Then comes the subsequent procedure. This rite is performed at the eastern gate or the western gate of the pavilion.
3.7.6	He burns the pavilion with fire from the west.
3.7.7	Having performed the Āṣṭa-homa, he binds the cow that has given birth once, the cow that has been milked, and the cow that has not been milked, with the mantra "That Savitr" for the purpose of prosperity. The Āṣṭahoma is performed at the beginning, and the subsequent rites are performed afterwards.
3.7.8	Having performed the Āṣṭa-homa, he offers the oblation with the verse "May they not sprinkle me." Having sprinkled the entire water of the village with the verse "Do not sprinkle me," he eats the rice mixed with barley, having sprinkled and recited the verse. Then, having performed the rite up to the removal of the oblation, one who desires prosperity.
3.7.9-10	With the verse "The divine Suparna," he offers oblations to Indra with the method of offering a cow. Now, the rite for one who is going to travel with a single fire is described.
3.7.11	Having remained silent, having taken the kindling woods, having seen the house, he mutters the six-versed hymn beginning with "Urdhvam bibhrat" (RV 10.189.1).
3.7.12	Having placed the kindling woods in his left hand and supporting the bundle of grass with his right hand, he mutters "Urdhvaṃ bibhrat" (
3.7.13	Then he offers the Samidh with the verse "Bearing strength," and with the verse "Auspicious, bestowing offspring," he takes the post for the house and stands by it.
3.7.14	He performs the utterance of speech with the verse "What I say."
3.7.15	The coming in is completed silently for one who desires prosperity.
3.7.16-17	With the verse, "Here only do I see men," he looks at the house and human beings. With the verse, “From the cow of Suyas,” he recites over the animals. The offering to the sacrificer at the entrance is complete.
3.7.18	Having placed the tips of the Dūrvā grass in the Anjulaka vessel, one recites the six-verse Sūkta beginning with "Pūrva-apara" on the new moon day. Some recite the Sūkta while seeing the moon, desiring prosperity. Now we shall describe the method of releasing a bull.
3.7.19-21	Having performed the Ājyabhāga offerings, having offered the bull with the verse, "Indra's belly," and having performed the Agniparinaayana rite as in marriage, he releases it along with the calves with the verse, "For the sake of semen." The sprinkling is done with the verse, "This young one of yours." Then the subsequent rites. Having performed the Ājya offerings, having offered a bull with the Arthasūkta verse, "Sahasraḥ," and having performed everything as in marriage, one releases it with the verses, "For the semen," and "This young one of ours." The sprinkling is done by reciting the verse, "This young one." The subsequent rites are as in the Ājyabhūga offerings. When one performs the Vṛṣotsarga rite on the eleventh day, one performs the Śāntiudaka rite and then performs the Vṛषotsarga rite. The Vṛṣotsariga rite is complete. Taking the tail of the bull, one recites, "I offer the bull to the gods, ancestors, and sages." Now the rites for prosperity are described.
3.7.22	With the verse "This is a thousandfold" he offers to Indra with a bull, desiring prosperity, according to the rules of Vasha.
3.7.23	With the verse "This thousandfold" he makes an offering to Indra with a white bull, desiring prosperity. Now the rites of the new moon are described.
3.7.24	Having performed the Ājyabhāgas at night, three potfuls of rice should be cooked with the Anuvāka beginning with "Truth is great".
3.7.25	After that, on the Darbha grass behind the fire, on the ground, he offers one potful of rice once, with all the offerings.
3.7.26	He eats the second potful of rice, having sprinkled it with the Anuvaka and having recited the mantra.
3.7.27	The third oblation is offered with the verse "Truth is great" (12.1.1-7) and the verse "O Earth, O Mother" (12) is recited three times.
3.7.28-29	One lies down with the verse "Those that are auspicious for you".
3.7.30	One turns around with the verse "He who lies down".
3.7.31	He rises in the morning with the nine verses beginning with "Truth is great" and the tenth verse "Santiva" and the two verses "Odaayusha".
3.7.32-33	Having gone out with the three verses beginning with "Udirāṇāḥ" towards the east or north, having gone out by the external path, he looks at the sun with the verse "Yāvatte". It is obligatory and also desired.
3.7.34	Having ascended a high place, he looks at it with the verse "yavatte" for prosperity. The rites thereafter are the same. The rites of Āgrahāyanī are concluded.
3.7.35	Having performed the rite, he sprinkles the yoke of the plough in front of the fire with the formula, "Truth is great." Then follows the subsequent rite.
3.7.36	The rite of ploughing is performed with the formula, “Truth is great.”
3.7.37	Having performed the Ājyabhāgas, he offers clarified butter with three verses beginning with "In which the Sadas and the Havirdhāna are located." The subsequent procedure is as follows: "The best one will come to me" - this is the desire expressed by one who is requested for a boon. One who desires all excellent fruits such as sons and wealth.
3.7.38	"In which food" - one stands with this verse desiring prosperity. Food such as rice and barley.
3.7.39-40	He stands up with two verses, "Bearing the treasure" etc., desiring the treasure of gems, gold, liquids, and jewels in the earth.
3.7.41	One who desires prosperity should recite the verse "Yasyaam Krishna" and perform mouth rinsing with fresh water. One who desires prosperity, should recite the verse "Yasyaam Krishna" and perform bathing with fresh water. The ritual of fresh water is complete.
3.7.42-43	Having recited the four verses beginning with "The chariot which is thy friend," he gives a red cow to a brahmin, desiring prosperity.
3.7.44	Having performed the rites, he cooks rice in milk with the four verses beginning "The chariot which was thy friend," and offers it as a complete oblation, desiring prosperity.
3.7.45	All the mantras mentioned in the third chapter for the rites of prosperity are recited here. The installation of all the verses beginning with "trisaptā" is done here.
3.7.47	The group of water (verses) "Brahma, the unborn" (KauS 18.25), "The Ambas go" (KauS_19.1), "May they flow together" (KauS _19.4), "The lion" (KauS.19.9), "May they come" (KauS._19.14), "He went this way", "This is the obstacle", "This is my protection", "Against the enemies" (KauS .19.22), "You are the best" (KauS ._19.26), "They are not diminished" (KauS _.19.27), "The first one dwelt" (KauS_.19.28), "The ploughmen yoke" (KauS..20.1), "The milky ones" (KauS ..21.1-6), "This is our sky" (KauS...21.7), "Come, O cows" (KauS ...21.8), "The fruitful ones" (Kau S...21.10), "The rays of the sun" (KauS....21.11), "For your sorrow" (KauS ....21.12), "The successful mantra", "That is the gift" (KauS .,22.1), "O Agni, my radiance" (KauS.,22.14), "Yajus in the sacrifice" (KauS _,23.1), "This is his upward" (KauS ,23.7), "Tvasti is mine" (KauS_,23.9), "Vayu is the wind" (KauS...,23.12), "Whose is this dust" (KauS ...,23.17), "Rise up" (KauS..,24.1), "To him" (KauS,24.3), "That of Savitar" (KauS,..24.7), "The divine bird" (KauS,.24.9), "Bearing energy" (KauS.,.24.11), "Indra's belly", "The thousandfold" (KauS ,.24.19), "Truth is great" (KauS,...,24.24), "Which of yours is auspicious" (KauS,,24.29), "In which is the assembly" (KauS,...24.37), "You whom the mares" (KauS.,,24.42) - these mantras are recited in the middle of the nourishing rites. These mantras are nourishing. He performs the offering or the presentation of all nourishing mantras optionally. According to the statement "The offering or the presentation is done to the nourishing rites" (KauS24.45), he performs the offering or presentation of the nourishing rites, desiring nourishment. He offers clarified butter, firewood, sacrificial cakes, milk, rice, milk pudding, animal, barley, and sesame, cooked grains, gruel, and cakes, knowing these to be the offerings. He should offer them wherever there is a rite, either at home or outside, for the sake of trees, men, cattle, elephants, horses, cows, buffaloes, goats, sheep, and other domestic animals, for the sake grains, wealth, and animals, and for the sake of deer, villages, cities, fields, and outside. Wherever there is a rite for a specific purpose, there he should offer the nourishing rites. There is no restriction of number or kind in the nourishing rites. Where there is a rite with a specific purpose, the nourishing rites should not be performed there. Everywhere the purpose of nourishment is the aim. Where the twice-born person feels himself to be mixed, there the offering with sesame is prescribed, not the rite of Nirriti. The meaning is that one should not perform the rite of Nirrti there. The offering or presentation is done to all nourishing rites. The group of water is mentioned - "The waters are firm", "May the goddesses be peaceful", "Brahma, born", "The untasted ones", "The thousand-streamed", "Of this left", "The red bull", two verses, "The clouds of the sky", "The head", "The one who endures poison" - this is the group of water. He performs the offerings or presentation of this group. Or he performs the presentation. Desiring all fruits, he performs the offering of the group of water, desiring sons, cattle, wealth, grains, and all desires. The nourishing rites are concluded. Here is a verse - "The rites of Nirriti were performed earlier for the removal of all sins. The nourishing rites were performed later in the third section of the Samhita."
4.1.1-3	Thus the medicine-pacification is called the medicine-word. There are two kinds of diseases: those caused by diet and those caused by sins in other births. Among those caused by diet, there is pacification of diseases in the medicines composed by Caraka, Bāḍaṅga, and Suśruta. Among those caused due to inauspiciousness, there is pacifica-tion of diseases in the pacifications prescribed in the Atharva Veda. And he will say later: "All the medicines not mentioned or prohibited should be performed with the signs of inauspiciousness. Those mentioned and those not mentioned should be performed. Binding, drinking, rinsing, and other things should be done. We shall describe the procedure of the medicine-practices."
4.1.4	Having performed the Ājyatantra up to the Ābhyanānas, having sprinkled the water pot with the Sūkta "Ye trisaptāḥ" (1.1), he anoints the body of the patient. The subsequent rites are as before. This is a remedy for all diseases.
4.1.5	Having performed the Ābhyanjana rite up to the end, sprinkle the water pot with the verse "Those who are thrice-born", and rub the face and body with the powder. Then perform the subsequent rites. If the young one has a ring, this rite is the remedy for all diseases. Now the remedies for fever and diarrhea are mentioned.
4.1.6	Having performed the Ābhyanjana rite, he binds the Muñja flower gem with a Muñja rope, consecrating it with the verse "We know the arrow," and then performs the subsequent rites. This is the remedy for fever, diarrhea, and excessive urination. Having performed the Ajya rite, he binds a Muñja head with a Muñjā rope, consecrating with the verse "What runs down below," and then performs subsequent rites. This remedy is for diarrhea and excessive urination.
4.1.7	Having recited the first Sūkta, "We know the arrow", one should recite the earth of the field and give it to drink in case of excessive diarrhea and excessive urination. This is a remedy. Having recited the Sūkta, “What is here”, one should recite the clay of the shape and give it to be drunk in case of excessive urination and excessive diarrhea. This is a medicine. Having recited the first, "We know of the arrow", one has to recite the earth of an anthill and give it to the patient to drink in case excessive diarrhea and excessive urine. This is a treatment. Having recited the sūkta, "What is here", one should recite anthill earth and give it to a patient to drink in cases of excessive diarrhea and excess urination.
4.1.8	With the first verse, "We know the arrow," he anoints the anus with ghee. This is a remedy for diarrhea. With the verse "What is there," he anoints or smears the anus with ghee.
4.1.9	Having recited the verse "We know the arrow" over the mouth of the leather bag, one should blow into the mouth of the wound. This is the remedy for diarrhea. With the verse "What is there" one should recite over the mouth of a leather bag or the mouth, and blow into the anus, penis, or a wound. The remedies for fever, diarrhea, excessive urination, and the flow of body fluids are completed. Now the remedies for excessive pain in urination and difficult defecation are described.
4.1.10	Having performed the Ābhyanjana rite, he binds the Harītakī or the resin, having consecrated it with the second verse, "We know the arrow..." Then the subsequent rites. In the case of urine and feces.
4.1.11	Having recited the second verse, "We know the arrow," he recites the second verse, and gives the mouse-earth to drink. Having recited the secondverse, "We know of the arrow," he gives the grass attached to the mound to drink. Havingrecitated the second verse, he gives curd-churned to drink. This is the remedy for obstruction of urine and feces. Having recited the verse, "Weknow of the arrow," and having ground the old moonstone, he gives it to drink. Thisis the remedy for obstruction etc. of urine. Having recited the verses of the second verse, having put the wood shavings in water, and having recited them, he gives them to drink. This isthe remedy for obstruction of feces.
4.1.12	"Having placed him on the ground of a rat-hole, he recites the two verses, 'May your bladder be pierced.' In the case of urine retention, having placed him on the grass of a cow-dung heap, he recites, 'May your urinary bladder be pierced.' Having placed him on the top of a heap of curd, he recites. Having placed him on a heap of old and rotten wood, he recites in the case of urine obstruction. Having placed the patient on a heap of wood shavings, he recites with the two verses, ‘May your urinary bladder...' The verse, 'May urine be released,' is from the penis."
4.1.13	Having performed the Ābhītaṇḍala rite, he consecrates the elephant etc. vehicle with the second verse, "We know the arrow..." and then makes the patient ride it. Then he runs quickly, desiring to urinate.
4.1.14	"We know the arrow ..." With the second verse, he consecrates his bow and arrow, and then shoots the arrow at the patient. It is quick.
4.1.15	Having recited the second verse, "We know the arrow," he recites the verse, "We have seen the arrow," and then inserts the iron rod into the penis. The meaning is that he makes the penis emerge from the skin.
4.1.16	Having recited the second verse "We know the shaft," he recites "We have seen..." and then inserts the metal rod into the penis, causing the flow of urine to be released.
4.1.17	With the second verse, "We know the bow," he places the bow with the string on the ground, pointing upwards towards the penis. He places water in a cow-dung vessel, throws twenty-one barley grains into it, and sprinkles the bow with that water, so that the water falls on the penis.
4.1.18-19	With the second verse, "We know the arrow," he boils barley, wheat, Valli, lotus root, and Pathika. Having enchanted them, he makes the sick person drink them. These are the remedies for urinary retention, painful urination, painful defecation, flatulence, and obstruction caused by a full belly. One who desires health should do these. Now the remedies for all diseases are mentioned.
4.1.20	Having performed the Ābhyanjana rites, one offers clarified butter with the verse "The Ambas go." Then the subsequent rites. With the verse "The Ambas go," one offers Palāśa, Udumbara, and other kindling woods. It is a remedy for all diseases. The rite is optional because it is a rite performed with the hands. Having performed the rite, one offers clarified ghee with the three-verse verse "Purified by Vayu." The subsequent rites. The remedy for all diseases is complete. Now the remedy for consuming Soma is described.
4.1.21	The Palasha and other kindling woods, smeared with Soma juice, are offered in the Soma-drinking ceremony, in the Soma-ablution ceremony, and in the Soma-offering ceremony, when a disease has arisen. The remedy is complete. Now the rites of the Bhūta Tantra are described. The peace is described in case of suspicion of Bhūta and Piśāca.
4.1.22	Having performed the Ābhyātanas, one offers Kukusa with the verses "Stuvanam" and "Idam havis". Then the subsequent ritual. This is for the treatment of pisācas. One makes the afflicted person inhale smoke. It means that one should perform the Homa and then make the smoke inhalation. The meaning is that one should make the smoke inhalation with the verse "Nisaalam". This is an optional ritual. The meaning is one should make the inhalation of smoke. One offers Kukusa with three verses beginning with "Arayakshayanam". One offers Kukusa and makes the inhalation of smoke with the verse "Shanno devi Prsniparni". One offers Kukus with the verse "Apashyati". One offers Kukusas with the verses "Tantsatyaujas" and "Tvayapurivam". This is an option in the ritual. One offers Kukusas and makes the smoke inhalation with "Purstadyukta". One offers Kukuses and makes the smoke with the Anuvaka "Rakshonam". One offers Tusas with the verses " Stuvanam" and "Idam havis" and makes the smoke. One offers Tusas and makes the smoke in the place where there is suspicion of pisācas, either in a village, city, or house.
4.1.23	He offers the Karkaṭikā-sticks with the verses, "Stuvanam" and "Idam haviḥ". He offers the Karkasika-sticks with the verse, "Nisaalam". He offers the Trāpuṣa-sticks with the three verses, "Arajakṣayana". He offers the Tripuṣa-sticks with the verse, "Sannā devī". He offers the Karkatika-sticks with the "Ā pasyati" verse. He offers the Träpuṣa-stīcks with the two verses, "Tānt satyaujāḥ" and "Tvayā pūrvam". He offers the Muṣala-sticks with the Trāpușa-sticks with the Anuvāka, "Rakṣohaṇam". He offers Muṣala-wood with the verse, “Sannā devy". He offers the Musala-wood with "Ā pasyati". He offers the Müṣala-wood-pieces with the two verses "Tāntsatyaūjāḥ" and "Tvayā pūrvaṃ". He offers the Müsala-sticks with "Purāstād yuktāḥ". He offers Muşala-wood with Anuvāka "Rakṣo haṇam". He makes the offering at the end of the Rk. He makes the offering with Svāhā at the end of all Rk. He offers the Khadira-sticks with the two verses "Stuvanam" "Idam haviḥ". He offers the Khadirā-sticks with "Nisaalam" verse. He makes the offerings with the three verses "Arajakṣayanam". He offers Khadira-sticks. He offers the Tārṣṭāghī-sticks with the "Sannādevī" verse. He offers Tārṣṭaghī-sticks. He makes the Khadira-stick offerings with the two verses "Tānt satyaūjāḥ" and "Tvayä pūrvam"." He offers the Khadirasticks with "Purāstādyuktāḥ".
4.1.24	Having recited the verses "Stuvanam" and "Idam haviḥ" seven or nine times over Khadira pegs, he buries them behind the fire, reciting the verse "Akshyau ni vidhy" as the mantra for burying. In case of Pisacha disturbances, having recited the verses "Nisaalam" seven times over Khadira stakes, he buries behind the fire, saying "Akshyu ni vidhy". In case of fear from Pisacas, having recited the three verses "Araayakshayanam" seven times over seven Khadira stakes, and saying "Akshu ni vidhy", he buries behind fire for protection from Pisacas. Having recited the verses beginning with "Shanno devyaḥ" over an odd number of Khadira stakes, saying "Akshayu ni vidhy", one buries behind the Agni. Having recited the seven verses beginning with "A pasyati" over seven stakes, saying "Akshyau ni vidhya", one buries them behind Agni. In all cases, one makes the ground level. Having recited the two verses "Taant satyaujaḥ" and "Tvayā pūrvam" over seven stakes and saying "Akshau ni vidhy", they are buried behind Agni. In case of fear of Pisacas, having chanted the Anuvaka "Rakshahanam" over seven Khadira-made stakes and saying "Akshyu ni vidhya", they are buried in the rear of Agni. In case there is fear of Pisacas.
4.1.25	Having recited the verses "Stuvanam" and "Idam haviḥ" five or seven times, one should bury iron pegs behind the fire, burying them everywhere with the verse "Akshau ni vidhy". Having recited the verses of the "Nisaalam" hymn, one should bury copper pegs behind the fire. Having recited the three verses "Araayakshayanam", one should bury copper nails behind the fire. "Shanno devy" - having recited this verse, one should bury nails made of copper behind the fire. Everywhere, one should bury them with the verse "Akshau ni vidhy" Having recited the verses "Taant satyauja" and "Tvayapuruvam", one should bury five or seven copper nails behind the Agni. Having recited the verses from the "Purataadyukta" hymn, one recites the verses from the Rakshahanam hymn, reciting them five or seven times and burying them behind the fire. One should bury them everywhere with the Rakshahanom hymn. Having recited the "Stuvanam", "Idam havi" and "Nisaalam", one should bury nails behind the fire, everywhere with the verse "Akshau ni Vidhy". Having recited "Shanno devya" and "Purataadyuksam", one should bury the nails behind the fire everywhere. Having recited the Rakshahanum hymn, one should recite the verses from the Purataadyukta hymn, burying them everywhere. Having recited "Purataadyuksam", one should recite the Rakshahanu hymn, burying them behind the Agni. The remedies are to be used everywhere.
4.1.26	Having recited the verses "Stuvanam" and "Idam haviḥ", one should sprinkle hot sand on the bed, or in the house, or in the village. Having recited the verse "Nisaalam" for protection against demons, one should sprinkle hot sands in the house, etc. For protection against pishachas, one should sprinkle the bed, heap, and floor with hot sand, reciting the three verses "Arayakshayanam". One should sprinkle the bed and heap with hot sand, saying "Shanno devi". One should sprinkle hot sand, saying, "A pasyati". One should sprinkle sand on the bed and heap, reciting the verses "Taamsatyaujaḥ" and "Tvayapūrvaṃ". One should sprinkle sands on the bed and floor, reciting the verse "Purāstadyukto vaha" for protection against pishacas. One should sprinkle sands in the bed, heap and floor, reciting "Raksohanam" for protection against Pishacas.
4.1.27-29	On the new-moon day, having performed the preliminary rites, one spreads a bed of reeds, offers oblations of mustard seeds, and recites the verses "Stuvanam" and "Idam haviḥ" three times each. One then performs the subsequent rites, including the preliminary rites. In this rite, one takes a handful of barley from the heap and grinds it with a pestle, moving counterclockwise. One then consecrates the afflicted person and cleans his tongue with a thread made of hemp. If one does not perform the tongue cleaning with hemp thread, one should know that the planet has not been subdued. On the new- moon day, having performed rites of ghee, a bed of reeds and mustard seeds, one offers oblations of barley that have been ground and not sifted, reciting the verse "Nisaalam" three times. One then performs subsequent rites. If one performs tongue cleaning with hemp, the planet is subdued. On the full-moon day, one performs the preliminary rites, spreads a bed of reads, offers oblations to mustard seeds, and performs the subsequent rites. If tongue cleaning is performed with hemp, the afflicted person is cured. On the new moon day, having completed the preliminary rites, spreading a bed of reeds with mustard seeds, one performs the subsequent rites and tongue cleaning with hemp. If tongue cleaning with hemp is not performed, the planet has not yet been subdued. The planet is incurable, meaning it cannot be subdued. Now the rite of subjugating planets is described. This rite is said to be for the subjugation of an inevitable planet. This rite is for the subjugation and control of an inevitable planet.
4.1.30	Having performed the rite with clarified butter up to the offering of oblations, he offers a mixture of Vīriṇa wool and Iṅgiḍa in a full-pit with the verses "Stuvanam" and "Idam haviḥ". Then the subsequent rite. With the verse "Niḥsālam" he offers a mixture Vīriṇa flowers and clarified butter in a Palāśa pit. In the rite with clarified butte, the subsequent rite. Having performed the rite, with the three verses "Araikṣayanaṃ" he offers a Vīriṇa-wool-mixed Iṅgiḍ in a Palāsa pit. The subsequent rite. Having done the rite, with "Shanno devī pṛṣṇipāṇī" he offers a Iṅgiḍ mixed with Vīriṇa grass in a Prāpa pit. The subsequent rites. This is the rite for the Graha. Having performed the rites, with the verse "Ā paśyati" he offers a mixed Iṅgiḍ with Vīriṇā grass in a Prīpa pit. The rites. Having performed the clarified butter rite, with the verses "Tān satyaujāḥ" and "Tvayā pūrvam" he offers a mix of Vīriṇī grass and Iṅgiḷa in a Prāpā pit. The subsequent ritual. Having performed the ritual, with the verse “Purāstād yuktaḥ” he offers a mixture Iṅgiḍ and Vīriṇi grass in a leaf pit. The subsequent rituals. With the section "Rakṣohaṇam" he offers Iṅgiḍ, mixed with Vīrīṇi grass, in a Prā pā pit in the rite with clarified ghee. The Graha rite is complete. Now, when there is doubt whether there is a Pisāca in this house or not, this rite is mentioned.
4.1.31-33	Having recited the verses "Stuvanam" and "Idam havis", he places the kindling wood and sacrificial grass made of reeds on top of the hut. In the morning, he inspects it. If it is deformed, there is fear of pishachas. Then the prescribed homa is performed. He offers a mixture of Vairina wool and Ingida in a pot. In the text, he recites the three verses "Arayakshayanam". Having recited the verses, "May the goddess protect us" and "May the goddess be with us", he places the sacrificial grass and kindling wood in the hut. If it is damaged the next day, there is fear from pishachas. He then offers a mixture of Ingida and Vairina wool in a pot. Having recited the verses in the text, "He sees", he places the grass and kindling in the hut. The next day, if it is damaged, there is fear due to pishachas. Having taken the grass and kindlings from the hut, he performs the prescribed ritual up to the Anantarahoma, and offers a mixture of Indida and Vairin wool in a pot with the verses "Tamsatyaujah" and "Tvayapuriva". If it is damaged on the next day, he offers a mixture of Engida and Vairine wool in a pot, reciting the same verses. Having recited the verse "Puratastyuktah" and "Raksohanam" in the text, he places the grass, and kindling in a hut. If it gets damaged the next day there is fear due the pishachas. Performing the prescribed ritual, he offers a mix of Engida and vairina wool in a pit. This is the ritual for pishacha possession.
4.1.34	Having paid homage to Vaiśravaṇa, he makes the patient drink water and sprinkles him with water, reciting the verses, "May it be well with us" and "This oblation." Having paid homage to vaiśravaṇa, the patient drinks water and is sprinkled with water, reciting with the verse, "Free from disease." Having paid homage, the patient drinks and is sprinkled with the water recited with the three verses, "For the destruction of enemies." Having paid homage and recited the verse, "May the goddess protect us," the patient drinks and sprinkles himself with the water. For protection against pisācas, having paid homage, the water is recited with the verse, "He sees" and the patient drinks and himself sprinkles. Having paid homage, water is recited with two verses, "Those who are truthful" and "By you formerly," and the patient drinks water, and is sprinkled. For protection against the fear of pisācas, water is recited by paying homage with the verse, "He is appointed in front." For protection against the danger of pisācas and for protection, water is recited, paying homage with the Anuvāka, "For the killing of pisācas." The patient drinks and sprinkles. For protection against danger, water is recited. In all cases, there is an option of rites. The human being possessed by pisācas should be attended to. In all cases the Homa should be performed. The medicinal rite should be performed at home. The rites to be performed at night are mentioned.
4.1.35-36	At night, having recited the two verses "Stuvanam" and "Idam havis", he grinds the two fire-sticks together. Then at dawn, he proceeds with the verse "Svashtida" and gives out the steps. In the fear of pishachas, at night, having recited "Nishalam" verse, he grinds the fire-sticks together and then at dawn, he goes with the verse "Svastida" and gives the steps. In pishacha fear, at night, he recites "Arayakshayanam" on the fire-sticks and grinds them together. Then at dusk, he proceeds with "Svastida". At night, having chanted "Shanno devi" on the fire sticks and grinding them together, he gives the steps at dawn. At night, having ground the two fire- sticks together with "A pasyati" at every end of the recitation, he recites the verse "Svasti da" at dawn and gives the steps for protection from pishachas. At night, he recitates "Purata dyuktah" on the fire stick and grinds them. Then at dawn he recites "Svasti da". The rite of going with the option of the group is for the destruction of all grahas. The rite of Brahma-rakshasa is also pacified. At night, reciting the section "Rakshahnam", he grinds two fire-sticks. Then at dawn reciting "Svasti da", he gives the steps. The rites of the night are completed. Pishachas, rakshasas, bhutas, apsaras, pretas, yakshas, gandharvas, and other grahas, as well as those born as brahmins, kshatriyas, vaishyas, and shudras, are all satisfied with these rites. The section on rakshasa grahas and the treatise on bhutas is complete. Now the treatment for ascites is described.
4.1.37	Having placed darbha-grass in a pot with the verse "This is the god of gods", and having sprinkled the pot with twenty-one household grasses, then sprinkle the sick person. Then the darbha grass tied together is called "pinjula". The treatment for ascites is complete. Success in the rite is attained by practice. One should do it daily for the purpose of destroying ascites. The first chapter on treatment is complete.
4.2.0	Now the medicines for wind, bile and phlegm are described.
4.2.1	Having recited the verse "Jarāyujah" three times, he should give the patient honey to drink. In the case of phlegm disorders, he should recite the verse "Jarayujah" threetimes and give the patient ghee to drink. In cases of both wind and bile disorders, he should give oil to drink, reciting the verse "Jarayujaḥ" three times. This concludes the treatment for wind, bile, and phlegm disorders. Now the rites for excessive coughing, headache, and head pain are described.
4.2.2	Having tied the head of the sick person with a Muñja-grass, taking the wind along with the sacrificial grains in the left hand and holding those grains in the right hand, he proceeds to the place of the disease, scattering the grains with the verse "Jarāyujaḥ". There itself, the Muñja-thread, the question, and the wind are to be released.
4.2.3-4	Holding the wind and the moon-like thread with the left hand, and holding the bowstring with the right hand, with the patient in front.
4.2.5	Going to the place where the disease has arisen, reciting the Sūkta "Jarāyujaḥ", he throws the thread and the wind into the patient.
4.2.6-7	Silently, he throws the bowstring at that place.
4.2.8	In the case of wind-fever, fracture of the waist, body-disease, wind-colic, wind-disorder, all diseases, wind-disease of the bow, trembling of the limbs, wind-fracture of the body, and all wind-disorders, the remedy is as follows: Having recited the verse "Born from the womb," one anoints ghee and gives it as a nasal drop in the case of head disease and wind fracture.
4.2.9-10	The five-jointed bamboo-stick is placed on the forehead and the mantra "Jarāyujah" is recited for headaches, fractures of the waist, or for disorders caused by wind. The section on the pain of the genitals is complete. Now, the treatments for bleeding in the body and externally, such as from injuries caused by weapons, stones, bricks, etc., are described. The five-jointed stick is placed where the blood flows, and the mantra "Amuryah" is recited to stop the flow of blood. The mantra "Amuryāḥ" is recited to sprinkle the dust of a road on a bleeding wound. The mantra "Amaryāḥ" is used to sprinkle sand on the affected area.
4.2.11	Having performed the Āṣṭa-homa, one consecrates and binds the Armakapālika with the verse "These are the goddesses." The subsequent procedure is as before.
4.2.12	One consecrates and gives the Armakapälika to drink with the verse "This is the goddess." The Armakapälikā is a dry clay pot used as a remedy for excessive menstrual flow and blood flow.
4.2.13	Having pounded four tips of Dūrvā grass with the Sūkta "Amūrāḥ", and then having mixed it with curd, butter, meat, etc., and having enchanted it, he makes it drink. In the flow of blood, in the middle of the body, in the stroke of a weapon, in the flow of blood outside, in the flow through the anus, in the flow from the mouth, in the flow due to blood from the nose, and in the flow of the head and fingers, the remedies are completed. Now the remedies for heart disease and jaundice are mentioned.
4.2.14	"After the Sun" - Having recited this, one should offer water mixed with red bull's hair to drink for jaundice and heart disease.
4.2.15	"After the Sun" is the mantra used to bring water from the back of a red bull, which is then recited and used for drinking.
4.2.16	Having performed the Ābhyanānas, he offers a red cow-hide with a hole and a gem in cow's milk, reciting the Sūkta beginning with "Following the sun". Having offered it, he consecrates and binds it.
4.2.17	He also makes the cow drink milk. The procedure from Ābhyanāna onwards is to be followed. This is for jaundice and heart disease. The disease of the genitals is also cured.
4.2.18	Having given yellow rice to the sick person, and having made the remnants and non-remnants into one, and having applied it as a paste, starting from the head and ending at the feet, then having seated the sick person on a cot, and having tied three birds - a parrot, a wooden parrot, and a cow-tilakka - to the left thigh with a green thread, and having tied them under the cot, then reciting the verse "Following the sun," he consecrates water and bathes the sick person in jaundice and heart disease.
4.2.19	Having recited the Sūkta "Anu sūryam" over the food, he offers it. In all cases, having made the sick person enter the house first, and then entering himself, he offers the food to the sick person. Wherever there is the word "offers", it should be understood thus.
4.2.20	One should recite the verse "Anu sūryam" while reciting the verse "Anusurayam" while reciting "Anusurayan" while reciting the parrot is speaking. One should recite the verses "Anusurayah" while reciting the verses "Anasurayah" while seeing a bird called Gopitilaka speaking anywhere. One should recite them while reciting the verses. One should recite while reciting the verses.
4.2.21	Having performed the Ābhityāna, one should make a gem wrapped in gold with the verses beginning with "Following the sun" and the heart-hair of a bull, dyed red with lac, consecrate it with the mantra, and bind it to the afflicted. The Ābhityāna and the subsequent rites are performed everywhere. In all cases, where many rites are prescribed, one should perform one, two, or all of them. There is an option in all rites. The remedies for epilepsy, forgetfulness, heart disease, jaundice, and dropsy are completed. Now the remedies for white leprosy are mentioned.
4.2.22	When the white leprosy is rubbed with cowdung until blood appears, he anoints the leprosy with the paste of Bhṛṅgarāja, Harin, Indravaruni, and Nilā flower, reciting the two verses "Annakta jāta" and "Suparna jāta". One can collect three or four of these herbs.
4.2.23	And for the removal of grey hair, having cut off the grey hair, one should rub and anoint it. Now the winds are mentioned.
4.2.24	"Born at night", "Born as a hawk" - with these two verses, one offers oblations to the Maruts in the manner of the Pakayajna. For white leprosy and white hair, having performed the preliminaries, one offers oblation to the king of cows with the two verses "Born at night" and "Born as a Hawk". The concluding rites are as follows: Having performed the preliminaries with the two verses, "Born at night, born as a hawk", one collects the herbs for cough, etc., consecrates them with the verses, and then places them in water with the vessel face down. Then the concluding rites. Having performed the rites, one offers the herbs for cough etc. in water with the two verses. Then the concluding rite. Having performed the preliminarities, one ties the dog's head, the sheep's head, and the human hair rope to the end of two bamboo poles and shakes them. This means "to hold". For the destruction of white hair and white leprosy, the remedies are as follows: "Born at night," "Born as a bird" - with these verses, one consecrates water and sprinkles it with the vessel. Then one places a stone. Then one places the vessel and the stone in a three-legged bag. Then one throws it into the water. Then the concluding ritual. The rites related to Maruts are completed. In all rites related to Marut, Marut-rice-gruel, Marut-boiled rice, and Marut-rice are offered. The rites related with Marut are completed. The remedies for leprosy are completed. Now the remedies for fever are described.
4.2.25	In cases of fever, of fever at the time of the sun's setting, of constant fever, of fever occurring every alternate day, of fever occurring on the fourth day, of fever due to cold, of fever occurring in four days, one should recite the verse "Yad agniḥ" and then heat the iron axe in fire. Then reciting the verse "Yat agniḥ" again, one should boil the axe in hot water. Then reciting the same verse again, one should sprinkle the patient with that water. Sipping water and rubbing the body should be done silently. The remedies for fever are complete. Now the remedies for destroying distress are mentioned.
4.2.26	Having performed the Ābhyanāntas, with the Sūkta "Upa pra āta" (RV 1.114.1), having tied together four white-coloured iron needles at both ends, making a gem and consecrating it with Sampāta, one binds it. After the Puṇyāha, then the subsequent rites. This is the remedy for distress.
4.2.27	Having made the ritual, one should make a white Vīraṇa reed-stalk with three incantations of the Sūkta "Upa prāgāt", consecrate it with the mantra, and bind it. Then the subsequent ritual is the remedy for distress.
4.2.28	Having recited the verse "Up pragaat" twice, one should rub two torches together at night during dawn. Then at dawn, one should proceed with the right foot reciting the verse "Svastidah". This is the rite for obtaining well-being. If there is sudden distress or babbling among the elderly, children, young men, women, or men, one should perform this rite. The remedies for distress have been completed. Now the remedies for Gandharva, Rakshasa, Apsara, Bhut Graha, etc. are being described.
4.2.29	Having performed the Āṣṭa-homa, one offers all herbs mixed with ghee with the verse "The divine Gandharva" (2.1). With the remaining oblations, one anoints the afflicted person. Perform the subsequent rites. Having performed the rite, one offers all the herbs mixed with ghee using the four-verse verse "This Agni is mine" (6.111). Then perform the subsequent rites. With the remaining oblation from the rite, one anoints a person afflicted by Gandharva-graha and other ailments.
4.2.30	Having placed the sick person at a cross-roads, having placed a darbha-blade on his head, having placed a skull filled with fire on it, having lit the fire there, he offers all herbs anointed with ghee with the verse, "The divine Gandharva". And at the cross-roads, on the head, in the skull of charcoal, having lit the Agni, he offers all the herbs anointed with ghee, with the four verses, "This Agni of mine". In the head-offering, there is no sequence.
4.2.31	Having placed in the hand of the sick person the Valliṅkā together with all herbs, and having made him enter facing the water of a river, he makes him plunge in, reciting the verse "The divine Gandharva". The performer scatters all the herbs in the water, reciting the verse. Standing behind, he sprinkles the sick person with the verse "The Divine Gandharva".
4.2.32	Then, having made all the herbs in a clay vessel, he binds them in a three-legged sling on the tree where the birds reside, saying, "This is my Agni." With this verse, he offers all the herbs anointed with ghee in the middle of the river, in a Vallika, separately for each verse. Then the performer sprinkles the afflicted one with water, saying, "May this be mine," and binds them in a tree with a three-legged nest made of Muñja grass, in cases of possession by Rakshasas, Yakshas, Gandharvas, Apsarasas, Rajas, and Tamas. The remedies for planetary possession are complete. Now, the remedies for worldly curses, Vedic curses, the curses of women, and the curses of men are described.
4.2.33-40	In all rites of the Saṃhitā method, after establishing the water pot in the middle of the main rite, one should consecrate the water with the verse "Hiranyavarṇāḥ" and sprinkle it. In all rites of generating intelligence, etc., one should perform the rites of binding the gem, etc., afterwards. One should not perform consecration in medicinal rites. Having performed the Ābhyānīya rite, one should sprinkle and consecrate the barley gem with the verse "Agha-dveṣṭā devajāta," grind it again, recite the verse, and bind it. The subsequent rites are as follows: In the case of worldly curses and Vedic curses, in the case of a Brahmin's curse, in the case when a demon or Rākṣasa is seen, and in the case of being afflicted by a demon, the medicinal rite is complete. Now the medicinal rite for being afflicted by a Rākṣasa demon is described: Having performed the Ājya rite, one sprinkles and consecrates the Priyangu plant with the verse "Śam no devī Pṛṣṇiparṇī," grinds it again, recites the verse, and anoints the afflicted person. The subsequent rites begin with the Ābhyānaya rite. In the case of severe diseases such as leprosy, etc., in the case of fever and all diseases, the medicinal rite for Rākṣasa-related diseases is complete. Now, the medicinal rite in the case of wind disorders is described: Having completed the Ābhyāna rite, one sprinkles the afflicted person with the verse "Pippalī kṣiptabheṣajī," grinds the Pippali substance, recites the verses again, and anoints it. The subsequent rite begins with the Ābhyaṇā rite. In all cases of wind disorders, in the case where wind is released, in the case with wind colic, in the case caused by wind disorders, in all wind disorders, the medicinal rite has been completed. Now, the medical treatment for ascites is described: Having recited the verse "Vidradhasya balāsasya" three times, one performs the sprinkling rite on the head of the afflicted person and consecrates him. The subsequent rite starts with the Ābhayaṇā rite. The medical treatment for ascitas is complete. In all cases where diseases spread, in the case known as Hṛdayāmaya, and in the cases of diseases spreading to the intestines, eyes, ears, and heart, and in the unknown diseases of Rājayakṣma, the medical treatment is complete. Having performed the rite, one binds the gem made of ten kinds of wood and smeared with lac and gold, having sprinkled and consecrated it with the verse "Ya babhravaḥ." The medical treatment for all diseases is complete. Now, the medical treatment in the case of surgical diseases is described:
4.2.41	Having performed the Āṣṭaśītihoma, having sprinkled the water pot with the Sūkta "Udagātām", having recited it, having taken the patient out of the house, he sprinkles. The rite from Āṣṭa to the end is to be performed. The disease of a farmer is hereditary, passed down from father to son. The disease of farmers is leprosy, consumption, disorders of the stomach, and all kinds of eruptions, blood disorders, etc.
4.2.42	Having performed the rite, he sprinkles the house outside with water, reciting the verse "The night is not to be drunk" and reciting the mantra. The rite from the Upāṁśu onwards is to be done in the latter part of the night in the case of a disease affecting the field.
4.2.43	Having performed the Āṣṭaśītihoma, one should bind the Arjuna wood, barley grains, and sesame seeds together in one place, reciting the verse "O Arjuna, the tawny one," and then perform the subsequent rites. In the case of a field disease, having performed the Āṣțasītihoma, bind the clay in the shape of a living person with the verse "O tawny Arjuna," and then perform subsequent rites. Having performed the Āștasītihoma, having bound the clay from an anthill in the shape of the living person with the mantra "O tawny Arjuna" and then perform the following rites. In the same disease, there is an option of all rites. The skin of a living animal is called a living person's skin. The skin of goats, sheep, or horses is also mentioned. A person who belongs to a family and is born in a family, having come from the group of mother and father, has an option of all the rites. This is the second chapter on remedies.
4.3.1	Having recited the verse "Salutations to the ploughs," and having sprinkled the water pot, he places it under the plough yoked to a bull and then sprinkles the patient. This is the remedy for field-related diseases.
4.3.2-4	Having placed the sick person in that pit, he performs the rite of sipping water. Having performed the rite of sprinkling and concluding with the recitation of the Sāman, he takes up a pot of water and recites the verse "Salutations to the gods with sharp weapons." The old pit brings the water with the sprinkling. He sprinkles the sick person with water containing Śālātṛṇa grass in the pit. Sipping water is done wherever there is bathing. In all cases, sipping water is done. Then the subsequent rites are performed. Wherever there is bathing and sprinkling, in all cases, the rite of sprinkling is done. Wherever there is sprinkling, in all the remedies, one should perform the rite of sprinkling on the head and below. Thus the rite of sprinkling for the sick person is completed. Now the remedy for Brahmagraha is described.
4.3.5	Having performed the Ābhyanjana rites, taking the twigs of ten trees such as Palāśa, etc. with the mantra "Daśavṛkṣa", and making a gem wrapped in lac and gold, consecrating it with the mantra, and binding it, then performing the subsequent rites, this is the remedy for Brahmagraha.
4.3.6	Then ten Brahmanas, the followers of Atharva-Angiras, reciting the hymn "Dasah Brahmanas" touch the body of the sick person. This is the remedy for all grahas, including Brahmagraha.
4.3.7	Having gone to a cross-road, having performed the Ābhyatāna rite, having sprinkled the water pot with the Sūkta "Kṣetriyatvāt tvā", having recited the mantra, having given the pieces of wood of the Kaṃpīla tree on the affected part, having thrown the Pinjūlī into the pot, then he sprinkles. Then Ācamana. The subsequent rites.
4.3.8	Having recited the Sūkta "Kṣetriyatvā" and having enchanted the water pot along with the Piñjūlī, one should sprinkle the patient at the crossroads. Having bound the patient with Kāmipila wood, the remedy for Kṣetriya is completed. The remedies for Kṣetriyas are completed. Now the remedies for thirst due to dehydration are being described.
4.3.9-11	When the sun has risen, in the morning, having seated two persons facing east and west, the sick one facing east and the healthy one facing west, having placed them on the branches of the Vitex tree, having put rice-gruel in a Vitex vessel, having churned it with Vitex sticks, having churned the gruel on the head of the thirsty one, having recited the verse "Of the king", having recited the Vitex vessel, he gives it to the thirsty one, to whom the disease occurs.
4.3.12	Having recited the verse "O Lord of the Earth," he sprinkles water on the thirsty person and makes him drink it as a remedy.
4.3.13	Having recited the verse "Vasini and Vasava," he makes the person drink buttermilk, both the sick and the healthy wearing one garment. The remedies for thirst are completed. Now the remedies for abdominal diseases and boils are mentioned.
4.3.14	Having performed the rite, he offers black gram mixed with ghee with the verse "The earth of Indra". The rite is optional.
4.3.15	Having performed the rite, one grinds the cow dung with a stone, wrapping it around the left side of the painted arrow with the verse "O Indra, the earth".
4.3.16	Then, having recited the verse, one heats it in the fire.
4.3.17	Then, having performed the rite, it is placed in the fire with the last verse of the hymn.
4.3.18	Having made dust on the left hand with the Sūkta "Indrasya ya mahit," and having rubbed it with the right hand, standing facing south, reciting the Sūkta, he scatters it over the sick person. This is the remedy for erysipelas.
4.3.19	Having made dust with the Sūkla "Indrasya yā mahit," the sick person rubs it with both hands.
4.3.20	With the verse "Indra's great power," he offers Palasha, Udumbara, and other kindling woods. The diseases of stomach worms, stomach abscesses, and visible worms are cured. Now the remedies for cow worms are mentioned.
4.3.21-23	Having recited the Sūkta "Udyannādityaḥ" in the morning, having uttered the name of the cow, they strike the mouth of the worms with darbha grass, reciting the mantra "They are killed."
4.3.24	This should be done at midday.
4.3.25	Facing the sun in the afternoon, this is completed at three times. The name of the cow is mentioned in place of "asau".
4.3.26	With the verse "Rising Aditya" he offers black gram mixed with ghee. This is a remedy for worms. With the verse " Rising Aditya" he holds a black-coloured arrow wrapped with cowhide. Then he pulverises it with a stone. Then he heats it with the verse. Then he recites the verse and offers it in the fire. This is the meaning of "offering". This is a remedy against worms. With the verses "Rising Aditya" and "Rising Aditya" one should recite the verses and offer them in the fire. With the verse "Rising Aditya" one should recite the verse and offer it in the fire.
4.3.27-28	Having performed the rite with clarified butter, having bound the patient on the joints, having sprinkled the water vessel with the verse "From your eyes", having recited the verse again and having sprinkled, he releases the knots of the joints of the patient. Then the subsequent rite is complete. The remedy for all diseases such as eye diseases, nasal diseases, ear diseases, head diseases, tongue diseases, neck diseases, and consumption, is completed with the verse "For your eyes". All remedies for diseases are completed. Now the remedies for field diseases are mentioned.
4.3.29	Having performed the rite, he binds the deer-horn gem after reciting the verse "Of the deer" and consecrating it. Then comes the subsequent rite. The remedy for the disease of the field is as follows: Having recited the verse "Of deer" and consecrated water with the deer-horn, he makes the patient drink it and rinse his mouth. Then, at dawn, perform this rite. Having lit the deer-armour stake and immersed it in water, then consecrate it with the verse "Of Deer" and sprinkle the sick person. Rubbing and rinsing are the remedies for the disease of fields.
4.3.30	With the verse "Of the deer" etc. he offers barley. The barley should be taken once from the middle of the heap, according to the number of verses. This is the remedy for diseases of the field.
4.3.31	With the verse "Of deer" etc. having consecrated the food, he gives it to be eaten. The remedy for diseases of fields is completed. Now the remedies for diseases caused by sexual misconduct and childhood are described.
4.3.32	Having recited the Sūkta "I release you", he recites over the rice mixed with putrid-smelling fish and gives it to the sick person to eat at mealtime.
4.3.33	With the verse "I release thee" he sprinkles water heated with forest sesame seeds into a vessel, and then sprinkles the patient at dawn. This is the remedy for the disease of sexual intercourse. At dawn, with the verse "I Release Thee", he sprinkles water heated by forest chaff, and then sprinkles. This is the cleansing and rinsing remedy for the disease caused by sexual intercourse. With the verse "Release Thee", he sprinkles the water heated by forest cowdung, and then sprinkles at dawn. This cleansing and rinsing remedy is for the disease caused from sexual intercourse. At dusk, with the verse "Release Thee", he sprinkles the water ignited by the forest fire, and then sprinkles on the patient. This is the cleaning and rinsing remedy for all diseases. Some desire sprinkling in the forest in the four rites of sesame, chaff, etc. Some desire sprinkling at home. There is an option. The remedy for the disease arising from sexual intercourse is complete. With the verse "Release thee", he sprinkles the patient. This remedy is for all diseases. Now the remedies for all diseases are mentioned.
4.3.34	Having performed the Ābhyanana, one sprinkles the patient with water from a pot filled with water, reciting the ten verses beginning with "O cows" (4.21-30), and then anoints him. In the case of anointing and rinsing, the Ābhyana and the subsequent rites should be remembered. This is the remedy for all diseases. Having performed the rites, one sprinkles the sick person with water from a pitcher, reciting the verse "Release me from the head affliction" (4.31). The Ābhyana is the beginning, and the subsequent rites are the end. This is the sprinkling. In all cases, anointing and rinsing are to be done. This is the cure for all diseases. The third section is completed.
4.4.0	The remedies for the poison of Skanda are mentioned.
4.4.1	Having paid homage to the deity Takshaka, he sips water reciting the two verses "The Brahman was born" and "The rain-giver". Having paid homage to Takshaka, the serpent, he sprinkles water reciting the two mantras "The Brahman was bom" and "The raingiver". This is the remedy for poison caused by Skanda.
4.4.2	With the two verses, "The Brahman was born" and "The rain-giver", he recites over a piece of wood from the Krmuka tree along with water and then drinks it. This is the remedy for Skanda poison. With the two verses "The Brahman was..." and "The rain giver", he recites and sprinkles over a piece of Krmuka tree wood along with water. Then all the rinsing and drinking is done silently. The water is sprinkled over the burning wood and then sprinkled on the patient. All the rinsing and drinking are done silently. With the two mantras "The Brahman was...", he throws the burnt skin of an old deer into the water, recites over it, and then sprinkles it. This is a remedy for poison. With the verses "The Brahman..." and "The Rain-Giver", he recites while sprinkling water over the burning wood made of broom grass and straw. This is the Skanda poison remedy.
4.4.3	Having performed the Ābhyanjana rite, one consecrates a vessel of water with the two verses "Brahmana was born" and "The giver of water", and sprinkles it. This is the remedy for poison. The remedy for poison: Having churned rice gruel with two fruits smeared with poison, reciting the two verses "The giver of Brahmana was born" "The giver of Water", one then consecrates it and makes one drink it. The remedy for Skanda poison: Having consecrated the Madana fruits with the two verses, "The giver of Brahma was born" and "The giver of water", one eats them. One should do as one vomits.
4.4.4	"Brahma was born" and "The giver of water" - Having recited these two verses, one should give Harira mixed with ghee. The remedy for Skanda poison is complete. Now, the remedies for bleeding caused by weapons and other injuries are mentioned.
4.4.5	Having boiled the Lakṣā water with the verse "Rohaṇy asi," one should sprinkle the affected area. This is a ritual to be performed at dawn. It is a remedy for bone fractures, blood flow, and injuries caused by bites or weapons.
4.4.6	Having recited the verse "Rohaṇy asi" over milk mixed with ghee, he makes the patient drink it. Having mixed milk with ghee and recited the verse "Rohany asi", he anoints the affected area. In cases of bone fracture, bone injury, bone bleeding, bone injury, broken bone, bone injury, tree injury, fist, stone, brick, animal horn, fire, stone, lump, weapon injury, or bleeding, or in cases of body injury, this is the remedy.
4.4.7	Having performed the rite, he binds the garland of flowers with the verse "He sees" after sprinkling and reciting. The rite from the Upāṁśu onwards is well-known. The Tri-sanhdya garland of flowers is well-known in the case of Brahma-graha, Kshatriya-graha, Vaishya-graha, Shudra-graha, or other internal Pisachas and Rakshasas, the remedy is complete. Now the remedy for all diseases is mentioned.
4.4.8	Having performed the Āṣṭa-homa, with the Sūkta consisting of seven verses beginning with "I think of Bhava and Śarva," he consecrates the seven pots filled with water, each with a verse. Then, consecrating each pot with a verse, he sprinkles the patient. Then he throws the pot behind. Thus he does the second and third. Then the subsequent rites are completed. This is the remedy for all diseases. Now the remedy for all ghost-possessions is described.
4.4.9	With the verse "Thou hast formerly," he makes a paste of the leaves of the śamī tree and puts it in the śamī fruit, recites it, and gives it in the middle of the barley flour for eating. It is a remedy for the Rākṣasa-graha.
4.4.10	With the verse "Thou has formerly," he makes paste of the leaves, puts it in the fruit, recites, and gives it as an ornament to the sick person. It is a general remedy for all grahas.
4.4.11	Having made a paste of the śamī tree and enchanted it with the verse "You have done this before," one sprinkles the house of the sick person with the paste. This is the remedy for all grahas, such as grahas caused by demons, apsaras, gandharvas, and others. The remedy for excessive possession is now explained.
4.4.12	At the time of eating, he offers food after reciting the mantra "O immortal one" for eating. When wisdom is lost, when ignorance and unrighteousness are seized, when the three goals of life are destroyed, and when gambling and other games are excessively indulged in, this is the medicine for bad thoughts. The medicine is mentioned for consumption in cases of consumption, head diseases, leprosy, and pain in all parts of the body.
4.4.13	Having mixed it with ghee and reciting the verses "He who was born in the mountains" and "Three times to the Angiras from the waters", one anoints the body of the patient with the afflicted part. This is the remedy for consumption, head diseases, leprosy, and pain in all parts of the body. Now the remedy for injuries caused by weapons, etc., is described.
4.4.14	Having boiled lac with the mantra of the verse "Ratri mata" and reciting it, one should make the patient drink it. This is the remedy for injuries caused by weapons, falling stones, fire, and all parts of the body. The remedies for women who have given birth and for Aridhaka are mentioned.
4.4.15	Having recited the Sūkta beginning with "Brahma, the unborn" (5.6.1), "Those who are not attained" (5. 6.2), "The one with a thousand streams is indeed you" (5. 6.3), he should offer the food to be eaten, first letting the woman enter silently, and then the performer himself, having entered silently, should offer the food, reciting the Sūkta.
4.4.16	Having recited the Sūkta "Brahma jajānam", he makes the patient drink a gruel of barley-flour, and then performs the rite of offering to the sun with the same Sūkta. Having recited the Sāvitrī Sūkta, he makes the patient rinse his mouth. This concludes the treatment for the defects of childbirth and the diseases of childbirth. The treatment for the removal of defects in the sight of wonders is complete. In all cases of wonders, one should perform the rite of eating or the rite of rinsing the mouth. The treatment for all the wonders mentioned in the Caraka and other medical systems, which are related to the healthy body, is this pacification. The treatment for those wonders mentioned in astrology that are related to the diseases of the body is also this rite. Now the treatment for all diseases is described.
4.4.17	Having performed the rite, he pours four libations into the water pot with the verse, "To the sky, svāhā."
4.4.18-19	Having given two Sampātas on the ground, then having collected the earth of the Sampāta, having put it in a vessel of water, then having recited the mantra, one sprinkles the sick person with the formula, "To the sky, svāhā." With three svāhā-utterances, there is one Sampāta. With three svāhã-utterances, three Sampātas. Two Sampātas with two verses. Thus there are six. The procedure from the Ābhyatāna is to be done afterwards. Having performed the Ābhyātana, with the verse "This barley," there is Homa with half verses. Having brought the Sampātas to a vessel of water and taken the two Sampātas from the ground, having put them in the vessel of water, and then reciting the mantra, one then sprinkles the sick person. The procedure from Ābhyātāna is to be performed afterwards. This is the remedy for all diseases.
4.4.20	Having performed the Āṣṭaśītihoma, one should perform the Homa with the mantra "Oṃ, to the Sun, to the Moon, to the Wind, to the Fire, to the Earth, to the Water, to the Sky, to the Space, to the Ether, to the Heaven, to the Heaven of Heaven, to the Supreme Heaven, to the Highest Heaven, to the All-Pervading Heaven, to the Unmanifest Heaven, to the Manifest Heaven, to the Manifested Heaven, to the Non-Manifest Heaven, to the Self-Manifest Heaven, Oṃ, to the Heaven." Having performed the Āṭṭahāsa Homa, one should perform Homa with the verse "Oṃ, I offer this barley to the Sun, the Moon, the Wind, the Fire, the Earth, the Water, the Sky, the Space, the Ether, the Heaven, the Heaven of Heaven." Having performed Homa with the Āṭṭhārasa Homa, one performs Homa with the following verse: "Oṃ, this barley is offered to the Sun, Moon, Wind, Fire, Earth, Water, Sky, Space, Ether, Heaven, Heaven of Heaven, Supreme Heaven, Highest Heaven, All-Pervasive Heaven, Unmanifest Heaven, Manifest Heaven, Manifested Heaven, Non-Manifest Heaven." Having performed Āṭṭhāma Homa, one offers Homa with the above verse. Having performed Āṭtāma Homa, Homa is performed with the above verse.
4.5.0	The remedy for snake poison is described.
4.5.1	Having paid homage to Takshaka, he recites the verse "Dadhir hi" and sips water. This is a remedy for snakebite and other poisons. Having paid homage to the Takshaka serpent, he recites "Dadhir hi," and sprinkles water on the person bitten by a poisonous snake. This is a poison remedy. Having crushed a piece of the Krmuka tree with the verse "Dadhi hi," and then adding water, he recites and sprinkles it on the person affected by poison. Having recited the verse "Dadhih" and sprinkled water on the person affected, he sprinkles it on the burning skin. Having recited the verses "Dadhir hi", "Dadhir hi”, and “Dadhir hi” respectively, he sprinkles water on the skin of a deer that has been burnt, on the water that has been burnt with the grass of a broom, and on the water that is burning. This is a cure for moving poisons. Having performed the preliminaries, he consecrates the water vessel with the verse " Dadhir hi" and then makes the person drink it. Having churned barley flour with the verses "Dadhi hi" and "Dadhi hi", which are smeared with poison, and then recited, he makes the person bitten by the snake drink it. This is a moving poison remedy. Having recited the Madhu fruit with the verse "Dadahir hi", he eats it for vomiting. This is a mobile poison remedy. Having chanted the saffron and ghee together with the verse " Dadahir hi", he makes the person drink. This is a movable poison remedy.
4.5.2-3	With the verse, "That which is not water for you" (5.13.2), he circumambulates the patient in an anti-clockwise direction. This is a remedy to paralyze poison. Poison that has been paralyzed cannot be cured by any other means. It can be done with the help of the Van Veda mantra.
4.5.4	Having recited the verse "Whatever is not water," he ties his hair. This is a remedy to stop poison. Having recited the verse, "Whatever is not..." he ties a knot with a white cloth. This is a means to stop poison. Reciting the verse once, "Whatever is..." he ties a thread on a hemp stalk. The poison does not spread, remains in its place, and does not spread in the body. This is a way to stop poison.
4.5.5	With the verse, "May my voice be like the bull's" (5.13.3), he presses the place where he was bitten, recites the verse, and goes elsewhere than the place. This is the remedy for removing poison.
4.5.6	The teacher then circumambulates clockwise, reciting the verse "Your eye is the eye of the sun." After reciting the verse "You are the destroyer of enemies," he ignites the grass and then throws it towards the snake.
4.5.7	After reciting the verse "Destroy the enemies," he throws the burning grass towards the snake's mouth.
4.5.8-9	Having recited the verse "O Kairața, O Pṛṣni" (5.13.5), one should recite the verse "O Asita" (5. 13.6) and tie the knot of the sacrificial thread, reciting the verse. This is the remedy for poison.
4.5.10	"Aligi and Viligi" (5.13.7) "Of Urugalaya" (5. 13.8) Having recited these two verses, he makes the honey-bees drink honey, honey-tree soil, and water.
4.5.11	With the verse, "Karna told this to the dog," one should recite the excrement of a parrot, myna, and a crane, and then give it to the dog. The dog's excrement is called "dog's excrement." One should recite the excreta and then give it as a drink to someone bitten by poison.
4.5.12	With the verse, "Karna told this to the," one should recite a piece of meat from a deer and then feed it to someone bitten by a snake. This is a remedy for removing poison.
4.5.13	Having recited the verse "Ta buvam na ta buvam" (5.13.10), one should throw water into the middle of the gourd and then recite the mantra while sipping water. This is a remedy for snakebite.
4.5.14	The mantra "Tastuvan na tastuvan" is recited while binding the gourd stem after sprinkling it with water. This is done in the case of a person bitten by a snake. In all cases, the application of rites is optional, not compulsory. One should perform one, two, three, or all the rites. The treatment for snakebite is complete. When there are many rites prescribed for a single disease, one should perform one rite, two rites, or all the Rites. Due to the abundance of rites, one should perform two rites, or perform all the rites. "There is no procedure in all rites involving fire offerings." Thus it is said. Now the binding of the mouths of evil speakers is explained.
4.5.15	With the two verses, "One is mine" and "If you are the only bull," one should mix together the three things - the tips of the family plants, honey, and water, recite them, and then make the sick person drink it. It is a remedy for binding the mouths of evil-speaking people. Evil people do not speak in secret.
4.5.16	Having recited the verse "If one bull", he eats food after reciting it. This is a remedy against curses. It is also a remedy against sins committed unintentionally.
4.5.17	Having recited the verse "if one bull", he closes the door of the house, meaning he enters. This is a means to bind the mouth of a malicious speaker and a remedy against a brahmin's curse. Now the remedy against fever is mentioned.
4.5.18	He makes the patient drink parched grains with the verse, "Agni is the one who burns." This is a remedy for all fevers.
4.5.19	Having performed the Ābhyanjana rite, he offers the Sampaata libations on the head with the Sookta beginning with "Agni st akmanam" and using a copper ladle. Then follows the subsequent rites. In this rite, the setting up of the sacrificial fire is completed. The remedy for fever is done in all fevers. Now the remedy for worms is mentioned.
4.5.20	Having performed the Āṣṭa-homa, he binds the Karīra root after reciting the verse "Ote me" and reciting the verse "The Karīra tree is the best of trees". Having bound the Karīra wood with cow dung, he recites the verse "O te me" and grinds it with a stone. Then he heats it in the fire with the verse "O me". Then he offers it with the verse "The fire is the best of fires". Then the subsequent rites are performed. This is the remedy for worms.
4.5.21	Having recited the verse "Ote me" over the village dust, one should scatter the dust facing south with the left hand. This is a remedy for all worms. Having recited the verse "Ote me" over the dust, one should mix it and scatter it on the worms with the hand. This is also a remedy for all kinds of worms. Having recited "Ote me", one should offer the twigs of the Shantatree. This is a means to destroy worms. This is a cure for worms in the mouth, ears, and all kinds of worms.
4.5.22	Having placed the child on the lap of the mother of Agni, with the verse "Ote me", and having heated it on the palate with a pestle and a mortar, and with ghee, one should apply it three times. This is the remedy for all worms, including the Apāna worm.
4.5.23	With the verse "Ote me" one should anoint the affected area with sesame seeds mixed with ghee, reciting the verse nine times. This is a remedy for wounds caused by worms.
4.5.24	With the verse "O te me" one should recite the verse twenty-one times over the roots of ushira grass, then crush them with a stone and burn them in fire, reciting the verse.
4.5.25	Having recited the verse "Ote me" twenty-one times, he consecrates the herbs and offers them to the sick person as a remedy against worms.
4.5.26	With the verse "Ote me" one should consecrate a pot of water along with twenty-one needles and besmear the patient. In the ghee ritual, this is the remedy for worms born from feces, eye, ear, mouth, head, nose, and teeth worms, seen as black, white, or yellow, and those unseen. The worm remedy is complete. Now the remedy for demons is mentioned. Here it is said:
4.5.27	Having performed the Ābhītaṇḍala rite, he eats the cooked rice-gruel with milk, consecrated with the verse "Those who enter him", and then performs the subsequent rites. The remedy for Rākṣasa is complete. Now the remedy for snake poison is described.
4.5.28	Having recited the three verses beginning with "Like the sky," he makes the patient drink honey, meaning "a lump of honey." This is a remedy for the symptoms of snakebite.
4.5.29	Having recited the verse "Pari dyām iva" three times, one should recite the verse "Pari dyaṃ iva" and sprinkle water on the patient. This is the remedy for poison. Having recited the verse "Pari dyaṃ ivā" three times, one should recite the verse "Pari dyām iva" and sprinkle water on a burning bundle of grass. This is the treatment for poison. Having performed the ritual, one should recite the verse "Pari dym iva" and sprinkle the water on the patient, reciting the verse "Pari Dyām iva" three times. This is the ritual for poison. Having prepared the ritual, one should recite "Pari dyamam iva" and sprinkle it on the patient, then recite the verse "Paridyamam iva" three times and sprinkle it on him. This is the ritual for poison. Having sprinkled the water on the vessel, one should recite it, then recite the verses "Pari dya mam iva" three times, and sprinkle it on the patient. This is a ritual for poison. One should recite the verse "pari dya mam iva" three times and sprinkle the water, then recite the remaining verses. This is the ritual for poison. Having recited the verse "pari dyām iva" three three times, one sprinkles the water on the affected part. This is the rite for poison. Having mixed the Madhuka fruit with poison, one should recite "pari dyām iva" and drink it. This is the antidote for poison. Having eaten the Madhuka fruits, one should recite “pari dyām iva” and drink it. This is the antidote for vomiting. Having recited the verses "pari dyām ivā" three times, and sprinkled the water on a burning pile of grass, one should recite them again and sprinkle the water. This is the cure for poison. Having taken the Haridra and ghee, one should recite "pari dyām iva" and drink it. The remedy for poison is complete. Now the remedy for phlegm is described.
4.5.30	This water is made by putting the water in a vessel, lighting a fire there, and sprinkling a piece of wood with the verse "Asthi sramsam," and sprinkling the afflicted with that piece of wood. Cleansing and rinsing are remedies for phlegm. There is no ritual. The fifth chapter is concluded.
4.6.0	Now the remedy for eye diseases is described.
4.6.1	Having performed the Ābhyanana rite, he binds the mustard-stalk-gem, having sprinkled it with the four-verse Sūkta beginning with "Ābhaya anābhaya," and having recited it. He makes it sprinkled with mustard oil. The subsequent rite is performed with the same procedure as before. This is the remedy for eye diseases.
4.6.2	Having performed the Ābhyanana, he binds the gem of mustard-stalk with the verse "Abeyas and Anabeyas", reciting it after sprinkling. The subsequent rites are as follows: Having anointed the principal and the limbs with ghee and mustard oil, he then binds the gem. This is the remedy for eye diseases.
4.6.3	With the verse "Ābhaya" he anoints mustard leaves with mustard oil, recites it, and gives it to the sick person for eye disease.
4.6.4	With the verse "Ābhayo" he recites four fruits of the Shaka tree and gives them to the sick person with eye disease.
4.6.5	Having sipped the root-milk with the verse "Ābhayaḥ," and then anointing the eyes of the afflicted one, the root-milk is applied to the affected area. This is called the root-milk.
4.6.6	Having performed the rite, he consecrates and eats the root milk with the verse "O Abhaya", and then performs the subsequent rite. The remedy for eye diseases is complete. The remedy for bile fever is described.
4.6.7	Having performed the rite, he offers the libations on the head with a copper ladle, reciting the three-verse mantra, "May Agni burn him, the dry one." Then the subsequent rite. In this rite, one should create a forest fire. The treatment for Pittaja fever is complete. Now the treatment for hair growth and hair loss is described.
4.6.8	With the three-verse hymn "These three," he recites over water sprinkled with tree, earth, and medicinal herbs, and sprinkles it at dawn. This rite is for hair growth and hair loss.
4.6.9	Having boiled the pith of honey with the three verses beginning with "These three," one should sprinkle it with the mantra. At dawn, having boiled the myrobalan fruits with the three verses, one should sprinkle the sick person with the mantra. This is the remedy for hair.
4.6.10	At dawn, having boiled the three herbs mentioned in the verse with two kinds of turmeric, one should sprinkle them while reciting the mantra. The medicine for hair growth and hair loss is complete. Now the medicine for stomach and mouth ailments is described.
4.6.11	Then, having recited the two verses "Krishna is the binding" and "The one with the eyes" along with the medicinal herbs, one sprinkles the patient with water. This is the medicine for stomach and beak.
4.6.12	He offers to Maruts with the two verses, "Krishna, the garment," and "The flowing," according to the rules of the Pakayajna. Just as Varuna, so Maruts. "The flowing," and "The garment," he offers clarified butter with the two verses. In the clarified butter section, he offers clarified butter. With the two verses, “The flowing,” and “The garment,” he sprinkles the herbs and then presses them down. In the clarified-butter section, he sprinkles the herbs with the two verses “The flowing,” “The garment,” and then presses them in water. In the belly of a water-filled bladder, or in a belly, he sprinkles the head of a dog with the two verses "The flowing," "The garment," and then presses it in water. Or he sprinkles the head or the belly of a goat with the two verses "The flowing," "the garment," and then sprinkles it in water. With the two mantras, "The flowing," "The garment," he binds the hair, beard, and shoes at the end of a bamboo, recites them, and then strikes them. With the two formulas, "The flowing" and "The garment", he sprinkles with a water pot that has been sprinkled, and places the water pot on a stone with three feet in the water. In the water-filled belly, in the belly with a beak, in the big belly, the remedies are completed. Now the remedies for heart disease, water-filled belly and jaundice are mentioned.
4.6.13	Having taken water from a river in the direction of the Himalayas, reciting the hymn "Himalavatah", one should throw Valika grass into it, then recite the mantra, and then sprinkle it on the sick person. This is the remedy for heart disorders, edema, and jaundice.
4.6.14	Having kindled the five-and-fifty twigs of the cow-dung with the verse "The five and the five," he places the twigs under the fire.
4.6.15	Having placed the leaves on the skull above the fire, he cooks them. Then, having recited the verse, he smears the garland of knots with the same wood.
4.6.16	Having rubbed the conch with the verse "Those five," he anoints the garland of sores. Having anointed the dog's mouth with the verse "Five," he anoints it. Having anointed the leech with the verse "Which five," he connects it to the garland of sores for the flow of blood. Having anointed the fish and others with the verse "The five," he connects them to the garland of ulcers.
4.7.1-4	With the verse, "To Agni, the speech," he offers a cake. With the verse, "To Agni, the voice," he offers milk. With the verse "To Agni, " he offers cooked rice. With the verse "To Agni, "he offers cooked rice. Translation: With the verse, “To Agni, the Speech,” he offers a cake, with the verse, “to Agni, the Speech” he offers milk, with the verse “to Agni, Speech” he offers cooked rice, with the verse "to Agni" he offers cooked rice and rice-gruel according to the rules for offering a cow, with the verse "to Agni" he offers rice, with the verses, “to Agni” he offers barley, with the verse "to Agni" he pours out rice, with the same verse he offers rice, the rite of offering is repeated for each verse, with the verse beginning "May they go forth" he offers ghee, the rite of protection against grahas is completed, with the verse starting "May they go forward" he offers wood from the Śāntavṛkṣa tree, with the verse commencing "May they go ahead" he offers a cake of roasted barley, with the same verses he offers cooked rice according to the rules of offering a cow, and with the verse "May they go away" he offers rice, and with the same verse, he offers barley, the rite is optional, with the verse ending "May they go" he offers rice and ghee, and with the verses "May they go", he offers rice and barley, the rite of protecting against grahas is complete. Now the protection against all grahas is described.
4.7.5	"Vaisvānara is for our protection" (6.35), "Vaisvânara, the truthful one" (6. 36) - reciting these two verses, he makes the person drink water. This is a remedy for all diseases. "Vaisvânaara is for our" and "Vaisvâneara, the truthful" - reciting these two Vedic verses, he makes a person drink barley gruel mixed with ghee. This is a general remedy. "Vaisvanara is for our", "Vaisvanar, the truthful" (6.40) - reciting these Vedic verses, he gives the person water mixed with turmeric and ghee to drink. "Vaisvaanara is for our," "Vaisvanaro, the truthful" reciting these two Vedic hymns, he makes the patient drink water that has been drawn out. If any liquid is being drunk as part of the ghee treatment, he makes the sick person drink it after reciting the two Vedic hymns. The general remedies are complete. Now the remedies for specific diseases are described.
4.7.6	Much talking leads to unrighteousness. This is a censure. Having performed the Āṣṭaśītihoma, one should consecrate the cow's horn fallen by itself with the first Sūkta beginning with "The sky stood." Then, having made water in the horn and reciting the mantra, one should rinse and sprinkle. The concluding rite is as before. The remedy for censure is complete. Censure is due to much talking during lunar eclipses and other occasions. Now, the remedy is stated for the pain arising in the stomach, heart, limbs, or whole body.
4.7.7	Having performed the Ābhyanānas, he binds the Shūlamani after reciting the Sūkta "Yam te Rudraḥ" and consecrating it. Then the subsequent rites. The Shūla is either a metal or stone amulet, or a Darīlabhadramat. The Rudrabhāṣya method prescribes reciting the Sūtra "Yam te Rudrah" for the afflicted. The Shūlabhaishajya is complete. Now the Rakshograhabhaishajya is described.
4.7.8	Having recited the verse "Utsūrya" three times, one should sprinkle the patient with water mixed with the herbs Citti and others. Having recited the verse "Utsūrya" three times, one sprinkles the patient with water and the herb Sami. Having recited the "Utsūryā" verse three times, one anoints the patient with water, the Sami fruit, and the herb Shirshaparni. Having recited the "Utsūryâ" verse three times and given water to the patient, one anoints him with the herb Shirshapārnī. The treatment for Rakshas graha is complete. Now the treatment for malignant tumors and ulcers is described.
4.7.9	Having recited the three-verse hymn "The sky and this earth are mine," one anoints the swelling with oil, and then rubs the affected area with one's hand. The meaning is "one sprinkles." This is a remedy for a malignant swelling. Reciting the hymn "The sky is mine," one rubs the affected area. This is a remedy in the case of a malignant swelling or a malignant ulcer.
4.7.10	With the verse "May the sky be mine" he rubs the wound on the post, meaning to rub. This is the remedy for a wound caused by blood, and for a malignant tumor. The remedy for an unhealed wound is described.
4.7.11	With the verse "This is indeed the remedy" he recites over cow's urine and rubs the wound with it.
4.7.12	With the verse, "This is indeed the remedy," he sprinkles the wound with urine.
4.7.13	With the same verse, he washes the wound with urine, for a wound whose opening is not visible is called "unbroken wound."
4.7.14	With the verse, "this is indeed the remedy", he anoints the teeth with the verse, it is the remedy for an unbroken wound.
4.7.15	Having recited the verse, "This is the remedy," one should anoint the wound with foam of grass and dust. If the wound does not bleed, the treatment of wounds is complete. The treatment for a string of boils is described.
4.7.16	Having rubbed the conch with the verse "Apacitaḥ pra patata", he anoints the swelling with it. Having rubbed the dog's saliva with the verse "Apachitaḥ", he anoints it on the swelling. The dog's saliva is the remedy for swelling. Having rubbed the leeches with the verse "Apocitaḥ", he attaches them to the swelling to induce the flow of blood in any way possible. Having rubbed the house lizard with the verse "A surasas", he attaches it to the swelling. Having rubbed a conch with the two verses "A surasasaḥ", he anoint the swelling with it, having rubbed the dog' saliva and the dog's mouth saliva with the two verses, he anoints the sweling with it. The sweling is the remedy for sweling. Having rubbed the leech with the two verses "A surasasa", he attaches it on the swelling to induce flow of blood. Having rubbed the lizard and mosquitoes with the two verses "A surasasa", he attaches them on the swelling to cause flow of blood.
4.7.17	Having powdered the Sindhu salt with the verse "Apacita", one should sprinkle it on the Gandamala, then spit on it. One should sprinkle the Sindhu salt, having powdered it with the two verses "A susrasa", on the disease, then spit on top of it silently. The Gandamala medicine is complete. Now the medicine for bird-striking is described.
4.7.18	Having recited the Sūkta, "He falls in the sky," one should anoint the place affected by wings with the clay from the dog's foot. This is the remedy for wing-affected diseases.
4.7.19	Having recited the Sūkta "Patati antarikṣeṇa" over a dog and a fly, throw it into the fire and then fumigate the affected area. This is the remedy for the attack of birds such as crows, vultures, pigeons, and hawks. Now the remedy for boils is explained.
4.7.20	"Having recited the half-verse "He will fall from glory," one should rub the boil with cow's urine. This is the remedy for boils. "Having recited the verse "He will fall..." one should wash the boil with cow urine. "Having recited "He will fall...", one should smear the boil with the teeth plaque. "Having recited "He will fall...", having recited the half- verse "He will..." one should smear the goat with the foam of grass and dust. The remedy for boils is complete. Boil means a boil. The remedy for a boil caused by donkeys, dogs, etc. is described.
4.7.21	Having recited the Sāman mantra, "Accepting your own oblation," he sprinkles the wound with the water of peace. Then, having performed the ghee ritual, he offers ghee with the mantra, "Accept your own oblation." Then, mentally contemplating, he offers the concluding oblations. The treatment for wounds caused by donkey bites and swelling is complete. Now, the treatment for diseases caused by sin and ascites is described.
4.7.22	Having thrown the Soma creeper into the fire with the three-verse hymn, "O Soma, the queen of herbs," one fumigates the sick person.
4.7.23	Having recited the three-verse mantra, "O Soma," one makes the patient drink honey and buttermilk. This is a remedy for water-belly, sin, and curse.
4.7.24	"O Soma, the king of herbs," with this verse, he mixes milk with buttermilk, recites it, and makes the patient drink it.
4.7.25	The four things, honey, buttermilk, milk and curd, are mixed together and then recited with the verse "O those herbs", and then given to drink to a person afflicted by a brahmin's curse or a disease caused by water. The remedy for diseases caused by poison, poison, immobile and mobile beings, and for flies is described.
4.7.26	Having made a mound of earth from an anthill with the three times "The gods gave", one consecrates and binds it. The ghee ritual is performed with the three times, "The gods gave". Having thrown anthill earth into water, one then consecrates and makes one drink it. With the three times, “The gods gave”, one throws anthill earth into the water, then consecrates and rinses. Antidote for poison is performed with the anthill earth, hot water, and the three times, "The gods gave". Having thrown anthill soil into hot water, one then anoints the wound bitten by poison. Antidote for both poison and poison is performed with anthill soil, hot water, the three times, and the three verses, "The gods have given". Antidote for poison and poison is completed. Now the remedy for cough and phlegm is described.
4.7.27	Having recited the verse "As the mind is with the mind's intentions," he gives food to be eaten. Having recited the verse "As the mind is" over barley gruel, he eats it. This is the remedy for coughing and phlegm. The rite of attending the sun is performed twice with the two verses. Having recited the water with the verse "As mind is with the minds' intentions," he sips it. Then the rite of attending the Sun is performed twice with both verses. This is the medicine for coughing and phlem. Having recited the barley gruel with the verse "They bring down from heaven" and given it to be eaten, he enters the house. Then he recites the food and gives it to be eaten. This is the cure for coughing and phlegin. Having recited the gruel with the formula "They bring down..." and given it to eat, he performs the rite of attending. Having recited water with the formula "Those who bring down..." and sipped it, he performs the attending rite. The rite of serving the sun is performed with both verses twice. The remedy for coughing and catarrh is complete. The remedy for strengthening and growing hair is described.
4.7.28	Having performed the Āsāḍha rites, he binds the Kañcīphala gem, having sprinkled and recited the two Sūktas, "The Goddess to the Goddess" and "Whom Jamadagni". Then the subsequent rites. He binds the Jīvantiphala gem with the two Sūktakas, "The Goddess..." and "Whom Jamadāgni". The Ajya rites. He binds Bhṛṅgarāja, having sprinkled and reciting the two Sūtras, "The Goddess ..." and "Whom Jamadaṇi". In the Ajya rites, for strengthening hair, for hair growth, for increasing short hair, the remedy is as follows: This rite should be performed on the new moon day, wearing black clothes, having begged for food made of black gram and sesame, the performer recites the two Sūktās, "The Goddess ...", and "Whom Jamaḍāgni", along with the Kañcāphala and Bhṛṅgaraja, and sprinkles with water at night during the Brahma Muhūrta. With that water, he sprinkles before the crow falls and the constellation Avakṣatra. The rite for hair growth, hair generation, hair generation in baldness, hair strengthening, and the remedy for graying is complete. The seventh chapter.
4.8.0	The remedy for the disease of the jaw is mentioned.
4.8.1	One should recite the mantra "O, your breast" over the breast and give it to the child to drink. The husband or the one who performs the ritual performs the remedy for the disease affecting the jaw, the remedy for the destruction of suffering.
4.8.2	The mother or the child is made to drink the rice-gruel of Priyangu mixed with milk, reciting the verse, "That which is thy breast." The rice-gruel is mixed with milk and then recited. It is given to the child or the mother. It is beneficial in cases of colic and pain. It is said to be a remedy for all diseases.
4.8.3	Having performed the Āṣṭaśītihoma, one should bind the patient with the noose of Muñja grass with the two verses "Agnavisnu" and "Soma Rudra". Having sprinkled the water pot along with the Śarapiñjūlī, one should sprinkle and recite the mantra. Then comes the subsequent ritual. This is the remedy for all diseases. Having performed the Āṭaśītahoma, one should sprinkle the water pot with the two verses, "Soma Rudra" and "Soma Varuna", bind the patient with Muñja grass at the joints, and sprinkle with the water pot alongwith the Darbhapijūlī. Then comes the sequential ritual. This is a remedy for all diseases." Having performed the Āstaśītihoma and sprinkled the water pot with nine verses beginning with "Sinīvāli", one should bind the Muñja grass, sprinkle with the Piñjūlīs, and perform the ritual of sprinkling and rinsing. One should remember this in all cases. This is a universal remedy. Having performed the Astaśītihoma with the two verses beginning with "Vi te muñcami raśnām", one should sprinkle the Muñja water pot, bind it at the joints, sprinkle with the water and Piñjūlis. Then comes the ritual of ghee. Having performed the Aṣṭaśītīhoma, one should recite the two verses "Śumbhani" and "Muñchantu mā" and sprinkle the water pot, bind the Muñjā grass at the joints with the noose, and sprinkle with Piñjūli. Then comes the sequence of rituals.
4.8.4	Having recited the two verses beginning with "Agnavisnu" and "Somarudra" respectively, one should sprinkle the afflicted person with water. The entire remedy is mentioned in the nine verses beginning with "Sinivāli". Having recited the two mantras beginning with "Vi te muñcami" and "Shumbhani" respectively, one shall sprinkle the afflicted person. In all cases, one should bind three fingers with Muñja grass and perform the sprinkling and application. In this context, sprinkling and application, as well as rubbing and rinsing, are completed in all cases. The remedies for all diseases are mentioned. Now the remedy for scorpion sting is mentioned.
4.8.5	Having ground the honey of the Jyesthima plant with the eight-verse mantra, "O king of the distant world," he makes the patient drink it.
4.8.6	Having sprinkled the clay of the field with the Sūkta "Tiracchirajeḥ", he binds it after reciting the mantra and performing the ritual. Having sprinkled the clay from an anthill with the eight-verse Sūkta "Tiraschirajeḥ" and recited the mantra, he binds it. Then comes the subsequent ritual. This is the remedy for scorpions and mosquitoes. The skin of a living animal is called "Jīvakoṣaṇī".
4.8.7	Having recited the eight verses beginning with "O king of the serpents," one should recite the verses beginning with "The king of the serpents" and give the patient water to drink. This is the remedy for scorpion bites. Having recited the eight times beginning with "O King of the Serpents," one should mix turmeric with ghee and recite the verses beginning "O King of Serpents" and give the mixture to drink. Having recited the verses beginning with “O King of Serpants” eight times, one should recite the eight verses beginning “O King of the serpents” and give the patient a mixture of water, honey, milk, and chewed leaves to drink. Having chanted the eight verses beginning "O king of serpents," one should chant the eight verses beginning "O king of serpents" and give the patient anthill soil to drink. The remedies mentioned here are from the verses beginning "The king of serpents." The remedies for scorpion bites, ants, mosquitoes, and leeches are complete. Now the remedies for glandular swellings are described.
4.8.8	"Having recited the two verses, 'The red ones have been reduced' (7.74.1-2), and the one verse, 'O Susira' (7.6.1), having made a bowstring of black antelope hair with these three verses, he pierces the garland of knots with a painted arrow. There are three arrows for each verse.
4.8.9	Having placed the Gandhārī with the fourth arrow, he pierces it with the fourth arrow and strikes it with the fourth verse, "Those who are afflicted by the neck..." He releases the Gandhārā with the fourth arrow by throwing away its own arrow outside.
4.8.10	"The four verses are: "Apacitam," "Asusrasa," "Ya graivyaḥ," and "Ya graiyyāḥ." Having recited these four verses, one should consecrate water with clarified butter and black antelope hair, and sprinkle the patient with that water at dusk, when the night is still young. There are two kinds of goiter: one is complete. Here is the remedy for goiter. Both have the same treatment. Now the remedy for consumption is described.
4.8.11	Having performed the Ājyatantra, he binds the broken string of the vīṇā after reciting the Trica verse "Yaḥ kīkasāḥ" and sprinkling it with water. The rite from the Āyātanas onwards is the remedy for royal consumption.
4.8.12	Having performed the rite as before, he binds the string of the vina, having tied the string of the lute to the neck of the vina, the conch-shell, and the string of the flute, having sprinkled it with water and recited the mantra. Then the rite as before. Remedy for royal consumption.
4.8.13	Having performed the Ābhyanjana, one should bind together three pieces of self-fallen and withered grass with the three-verse mantra "Yaḥ kīkasāḥ" and consecrate them. Then perform the subsequent rites. This is the remedy for royal consumption. In all cases, where many rites are prescribed, one should perform one, two, or all of them. There is an option of rites in all cases. In all cases there is an option of the Homa rite. Success is attained by practice. The remedy for royal consumption is complete. Now the remedy for being afflicted by Varuna in water-belly is described.
4.8.14	Having made a pavilion in the middle of two flowing rivers, having performed the rites with clarified butter, having sprinkled the hot water pot with the four verses beginning with "O king Varuna, in the waters," and having enchanted it, one should sprinkle the patient along with the Pinjula (medicinal plant) and perform the cleansing and sipping rites. Then perform the subsequent rites. This is the remedy for ascites.
4.8.15	Having made a pavilion at the confluence of two rivers flowing together, having recited the four verses beginning with "O king, in the waters" and having taken the water along with the darbha tuft, he sprinkles the sick person and performs the cleansing and rinsing. This is the remedy for ascites.
4.8.16	The sprinkling is done with hot water and the pouring is done with cold water. One of the two acts is completed. This is the treatment for ascites. Now the treatment for fever is described.
4.8.17	Having placed the patient on a bed with the two verses "Salutations to Ruru", and having bound the frog with a thread of blue and red color, having placed the frog below the bed, and having seated the patient on the bed, then reciting the mantra over water, one sprinkles the patient. While the patient is being sprinkled, one should act as the frog is being sprinkled. Wiping and rinsing should be remembered everywhere. The treatment for fever is complete. Now the treatment for all diseases is mentioned.
4.8.18	With the verse "The head is the power, the head is the disease," he touches the body of the sick person. The meaning is that he should perform the recitation.
4.8.19	With two verses, "By your feet" etc., he worships the Sun in diseases of the head, ears, body, pain, blood urine, blood feces, consumption, mouth diseases, eye diseases, body disorders, body fever, creeping diseases, chest diseases, internal body diseases, heart diseases, cough, phlegm, and secret remedies. All remedies are completed. Now the remedies for all poisons are described.
4.8.20	Having paid homage to Takshaka, he recites the verse "Indrasya prathamah" and then drinks water. This is a remedy against poison. Having paid homage to Indra, he recites "Indrasya Prathamah" and sprinkles the sick person with water. This is also a remedy against poison, as well as for rubbing and drinking. Having recited "Indrasya Prathama" over water, he sprinkles the sick person. This is also for rubbing and drinking, as well as a remedy against poison.
4.8.21	"The first of Indra" is the meaning of the verse. Grinding the insect known as "talini" in the world, and reciting the mantra, one gives it to the right nostril with the thumb of the right hand. The remedy for poison is complete. Now the remedy for fear of snakes is described.
4.8.22	Having recited the Sūkta beginning with "Indrasya prathamah", he digs it where there is fear of snakes. The insect resembling the color of gold or variegated is called Paida. It is a remedy against snakebite. He binds it above the house or below the house, when there is fear of seeing or not seeing snakes.
4.8.23	With the verse, "From limb to limb may it be cast away," he anoints the head and other limbs with his hand, up to the feet. This is the remedy for snakebite.
4.8.24	With the verse, "The Are was born," he lights a torch, recites the mantra, and then, seeing the wound caused by poison, throws it in front of the wound. This is the antidote for snakebite.
4.8.25	Where the snake is seen, one should throw a spear. The remedy for snakebite is complete. Now, among the remedies for all diseases mentioned in the Kauśikīya (text), whether mentioned or not, the remedies are mentioned in all of them. The mantras are mentioned in the remedies for all illnesses.
