1.1.1	Agni is the lowest of the gods, Vishnu is the highest, and between them are all the other gods.
1.1.2	They offer a cake on eleven potsherds to Agni-Vishnu for the consecration.
1.1.3	They offer it to him between the two gods.
1.1.4	Agni is all the gods, Vishnu also is all the gods.
1.1.5	These are the last two forms of the sacrifice, Agni and Vishnu. In that they offer an oblation to Agni-Vishnu, they prosper the gods at the end.
1.1.6	They say, "If the oblation is in eleven potsherds, and there are two Agni-Vishnus, how is the distribution made?"
1.1.7	The Agniya (cake) is on eight potsherds. The Gayatri has eight syllables. The metre of Agni is the Gayatri. The Visnuya (cake) on three potsherds. Three times indeed did Vishnu stride. There was a division of the army there. That is the division.
1.1.8	One should offer a cake on ghee for one who thinks he is not established.
1.1.9	He indeed is not established in this (world) who is not established.
1.1.10	Whatever is ghee, that is the woman; whatever are the grains, that is the man. That is a pair. By means of a pair he thus generates him with offspring and cattle for propagation.
1.1.11	He who knows this is born with offspring and cattle.
1.1.12	Now, he who performs the Darsha-Purnamāsa sacrifices is one who has begun a sacrifice and has begun a deity. Having performed the offering of the New Moon or the Full Moon, one should consecrate oneself in that very offering, on that very sacrificial grass. This is the single consecration.
1.1.13	One should recite seventeen Sāmidhenī verses.
1.1.14	Prajapati is seventeenfold, twelve months, five seasons, the winter and the summer being combined. So long is the year, so long is Prajapati.
1.1.15	He who knows this, indeed, prospers by means of the abodes of Prajapati.
1.2.1	Sacrifice went away from the gods. He desired to send it by means of Iṣṭis. When he desired to send it through Iṣṭis, that is why Iṣṭis are called Iṣṭis; they found him.
1.2.2	One who knows this finds success.
1.2.3	These are called the Ahuti (oblations) because they are offered. By means of these, the sacrificer invites the gods. That is why they are called Ahuti.
1.2.4	These are called the Utayis (inviting) because by means of them the gods come to the sacrificer's call. Those are the paths, those are the streams. They are the Utayis. They become the path to heaven for the sacrificer.
1.2.5	They say, "When one offers and another recites the Yajus, why is the one who recites called the Hotṛ?"
1.2.6	"When he brings the deities to that place according to their respective shares, saying 'Bring this one, bring that one,' that is the Hotṛ's Hotṛhood."
1.2.7	One becomes a Hotṛ, and is called a Hotṛ, by one who knows this.
1.3.1	The priests again make the embryo of him whom they initiate.
1.3.2	They sprinkle him with water.
1.3.3	Water is semen; having made him have semen, they initiate him.
1.3.4	They anoint him with fresh butter.
1.3.5	The ghee is the fragrance of the gods, the butter of men, the oil of the ancestors, the fresh butter of the embryos. When they anoint with fresh butter, they make him prosper with his own share.
1.3.6	They anoint him.
1.3.7	The anointing is the lustre of the eyes. Having made him lustrous, they initiate him.
1.3.8	They purify him with twenty-one darbha-blades.
1.3.9	They consecrate him as pure.
1.3.10	They make him walk the distance of a consecrated person.
1.3.11	This is the womb of the consecrated person, the distance of a consecrate person; they make him walk his own womb.
1.3.12	Therefore he dwells and moves from that firm womb.
1.3.13	Therefore from that firm womb, embryos are conceived and born.
1.3.14	Therefore the consecrated one should not be brought near any other than the consecrated one, nor should the sun rise or set, nor should he be brought near.
1.3.15	They sprinkle with a garment.
1.3.16	The garment is the embryo of the consecrated one; they sprinkle him with the embryo.
1.3.17	The upper garment is made of black antelope skin.
1.3.18	The upper garment is the embryo, the placenta is the placenta.
1.3.19	He makes a fist.
1.3.20	Having made a fist, the embryo lies within. Having made a fist, a child is born. When he makes a fist, he makes the sacrifice and all the deities.
1.3.21	They say, "There is no consecration before the sacrifice. The sacrifice of him who has been consecrated is taken up, and the deities are taken up. There is no distress for him who has been initiated. It is as it is."
1.3.22	He releases the black antelope skin and enters the Avabhṛtha. From that the embryos are released from the womb and are born.
1.3.23	He goes forth with the garment; therefore the child is born with the caul.
1.4.1	One should recite the Puronuvākyā for the Ajyabhāga offerings, "You, O Agni, are the one with brilliance, O Soma, those of yours who are bountiful," for one who has not performed the sacrifice before.
1.4.2	"With you, they spread out the sacrifice," he spreads out the sacrifice for him.
1.4.3	Agni, with the ancient hymn, O Soma, we praise thee. He who would offer first, to him.
1.4.4	"The word "ancient" is used to indicate the earlier rite."
1.4.5	One should not pay attention to that.
1.4.6	One should perform the Vartraghna rites with the verses "Agni has shattered the foes...", "O Soma, thou art the lord of truth..."
1.4.7	He who approaches the sacrifice is slain by Vritra. Therefore, they should be performed in the Agni-Vritra-slaying rite.
1.4.8	"The Agni-Vishnu rite has the following two verses: "Agni is the first deity, the mouth; Agni and Vishnu are the supreme and highest heat."
1.4.9	The Agni-Visņu offerings are the most prosperous. Prosperity is the most prosperous in a sacrifice. When a rite is being performed, if a verse is recited,
1.4.10	Agni and Vishnu are the guardians of the consecration of the gods. They rule over the consecration. When there is an oblation to Agni and Vishnu, it is because they rule over the consecration, and they are pleased, and they bestow the consecration. They are the consecrators, and they consecrate.
1.4.11	They are in the Tristubh metre, for the sake of having the senses.
1.5.1	One desiring brilliance and brahmic glory should perform the Gāyatrī and Svishtakṛt offerings.
1.5.2	Gāyatrī is indeed brilliance and brahmic splendor.
1.5.3	One becomes brilliant and brahmic by performing the Gāyatrīs, knowing this.
1.5.4	One desiring longevity should perform the Uṣṇīṣa offerings.
1.5.5	Uṣṇīṣ is indeed longevity.
1.5.6	One who knows this attains the full span of life by performing the Uṣṇīṣa and Anuṣṭubh verses.
1.5.7	One desiring heaven should perform the Anuṣṭubha verses.
1.5.8	There are sixty-four syllables in two Anuṣṭubhas, three are the higher ones, twenty-one are the worlds. One ascends these worlds by twenty-one. One attains the heaven by the sixty-fourth. One stands firm in the world.
1.5.9	He who knowing thus, makes the Anushtubh verses, prospers.
1.5.10	One desiring prosperity and fame should make the Brihatis.
1.5.11	Brihatis are the prosperity and fame of the metres.
1.5.12	He who knowing thus, make the Brihaty verses, attains prosperity and fame in himself.
1.5.13	One desiring the sacrifice should make the Pankti verses.
1.5.14	The sacrifice is fivefold.
1.5.15	The sacrifice bows to him who, knowing this, performs the Pankti.
1.5.16	One desiring strength should perform the Tristubh.
1.5.17	The Tristubh is strength, energy, and virility.
1.5.18	He who, knowing this performs the Tristubh becomes strong, energetic, and virile.
1.5.19	One desiring cattle should perform the Jagati.
1.5.20	Cattle are indeed Jagati.
1.5.21	He who knows this and performs the Jagati verses becomes a possessor of cattle.
1.5.22	One desiring food should perform the Viraja verses.
1.5.23	Food is Viraja.
1.5.24	Therefore, he who has the most food here shines the most in the world. That is the Viraja's Viraja-ness.
1.5.25	He shines among his own and becomes the best of his own, he who knows this.
1.6.1	Now, the Viraj is indeed the five-fold energy of the Chanda.
1.6.2	The three feet of it are the Tristubh, the eleven syllables of its feet are the Jagati, and the thirty-three syllables are the Anushtubh. The Chanda do not proceed with one syllable or two syllables. The Viraj is the fifth.
1.6.3	He obtains the strength of all the metres, he attains the strength of all metres, he attains union, similarity and the same world as all the metres. He becomes the lord of food, the lord of food. He attains offspring and food. He who knowing thus performs the Viraj rites.
1.6.4	Therefore the Viraj rites should be performed.
1.6.5	"The two verses, 'Agni is kindled, Agni is the fire,' are recited.
1.6.6	Indeed, initiation is truth and truth is initiation. Therefore, one who is initiated should speak only the truth.
1.6.7	However, some say, 'Who is worthy to speak all the truth? The gods are truthful, the humans are untruthful.'
1.6.8	One should speak with discernment.
1.6.9	The eye is the most discerning, for one sees through it.
1.6.10	This is the truth that is hidden among men, namely, the eye.
1.6.11	Therefore, when one tells something, they say, "You saw it." If he says, "I did not see it," then they believe him. But if he says, "If I had seen it myself, I would not believe many others."
1.6.12	Therefore, one should speak only what is wise. The speech of one who speaks the truth rises up.
1.7.1	One goes to heaven by this (rite). This is why it is called Prāyṇīya.
1.7.2	Prāṇīya is the Prāṇa, Udayanīya is the Udanā. The Hotr becomes the Sāman. Prāṇa and Udanā are common. For the establishment of the Prāṇas, for the recognition of the Prānas.
1.7.3	The sacrifice indeed fled from the gods. The gods were not able to do anything, they did not know. They said, "We will know this sacrifice through you." She said, "So be it." They said, "You may choose a boon." She said, "Let my sacrifices be the first and my rising the last." They said, "So be it." Therefore the Adityas are the first and the rising is the last. For she chose this boon.
1.7.4	Then he chose this boon: "May I myself protect the eastern direction, Agni the southern, Soma the western, Savitr the northern."
1.7.5	He offers to Pathya.
1.7.6	Because he offers to Pathya, therefore it rises in the east and sets in the west, for it moves along Pathya.
1.7.7	He offers to Agni.
1.7.8	Because he offers to Agni, therefore the plants, when cooked, come from the south. The plants are connected with Agni.
1.7.9	He offers to Soma.
1.7.10	Because he offers to Soma, therefore the many waters flow from the west. The waters are connected with Soma.
1.7.11	He offers (to) Savitr.
1.7.12	Since he offers to Savitar, therefore the Pavamāna (wind) blows most strongly from the north and west. For this (wind) blows with the impulse of Savitar.
1.7.13	He offers to Aditi as the last (deity).
1.7.14	Since he offers to Aditi last, therefore she sprinkles this (earth) with rain and smells it.
1.7.15	He offers to five deities. The sacrifice is fivefold. All directions are established. The sacrifice is established.
1.7.16	For that community it is established where the Hotṛ knows thus.
1.8.1	He who desires brilliance and brahmic glory should go east with the offerings at the end of the sacrifice. Brilliance and brahmic glory are in the eastern direction.
1.8.2	He becomes brilliant and endowed with brahmic glory, he who, knowing this, goes forward.
1.8.3	One who desires food should go with the offerings of the Prajās and Dakṣiṇā. Agni is indeed the giver of food and the lord of food.
1.8.4	One becomes the giver of food, the lord of food, and obtains offspring and food, he who, knowingly, goes with the Dakṣiṇās.
1.8.5	One who desires cattle should go to the west with the oblations of the Prajās. The waters are indeed cattle.
1.8.6	One who knows this and goes to the west becomes possessed of cattle.
1.8.7	One desiring Soma-drink should go to the north with the oblations. Soma, the king, is indeed in the north.
1.8.8	One who, knowing this, goes to the north obtains Soma-drink.
1.8.9	The heaven is the only upward direction, and one prospers in all directions.
1.8.10	These worlds are in order, and these worlds are in order for him who knows this.
1.8.11	He offers to Pathya. In that he offers to Pathya, he places speech at the mouth of the sacrifice.
1.8.12	Prāṇāpāna are Agni and Soma, Savitā for delivery, Aditi for stability.
1.8.13	He offers the Pathya (oblation) only; in that he offers the Pathya only, he leads the sacrifice by means of speech to the path.
1.8.14	The two eyes are Agni and Soma, Savitar for the impulse, Aditi for the support.
1.8.15	The gods knew the sacrifice through the eye. Through the eye one knows what is not known. Therefore, even a fool, having wandered, knows when he sees with the eye.
1.8.16	Now, when the gods knew the sacrifice, they knew it in this (earth), they brought it together in this (earth). The sacrifice is performed for this (earth), it is performed for this, it is brought together for this, for this is Aditi. He offers to Aditi the last (oblation). In that he offers to Aditi last, (it is) for the knowledge of the sacrifice, for the fame of the heavenly world.
1.9.1	The gods are to be arranged in order, they say. When they are arranged, the human classes are arranged after them. All the classes are arranged. The sacrifice is also arranged.
1.9.2	For that community it is arranged where the Hotṛ knows thus.
1.9.3	"May we be well on the paths of the Dānava."
1.9.4	May there be welfare in the waters, in the dwelling, in the heaven-reaching. May there be welfare for us in the places of birth of sons. May there be prosperity in the abode of the Maruts.
1.9.5	The Maruts are the classes of the gods. He thus makes them choose the mouth of the sacrifice.
1.9.6	They say, "One should sacrifice with all the metres." The gods, having sacrificed with all the metres, conquered the heavenly world. In the same way, the sacrificer, having sacrificed with the metres, conquers the heavenly world.
1.9.7	May we have good fortune on the paths, on the roads, may we have good fortune in the best of roads. The two Tristubh verses of Svasti are: "O Agni, lead us by the good path to wealth, to the path of the gods." The two Tristubhs of Agni are: "O Soma, you know the thoughts that are in your heavenly and earthly abodes." The Tristubh of Soma is: "The all-knowing lord of truth, who knows all these beings." The two Gayatri verses of Savitar are: "The well-measured earth, the heaven, the great, the mother of the well-behaved, the Aditi." The two JagatI verses of Aditi are:
1.9.8	These are all the metres: the Gāyatrī, the Tristubh, the Jagatī. They are different from one another. They are performed in the sacrifice as the first.
1.9.9	He who knows this, his sacrifice is performed with all the metres.
1.10.1	These are the Pravatii, the leading, the guiding, the auspicious verses. They are the invocations and responses to this oblation. Having offered with these, the gods conquered the heavenly world. In the same way, the sacrificer, having offered with these, conquers the heavenly world.
1.10.2	In them there is the word 'Svāstirāye Maruto dadhatane' (May the Maruts bestow prosperity). The Maruts are the divine class of beings, the partakers of the atmosphere. He who goes to the heavenly world without offering to them, is either stopped or destroyed by them. When he says 'Svāstirāya Maruto dadhatani' (May the prosperity be bestowed by the Maruts), he offers to the Maruts, the divine class of people, the sacrificer. The Maruts, the class of divine beings, do not stop or destroy the sacrificer going to the heavenly world.
1.10.3	May he be blessed, may he be blessed, those who know this, they attain heaven.
1.10.4	The two Virājas should be the Samyājyās of this Agni Svishtakṛt oblation, which consists of thirty-three syllables.
1.10.5	"May Agni be better than other Agnis, may Agni be better than those who are falling down." These are the two Virājas.
1.10.6	The gods, having performed the Viraj sacrifices, conquered the heavenly world; in the same way the sacrificer, having performed the viraj sacrifices, conquers the heavenly world.
1.10.7	They become the thirty-three syllables. The thirty-three are the gods, the eight Vasus, the eleven Rudras, the twelve Adityas, Prajapati, and the Vasat-call. In the first mouth of sacrifice, he makes the deities share the syllables. With each syllable he pleases the deities. With the divine vessel he satisfies the deities.
1.11.1	The Pravargya rite should be performed without the Anuyājas, as in the case of the Prayāja rites.
1.11.2	They say that the Pravargya rite is deficient and incomplete, since it lacks the Anuyāja offerings.
1.11.3	Just as the Prāyājas, so the Anuyājas should be offered. The Prāyājas are the vital airs, the Anuyā jas are the progeny. If one were to offer the Prāyā jas in between, he would be offering the vital airs of the sacrificer in between. If one were
1.11.4	to offer the Anuyā jās in between, he were to offer the progeny of the sacrificer.
1.11.5	Therefore, just as the Prāyäjas, so the Anu yäjas should be offered.
1.11.6	The sacrifice is not completed with just that much.
1.11.7	One should place the Pravargya vessel on the Udayaniya (fire) so that the sacrifice is continuous and not interrupted.
1.11.8	Or, one should offer the Udayaniya in the same vessel in which the Pravargya was offered. Thus the sacrifice becomes continuous and uninterrupted.
1.11.9	They say that one attains the other world by this (sacrifice), not this world, when they say that it is the Prāyaniya (sacrifice). They offer the Prāyaniyā, perform the Prāyaniyā, saying, "The sacrificers go away from this world."
1.11.10	They say this out of ignorance. One should omit the Yājyā and Anuvākyā.
1.11.11	The Puronuvākyās of the Pravargya are the Yajyās of the Udayaniya; the Yajyäs of the Udayaniyas are the Puronuvākyat of the Pravargyas. He thus interchanges them for the prosperity of both worlds, for the establishment in both worlds, for prosperity in both worlds, and for establishment in both worlds.
1.11.12	He who knows thus, prospers.
1.11.13	The offering to Aditya is the Prāyaniya (offering) and the offering to Aditya is Udayaniya (offering). For the stability of the sacrifice, for the continuity of the sacrifice, and for the non-interruption of the sacrifice.
1.11.14	"Just as the Adityas, so indeed did Tejanī say. For the non-slipping of the two ends of the sacrifice, he binds the two ends of this (cord). In this way, for the non-slipper of the two ends, he binds the ends of the sacrifice. The Prāyaniya (oblation) is to Aditya, and the Udayaniya (oblation) to Aditya."
1.11.15	They go to the path of welfare, they rise to the path of welfarethe path of welfare they go to, the path of welfare they rise to.
1.12.1	The gods bought Soma from the eastern direction, therefore it is bought from the eastern direction.
1.12.2	He bought it for thirteen months. Therefore, the thirteenth month is not found. The seller of Soma is not found. Because the seller of Soma is sinful.
1.12.3	When he had bought it, and was returning with the men, the powers and senses of the directions settled down upon him. They mounted them in one verse, but they could not do so. They mounted them with two, with three, with four, with five, with six, with seven, but they did not mount them. They mounted them by eight, and obtained them by eight. In that they mounted them by eight and obtained them byeight, that is the reason why there are eight of them.
1.12.4	He who knows this attains whatever he desires.
1.12.5	Therefore, in these rites, eight are recited each time, for the purpose of securing the strength of the senses.
1.13.1	The Adhvaryu says, "Recite for Soma, bought and being offered."
1.13.2	He recites, "Go from the good to the better."
1.13.3	This very world is the good one. Therefore, this very world is the better one. It indeed takes the sacrificer to heaven.
1.13.4	"May Brihaspati be your leader." Brihaspati is indeed Brahman. He has made Brahman his leader. Nothing can surpass Brahman.
1.13.5	"Then (he says), 'May he be the best of the earth.' The sacrifice to the gods is the best for the earth. He thus places him in the sacrifice. 'Destroy the enemies,' (he says). 'Be victorious over all.' He thus repels from him the enemy, the evil one. He puts down the foot.
1.13.6	"O Soma, those of thine are the gifts of wealth" (RV. 9, 9, 1) is the third verse, a Gayatri verse addressed to Soma. When Soma, the king, is being offered, he himself, by his own deity and his own metre, prospers.
1.13.7	"All rejoice in the fame that has come" (RV.
1.13.8	Soma, the king, indeed is fame. All rejoice in this Soma that is being offered, whether one is going to obtain it at the sacrifice or not.
1.13.9	The friend of the assembly is the friend of the Brahmanas. The king Soma is the friend of Brahmanas.
1.13.10	The friend of sin is the same as the friend of the assembly.
1.13.11	He who becomes the best, he becomes the sinner.
1.13.12	Therefore they say, "Do not speak arrogantly, lest you should be tormented by sin."
1.13.13	"The father's share" - the food is the father's share, the Dakshina is the father' s share. He makes it for him, making it the father's food-share.
1.13.14	"He becomes the one who has attained the horse" - the horse is the strength and energy.
1.13.15	"The horse does not cease to be for him" - he who knows this.
1.13.16	"The god has come" - he recites thus.
1.13.17	For then he has come.
1.13.18	May the seasons increase him, may he not diminish. The seasons are the royal brothers of King Soma. Just as a human being has them, so he brings him together with them.
1.13.19	May Savitar grant us offspring and food. He prays for a blessing.
1.13.20	May he delight us with the nights and days. The days are the days, the nights are the nights. He prays for this blessing to the days and nights. May he bestow on us offspring and wealth. He prays for a blessing.
1.13.21	"He recites, "Those who worship you with oblations."
1.13.22	May all your worlds be at your sacrifice.
1.13.23	"He who is the protector of cattle, the one who saves, the good hero" - he who protects the cattle, he who saves, the hero.
1.13.24	"He who is the destroyer of the wicked, he who moves, the one who goes to the bad places" - the bad places are the houses. The Soma, the king, is afraid of the houses of the sacrificer. When he recites this, he appeases him for peace. He is peaceful and does not harm his offspring or cattle.
1.13.25	When he is learning this knowledge, he places it in the direction of Varuna.
1.13.26	This (rite) belongs to Varuna as long as it is tied up, as long as the enclosing sticks are placed around. He thus makes it prosper by its own deity and its own metre.
1.13.27	"When he is learning, he places it towards the gods." He who sacrifices is indeed learning.
1.13.28	"O Varuna, do thou supervise the sacrifice." He means to say, "Do thou supervise the sacrifice, do thou supervise knowledge and power."
1.13.29	"May we cross over all evils by the boat of Sutairma." The sacrifice is the boat of Sutama. The black antelope skin is the boat of Sutanma. Speech is the boat of Sutarma. Having mounted on speech, he crosses over to the heavenly world.
1.13.30-33	These eight are the forms of prosperity. This is the prosperity of the sacrifice, namely, the forms of prosperity; when a rite is being performed, if a verse is recited.
1.13.34	He who knows this, indeed, attains prosperity through the abodes of Prajapati.
1.13.35	He recites the first three times and the last three times, thus he makes the sacrifice firm for stability, strength, and non-slipping.
1.14.1	One bull should be yoked and the other released, then they should bring the king.
1.14.2	If both are released, they should make the king who is devoted to the ancestors.
1.14.3	If the subjects find prosperity and welfare when both are yoked, those subjects would be wandering.
1.14.4	The bull that is released from the pen is the form of the creatures in the pen, and the bull that is yoked is the form of their activities. Those who take the released and the yoked to be different, they both imagine the union with the peaceful.
1.14.5	The gods and the Asuras fought for these worlds. They fought in the eastern direction. The Asuras conquered them there. They fought in southern direction. The Asura conquered them there. The Asuras fought in the western direction. The Asures conquered them there. Then they fought in the northern direction. The Asuuras conquered them there. In the northern and eastern directions they fought. They were not conquered there. This is the direction which is unconquered. Therefore one should fight in this direction. One should fight or go to this direction. One becomes the lord of the one who does not do evil.
1.14.6	The gods said, "They conquer us without a king. Let us make a king." They said, "So be it." They made Soma the king. With Soma as the king, they conquered all directions. He who sacrifices is indeed Soma the king. Standing towards the east, they place him. With that, he conquers the eastern direction. They carry him towards the south. With that, they conquer the southern direction. They turn him towards the west. With that, the conquer the western direction. Standing towards the north, they bring him down. With that, one conquers the northern direction.
1.14.7	King Soma conquers all directions for him who knows this.
1.15.1	When King Soma arrives, a sacrificial offering is made to him.
1.15.2	King Soma comes to the house of the sacrificer, therefore this sacrificial offering is made for him. That is the nature of hospitality.
1.15.3	It has nine potsherds, because there are nine vital airs, for the establishment of the vital airs, for their recognition.
1.15.4	He becomes a devotee of Vishnu. Vishnu himself, with his own deity and his own metre, blesses him.
1.15.5	All the metres and the pages approach the king Soma when he is bought. All those who follow the king are honoured as guests.
1.16.2	"The gods have approached thee, O Savitar," thus he recites the Savitri verse.
1.16.3	They say, "Why does he recite the Savitri verse after reciting the verse to Agni being churned?"
1.16.4	Savitar is the lord of births. They churn him with the Savitri verse.
1.16.5	The earth and heaven are the two. Thus he recites the hymn of heaven and earth.
1.16.6	They say, "Why does one recite the Dyāvāpṛthivīya hymn after reciting the Agni hymn while churning?" The gods took him who was born from heaven and earth, and he is still taken by them. Therefore one recites the Dyāvāprthivīya.
1.16.7	"He recites the verse, "From the lotus, O Agni," etc. This is a Gayatri verse addressed to Agni. When Agni is being churned, he thus makes it prosper by its own deity and its own metre.
1.16.8	" "Atharva churned out"; this is a form of prosperity. Prosperity at a sacrifice is a form of prosperit. When a rite is being performed, if a verse is recited,
1.16.9	If he is not born, or if he is born late, the Raksas-destroying Gāyatrī verses should be recited.
1.16.10	"These are the verses: "O Agni, you destroy the wicked one..."
1.16.11	For the destruction of Rakshas.
1.16.12	Rakshas then attack him when he is not born or when he is born late.
1.16.13	If he were to be born to only one unmarried woman, or to two, then let the people say: "Let him be born to the one who is beautiful and has given birth."
1.16.14	What is beautiful at a sacrifice is prosperous.
1.16.15	"To whom they give the hand, not to be eaten,"
1.16.16	For they churn him with their hands.
1.16.17	The child is so called because it is like a child, for Agni is the firstborn.
1.16.18	"They carry Agni, the lord of oblations, the protector of the people."
1.16.19	"What is not of the gods, that is theirs."
1.16.20	"They carry the god to the place of the gods, the most bountiful of the bountiful."
1.16.21	"What appears at the sacrifice is prosperous."
1.16.22	"May he sit down in his own place."
1.16.23	This indeed is his own place, namely, Agni.
1.16.24	"May he be born, the knower of the born."
1.16.25	One is born, the other is the knower of what is born.
1.16.26	"May the guest be cherished, the dear one." This indeed is his dear guest, namely, Agni.
1.16.27	"O Agni, come to the householder!" He thus establishes him in peace.
1.16.28	"Agni is kindled by Agni, the wise householder, the young one, the bearer of oblations, the one with the ladle." It is a suitable (verse).
1.16.29	What is suitable at a sacrifice, that is prosperous.
1.16.30	"You, O Agni, with Agni, the sage, with the sage, the one who is together."
1.16.31-34	The Brahman is the other, the other is the Brahman. The friend is the friend, the friend is the friend. He is the friend of the friend, the Agni is his own friend. They anoint him, the one with good resolve, the leader, in the contests, in his own contests, the one with strength. This is his own contest, the Agni is the Agni.
1.16.35	The gods worshipped the sacrifice with sacrifice. Thus he lays down the supreme (bricks).
1.16.36	The gods worshipped the sacrifice by means of sacrifice, by means of Agni they worshipped Agni. They went to the heavenly world.
1.16.37	Those were the first rites. They attained the heaven of greatness, where the Sadhyas, the former gods, are.
1.16.38	The Sadhyas, the gods of the Vedas, first offered Agni with Agni. They went to the heavenly world.
1.16.39	The Adityas and the Angirasas came here. They first offered Agni with Agnis. They went to heaven.
1.16.40	This is the offering to heaven, namely, the offering to Agni. If a Brahmin speaks, if a bad speech is spoken, then this offering reaches the gods and is not mixed with sin.
1.16.41	This offering of him who knows thus reaches the gods, and this offering is not mixed with the sin.
1.16.42	These thirteen are the forms of prosperity.
1.16.43	This is the prosperity of the sacrifice, namely, the forms of prosperity; when a rite is being performed, if a verse is recited.
1.16.44	Of these, he recites the first three times and the last three times; they become seventeen. Prajapati is seventeen; twelve months, five seasons, so long is the year, Prajapati is the year.
1.16.45	He who knows this, indeed, attains prosperity through the abodes of Prajapati.
1.16.46	He recites the first three times and the last three times, thus he makes the sacrifice firm for stability, strength, and non-slipping.
1.17.1	"The oblations are pleasing to Agni, do thou swell, may they come together." These are the Puronuvākyās for the Ajyabhāgas, pertaining to Atithi, and having the form of Samṛddhi.
1.17.2	This is the prosperity of the sacrifice, that it is prosperous in form, that when a rite is being performed, a verse is uttered.
1.17.3	This is the Agni-related Atithi-related verse. There is no Soma-related Atithi verse. If there were a Soma-related Atithī verse, it would be permanent.
1.17.4	But this is the Atithi verse, namely the Apaina-vatī.
1.17.5-8	When he is about to receive a guest, he becomes as if fat. He offers with the two verses, "He who is the lord of the two worlds, the lord of the three worlds, the lord who is the lord, the lord of all, the lord of heaven, the lord of earth, the lord of men, the lord of cattle, the lord of wealth, the lord of food, the lord of water, the lord of plants, the lord of trees, the lord of herbs, the lord of grass, the lord of grains, the lord of fruits, the lord of flowers, the lord of leaves, the lord of wood, the lord of fire, the lord of wind, the lord of space, the lord of time, the lord of light, the lord of darkness, the lord of day, the lord of night, the lord of dawn, the lord of evening, the lord of morning, the lord of noon, the lord of afternoon, the lord of twilight, the lord of seasons, the lord of months, the lord of fortnights, the lord of days, the lord of hours, the lord of moments, the lord of instants, the lord of years, the lord of half-years, the lord of ages, the lord of creation, the lord of dissolution, the lord of protection, the lord of truth, the lord of falsehood, the
1.17.9	There are seven steps. The head is the most important part of the sacrifice. The head has seven vital airs. He thus places the vital airs in the head.
1.17.10	The Hotr, the brilliant charioteer of the sacrifice, Agni, the hearer, is the first to offer. This is at the Svishtakrit offering. The Atithyavati verses are in the same form. This is the prosperity of the sacrifice, that it is in the same form, and when a rite is being performed, a verse is recited.
1.17.11	There are two Tristubh verses for the sake of having Indra.
1.17.12	It should be with the Idāntas. The gods attained their goal by means of this (Idānta). Since it is hospitality, therefore it should be done with the Idānta.
1.17.13	Here they offer the Prayājas and not the Anuyājas.
1.17.14	The Prāyaṇīya and Upayāṇīya are the vital airs. Those vital airs which are in the head are the Prāyaṇīyas, those which are below are the Upayāṇiyas. He who would offer the Upayāṇa offerings here, would be like one who, having cut off these vital airs, would desire to put them back on the head.
1.17.15	These vital airs are indeed excessive, and these vital airs are indeed connected.
1.17.16	Now, when they offer the Prayājas and not the Anuyājas, then that desire is fulfilled which is fulfilled by the Anuyāja offerings.
1.18.1	Sacrifice went away from the gods, saying, "I shall not be your food." The gods said, "No, you shall be our food." The gods made him a victim. He was not able to escape from them. They said, "The gods have not made him a victim in this way. Let us collect this sacrifice." "So be it." They collected it.
1.18.2	Having collected it, they said, "O Asvins, heal this." The Asvins are the physicians of the gods. The Asvins are Adhvaryus. Therefore, the Adhvaryus collect the Gharma.
1.18.3	Having collected it, they announced, "O Brahman, we shall proceed with the Pravargya. O Hotar, praise."
1.19.1	"He recites, 'Brahma, the first-born, in front,' he means to say, 'Brahma is Brihaspati; he heals him with Brahma.'
1.19.2	'This is the kingdom of the father, having come first,' the kingdom is speech; he places speech in him.
1.19.3	The great earth has been spread out, having been born. This is a Brahmanical hymn. Brihaspati is Brahman. He heals him with Brahman.
1.19.4	"He approaches that god Savitar, the one who is in the sky." This is a hymn to Savitar. Savitar is the vital breath. He places the vital breath in him.
1.19.5	"Be seated. You are great." He thus makes him sit down.
1.19.6	The priests, praising him, anoint him. The two verses, "The one who is being anointed, the handsome one," and "The handsome one at the sacrifice," are prosperous.
1.19.7	"The flying one, smeared by the demon's magic, O Agni, who harms us for our wealth, be friendly to us, O Agni." The two verses, "Be friendly to us," and "Be friendly to" are prosperous. The handsome one at the sacrifices is prosperous.
1.19.8	Make the earth yield, make the earth yield, the five (verses) for the slaying of demons, for the destruction of demons.
1.19.9	The two of you have placed your praises on you, the two of you, O givers of wealth, the two of us have placed our praises on you, O givernors of wealth. The two of us have seen you, the two protectors, the two of them, the two of him, the two of her, the two of it, the two of its, the two of their, the two of theirs, the two of ours, the two of our, the two of ourselves, the two of themselves, the two of yourselves, the two of yourself, the two of himself, the two of herself, the two of itself, the two of yours, the two of your, the two of his, the two of hers, the two of mine, the two of myself, the two of thine, the two of thyself, the two of thee, the two of thy, the two of thou, the two of they, the two of ye, the two of the two of them. The four (verses) for one protector.
1.19.10	They are twenty-one in number.
1.19.11	This is the twenty-first person. Ten fingers, ten toes, and the self make twenty-one. He makes this self twenty-one.
1.20.1	"They have come together, the drops of the flowing, the drops of Srakva." There are nine Pavamana verses. There are nine vital airs. He places them in him.
1.20.2	"This Vena has been urged by the one with the tawny embryo."
1.20.3	This is indeed Vena. The other prāṇas are above him. The other prānās are below him. Therefore, Vena. Prāṇa, being this, is in the navel. Therefore, navel. That is the navel-ness of the navel. He places that prāṇa in it.
1.20.4	"The pure one is spread out for thee, O Brahmanaspati. The pure Tapas is spread out on the seat of heaven. The pure one is spread by the Dhitis." The pure breaths are these, the downward ones, the semen, the urine, the feces. He places them in him.
1.21.1	"We invoke thee, O lord of the hosts, as the lord of the hosts." This is the Brahman-related (verse). Brihaspati is Brahman. He heals him with Brahman.
1.21.2	"And whose names are Prathas and Saprathas," he makes him of the same form as the one who has the body of heat.
1.21.3	He recites the Rathantara, Vasistha, Bharadvaja, and Brihat. He makes him who has the Brihat and Rathantara.
1.21.4	"He sees thee with the mind, O Chekitana." He makes him who is Prajapati and has offspring. He places offspring in him.
1.21.5-6	The nine metres are the Hotr and the Asvins. This is the end of the sacrifice. The end is like a small thing, and the small is like the big. Therefore these metres are small.
1.21.7	He goes to the dear abode of the Asvins, he conquers the supreme world, he who knows thus.
1.21.8	"The verse, "The Agni shines forth in the array of the dawns,"
1.21.9	The verse, "Drinking the hot-water, the Asvins," is suitable for the sacrifice. What is suitable for the Yajna is prosperous.
1.21.10	That is Tristubh. The Tristubh is power. He places power in it."
1.21.11	"As if with stones, you two, do you destroy the enemy." This is a verse. "As if with eyes, as if with ears, as if with noses." This is a name of the limbs. He places the senses in it.
1.21.12	This is a Tristubh verse. The Tristubh is energy. He places energy in it.
1.21.13	"I praise heaven and earth, the first-minded ones." This is a hymn.
1.21.14	Agni, the hot, the shining, the going, the desirable, the offerings, is the appropriate (verse) at the sacrifice. What is appropriate at the sacrifice, that is prosperous.
1.21.15	That is the Jāgata (verse). Animals are Jāgata. He thus places animals in it.
1.21.16	With those (verses) he saw the desires of the Asvins, and those (verses) which he saw, he places them in this (verse). With them he makes it complete.
1.21.17	"Pṛśni shone forth, the dawn, the best," (he says). He places shining in it.
1.21.18	With the bright, with the shining, do ye protect us. Thus he places it with the last verse.
1.21.19	With the auspicious, with the fortunate, O Asvins, may Mitra, Varuna, Aditi, the ocean, the earth and heaven protect us. Thus with these very (verses) he blesses him with those very desires.
1.21.20	Thus is the first section.
1.22.1	Now the second.
1.22.2	I call to the well-milking cow, the one who lowed, the wife of Vasus, the Vasus. O god Savitar, may we approach thee, like a calf to its mother, like a calf approaching its mother. The teat that is thine, the one that is mine, the cow that has milked, the calf that is approaching, you have approached, knowing, with ten (teats), the one that is known, the one that has been milked by the ten (teats). The Agni who is kindled, the Ashvins, the Agni who is kindled. The one who is pleased with the male organ, the one who is the most visible of his works, the one who has the nature of the sky, the one who milks ghee and milk, the one who approaches, the one who stands up, the one who knows, the one who presses, the one who causes to press, the one who makes to press, the Brahman-knower, the one who praises, the one who brings, the one who carries, the one who pours, the one who sprinkles, the one who bestows, the one who gives, the one who grants, the one who nourishes, the one who increases, the one who delights, the one who pleases, the one who rejoices, the one who enjoys, the one who drinks, the one who tastes, the one who eats, the one who consumes, the one who satisfies, the one who fills, the one who satiates, the one who fattens, the one who grows, the one who prospers, the one who shines, the one who illuminates, the one who illumines, the one who brightens, the one whose light is bright, the one who possesses light, the one who holds light, the one whose radiance is bright, the Rishi of the Ashvins, "The great waters are united." The one that is visible at the sacrifice is prosperous.
1.22.3	"The sun rises, the god Savitar, with the golden (rays). He rises in accordance with the chant. Let the Brahmanaspati go forth. The Gandharva is here, guarding his place. He looks at the Khara (horse) as it falls down from the sky. He sits down, saying, 'The heated Gharmā is not injuring you. Drink, O Asvins!' He offers in the morning."
1.22.4	"O Agni, do thou eat!" he says at the end of the offering. It is the portion for the Svishtakrit.
1.22.5	"O Agni, do you drink the ghee and milk offered to the Usriyas!" he says at sunset. "O Agni, eat!" he says in the end of the oblation. It is the share for the Svishta-krits.
1.22.6	At the Svishtakrit offering of the three oblations, they do not mix together, saying, "Of Soma, of Gharma, of Vaji." When he pronounces the Anuvshada, it is for the Svishtakrt Agni alone, so that there is no interruption.
1.22.7	The Brahman recites, "All directions are to be given to the south."
1.22.8	The pure heat, consecrated with "svāhā," is raised from the ocean by the waves. The drop, the friend, seeks the ocean. O friend, turn to your friend. The high-born, the high-born, protect us. The one who is to be honored, the one who is to receive honor, the one who deserves honor, the one to be honored. The one who deserves honor is the one who is honored. The one to be honored is the one who deserves to be honored. The one who is to honor is the one to be worshiped. The one who should be worshiped is the one who should be honored. The ones who are to be honored are the ones who are to receive honor. The ones who deserve honor are the ones who deserve to be honored. Those who are to be worshiped are the ones who should be worship. Those who should be worship are the ones who have been worshiped. Those who have been worship are the ones to be worship. Those to be worship are the worshipers. Those who are worshipers are the ones to worship. Those who are the ones to honor are the ones to receive honor. Those who are worthy of honor are the ones worthy of honor. Those who deserve honor are worthy of honor. The ones worthy of honor are worthy of being honored. The ones worthy to be honored are worthy of being worshiped. The ones worthy for worship are worthy of being worshipped. The ones worthy worthy of being worshipped are worthy of being praised. The ones worthy praise are worthy of being sung. The ones worthy being sung are worthy of being chanted. The ones worthy chanting are worthy of being recited. The ones worthy recitation are worthy of being read. The ones worthy reading are worthy of being studied. The ones worthy study are worthy of being learned. The ones worthy learning are worthy of being known. The ones worthy knowing are worthy
1.22.9	The fire-god is desirous of eating your oblation.
1.22.10	We have offered the oblation, the sweet oblation, to the Indra-like Agni. O divine Gharma, we have eaten of you, the sweet one, the fatherly one, the one with strength, the one from Angiras. Obeisance to you. Do not harm me. Thus one eats the Gharma.
1.22.11	The hawk has made his nest, his seat, by wisdom; in it the seven Vasus are seated together. He recites this verse when the (sacrificial) grass is being spread.
1.22.12	The divine seat of the offering is the offering. When they are about to spread the grass on the day of the Soma-pressing,
1.22.13	he spreads it with the verse, "May the goddess be gracious to us from the Suyas."
1.22.14	This is the divine couple, the heat. The heat is the penis. The two hairs are the two hairs. The two nipples are the two hip bones. The milk is the semen. This semen is deposited in the fire, the divine womb, in the generative act. The fire is the divine womb. It is born from the oblations of the fire, the womb of the gods.
1.22.15	He who is composed of the Ṛg, Yajus, Sāman, Veda, Brahman, and Nectar, and who, having come together, attains the deities, he who knows this, and he who, knowing this, performs this sacrifice,
1.23.1	The gods and the Asuras fought for these worlds. The Asuras made these worlds their own, as they were stronger and more powerful. They made this world of iron, the atmosphere of silver, and heaven of gold. They made these worlds their (own). The gods said: The Asuras have made these worlds their front. Let us make these worlds our front. They said: Yes. They made the fire-altar of earth, the Agnidhra-chamber of the atmosphere, and the Havirdhana of heaven. They made these (worlds) their front.
1.23.2	The gods said, "Let us go to the Upasads. By the Upasads we shall conquer the great city." They said, "So be it." Those who went to the first Upasad, they were driven away by that (Upasad) from this world; those who went to the second, they were driven by that from the atmosphere; those who went (to the third), they were driven by it from heaven. Thus they were driven away from these worlds.
1.23.3	The Asuras, having been driven out from these worlds, took refuge in the seasons. The gods said, "Let us go to the Upasads." "So be it." They went twice to each of the three Upasads. They became six. There are six seasons. They followed the seasons.
1.23.4	The Asuras, having been driven away from the seasons, sought refuge in the months. The gods said, "Let us go to the Upasads." "So be it." They went twice to each of the six Upasads. They became twelve. The months are twelve. They followed them in the months.
1.23.5	The Asuras, having been expelled from the months, took refuge in the half-months. The gods said, "Let us go to the Upasads." "So be it." They went to the twelve Upasads, going twice to each one. They became twenty-four. There are twenty-four half-months. They expelled them from the half-months.
1.23.6	The Asuras, who had been excluded from the half-months, took refuge in the day and night. The gods said, "Let us go to the Upasads." "So be it." They went to the Upasad of the forenoon, and with that day they followed them. They went to the afternoon Upasad, and with that night they followed them. Thus they separated them by both.
1.23.7	Therefore, one should perform the morning Upasads in the morning and the evening Upasads in evening. One destroys the world of the enemy by that much.
1.24.1	The Upasads are called the Conquerors. The gods conquered the unconquered by these.
1.24.2	One conquers the unconquered by this, he who knows this.
1.24.3	The gods won the victory in these worlds, in the seasons, in the months, in the half-months, in the day and night. He who knows this wins the victory.
1.24.4	The gods were afraid, thinking, "The Asuras will know our measure." They withdrew and consulted together. Agni went forth with the Vasus, Indra with the Rudras, Varuna with the Adityas, Brihaspati with the All-gods.
1.24.5	They thus having gone out, consulted together. They said, "Let us put in the house of Varuna, the king, those bodies which are most dear to us. Let him be united with us by means of them. Let him not transgress this, he who desires to transgress." "So be it," they said, and put their bodies in the house of the king Varuna.
1.24.6-8	When they placed the body of Varuna, the king, in his house, that became the Tanunaptra. That is why Tanunaptra is called Tanunaptra.
1.25.1	The Atithya is the head of the sacrifice, the Upasads are the neck. They have the same sacrificial grass. The head and the neck are one.
1.25.2	The gods made this arrow, namely the Upasads. Agni was its army, Soma its arrow, Vishnu its shaft, Varuna its leaves. They released it with ghee as the bowstring. With it they broke through the enemies and went forward.
1.25.3	Therefore these are offered with ghee.
1.25.4	One undertakes the vow of four breasts at the Upasads, for the Upasads are the four joints, the army, the shield, the arrow, and the leaf.
1.25.5	One who is going to perform the Upasads should drink three breasts of the cow. The Upasads are three-fold, the arrows, the wounds and the ointments. One who is goingto perform the Upasad should drink two breasts of the cow, the Upasads are two-fold, the arrow and the ointment. One who isgoing to perform the Upasaḍs should drink one breast of the cow. It is said that the Upasads is one-fold. By one is the deed done.
1.25.6	The worlds above are more excellent, the worlds below are inferior. One approaches the Upasads from below, for the conquest of these worlds.
1.25.7-8	To the Upasad-sacrificer, to the one who is to be praised, this my Agni-kindling, this my Upasad-sacrifice, this my forest-sacrifice. These are three Sāmidhenī verses, increased in form. This is the increase of the sacrifice, that it is increased in form. If a verse is uttered when a rite is being performed,
1.25.9	Agni, the destroyer of foes, the fierce one, the slayer of foes, thou art Soma, the true lord, the bestower of wealth, the remover of evil. This Vishnu has strode three steps. He has strode the three steps. These are the verses.
1.25.10	One recites them in the evening in the reverse order.
1.25.11	The gods, while breaking the fortresses, advanced with these (verses). The Upasads are those.
1.25.12	They should be done with the Chandasas, not without the Chandasas.
1.25.13	If one does it without the Chandas, then one would have a lump on the neck. The lord Glavā is born from the womb.
1.25.14	Therefore, they should be done with Chandasas, and not without Chandasas.
1.25.15	Now, indeed, Hopavir Janashruti, the Brahman of the Upasads, said: "The mouth of a learned man, even though he is speaking indecently, is known to be satisfied, as it were, and to be buzzing, as it were." For the Upasads are offered with ghee, and the mouth is placed on the neck. Therefore he said that.
1.26.1	This is the divine armour, that the Prayājas and Anuyājas are not Prayājas and not Anuyājas, for the sake of firmness and non-injury.
1.26.2	Having gone beyond once, he calls out, for the sake that the sacrifice has gone beyond and not gone back.
1.26.3	They say, "This is cruel, indeed, that they perform the Soma-sacrifice at the end of the king Soma. When they perform the Soma sacrifice at the end with ghee, it is as if Indra had struck Vritra with the thunderbolt and ghee.
1.26.4	Then the king is made to drink the Soma. The king is made to recite the verse, "O god Soma, may I be nourished by thy rays. May Indra be nourished by thee, knowing the one wealth. May Indra be nurtured by thee. May thou be nurtured by Indra. Nourish us, the friends, with the means of knowledge. May there be welfare for thee, O god Soma, in the Soma-drinking." They make the king drink the Soma. Whatever of his is fierce, they make it to move at the end. By this they make it to be nourished. And they nourish him.
1.26.5	The Soma-king is indeed the embryo of heaven and earth. When he is pressed, he is pressed for wealth and for good things. He is pressed for Bhaga, for truth, for those who speak truth. He is pressed with the words, "Salutations to heaven, salutations to earth." He is pressed on the pressing stone. Thus they pay homage to heaven and earth. They also make them grow. They make them grow.
1.27.1	Soma, the king, was among the Gandharvas. The gods and the sages thought, "How can this Soma, the king go away from us?" That speech said, "The Gandharvas are desirous of women. Make a wager with me, who am a woman." The gods said, "No." She said, "How can we be without you?" She said, "When you will have a need for me, then I will come back." They said, "Yes." With her, who was a great fire, they bought back Soma, the king.
1.27.2	The calf-like Soma-purchasing cow, which is not yet milked, they lead to the Soma-pressing. With her the king buys Soma.
1.27.3	He should buy her back again, for she again comes to him.
1.27.4	Therefore, when the king Soma is bought, one should speak in a low voice, for then speech becomes like Gandharvas. When the Soma is being led to the pressing, it again comes.
1.28.1	The Adhvaryu says, "Recite to Agni being led forward."
1.28.2	He should recite the Gayatri verse, "Do you lead the god with divine wisdom, the all-knowing one, may he bring our offerings in due order."
1.28.3	The Brahman is indeed Gayatri. Gayatri is indeed the radiance and brilliance of the Brahman. By that radiance and brilliance, he thus prospers.
1.28.4	One who is a king should recite this verse in the Tristubh metre: "This is the praise for the great one."
1.28.5	The king is in the Tristubha metre. The Tristubha metre is strength, energy, and vigour. He thus makes him prosper with strength, energy, vigour.
1.28.6	"They have always been praised, they have been praised."
1.28.7	He thus makes him attain the highest position among his own people.
1.28.8	Let him hear us with his tamed armies, let Agni hear with his divine, constant (armies).
1.28.9	He shines in this (world) without decay, the constant one. He who knows thus,
1.28.10	This one here first came with the creators. One should recite the Jagati for the Vaishya.
1.28.11	The Vaisya is the Jagat; cattle are the Jagat; he thus prospers him with cattle.
1.28.12	"He enters the variegated, all-pervading (verse) in the forests, he enters the (verse) called Vish." The Yajna is the form of the Vish; it is prosperous.
1.28.13	"This is indeed the divine year."
1.28.14	He releases speech with the Anushtubh.
1.28.15	Speech is the Anushtubha; he thus releases speech.
1.28.16	"This is the one who is here, who has come to me, who has spoken to the Gandharvas. This is what she says."
1.28.17	"This Agni is the one who prospers."
1.28.18	This Agni is the prospere
1.28.19	"As from the birth of the immortal." He thus establishes immortality in him.
1.28.20	And the god Agni, who is better than all, has been made for life.
1.28.21	For this god Agni has been made for the sake of life.
1.28.22	We have placed you in the place of Ida, on the navel of the earth.
1.28.23	This is the place of Ida - the northern altar and the navel.
1.28.24	We invoke the knower of birth, for they are about to place him.
1.28.25	"O Agni, for the offering to be borne," for he is about to offer the oblation.
1.28.26	"O Agni, with all your own gods, the first to sit on the seat covered with wool."
1.28.27	He thus makes him sit down with all the gods.
1.28.28	"The Kulayin (priest) with ghee, Savitar (the god of the sun), the Kulayin (priest), for the Kulayin (god) is indeed what is done at the sacrifice in the form of the Paitudarava (priests) and the Gulagula (priests) with fragrant incense. Lead the sacrifice to the sacrificer, well (done). He thus establishes the sacrifice in the straight path."
1.28.29	"O Hotṛ, thou art seated in thy own world, healing." Agni is the Hotṛ of the gods; this is his own world, the altar with the navel.
1.28.30	"He places the sacrifice in the womb of good deeds." The sacrificer is the sacrifice; he prays for this blessing for the sacrificer.
1.28.31	"O Agni, with the oblation do thou worship the gods, do thou bestow great life on the sacrificer." Life indeed is the great life; he thus bestows life on the sacrificers.
1.28.32	"The leader, the knower, in the place of the Hotri," Agni indeed is the Hotri of the gods; this is his place of the Hotṛ, namely the northern altar.
1.28.33	He shines forth, the well-skilled one. He is near, for then he is near.
1.28.34	Vasishtha, of unerring vow and wisdom. Agni is the Vasishtha of the gods.
1.28.35	Agni, the thousand-bearer, the pure-tongued one. This is his thousand-bearing, that they make him who is one, many.
1.28.36	He who knows this attains a thousandfold prosperity.
1.28.37	"He places the (bricks) with the verse, "Thou art the messenger, thou art the protector of us;
1.28.38	Thou art the leader of our wealth, O bull, O Agni, of our progeny, of our bodies, shining, not burning, the protector."
1.28.39	Agni is the protector of the gods. He thus gives Agni as the protector on all sides to himself and to the sacrificer. When one who knows this thus offers it, he also makes it a year-long blessing.
1.28.40	These are the eight Anvähs. They are enriched with forms. This is the enrichment of the sacrifice, namely, the enrichment with forms. When a rite is being performed, if a verse is recited,
1.28.41	He recites the first three times, the last three times. They amount to twelve. The year consists of twelve months. Prajapati is the year. He succeeds in the abodes of Prajapati. He who knows thus recites the first thrice, the last thrice. He thus makes the sacrifice firm for stability, strength and non-slipping.
1.29.1	The Adhvaryu says, "Recite while the Havirdhana-carriers are being pushed forward."
1.29.2	He recites, "I yoke you with the ancient Brahman and salutations." The gods yoked themselves with Brahman. The Havirdhana-bearers are Brahman. He yokes them with Brahman. One who is Brahman-endowed does not perish.
1.29.3	The verse "O ye two, O ye two, O Soma, O ye two" is the third verse of the Yajus. It is in the Dyava-Pritbaviya hymn.
1.29.4	They say, "When the two Havirdhana-carriers are being pushed forward, one recites the speech. Why does one recite the Triṣṭubh verse addressed to Heaven and Earth?" Heaven and Earth were the Havirdhana-bearers of the gods. They are still the Havirdhana bearers. They are between all this oblation, whatever it is. Therefore one recites the Triṣṭhubh verse addressed to heaven and earth.
1.29.5	As if Yama were striving, they have come to this. For Yama indeed are they striving, having come from afar.
1.29.6	The men who are devoted to the gods, they bring you forth. For the gods are indeed devoted to them, the men who bring them forth.
1.29.7	They have come to their own world, to the one who gives, be ye in your own place, in the moon. For Soma indeed is the moon. To Soma indeed he has come, to the king.
1.29.8	He places it on two (layers) with the verse, "He has placed the Ukthya speech on two (layers)."
1.29.9	For this is the third layer placed on two (layers).
1.29.10	When he says, "Ukthya speech," it means that the Ukthya rite is a sacrificial rite. By this he makes the sacrifice prosper.
1.29.11	"The one who has the ladle, the one who is united with his wife, the one who has not transgressed the vow, he prospers."
1.29.12	Whatever he has said before, that he pacifies with this peace.
1.29.13	He prays for a blessing: "May the good power be for the sacrificer, may the Sun be for the sacrificers."
1.29.14	"The wise one releases all forms," he says, referring to the All-Form.
1.29.15	He should recite while looking at the Raraṭyā.
1.29.16	The form of the Raraṭyā is like the universe, like white and like black.
1.29.17	The form of the universe is like the Raraṭya. He who knows this, looking at the Raraṭyām, recites it for himself and for the sacrificer.
1.29.18	"He encloses thee with the songs of the Givers." With the last verse he encloses.
1.29.19	When he thinks that the sacrificial grass has been spread on the sacrificial grass, then he should enclose.
1.29.20	The wives of the Hotṛ and the sacrificer are not to be without fire. When one who knows this places them on the two sacrificial posts which are surrounded, it is so.
1.29.21	They are surrounded by the Yajus. When one surrounds them by the Yajush,
1.29.22	When the Adhvaryu and the Pratiprasthātṛ strike them both from the sides, then one should place them.
1.29.23	Here you are, surrounded by them.
1.29.24	These are the eight Anvähs. They are enriched with forms. That is the enrichment of the sacrifice, namely, the enrichment with forms. When a rite is being performed, if a verse is recited, then one should recite the first three times and the last three times. They become twelve. There are twelve months in a year. The year is Prajapati. One who knows this attains prosperity through the abodes of Prajapati. He recites the first three times, the last three times, thus he makes the sacrifice firm for stability, strength, and non-slipping.
1.30.1	The Adhvaryu says, "Recite after the Agni-Soma being led forth."
1.30.2	He recites the Savitri verse, "O god Savitr, thou leadest forth the first for the father."
1.30.3	They say, "When the Agniṣṭoma and Soma are being led forward, one recites the Savitrī verse. Why does one recite the Savitrī?" Savitr is the lord of all that is born. They lead them forward with the Savitrī. Therefore one recites the Sāvitrī.
1.30.4	"May Brahmanaspati lead forward." He recites the Brahmanaspatiya verse.
1.30.5	They say, "Why does he recite the Brhaspati hymn after the Agni-Soma hymns which are being recited? ", because Brhaspati is Brahman, he has made Brahman the leader of these two. Brahman does not fail.
1.30.6	"May the Goddess come with truth" - thus he makes the sacrifice truthful. Therefore he recites the Brahmanaspatya.
1.30.7	"The Hotar is the immortal God" - thus he recites the three verses of Agni in the Gāyatrī metre, when Soma is being brought.
1.30.8	When Soma was being brought in, the Asuras, the Rakshas, tried to attack it between the Sadas and the Havirdhana. Agni, by his magic, led it away.
1.30.9	He goes forward by magic. By magic he led it away. Therefore they place Agni in front of it.
1.30.10	O Agni, come to thee, to the heaven, to the heaven. Come to the dear, to the dear. Three and one he recites.
1.30.11	Indeed, these two are united, the sacrificer and the one who is to be released, and the one who releases him. When the first one is released and the second one is released, when he recites three and one, then he unites them in recognition. He establishes them in the foundation, for the sake of the non-injury of the self and the sacrificer.
1.30.12	"O Agni, accept this offering, O Hari, this speech of mine." He recites this when the oblation is being offered.
1.30.13	He thus makes the oblation reach Agni's liking.
1.30.14	"Soma, the knower of the path, moves." He recites the third verse of the Somasoma-gāyatrī when Soma is being brought forward. He thus makes it reach its own deity and its own metre.
1.30.15	Soma has sat down in the same place. He is about to sit down.
1.30.16	One should recite after crossing it, as if making the Agnidhra stand behind.
1.30.17	This is the Vaishnavi verse: "This is his king Varuna, this is his horse."
1.30.18	The Maruts, the wise, attend the sacrifice. Vishnu, the friend, supports the best and most excellent of the Daksas, and the herd of cattle.
1.30.19	Vishnu is the doorkeeper of the gods. He opens this door for us.
1.30.20	"And within, and before, be thou Aditi." He recites this when the Prapadi is being recited.
1.30.21	The hawk, by his mind, has made his nest, his home, in the nest.
1.30.22	The golden one approaches the abode.
1.30.23	He covers himself with the black antelope skin as if with gold.
1.30.24	Therefore he recites this verse.
1.30.25	The Asura, knowing all, has established the heaven. He places it with the Varuna verse.
1.30.26	This is indeed the deity of Varuna, as long as it is tied up, as long as the fringes are attached. He thus makes it complete by its own deity and its own metre.
1.30.27	If they should run towards it, one should desire safety and should attach it with the verse, "Obeisance to Varuna, the great."
1.30.28	One who knows this, and who wishes to give protection to as many as he wishes, and who meditates on giving protection to as many, to that many he gives protection. Where one who knows this, having known this, performs this rite, therefore one who knows this should perform this rite.
1.30.29	These seventeen are the forms of prosperity. Prosperity in the sacrifice is the forms of prosperity, when a rite is being performed and a verse is recited. He recites the first three times, the last three times. They become twenty-one. Prajapati is twenty-one. The twelve months, the five seasons, these three worlds, the sun, the twenty-one is the highest prosperity.
1.30.30	That is the divine Kshatra, that is the prosperity, that is the sovereignty, that is the expanse of the Brahman, that is the abode of Prajapati, that is the self-sovereignty.
1.30.31	He prospers with these twenty-one (verses) and twenty-one.
2.1.1	The gods, having gone up to heaven by means of sacrifice, were afraid, thinking, "Having seen us, men and sages will follow us." They approached him by means of the sacrificial post. In that they approached him by means means of the sacrificial sacrificial post, that is the sacrificial post's sacrificial post-ness. They approached him with the tip pointing downwards, and went up with the tip pointing upwards. Then men and sages approached the place of sacrifice of the gods, thinking, "We will seek some part of the sacrifice by means of knowledge." They found the sacrificial post with the tip pointing downward. They knew, "By means of this the gods approached the sacrifice." Having dug it up, they placed it with the tip pointing upward. Then they knew the sacrifice and the heavenly world.
2.1.2	The reason why the sacrificial post is erected is to know the sacrifice and to make the heavenly world known.
2.1.3	The sacrificial post is indeed a thunderbolt. It should be made eight-cornered, for the thunderbolt is eight-cornered. It strikes him who is hostile, the enemy, and the one who is hidden from him. One should strike him.
2.1.4	The sacrificial post is a thunderbolt, and it is raised up as the slayer of the hater. Therefore, even now, if one hates, it becomes unpleasant for him. Seeing (the post) one says, "This post is for him, this post is for him."
2.1.5	One who desires heaven should make the sacrificial post of Khadira wood. The gods conquered the heavenly world by means of a Khadira post, and in the same way the sacrificer conquers the heavenly world by a Khadira post.
2.1.6	One who desires food and prosperity should make a Bilva sacrificial post. Bilva is taken up at the same height. That is the form of food. It is attached to the branches from the root. That is prosperity.
2.1.7	One who knows this makes a Bilva sacrificial pole, he prospers in offspring and cattle.
2.1.8	What is called Bilva is light.
2.1.9	He who knows this becomes the best among his own people.
2.1.10	One desiring brilliance and brahmic lustre should make a sacrificial post of Palasa wood. Palasa is the brilliance and brahmic splendour among trees.
2.1.11	One who knows this and makes a sacrificial post of palasa wood becomes brilliant and brahmic.
2.1.12	The Palasha is the source of all trees. Therefore, they call it Palasha by the name of Palasha.
2.1.13	He who knows this, obtains the desire for all trees.
2.2.1	The Adhvaryu says, "We are binding the sacrificial post. Do you recite."
2.2.2	"They anoint thee at the sacrifice, O god-desiring one," he says.
2.2.3	For at the sacrifice they anoint him, O god-loving one.
2.2.4	"O tree, with divine honey," this is the honey of the divine, namely ghee.
2.2.5	"Whatever is above, bestow wealth here; whatever is the loss of this mother's womb." If you stand or lie down, bestow wealth upon us. That is what he says.
2.2.6	"Grow, O tree-lord!" The growing is beautiful. Whatever is beautiful at the sacrifice, that is prosperous.
2.2.7	The Yūpa is erected on the earth, and the earth is the Yūpa.
2.2.8	"He prays, "May I be honoured with the praise of the sacrificers, with the praise of those who offer sacrifices."
2.2.9	"He prays thus: "May I be worshipped in front of the kindled one."
2.2.10	For he is worshipped in front of what is kindled.
2.2.11	"Seeking the Brahman, the immortal, the good hero," he pronounces a blessing.
2.2.12	"Removing from us the excess of sin," the excess of sin is indeed hunger; he thus drives it away from the sacrifice and from the sacrificer.
2.2.13	"Rise up for great prosperity," he pronounces the blessing.
2.2.14	"Stand up, O God, for the blessing of the gods."
2.2.15	What is the name of the gods is their "Om." "Stand up, like a god, for the blessing." That is what he says.
2.2.16	"Stand up for the blessing of strength." He thus makes him stand for the blessing of wealth.
2.2.17	"With the hymns, with the praises, we delight them." The hymns are the Anjyas, the praises are the Vāghatas. With these the sacrificers delight the gods. "May the gods come to my sacrifice, may the gods come to the sacrifice of me."
2.2.18	If even many people offer sacrifices, then the gods go to his sacrifice. He who knows this and recites it thus,
2.2.19	"Protect us from above, O Agni, with thy light, burn up all the evil-doers."
2.2.20	Evil-doers are demons; he means to say, "Burn up the evil-doer."
2.2.21	"Make me go upwards for the chariot, for life," he says; he means to make him go upwards for the charioteer, for life.
2.2.22	If the sacrificer is like one who has gone, then he gives him over to the year.
2.2.23	"He prays, "May we be known among the gods." He prays for a blessing."
2.2.24	"He says, "Born, he is born for the good days of the year."
2.2.25	For he is born from this.
2.2.26	"He says "Growing at the assembly, at the sacrifice," he blesses him.
2.2.27	The wise purify the mind with the waters. They purify him with that.
2.2.28	The divine one, the Brahman, raises up the speech. He thus informs the gods of him.
2.2.29	The young one in new clothes has come around. He places it with the highest.
2.2.30	The young man in new clothes is the breath. He is surrounded by the body.
2.2.31	He becomes better when born. He becomes better and better when born.
2.2.32	The wise ones, the poets, lead him with their minds, seeking the gods. Those who are not the same are the poets. They lead him.
2.2.33	These seven Anvähs are the most prosperous in form. This is the prosperity of the sacrifice, namely, the prosperity in form. When a rite is being performed, if one recites a verse, then one recites the first three times and the last three times. They become eleven. The Tristubh metre has eleven syllables. The thunderbolt of Indra is the Tristubh. One indeed attains the abode of Indra. One who knows this attains the abode of the one who attains the abode of. One recites the first thrice and the last thrice. One thus makes the sacrifice firm for stability, strength, and non-slipping.
2.3.1	They say, "One should stand by the sacrificial posts and strike them."
2.3.2	One should stand by them if one desires cattle.
2.3.3	The cattle, the food of the gods, did not stand for being taken. They went away and said, "You will not get us." Then the gods saw this sacrificial post as a thunderbolt and threw it at them. Fearing it, they returned. They still return to it. Then the cattle stood for being taken as food of the gods.
2.3.4	The animals stand for him as food, for the purpose of being eaten, for him who knows this, and for him whose sacrificial post stands thus.
2.3.5	One should strike it for one who desires heaven.
2.3.6	The ancients used to strike it.
2.3.7	The sacrificer is the sacrificial post, the sacrificer is the Prāstara. Agni is the divine womb. He will be born from the oblations of the divine womb of Agni and will ascend to heaven with a golden body.
2.3.8	Now those who were inferior to them saw this Svara, a piece of the sacrificial post. At that time one should strike it. The desire that is obtained there is the one that is obtained in striking. The desire that one obtains there is the one obtained in the place.
2.3.9	When one is initiated, he offers himself to all the deities. Agni is all the deities, Soma is all the deities. When one offers an animal to Agni and Soma, the sacrificer redeems himself from all the deities.
2.3.10	They say, "The Agniṣṭoma should be performed in two forms, because it is for two deities." One should not pay attention to that. The animal should be performed as fat, because animals are of a fat form. The sacrificer indeed becomes emaciated. When the animal is fat, he nourishes the sacrificer with his own brilliance.
2.3.11	They say, "One should not eat of the animal offered to Agni and Soma, for one who eats of the animal offered in the Agniṣṭoma eats the man. For the sacrificer redeems himself by this."
2.3.12	Now, the Agniṣṭoma is the sacrifice to Indra and Agni. Indra killed Vṛtra with the help of Indra and Agni. They said to him, "We two helped you to kill Vṛtra. Choose a boon from us." "Choose," he said. They chose this very boon. "On the day after tomorrow, a beast for you two." He became their immovable boon. Therefore, one should eat and desire it.
2.4.1	He pleases them with the Apryas.
2.4.2	The Apryas are indeed brilliance and Brahmic glory; he thus pleases them with brilliance and Brahmic glow.
2.4.3	He offers the Samidh twigs.
2.4.4	The Samidh twigs are indeed the vital airs; they kindle all this here, whatever there is; he thus pleases the vital airs and places the vital airs in the sacrificer.
2.4.5	He offers to Tanunapat. Tanunapat is the breath, for he protects the body. He thus delights the breath and places the breath in the sacrificer.
2.4.6	He offers to Narasamsa. Narasamsa is speech. He thus delights both progeny and speech and places progeny and speech in the sacrificer.
2.4.7-9	He offers on the Iḍa. The Iḍa is food. He thus pleases food. He places food in the sacrificer. He offers on the sacrificial grass. The sacrificial grass is cattle. He thus pleases cattle. He places cattle in the sacrificer.
2.4.10-11	He makes offering to Ushas and Nakta. Ushas and Naktas are the day and night. He thus propitiates the day and night, and places the sacrificer in the day and night.
2.4.12	He offers to the three goddesses. The out-breath, the in-breath and the through-breath are the three goddesses. He pleases them and places them in the sacrificer.
2.4.13	He offers to Tvashtra. Speech is Tvashtra. Everything here is made by speech. He pleases speech and places speech in the sacrificer.
2.4.14	He offers to the tree. The tree is the breath. He thus pleases the breath. He places the breath in the sacrificer.
2.4.15	He offers with the formula "Svāhā". Svāhā is the support. He thus establishes the sacrifice at the end in the support.
2.4.16	If he were to please the sacrificer with the formula "Yathṛṣṭi", he would abandon the sacrificer in friendship.
2.5.1	The Adhvaryu says, "Do you recite the Anuvākya for Agni being made."
2.5.2	He recites the three verses of Agni, in the Gayatra metre, "Agni is the Hotar, our sacrifice." When Agni is being made, he makes it complete by its own deity and its own metre.
2.5.3	"Having become a steed, he is led around." He is led around as if he were a steed.
2.5.4	"He goes around the three worlds, the sacrifice, like a charioteer. The Agni goes around like a charioteering the sacrifice."
2.5.5	"He is the lord of the horses, the wise one." He is the lord of horses.
2.5.6	The Adhvaryu says, "O Hotar, please come forward to offer the oblations to the gods."
2.5.7	Agni has conquered, has won the prize. The Maitrāvaruṇa responds to the call of the Adhvaryu.
2.5.8	They say, "Why does the Maitrāvaruṇa respond to the call of Adhvaryu when the Adhvaryus calls the Hotṛ?"
2.5.9	The Maitrāvaruṇa is the mind of the sacrifice, the Hotṛ is the speech of the sacrifice. Speech speaks according to the mind. If one speaks with a mind other than that, then that speech is not bright, not pleasing to the gods. When the Maitrāvaruṇa responds to the call, he directs speech by the mind. With speech directed by the mind, he accomplishes the oblation for the gods.
2.6.1	The divine Sāmitaras (priests) begin (the ceremony) with the words, "Do ye begin, O men."
2.6.2	He thereby instructs those who are the Sāmitaras of the gods and those who are the human Sāmitaras.
2.6.3	"Bring to me the sacrificial grass, the sacrificial grass-holders, and the sacrificial grass-owners."
2.6.4	The sacrificial grass is the animal, the sacrificial grass holder is the sacrificer, the sacrificial grass owner is the sacrificer. He thus makes the sacrificer prosper with his own sacrificial grass.
2.6.5-7	Now they say, "The deity to whom the animal is offered is the lord of the oblation." If the animal belongs to one deity, one should say, "To the lord of the offering." If it belongs to two deities, "To the lords of the offering." If it belongs to many deities, "To all the lords of the offerings." This is the settled rule. "He brings Agni to us."
2.6.8	The animal being led to slaughter saw death. He did not desire to follow the gods. The gods said to him, "Come, we shall take you to heaven." He said, "So be it." "One of you should go in front of me." "So be it," they said. Agni went in front of him. He followed Agni and went east.
2.6.9	Therefore they say, "The animal sacrifice is indeed dedicated to Agni, for it is Agni that he approaches."
2.6.10	Therefore they carry Agni in front of him.
2.6.11	"Spread the grass," for the animal sacrifice is the plant, and thus he makes it of all the forms of the animal.
2.6.12	May his mother, his father, his brother born of the same womb, his friend, his companion, think of him thus. Thus they offer him to the gods with the consent of his kinsmen.
2.6.13	Let him place his foot towards the north, let him direct his eye towards the sun, let him release his breath after the wind, let him direct the ether to his breath, the directions to his hearing, the earth to his body. Thus he places him in these worlds.
2.6.14	Having covered him with one skin, he should say, "Let him cut the navel from the navel, let him cut the fat from the navel, and let him stop the heat inside." In this way, he places the vital breaths in the animals.
2.6.15	May his chest be like a hawk, his arms like the Sal tree, his shoulders like the Doshani, his hips like the Kashyapa, his thighs like the Kavasa, his knees like the Sreekparna, his urine like the Asthivanta. The twenty-six crooked ones of him, may they be performed. May each part of him be made straight. May each part be made straight. Thus he pleases his limbs.
2.6.16	"He says, 'Dig the earth, O king, for the sake of the Upavyadha plant.' The Upavyadhas are plants, and this is the foundation of plants. He thus establishes it in its own foundation, at the very end.
2.7.1	"He says, 'May the Raksases be destroyed by the ashes.' The gods, by means of the husks, separated the Raksases from the oblations at the great sacrifices. He says, 'May they be destroyed by the ash.' He thus separates the Raksases by their own share from the sacrifices.
2.7.2	They say, "One should not mention the demons at a sacrifice. The sacrifice is indeed protection from demons."
2.7.3	They say, "One must mention them."
2.7.4	He who pushes away the shares of one who is entitled to a share, he accumulates it for him. If he does not accumulate it for him, then he accumulates it for his son, then for his grandson. He certainly accumulates it for him.
2.7.5	If he were to recite in a low voice, he would recite as if in a whisper. The low voice is like a whisper. The Rakshas are like a whisper.
2.7.6	If he were to recite loudly, his speech would be too powerful for the Rakshas.
2.7.7	He who speaks the Rakshas-like speech,
2.7.8	The speech that the intoxicated one speaks, the speech that the mad one speaks, that is the Rakshas speech.
2.7.9	He does not exult himself, nor is his progeny born with pride, who knows thus.
2.7.10	"Do not injure his calf, thinking it is a calf. Do not injure your own offspring. The Ravishatas (the destroyers) are the ones who destroy. Those who destroy the gods and those who destroy men, to them he gives it over."
2.7.11	"O Adhrigu, do thou pacify, O Shami, do thou pacifiy, do thou paciffy. Do thou pacify, do thou pactify, do thou paciffy." He should say this three times and also "O Adhrigur, do thou paclify." The Adhrigu is the pacifier of the gods. The pacifier is the one who is restrained. He gives him to the pacifiers and also to the restrainers.
2.7.12	The Hotr, having recited the Anushtubh verse, says, "Whatever good deed you have done here, that is yours; whatever evil deed, that is elsewhere." Agni was the Hotr of the gods; he separated him by speech. The Hotr separates him by speech. Whatever is cut below, whatever is cut above, whatever is sharp, whatever is blunt, whatever is done by the Smitars, he directs it to the Smitars and the Nigrahis. He is released by the Hotr with welfare, for all life, for all life.
2.7.13	He who knows this attains the whole of his life.
2.8.1	The gods sacrificed to the man as an animal. From him, the sacrificial oblation escaped. It entered the horse. Therefore the horse became fit for sacrifice. Then they sought to recover the oblation that had escaped. It became the man of the forest.
2.8.2	They offered the horse. It escaped from the horse-sacrifice. It entered the cow. Therefore the cow became fit for sacrifice. Then they pursued the escaped sacrifice. It became the deer-cow.
2.8.3	They offered the cow. From the cow that was offered, it went out and entered the goat. Therefore the goat became fit for sacrifice. Then, when it went out, they offered the goat. From the goat that was offered, it went out and entered a sheep. Therefore the sheep became fit for sacrifice, and then, when it went away, they offered the sheep. From the sheep that was offered, 
2.8.4	He was pleased with the goat, and therefore the goat is the most useful of these animals.
2.8.5	They sacrificed the goat, and it escaped from the goat-sacrifice. It entered this (earth), and therefore this became sacred. Then they pursued the goat that had escaped, and it became a Sarabha.
2.8.6	These are the animals that have lost their intelligence and are not intelligent. Therefore, one should not eat them.
2.8.7	He followed her here. That which was followed became barley. When they offer the Puronuvākyā for the animal, they say, "May we be blessed with intelligence and the animal," or "May we be blesed with the animal alone."
2.8.8	When one knows this, one becomes a true animal.
2.9.1	The Puròàasa is indeed the animal that is obtained.
2.9.2	Its husks are its hair, its chaff is its skin, its grains are its blood, its flour is its flesh, and whatever is the essence of it is its bone.
2.9.3	He who sacrifices with a cake, sacrifices with the vital breath of all animals.
2.9.4	Therefore they say that the sacrifice with cakes is worthy of the world.
2.9.5	You two have placed these shining ones in heaven, Agni and Soma, the wise. You two have released the rivers from the curse, from sin, Agni and Soma have released the rivers. He sacrifices to Vapa.
2.9.6	When one is consecrated, he is bound by all the deities. Therefore they say, "One should not eat when the consecrator is eating." When Agni and Soma release him from the grip, he offers to Vapa. Thus he releases the sacrificer from all the deities. That is why they say, "When Vapa has been offered, one should not eat, for then the sacrificer is released."
2.9.7	"The other heaven, the other mother, the other father, the other friend, the other kinsman, the other relative, the other companion, the other guest, the other guest-friend, the other guest of the guest, the other friend of the friend, the other friend-of-the-friend, the one who is the friend of the friend of the guest, he has brought forth, he has brought hither, he has brought here, he has brought to the sacrifice, he has brought for the sacrifice, he brings, he brings hither, he brings here, he brings to the sacrifice, Translation: "The other heaven," etc., he offers on the sacrificial cake.
2.9.8	"The hawk has brought forth the other from the mountain," for the offering-cake is brought forth from the mountain.
2.9.9	"Taste, shine forth, be united with the food," he offers on the cake of the Svishtakrit.
2.9.10	He makes the offering-cake taste for him, and bestows strength upon him.
2.9.11	He calls out to Ida. Ida is cattle. He thus calls out to cattle. He places cattle in the sacrificer.
2.10.1	The Adhvaryu says, "Recite after the oblation is offered to Manota."
2.10.2	He recites the verse, "You, O Agni, are the first to know."
2.10.3	They say, "If the animal is of another deity, then why does one recite the Agni-related verses when the oblation is being offered to Manota?"
2.10.4	The three are the Manota of the gods, for in them their minds are fixed. Speech is the Manota of gods, for in it their minds are fixed; the cow is the Manota, for in it are their minds fixed; Agni is the Manota; for in him are their minds fixed. Agni is the Manotā of all; the Manotās meet in Agni. Therefore the Manotā offerings are offered to Agni alone. When the Manotā offering is being offered, one recites (the following verse):
2.10.5	Agni-Soma are the two deities of the oblation that is being offered.
2.10.6	The oblation is offered to Agni-Soma.
2.10.7	One who knows this goes to the gods with all his prosperity.
2.10.8	He offers to Vanaspati. Vanaspati is indeed the breath.
2.10.9	He goes to the living, to the laughing, to the offering, to the gods, where he who knows thus offers to the tree of the forest.
2.10.10	He offers to Svishtakrit. Svishtakrit is indeed stability. He thus establishes the sacrifice at the end in stability.
2.10.11	He invokes Ida. Ida is indeed cattle. He thus invokes cattle. He places cattle in the sacrificer.
2.11.1	The gods were performing the sacrifice. The Asuras, while they were performing, came near them. They said, "We shall perform the sacrifice in their midst." When the animals were offered, they went around the sacrificial post in front of Agni, as if around a city. The gods, knowing this, went around the three cities of Agni for the protection of the sacrifice and themselves. These cities of Agni shone and blazed for them. The Asuras fled from them, unable to withstand them. The gods struck down the Asura-protectors in front with Agni, and behind with Agni.
2.11.2-3	Similarly, when the sacrificers perform the Parigni rite, they encircle the three cities with fire. For the protection of the sacrifice and the self, they perform the Parigani rite. Therefore, they perform the Pari Agni rite. Therefore, one recites for the Pari Agni rite.
2.11.4	They carry the torch in front of him.
2.11.5	The animal is indeed the sacrificer in the sense that the sacrificer, by means of this light, will go to the heavenly world as the foremost one. By means of this light the sacrificer goes to the heavenly world.
2.11.6	When they are about to kill it, the Adhvaryu places the sacrificial grass under it.
2.11.7	When they take him out, having been burnt, outside the altar, they make him one who is seated on the sacrificial grass.
2.11.8	They dig a pit for him.
2.11.9	The pit is a medicine, and this (earth) is the support of plants. They thus establish him in his own support.
2.11.10	They say, "This is the oblation, and this is the animal. But much of it goes away: the hair, the skin, the blood, the fat, the hoofs, the horns, the flesh. By what is it filled?"
2.11.11	When they spread the cake on the animal, it is filled by that.
2.11.12	The intelligence of the animals indeed went out. The two plants, barley and wheat, were born. When they offer the cake to the animal, they say, "May we be blessed with the animal and intelligence together. May we be blessed with only the animal."
2.11.13	He who knows this is blessed with the animal together with intelligence. He who knows this is only blessed with the animal.
2.12.1	Having taken out the omentum of that (animal), they take it up. The Adhvaryu, pouring clarified butter over it with the ladle, says (to the sacrificer), "Do you recite the Stoka-verses."
2.12.2	When the Stoka-verse are recited, all the gods are pleased. He does not go to the gods who are not pleased.
2.12.3	He says, "Do you accept the most excellent."
2.12.4	"The words of the divine damsels are the best, the offering-pouring is the seat."
2.12.5	He offers them indeed in the mouth of Agni.
2.12.6	He recites the verse, "Place this our sacrifice among the immortals."
2.12.7	He desires the offering-pouring with the verse, "O Jātavedas, accept these offerings."
2.12.8	The Stokas are of fat and ghee. They are of fat and of ghee.
2.12.9	"The Hotr, having sat down first, eats." Agni is the Hotr of the gods. He says, "Agni, having sat down, first eats."
2.12.10	"The Stokas flow with ghee and fat, O Shining One." They are of fat as well as of ghee.
2.12.11	"O Agni, the best of our own duties, bestow on us the best of gifts." Thus he prays for a blessing.
2.12.12	"The drops of ghee belong to you, O Agni, to the Rishi who is present." The drops of ghee belong indeed to him.
2.12.13	"The Rishi is the best, you are kindled. Be the leader of the sacrifice." Thus he prays to the prosperity of the sacrifice.
2.12.14	For thee, O Agni, the streams flow, like the streams of Soma, the drops of fat and ghee. For fat and ghee indeed are produced from the streams of Soma.
2.12.15	O Agni, with thy great light, O sage, accept my offerings, O thou who art worthy of oblations. He indeed prays for the acceptance of oblations.
2.12.16	The most vigorous, the fat has been scraped from the middle, we give it to thee. Thy drops flow on thy skin, for them, O god, do thou pour out.
2.12.17	He indeed offers them with the Vasat-call, as if saying, "O Agni, do thou pour down the Soma."
2.12.18	Now, the drops that fall are all dedicated to the gods. The drops are the drops. Therefore, this rain is distributed.
2.13.1	They say, "What are the introductory verses of the Svāhā-uttered prayers? What is the instruction? What is the offering verse?"
2.13.2	Those very ones that are recited are the introductory verses. The instruction is the instruction. The offering verse is the offering verse.
2.13.3	They say, "Which deities are the ones to whom oblations are offered?"
2.13.4	One should say, "All the gods."
2.13.5	Therefore, let the gods eat the oblation offered to them."
2.13.6	The gods, by means of sacrifice, toil, penance, and oblations, conquered the heavenly world. When the omentum was offered, the heavenly world became manifest. Having offered the omentum, they went to the heavenly world, disregarding the other rites. Then men and sages followed the gods to the place of sacrifice, saying, "We shall seek some part of the sacrifice." They went around and saw the animal lying with its entrails removed. They knew, "The animal is indeed as big as the omentum."
2.13.7	The animal is only as big as the fat.
2.13.8	But when they offer him after having roasted him at the third pressing, then they have offered with many oblations, and have offered with a single animal.
2.13.9	He who knows thus, has offered with many oblatioins and has offered with a single anımal.
2.14.1	The oblation to Agni is the oblation of immortality. The oblation of ghee is the oblation to immortality. The oblations to Soma are the oblations to immortality. Those oblations which are without a body, whatever oblations are without a body - by them the sacrificer wins immortality.
2.14.2	Now, that (cow) is indeed the semen itself. Semen indeed melts away like the Vapa. The Vapa melts away like semen. Semen is white. The Vapa is white. The body is semen. The Vapa has no body. What is blood and what is flesh, that is the body. Therefore one should say, "Let it be covered up as long as it is not bloody."
2.14.3	It is five-edged, even though the sacrificer may be four-edged. The offering-spoon is five-edged.
2.14.4	He sprinkles clarified butter. The offering- spoon is of gold. He pours clarified butter over it.
2.14.5	They say, "If there is no gold, how would it be?" Having placed the clarified butter twice and having put the omentum, he pours twice over.
2.14.6	Clarified butter is nectar, gold is nectar. The desire that is fulfilled in clarified butter is fulfilled in gold. They become five.
2.14.7	This man is fivefold, divided into five parts: hair, skin, flesh, bones, and marrow. He offers the man, as big as the man, in the fire, in the womb of the gods. Agni is the womb of the Gods. From the oblations in the womb of Agni, having united, he goes upward to the heavenly world with a golden body.
2.15.1	The Adhvaryu says, "O Hotṛ, recite the Prastara for the gods who come in the morning."
2.15.2	These indeed are the gods who come to the morning, namely Agni, Ushas, and the Ashvins. They come with seven times seven metres.
2.15.3	Those who know this go to the call of the gods who come at dawn.
2.15.4	In Prajapati himself, the Hotri recited the morning hymn. The gods and the Asuras approached the sacrifice. They said, "Recite for us." He recited only for the gods.
2.15.5	Then the gods became victorious, the Asuras were defeated.
2.15.6	He who knows this becomes victorious himself, his enemy, his sin, his foe is defeated.
2.15.7	He then told it to the gods in the morning. That is why it is called Prātar-anu-vāk (Morning-after-recitation).
2.15.8	It is to be recited at the end of the night, for the purpose of embracing all speech and all Brahman. He who becomes the best, his speech is followed by others. Therefore, it is to be recited in the end of the nignt.
2.15.9	The Anūcya is to be recited before the speech of the one who is speaking.
2.15.10	If one were to recite after the speech has been uttered, then he would make the one who is reciting the Anūcya to recite after the utterance of another.
2.15.11	Therefore, the Anūcyā is to be recited in the great night.
2.15.12	One should recite before the utterance of the omen.
2.15.13	This is the mouth of Nirriti, the Vyaṃsa and the birds. If one were to recite before the birds have started to sing, one would be reciting a speech that is not for sacrifice. Therefore, one should not recite until the great night has passed.
2.15.14	Or else, one should recite when the Adhvaryu begins.
2.15.15	When the Adhvaryu makes the offering, he makes it with speech. The Hotṛ recites with speech. Speech is indeed Brahman. There, that desire is fulfilled which is in speech and Brahman.
2.16.1	Prajapati himself, as the Hotri, will recite the morning hymn. All the deities will be hoping, "He will recite me first, he will recite me first." Prajapati thought, "If I recite only one deity, by whom will the other deities be approached?" He saw this verse, "The waters are the Revatis." The waters are all the deities, and the Revatis are all the deities. With this verse, he recited the morning hymn. Those deities were delighted, "He recited me first, he recited me first."
2.16.2	All the deities rejoice when he recites the morning hymn.
2.16.3	He who knows this, is initiated by all the deities.
2.16.4	The gods were afraid, thinking, "The Asuras will take away our morning sacrifice. They are stronger and more powerful than we." Indra said to them, "Do not be afraid. I will strike them with the thunderbolt three times tomorrow. This is the verse he spoke then. The thunderbolt is in the Apampatri (verse), the thunderbolt is in the Tristubh (verse), the voice is in the Gayatri (verse). He struck them with that. He killed them with that. Then the gods became victorious and the Asuras were defeated.
2.16.5	He who knows this becomes his own self, and his enemy, sin, becomes his foe.
2.16.6	They say, "He who would generate all the metres in this verse should be the Hotri." This is indeed the three times repeated verse. It contains all the metres. This is the generation of the metres.
2.17.1	The hundred (verses) recited in succession are for one who desires long life. Man has a hundred years of life, a hundred powers, a hundred senses; he thus places him in life, in power, in the senses.
2.17.2	The three hundred and sixty (verses) recited successively are for one who wishes sacrifice. There are three hundred and sixty days in a year, so long is the year, the year is Prajapati, Prajapati is sacrifice.
2.17.3	The sacrifice bows to him who knows this, and he recites three hundred and sixty.
2.17.4	The twenty-seven hundred (verses) are for one who desires offspring and cattle. The twenty-seven hundreds are the days and nights of the year. The year is so much. The year is Prajapati. He who is born, this entire form follows him. He thus follows Prajapati, who is born, with offspring and cattle, for propagation.
2.17.5	He who knows this is born with offspring and cattle.
2.17.6	One should perform the sacrifice for one who has spoken wrongly or been accused by a non-Brahman, for one who has been accused of a crime, for one who is afflicted by sin. The Gayatri has eight syllables. The gods destroyed sin and impurity with the Gayatri. It destroys his sin and impurity.
2.17.7	He who knows this destroys sin.
2.17.8	The thousandfold recitation is for one who desires heaven. The heaven world is here in the autumn. For the attainment, success, and union of the heaven world.
2.17.9	The Prātaranuvāka is the praise of Prajapati, in it all desires are fulfilled. When he recites the Apamita hymn, all desires are fulfilled for him.
2.17.10	He who knows this, fulfills all desires.
2.17.11	Therefore one should recite the Apamita.
2.17.12	He recites the seven Agniya metres. The worlds of the gods are seven.
2.17.13	He who knows this prospers in all the worlds of the gods.
2.17.14	He recites the seven Ushasya metres. The domestic animals are seven.
2.17.15	One who knows this obtains the domestic animals.
2.17.16	The seven Savanas (offerings) are the metres. Speech spoke in seven ways. Speech spoke in that way. For the complete acquisition of all speech, of all Brahman.
2.17.17	Three deities are recited. These three worlds are threefold. For the conquest of these worlds.
2.18.1	They say, how is the morning recitation to be recited?
2.18.2	The Prātaranuvāka should be recited according to the desire. These are the limbs of Prajapati, namely the Vedas. He who sacrifices is indeed Prajapati. Therefore, it is for the benefit of the sacrificer.
2.18.3	The Prātaranuvaka should be recited at the end. Animals have four feet. For the purpose of securing animals.
2.18.4	The Anuvāka is recited in half verses, because it is recited in this way. It is indeed for the sake of stability. Man is indeed two-footed, animals are four-footed. He thus establishes the sacrificer who is two-footed in animals who are four-footed.
2.18.5	They say, "How does the morning recitation become un-extended?" One should say, "If it is not extended in the middle."
2.18.6	The oblations are offered to the deities of the oblations, the Stoma and the Chanda are offered to the Stoma and Chanda. Those oblations which are offered in the fire, by them the deities of the offerings are gratified. And when they praise and recite, by that the Stoma and deities of the Chanda are gratified.
2.18.7	The deities of both kinds are gratified and pleased for him who knows this.
2.18.8	The thirty-three gods are the Soma-drinkers, the thirty-three are the non-Soma-drinkers. The eight Vasus, the eleven Rudras, the twelve Adityas, Prajapati and the Vasat-call are the Soma-drinking gods. The eleven Prayajas, the eleven Anuyajas, the eleven Upayajas are the non-drinking gods. They are the recipients of the animal sacrifice. With Soma he pleases the Soma-drink-ers, with the animal he pleases the non-Soma drinkers.
2.18.9	Both these deities are pleased and become the desired ones for him who knows this.
2.18.10	"He recites, "Uṣas has become the one with shining cattle." He recites with the last verse."
2.18.11	They say, "How can all three sacrifices be completed when he recites them with one verse? The Agni, Uṣas and Aśvina sacrifices."
2.18.12	"The dawn was the shining animal" is the form of the dawn. "Agni, the seasonal one, was placed" is the form for Agni. "Your chariot, O you two possessing strength, is immortal, sweet, for the two Asvins." "May my call be heard" is the form to be used for the Asvins. Thus, when one offers with a single verse, all three rites are offered.
2.19.1	The sages were performing a sacrifice on the Sarasvati. They brought Kavasa Ailusha from Soma. The son of a slave, a gambler, was not a brahmin. How did he initiate us in the middle? They carried him outside the river. Here he was afflicted by thirst. "The Sarasvati said, "Do not step on me." He was carried outside the river. He was afflicted by thirst and saw this water of the great-grandson. "He said, "May the singer go to the divine Brahman." By that he approached the beloved abode of the waters. The waters followed him. The Sarasvati flowed around him on all sides."
2.19.2	Therefore, even now, it is called Parisaara (encircling) because Sarasvati encircled it on all sides.
2.19.3	Those sages said, "The gods know him. We shall call him." They said, "So be it." They called him. Having called him, they made him the Apampatriya (the one who is dear to the waters). "May he go to the divine Brahman, the singer." By that he approached the dear abode of the waters, and the gods.
2.19.4	He goes to the dear abode of the gods, he conquers the supreme world, he who knows this and he who knowing this performs this Apamāna rite.
2.19.5	One should recite it continuously.
2.19.6	Where one who knows this recites this continuously, there the rain falls continuously and the Parjanya becomes continuous for the offspring.
2.19.7	If one were to recite the verse with a hiatus, then the rain-bearing Parjanya would be harmful to the creatures. Therefore, it should be recited continuously.
2.19.8	He recites the first three verses continuously. Thus, the entire verse is recited continuously.
2.20.1	These ten verses are recited continuously.
2.20.2	"O Hina, do not obstruct our sacrifice, O god-worshipper!" (is recited) on the tenth day.
2.20.3	The rivers are turned back, flowing in two directions, in the rivers that flow in two directions.
2.20.4	The rivers are seen flowing, in the rivers seen flowing.
2.20.5	The cows are coming with milk for a swift purpose, in the rivers coming towards one.
2.20.6	Some are coming together, others are coming towards, in the rivers flowing together.
2.20.7	The waters contended, saying, "We shall offer the sacrifice first." Those who are taken on the previous day and those who are taken in the morning, Bhṛgu saw them contending. He made them know by this verse, "They go together, others approach together." They came to know.
2.20.8	Those who know this, the waters, carry the sacrifice. He who knows this,
2.20.9	"The waters, the goddesses, approach the Hotri," thus he recites when the waters are being mixed together in the Hotri's cup, in the waters of the Vasatīvarī, which are of one kind.
2.20.10	"The waters are the Adhvaryu," thus the Hotri asks the Adhvaryus.
2.20.11	"The sacrifice is the waters," thus he says.
2.20.12	The Adhvaryu replies, "Are these not the food-givers?"
2.20.13	He means to say, "Are these seen?"
2.20.14	O Adhvaryu, pour the Soma for Indra, sweet, rain-giving, strong, very strong, for the Vasus, Rudras, Adityas, the Rishis, the All-gods, for whom Indra, having drunk, has slain the foes. He rises up with the verse, "He who has saved his own offspring from the flood."
2.20.15	The waters rise up to meet him who approaches them, because the superior approaches them. Therefore they rise up to meet (the worshipper).
2.20.16	(The worshipper) should approach them without turning his back on them.
2.20.17	The superior approaches them without turning his face away from them. Therefore one should approach them without facing away from them. One should follow the one who recites (the mantra) without turning away from him.
2.20.18	If the lord of sacrifice is different from the sacrificer, then the Hotṛ is the one who desires fame. Therefore, one should follow the one who recites.
2.20.19	One should follow the one reciting the verse, "The sons of Amba go on the paths."
2.20.20	"The sons of Jama go on the paths, drinking with honey and milk."
2.20.21	One who desires fame and wishes to be famous should recite this.
2.20.22	Those who are above the sun, or with whom the sun shines together, he who desires brilliance, he who desires brahmic glory.
2.20.23	The goddesses of the waters, I invoke them, where the cows drink, he who desires cattle.
2.20.24	One should recite all these verses in succession, for the attainment of these desires.
2.20.25	He who knows this attains these desires.
2.20.26	"These have come to the auspicious, the blessed with life," so one should recite while the Vasatīvarī waters are being mixed together.
2.20.27	"The waters have come, the auspicious ones, to this sacrificial grass," so one should place them in the prepared waters.
2.21.1	The morning recitation is the head of the sacrifice, the Upāṁśu and Antaryāma are the Prāṇa and Apāna. The Upāṁśus and Antaryāmas are the thunderbolt. The Hotr should release speech at the Upāṁshu and Antaryāmu offerings.
2.21.2	If the Hotṛ were to release speech at the Upāṁśu and Antaryāma offerings, he would strike the sacrificer with the thunderbolt of speech. If someone were to tell him, "You have struck the sacrificer with speech as a thunderbolt, he will lose his life," it would be so. Therefore the Hotṛ should not release speech at the offerings of Upāṁśus and Antaryāmas.
2.21.3	"He should recite the Upāṁśu-mantra, "O Prāṇa, give me life." He should recite the Antar-yāma-mantra, "O Apāna, give me life." Having touched the Upāṁshu-savaṇa-gravāṇa, he releases speech with the words, "For Vyāna to you."
2.21.4	The Upaṁśusavana is the Self. The Hotr, having withdrawn the breaths into himself, releases speech. For all life, for all life.
2.21.5	He who knows this attains all life.
2.22.1	They say, "Should one go or not go?" Some say, "One should go." Those who say this say, "This is the share of both gods and men, namely, the Bahispavamāna. Therefore, they approach him."
2.22.2	One should not pay attention to this.
2.22.3	If he were to recite a verse, he should make it follow the Sama. If someone were to say to him, "The Hotr has become the follower of the Sama-knower, he has taken away the fame from the Udgâtri, and has taken away from the permanent place," then it would be so.
2.22.4	Therefore, sitting there itself, he should recite.
2.22.5	"He who is the drinking of the gods here, at the sacrifice, on the sacrificial grass, on the altar, of that also do thou eat."
2.22.6	Thus indeed, he is not obstructed from the drinking of Soma.
2.22.7	Then he should say, "Thou art the mouth, may I become the mouth."
2.22.8	The Bahispavamāna is indeed the mouth of this sacrifice.
2.22.9	One becomes the mouth of one's own, the best of one's kinsmen, he who knows this.
2.22.10	The Asura Diirghaljihvi (Long-tongue) stole the morning Soma-pressing of the gods. The gods then knew it. They said to Mitra and Varuna, "Do you two remove this." They said, "So be it." They said, "Choose a boon from us." They chose this boon, that in the morning pressing they should have Payasya (milk-rice) and that they should be exempt from the Sviṣṭakrt (oblation). This is the boon that was chosen by them, because they removed it by means of her. Whatever was deficient in her, that became abundant for her, for they removed it by her.
2.23.1	The gods' offerings were not being held together. They saw these cakes and poured them out after the offerings for the holding together of the offerings. Then they were held together.
2.23.2	In that the cakes are poured out after the offerings, it is for the holding together (of the offerings). Thus they were held together.
2.23.3	The gods indeed placed them in front, hence the name Puròdasha.
2.23.4	They say: One should offer the Puròdasha oblations after the Soma-pressing. The oblation should be of eight potsherds at the morning pressing, of eleven potsherds at midday pressing and of twelve potsherds at third pressing. Thus the form of the pressings is so and the form of the metres is so.
2.23.5	Now, they should not be ignored. All these are offered to Indra. The Anusavana cakes are offered to Indra, therefore one should offer them in eleven potsherds.
2.23.6	They say, "If there is no anointing with ghee, one should eat of the cake from that place. For the protection of the Soma drink. For Indra killed Vritra with the thunderbolt of ghee."
2.23.7	Now, that (food) should not be disregarded. This is indeed an oblation, for it is well-cooked. This is indeed the drinking of Soma, for it is cooked. Therefore, one should eat it from wherever one gets it. All these offerings of food, viz. ghee, cooked rice, gruel, soup, cake, milk-rice, come to the sacrificer.
2.23.8	All the offerings come to him from all sides, who knows this.
2.24.1	He who knows the sacrifice as the row of oblations, attains the sacrifice as the oblations. The oblations are: the cooked rice, the gruel, the libation, the cake, and the milk-rice. This is the sacrifice as the line of oblations. He attains the sacrifice as oblations, who knows this.
2.24.2	He who knows the sacrifice as the row of syllables, and who succeeds in the sacrifice as the rows of syllables, he indeed succeeds in the sacrifice, the row of syllables. He who knows thus, succeeds in the sacrifice.
2.24.3	He who knows the sacrifice as the series of Narasamsa, prospers with the sacrifice as the Narasamsa series. The morning pressing is twice Narasamsa, the midday pressing is twice Naramasa, and the third pressing is once Narasamsa. This indeed is the sacrifice as the Narsamsa series. He prospers with the Narasamsa sacrifice who knows thus.
2.24.4	He who knows the sequence of the Savanas in the sacrifice, he prospers with the sacrifice having the sequence of the savanas. The animal is tied up on the Upavasatha day. The three Savanas are the animal. The animal is the sequence. This indeed is the sacrifice having the Savana sequence. He prospers with the sequence of the sacrifice who knows thus.
2.24.5	The oblations are offered in the order of Harivaṃ, Indra, Dhānas, Pūṣan, Karambha, Sarasvatī, Bharata, Parivāpa, Indra's cake.
2.24.6	The Rk and Sāman are the two horses of Indra.
2.24.7	Pashus is Pūṣan; Anna is Karambha.
2.24.8	Sarasvatī and Bharata are the same as speech and breath.
2.24.9	The Parivap is food, the Apup is food.
2.24.10	He goes to the world of those deities, to their union, to their likeness, to their world. He goes to the union of the best, he goes to the best, he who knows thus.
2.24.11	The Havir Agni Vihī is the Anusavan, the Purorasa Svishtakrit offers.
2.24.12	Avatsara, by means of this, approached the dear abode of Agni, and conquered the supreme world.
2.24.13	He who knows this goes to the dear abode of Agn, and conquers the supreme world. He who, knowing this, offers with this oblation-row, offers, and offers.
2.25.1	The gods, when they were drinking the Soma of King Soma, did not agree among themselves, saying, "I shall drink first," "I shall drink." When they were agreeing, they said, "Let us play a game of dice. He who wins shall drink first." They agreed. When they had started to play, Vayu was the first to reach the goal. Then Indra, then Mitra-Varuna, then the Asvins.
2.25.2	He knew that Indra would win. He followed him, saying, "Let us both win together." He said, "No." He said, "I will win alone." "Let us win together in the third." "He said, "No." He said, "Let us win together on the fourth." "Yes," he said. He won on the fourth. Indra became the fourth part, Vayu the third part.
2.25.3	Together with Indra and Vayu, they have risen up, together with Mitra and Varuna, together with the Asvins. These are their shares as they have risen up: first to Indra and Vayu; then to Mitra and Varuna; then to the Asvins.
2.25.4	This is the Indra-share that is taken when the Indra-Vayu libation is offered.
2.25.5	The Rishi, seeing this, recited: "Indra, the charioteer, has been driven by the Niyutvas."
2.25.6	Therefore even now the Bharatas, in the fourth, the collectors say, "By this very light, Indra, having become like a charioteer, conquered."
2.26.1	Those who are the two-deity deities are indeed the vital airs.
2.26.2	Speech and breath are Indra-Vayu, sight and mind are Mitra-Varuna, hearing and self are Asvins.
2.26.3	Some perform the Anushtubh verses in the Puronuvakya of this Indra-Vayu hymn and the Gāyatrī verses in the Yajya.
2.26.4	The Indra-Vayu cup is the union of speech and breath. I shall unite them as they are united in the metres.
2.26.5	That should not be disregarded. What is done at a sacrifice is defective if the Puronuvākyā is greater than the Yājyā. Where the Yājyās are greater, that is prosperous. And where they are equal, one should do it for that purpose. Herein, the Prāṇa and the Vāc have been obtained.
2.26.6	The Vāyavya is the Puronuvākyā, the Indra-Vāyavya the Yājyā. The Vāyavyā is the Prāṇa, the Vāyu being the Prāṇa; and the Indra-Vayavya is the Vāc, the Indra being the Vāc. He obtains that desire which is in the Prāṇa and the Vāc; he does not make the sacrifice uneven.
2.27.1	The two-deity offerings are taken in one vessel; hence the Prāṇas have one name. They are offered in two vessels; hence the Prānās are in pairs.
2.27.2	The Adhvaryu gives (the Soma) with the same Yajus with which the Hotṛ receives it.
2.27.3	This is Vasu, the many-treasured, here is Vasu, many-treasured; Vasu, many treasured, is in me. O Vasu, many treasures, protect my speech. He consumes the Indra-Vayu offering.
2.27.4	The voice has been invoked with the breath. May the voice invoke me with the breath. The divine sages, the guardians of the body, born of austerities, have been invoked for the body. May the divine sages, the body-guardians, born of austerity, invoke me for the body.
2.27.5	The Rishis are the vital airs, the divine ones, the protectors of the body, born of the body, of austerity. He thus invokes them.
2.27.6	"This is Vasu, the knower of wealth, here is Vasu, knower of wealth; may Vasu, knowers of wealth, protect my eyes. He eats the Maitrāvaruṇa cake. The eyes have been invoked along with the mind. May the eyes invoke me along with the mind." "The divine seers, the protectors of the body, born of Tapas, have been invoked. May the divine seers, protectors of the body and born of Tapas, invoke me." "The divine breathers are the seers, protectors, born of Tapas. He invokes them."
2.27.7	"This is Vasu, the possessor of wealth, the wealth-possessor here, the wealth-possessed in me, the wealth-holder. The hearer, protect my hearing." He consumes the Asvin (Soma). "The invited hearing, along with the self, may call me. The invited divine sages, the body-protectors, born of Tapas, may call me, the body-protector, born of Tapas." The divine sages are the vital airs, the body-protectos, born of Tapas. He thus invites them.
2.27.8	He eats the Indra-Vayu portion first. Therefore, the vital airs Prāṇa and Apāna are in front. He eats the Mitra-Varuna portion first. Therefore the eyes are in front. The Asvin portion is eaten all round. Therefore men and animals hear speech from all sides.
2.28.1	The two-deity sacrifices are the vital breaths. One should offer to the two-deity deities for the continuity and non-interruption of the vital breaths.
2.28.2	The two-deity offerings are the vital breaths; one should not offer the Vaṣaṭ-call after the two-deities.
2.28.3	If one were to offer the Anuvṣṭakāra for the two deities, one would establish the unstable vital airs. The Anuvṣṭkāra is indeed a stable (rite). If someone were to say to him, "You have established the unstable vital airs," he would be so. Therefore, one should not offer the Anuvṛṣṭakāra to the two deities.
2.28.4	They say, "The Maitrāvaruṇa recites twice, the Pratiprasthātṛ recites twice, and the Hotṛ recites once. What is the Hotṛ's recitation?"
2.28.5	The Pranas are the two-deity-sacrifices. The thunderbolt is the Hotr. If the Hotr were to offer the two-deities-sacrifices in between, the thunderbolt would destroy the sacrificer's life. If someone were to say to him, "The thunderbolt has destroyed the sacrificer' life," then it would be so. Therefore the Hotr should not offer the two- deities-sacrifices in-between.
2.28.6	Now, the mind is the sacrifice, the Maitrāvaruṇa is the speech, the Hotr is the sacrifice, speech speaks with the mind. Whatever speech one utters with a different mind, that speech is not bright, not pleasing to the gods. Whatever the Maitrāvaruņa recites twice, that is the Hotr's recitation.
2.29.1-3	The Rtu-offerings are the vital airs. When they perform the Rtu-offer- ings, they place the vital airs in the sacrificer. They offer six times to the seasons. They place the vital airs into the sacrificer. They offer four times to the seasons, they place the out-breath into the sacrificer.
2.29.4	Twice they offer to the seasons. They thus place the Vyana in the sacrificer above.
2.29.5	This breath is threefold, namely, Prāṇa, Apāna and Vyāna. When they offer to the season and to the seasons, it is for the continuity of the breaths and for the non-interruption of the breaths.
2.29.6	The Rtuyaajas are the vital airs. One should say "Svāhā" after the Rtuyaajas. The seasons are not fixed. Each one is alone.
2.29.7	If one were to recite the Anuvṣṭakāra for the seasonal offerings, one would establish the seasons which are not established. The Anuvṣṭkāra is indeed a settled (rite). If someone were to say to him, "You have established the seasons which are unsettled. There will be a bad harvest," it would be so. Therefore, one should not recite the Anuvșṭakāra for seasonal offerings.
2.30.1	The Pranas are the two-deity deities, the animals are Ida. Having eaten the two-deities, he invokes Ida. Ida is the animals. He invokes the animals. He places the animals in the sacrificer.
2.30.2	They say, one should eat Ida first, and then eat the Hotr's goblet.
2.30.3	The Hotr should first partake of the Avantya cup and then partake of the Hotr's cup.
2.30.4	Now, when he eats the two-deity offerings first, then his Soma-drinking is eaten first. Therefore one should eat the Avantara-cup first, and then the Hotr's cup. Thus he takes up the food on both sides. For the taking up of the food by the Soma-drinking.
2.30.5	The two-deity sacrifices are the vital breaths. The Hotr's cup is the self. The two-deities' sacrifices are the Hotr's cups. He pours them into the Hotr' s cup. Thus the Hotr pours the vital breaths into the self. For all life, for all life-span.
2.30.6	He who knows this attains all life.
2.31.1	The gods and the Asuras did the same things in the sacrifice. They were of equal strength and did not deviate. Then the gods saw this silent praise. The Asuras did not follow it. Silent praise is a silent offering.
2.31.2	The gods, when they were about to strike the Asuras with the thunderbolt, were discovered by them. Then the gods saw this silent hymn as the thunderbolt, and when they struck the Asuras with it, they were not discovered by them. They struck them with it, and killed them while they were still asleep. Then the gods became victorious, the Asuras were defeated.
2.31.3	He who knows this becomes the self of others, and his enemy, sin, becomes his foe.
2.31.4	The gods, thinking themselves victorious, performed the sacrifice. The Asuras approached them, saying, "We shall take away the sacrificial gifts from them." They saw them standing all around, in great numbers, and said, "Let us establish this sacrifice. Let the Asuras not kill our sacrifice." They said, "So be it." They established it silently, saying, "Agni is the earth, Agni is the light." They established it in the Ajyaprauga (verse), saying, "Indra is the light, the light is Indra." They established it at the Niskevalya and Marutvat (verses), saying, "The sun is the light, Surya is the light." Translation: The gods, thinking they were victorious, performed the sacrificial rite. The Asuras came to them, saying, “We will take away the sacrificial offerings from them.” They saw them standing around in great numbers and said, “Let us establish this sacrificial rite. Let the Asura not kill our sacrifice.” They said, “So be it.” They established it silently with the words, “Agni is the Earth, Agni is the Light.” They established it in Ajyapraugah (verse) with the words, "Indra, the Light, the Light is Indra." They performed it at the Nishevalya and Maruta verses with the words, "The Sun is the Light, the Sun is the Light." They performed it at Vaishvadeva and Agni-Marut verses with the words "The Sun is Light, the Sun Light." Having established it silently, they attained the goal without any harm.
2.31.5	Then indeed that sacrifice is completed when the Hotṛ recites the silent Sāmans.
2.31.6	If someone were to speak or utter a word to him while he is reciting the Sastras silently, he should say, "He will certainly meet with this calamity. Tomorrow we shall recite the Sastras for him silently. We shall establish him so that he may be able to perform his duties like one who has returned home. In the same way, he will be able to perform them now." He who knows this and speaks or utters a word while reciting the Sastra silently, certainly meets with that calamity. Therefore, knowing this, one should not speak or utter a statement while reciting the Sastra silently.
2.32.1	The Tushni-shansas are the eyes of the Savanas. "The eye of the morning Savana is Agni, the light, the light is Agni." "The eye of midday Savana is Indra, the light, light is Indra." "The eye at the third Savana is Surya, the light, Surya is the light."
2.32.2	He attains the worlds of the gods with the worlds of the eyes, he attains the heavenly world with the worlds of eyes, he who knows thus.
2.32.3	This is the eye of the sacrifice, that which is silently praised. The single truth is uttered in two ways. Therefore the single eye is twofold.
2.32.4	Now this is the root of the sacrifice, namely, the silent praise. If one should desire of him, 'May he be without a home,' then one should not praise the silent praise at his sacrifice. The sacrifice, indeed, is uprooted, and he who follows it is also uprooted.
2.32.5	They say, "The officiating priests are not pleased when the Hotṛ silently recites. The sacrifice is established in the officiating priests, and the sacrificer in the sacrifice. Therefore, one should recite, one should recite.
2.33.1	The Brahman is the invocation, the Kshatra is the Nidvida, the Vid is the Sukta. He invokes the Nidvida and then establishes the Sukta. Thus he unites the Kshatra with the Brahman. Having chanted the Nidvida, he chants the Sukta. The Nidvida is the Kshatra, the Sukta is the Vid. Thus he unites Kshatra with Vis.
2.33.2	If one wishes to weaken him with the Kshatra, one should recite the Sukta in the middle of this Nidhi. The Nidhi is the Kshatra. The Sukta is the Vritra. One weakens him with the Ksatra.
2.33.3	If one wishes to weaken a clan, one should recite a Nidhi in the middle of that Sukta. The Nidhi belongs to the Kshatra and the Sukta to the Vritra, one weakens it with the clan.
2.33.4	If one wishes that everything of his be as it was before, straightened and arranged, then one should call him, then offer a gift, then recite the hymn. That is the arrangement of everything.
2.33.5	Prajapati was the only one here in the beginning. He desired, "May I beget, may I be more." He practised austerity. He controlled speech. After a year he spoke twelve times. This is a twelve-fold arrangement. He spoke this very arrangement. All beings followed it.
2.33.6	The sage, seeing this, recited it in the form of a hymn: "The Creator, with his former intention, created these creatures, the subjects of Manu."
2.33.7	And when he places this hymn before the hymn, it is for propagation.
2.33.8	He who knows this is propagated with offspring and cattle.
2.34.1	"He recites, 'Agni is kindled by the gods.' Agni is indeed kindled by the gods, for the gods kindle him. He thus brings him to this world.
2.34.2	He recites, ‘Agni is kindled in the mind.’ Agni is indeed kindled in the mind, for men kindle him. He brings him to this very world.
2.34.3	Agni is the well-kindled one. He praises Agni as the well-kindler. Agni is Vayu. Vayu himself kindles himself. Vayu kindles everything that is here. Vayu extends the world of the atmosphere.
2.34.4	"The Hotri is surrounded by the gods," he says. The Hotri is indeed surrounded by the gods, for he is surrounded by the deities on all sides. He thus extends him to this world.
2.34.5	"The Hotri is encircled by men," he says. Agni is indeed encircled by men, for he is encircled by men on all sides. Thus he extends Agni to this world.
2.34.6	"The wind is the leader of sacrifices" - thus he praises. The wind is the leader (of sacrifices). When the wind blows, then the sacrifice takes place. Then the Agnihotra. Thus he extends the wind to the world of the atmosphere.
2.34.7	"He praises him as 'the charioteer of sacrifices.' He is indeed the charioteer of the sacrifices. For he moves like a charioteer. He thus extends him to this world.
2.34.8	He praises him as the 'unfailing Hotri.' Agni indeed is the unfailing Hotri. For no one can cross him transversely. He thus extends Agni to this world.
2.34.9	He praises him as "Tūrni, the bearer of oblations." Vayu is Tūrni, the carrier of oblations. Vayu is all this. He crosses it quickly. Whatever there is, Vayu carries oblations to the gods. He thus extends Vayu, the world of the atmosphere.
2.34.10	"May the god convey the gods" - thus he praises. This indeed is the god who conveys the gods. He thus brings him to this world.
2.34.11	"May Agni, the god, convey the gods" thus he praises. Agni indeed is the god here who conveys the gods to the sacrifice. He thus brings Agni to this world.
2.34.12	He makes the sacrifice, O Jātavedas, he praises. Vāyu is Jātavedā. Vāyu makes everything here that is here. He extends Vāyu itself to the world of the atmosphere.
2.35.1	For you, O god Agni, are the Anushtubh verses.
2.35.2	He wanders in the first foot. Therefore a woman's thighs wander.
2.35.3	Therefore the man joins the thighs. That is the pair. He makes it a pair in the Utkamukha (Sāman). For propagation.
2.35.4	He who knows this is propagated with offspring and cattle.
2.35.5	The first foot of the Anushtubh verse is "Pra vo devāy agnaye" (O Agni, for you, O Gods). He thus makes the thunderbolt more and more powerful. He then unites the latter foot. The thunderbolt is indeed the beginning, the end, and the middle. He thus strikes the thunderbolt at his hateful brother, at him who has concealed himself.
2.36.1	The gods and the Asuras fought for these worlds. The gods made their abode in the Sadas (the hall of assembly). They conquered the Sadas. They approached the Agnidhra (the priest in charge of the fire). They were not defeated from there. Therefore they observe fast at the Agnidhra. Not at the Sadas, for they placed it at the Agnidhrā. What they placed at the Agnidhara, that is the Agnidhra's Agnidhrahood.
2.36.2	The Asuras, the adversaries of the gods, extinguished the fires of the gods in the assembly. The gods then made the fires of the assembly blaze forth from the Agnidhra. With them they destroyed the Asura-protectors. In the same way the sacrificer now makes the fires of the Assembly blaze forth from the Agni-dhr. With them he destroys the Asura-protectos.
2.36.3	They won by means of the morning-libations. They came back. Because they won by means of morning-libations, they came back, therefore the morning-libation is called "ajya".
2.36.4	Of those Hotresses who are coming, who are conquering, the one called Aśāvakīya was the last. Indra and Agni were seated on that (Hotress). Indra and Agni are the strongest, the most powerful, the most enduring, the most excellent, the most capable of the gods. Therefore the Aśāvakas chant the Indra-Agni (Sūkta) at the morning pressing, for Indra and Agni were indeed seated on that (Sūkta).
2.36.5	Therefore, the other Hotr-priests go to the Sadas before him, and the Shavasaka goes last, for the inferior one goes after.
2.36.6	Therefore, the one who is a Brahman, a learned one, and powerful should perform the Shavasakiya for him, and he becomes successful.
2.37.1	The sacrifice is indeed a divine chariot, and the two ends of it are the two offerings of clarified butter. When he recites the Pavamāna hymn with clarified butter, he makes the two ends of the divine chariot move in the form of the two offerings of butter.
2.37.2	The two ends of the human chariot also move in the form (of the two offerings of) butter, for the sake of non-greed.
2.37.3	The chariot of the gods does not tempt him, nor the chariot of men, he who knows thus.
2.37.4	They say, "Just as the praise, so the hymn, the singers of the Pavamana hymns praise in the same way." The Hotṛ recites the Agniya offering. How do the Pavamana verses become recited?
2.37.5	He who is Agni, he is Pavamana.
2.37.6	This is also said by the sage, Agni is the sage Pavamana.
2.37.7	Thus, for one who is undertaking with the Agniyeeyi verses, the Pavamantya verses become prescribed.
2.37.8	They say, "Just as the Stotra is sung in the Gāyatrī verses, so the Sastra is sung in the Anushtubh verses. The Hotṛ recites the Ajya in the Anushtup. How do the Gāyatrīs become recited?"
2.37.9	One should say, "For prosperity."
2.37.10	These seven Anushtubh verses, three of them in the first and three in the last, make eleven. The Yajya is the Viraj, the twelfth. The metres are not completed with one syllable, nor with two. They are sixteen Gāyatrī verses.
2.37.11	Thus, indeed, he who is proceeding with Anushtubh, has the Gāyatrī prescribed for him.
2.37.12	Agni and Indra are the two who conquer the house of the giver. He offers to Agni and Indra.
2.37.13	Indra and Agni do not conquer each other. These two conquer each other. In that he offers to Agni and Inda, it is for the sake of conquest.
2.37.14	It is Viraj, consisting of thirty-three syllables. The thirty-three gods are the Vasus, the Rudras, the Adityas, Prajapati, and the Vasat call. He thus makes the deities partake of the syllables in the first Upakrama. The deities drink the syllables one by one. The deities are satisfied with the divine vessel.
2.37.15	They say, "Just as the weapon is (used) in battle, so the Hotṛ recites the Ajya-verse of Agni. Then why does he offer to Agni-Indra?"
2.37.16	Agni-Indra is the same as Indra-Agni. This hymn is Indra-Agni with the Graha and the silent recitation.
2.37.17	The Adhvaryu takes up the Indra-Agni cup with the verse, "Indra and Agni have come to the Soma pressed with the verses. They have come to the most desirable heaven. They drink it for the sake of the desired thought." The Hotṛ chants the silent praise with the verses, "Agni is the earth, Agni is the light, Indra is the light, the light is the earth, Indra is the sun, the light is Surya, the light is heaven." Thus the Yajyās are chanted in the same way as the Sastra.
2.38.1	He mutters the Hotr's formula, he sprinkles the semen.
2.38.2	He mutters in a low voice, for the sprinkling of semen is as it were in a low voice.
2.38.3	He muttters before the invocation, for whatever is above the invocation is indeed the weapon.
2.38.4	He invokes him sitting facing the opposite direction and with four feet. Therefore, having become facing the opposite direction, with four feet, they sprinkle the semen.
2.38.5	It is right, it is two-footed. Therefore, having become right and two-footed, they sprinkle semen.
2.38.6	He says, "Father, O Parjanya!" Parjanya is indeed the father, Parjanya is the father, Parganya is semen, he sprinkles semen.
2.38.7	"With unbroken feet, O Goddess!" Semen is indeed unbroken, for from it one is born unbroken.
2.38.8	The poets, reciting the flawless verses, are the Anucasanas. They are the poets. They generate this flawless seed. That is what he says.
2.38.9-10	Soma, the all-knowing, has brought the hymns; Brihaspati has sung the praises. The Brahman is Brihaspati, the Kshatra is Soma. The hymns and praises are the weapons of praise. He sings the hymns with both the divine Brahman and the divine Kshatra. These two indeed are the lords of all this creation.
2.38.11	Whatever he does without begetting by these two, that is not done. That is not done. They censure it, saying, 'It is not done.'
2.38.12	For him who knows this, what is done becomes done. What is not done does not become done.
2.38.13	He says, 'Speech is life, all-life, all-life.' Life is breath, breath is semen, speech is the womb. Having united with the womb, he pours semen.
2.38.14	"Who will proclaim this?" He says, "Prajapati will proclaim this." Prajapati is the one who generates. He says, "Who will generate?"
2.39.1	He recites the silent praise after being called. The semen that is deposited is transformed. First there is deposition, then transformation.
2.39.2	He recites the Upāṃśu and Tūṣṇiṃśaṃśa silently, for the impregnation of semen is like the Upāṃshu.
2.39.3	He recites the Tūṣṇīṃśaṃsa silently as if in a hole, for the semen is transformed as if in a pit.
2.39.4	He recitates the Tūṣnīṃśaṃṣa in six places, for man is sixfold, and the self is six-limbed. He thus transforms the self into the sixfold, six-limbed.
2.39.5	Having chanted the silent praise, he chants the Puroruc. That is the semen which is transformed and generates. Transformation is first, then generation.
2.39.6	He chants the Puroruca loudly. He generates it loudly.
2.39.7	He recites the Puroruc verses of twelve feet. The year has twelve months, the year is Prajapati, he is the progenitor of all this. He who is the progenitor of this all, he indeed generates him through progeny and cattle for propagation.
2.39.8	He who knows this, is generated through progeny and cattle.
2.39.9	He recites the Puroruca verse of Jātavedas. Jātavedā is the Anga.
2.39.10	They say that the third pressing itself is the abode of Jātavedas. But why does one recite the Puroruc verse to Jātavedā at the morning pressing?
2.39.11	Jātavedas is indeed the breath. He knows the extent of those who are born. Those who are born, he knows. Those who are not born, he does not know. What would they be? Or he who knows the self-purification of the ghee, that is well known.
2.40.1	He recites, "For you, O gods, to Agni." The breath is the "pra." All these beings follow the breath. He thus makes it abundant, makes it pure.
2.40.2	He recites, "The shining, the new." The mind is the "shining." There is nothing before the mind. He thus makes the mind abundant, makes it purified.
2.40.3	"He praises, 'May our shields be free from distress.' Speech is the shield. Therefore, when one speaks in accordance with speech, he says, 'May our means of protection be free from distress,' thereby he makes speech flourish, he makes speech prosper.
2.40.4	"O Brahman, do you proclaim to us the truth." The Brahman is the ear, for by the ear one hears the Brahman. The Brahman is established in the ear. He thus makes it flourish and cultivates the ear.
2.40.5	He praises him as the controller of these (vital airs). The Apana is the controller, for it is by the Apana that this (body) is controlled. The Prāṇa does not go beyond the Apana. He thus makes the Apana grow and develops it.
2.40.6	He who is truthful, whose truthfulness is praised by the two worlds, he who is truthful, his truthfulness is praised. He who of two disputing parties says, "I saw with my eyes," they believe him. He makes his truthfulness manifest, he makes his truthfulness perfect.
2.40.7	"Now do thou bestow on us a thousandfold, a progeny-bearing, a prosperity-bearing (gift). The Self is the whole, the thousandfold, the progeny-bearing, the prosperity-bearing. He thus makes the Self whole, makes the Self thousandfold, makes the Self progeny-bearing, makes the Self prosperity-bearing."
2.40.8	The Yajya is the offering, the Lakṣmī is the auspicious, he makes the auspicious Lakṣmī prosper, he makes the prosperous Lakṣmī flourish.
2.40.9	He who knows this, being composed of the Vedas, composed of the deities, composed of Brahman, composed of immortality, attains the deities. He who knows this.
2.40.10	He who knows that, as he is composed of the Vedas, composed of the deities, composed of Brahman, composed of immortality, he attains the deities. That is well known.
2.40.11	Thus is the Adhyatma. Now is the Adhidevata.
2.41.1	He recites the six-footed silent praise. The six seasons are the seasons. He creates them. He attains the seasons.
2.41.2	He recites the Puroruc verse with twelve feet. There are twelve months. He thus arranges the months and reaches the months.
2.41.3	He recites, "For you, O gods, to Agni." The space is the end. All these beings move towards the space. He thus arranges space and reaches space.
2.41.4	He praises him as the one who shines, the unequalled. Agni is the one who shines. There is nothing prior to him. He makes him (Agni) alone. He approaches him alone.
2.41.5	He praises him as the protector of our shields. Agni is the protector of shields. He bestows food. He makes Agni alone. He approaches Agni alone.
2.41.6	"O Brahman, do not be angry with us." He recites this. The Brahman is the moon. He thus makes the moon. He approaches the moon.
2.41.7	"He who is the leader of these." He recites thus. The leader is the wind. This is led by the wind. The sky does not fall. He thus makes wind. He approaches the wind.
2.41.8	"He praises him as 'the true one of heaven and earth', for heaven and earth are the Rodasi (heaven and earth). He thus establishes heaven and earth. He goes to heaven and earth.
2.41.9	"Do thou pour for us a thousandfold, for offspring, for nourishment, for wealth." With the last verse he concludes. The year is the whole, the thousandfold, the offspring, the nourishment, the wealth. He thus makes the year the whole, the offspring, nourishment, wealth. He attains the whole year.
2.41.10	He offers with the Yajya. The Yajya is the rain, the Vidhu is lightning. He thus bestows the rain, the food, on this (earth). He thus makes the lightning, he reaches the lightning.
2.41.11	He who knows this becomes one with the deity, becomes one with the gods.
3.1.1	The Prauga is the same as the Grahoktha. Nine Grahas are taken in the morning, nine hymns are sung in the Bahispavamana, and the tenth is taken in the Stoma-sastra. The tenth of the others is the Hinkara. Thus it is complete.
3.1.2	He recites the Vayu-sastra, thereby he becomes the Vayu-ukthavani.
3.1.3	He recitess the Indra-Vayu-sastra. Thereby he becomes the Indra-Vauyu-ukthavaniya.
3.1.4	He recites the Maitrāvaruṇa hymn. By that he is the Utkhavant of Maitrāvaruṇa.
3.1.5	He recites the Āśvina hymn. By that, he is the Uktkhavant of the Ashvins.
3.1.6	He recitates the Indra hymn. By that (he is) the Utkhavantau with Sukra and Ammani.
3.1.7	He recitaes the Vaishvadev hymn. By that the Aghayan is the Utkhavan.
3.1.8	He recitas the Sarasvat hymn.
3.1.9	There is no Graha of Sarasvat.
3.1.10	Those who are Sarasvati, the speech, and those who are grasped by speech, all of them are praised in the Uktha.
3.1.11	One becomes Ukthina (one who praises) if one knows this.
3.2.1	One obtains food by this, because in the Prauga, other deities are praised and other Ukthas are performed.
3.2.2	Other and other food is held in the Grahas for him who knows this.
3.2.3	This indeed is the most intimate of the sacrificer's hymns, namely the Prauga. Therefore they say that this is the most neglected of them, for by this the Hotri makes him pure.
3.2.4	He recites the Vāyavya (hymn). Therefore they say, "The wind is the breath, the breath is the seed, the seed is the first origin of man." When he recites the Văyavya (hvm), he sanctifies his breath.
3.2.5	He recites the Indra-Vayu (hymn). Where there is the breath, there is the out-breath. When he recites Indra-Vayu, he sanctifies his in-breath and out-breath.
3.2.6	He recites the Maitrāvaruṇa hymn. Therefore they say: "The eye of a man is the first to be born when he is born." When he recites the Maitravaruna hymn, he makes his eye whole.
3.2.7	He recites the Asvin hymn. Therefore they listen to a child when it is born and think: "It is listening, it is thinking." When he recitesthe Asvin hymn, he makes its ear whole.
3.2.8-9	He recites the Indra hymn, therefore they call a boy born (to be) Indra. He recites the Vaisvadev hymn, therefore a boy born moves about only later. The limbs are Vaisvadev, when he recites the Viasvadev hymn, he makes his limbs.
3.2.10	He praises Sarasvatī. Therefore, when a child is born, the lowest speech enters it. Sarasvatī is speech. When he praises Sarasvatī, it purifies his speech.
3.2.11	He who knows this is born and is born for all these deities, for all the praises, for all the metres, for all the Praus, for all the Savanas. And he for whom one who knows this sings this.
3.3.1	The Prauga is the praise of the vital airs; he praises seven deities, the vital airs in the head are seven, he thus places the vital airs in their proper place.
3.3.2	"What evil or good will the sacrificer suffer?" "He who is his Hotri," he said. "Here he should do as he wishes."
3.3.3	If one wishes to weaken someone by his breath, one should recite a verse or a foot of the Vāyu hymn for him. By that alone he is weakened, and by his breath he is weakened.
3.3.4	If one wishes, "May I weaken him through the vital breaths," one should recite the Indra-Vayu hymn for him, or add a verse or a foot. By that very (act) he weakens him. Through the vital breaths he weakens him.
3.3.5	If one wishes to weaken someone with his eyes, one should recite the Maitrāvaruṇa verse of him who is greedy, or one should recite a verse or a foot more. By that very thing he weakens him, and with his eyes he weakens him.
3.3.6	If one wishes, "May he be deprived of hearing," one should recite the Aśvin hymn for him, or add a verse or a foot. By that very thing, he is deprived. By that very hearing, he is deprived.
3.3.7	If one wishes to weaken someone by his energy, one should recite the Indra hymn of his (enemy) and add a verse or a foot. By that very (verse) he weakens him, and thereby weakens him by his energy.
3.3.8	If one wishes to weaken him with his limbs, one should recite the verse of the Visve Devas for him. One should recite a verse or a foot more. By that alone he is weakened. With his limbs he weakens him.
3.3.9	If one wishes to weaken someone's speech, one should recite a verse or a word of the Sarasvatī hymn, which is greedy. By that alone, one weakens it, and thereby weakens his speech.
3.3.10-11	If one desires, 'May he be prosperous with all his limbs, with his entire self', then one should recite the verses in the proper order. He prospers with all his limbs and with his entire self.
3.4.1	They say, "Just as the Stotra is sung, so the Sastra is sung by the Sāman-singers in the Agniyeys. The Hotṛ responds with the Vāyavy. How does it become a response to the Agniyeys?"
3.4.2	These are all the forms of Agni, namely, these deities.
3.4.3	When Agni burns like fire, that is his Vāyavy form. He responds to him with that.
3.4.4	Then, when he burns it as if in two parts, that is his Indra-Vayu form. He thus honours him with that.
3.4.5	Then, when he is pleased both above and below, that is his Mitra-Varuna form. He thus honors him with that.
3.4.6	Now, since Agni is terrible to touch, that is his Varuṇa form. When they worship him as terrible to touch, it is his Mitra form. By that he honors him.
3.4.7	Now when they churn him with two arms and two kindling woods, then he is the Asvin form of him, and he honours him with that.
3.4.8	And when he roars loudly, thundering, as it were, and burns, because beings are frightened of him, then he is his Indra form, and he honours it with that.
3.4.9	Now when they make him who is one, many, that is his Vaiśvadeva form, and by that he honours him.
3.4.10	And when he burns, as it were, speaking with a voice, that is his Sarasvatī form, and by it he honours him.
3.4.11	Thus, indeed, when one who is proceeding in the Vāyavya manner, is praised by the Stotriya with these three verses, he becomes praised by these deities.
3.4.12	Having praised the eulogy to the Viśve Devas, he offers to the Viśvedevas. Thus he pleases the deities according to their shares.
3.5.1	The Vasat-call is indeed the divine vessel. When he makes the Vasat-call, he satisfies the deities with the divine vessel.
3.5.2-3	He makes the Anuvṣat-offering. Just as one would again and again feed horses or cows, so also the deities are again and again fed when he makes the Anuvṛṣat-offering.
3.5.4	When he says, "O Agni, do thou take the Soma," and pronounces the Anuvṣṭakāra, thereby he pleases the Dhishnyas.
3.5.5	They say that the Somas are not consumed by those for whom the Anuvṣakāra is not pronounced. What is the Svishtakrit portion of the Soma?
3.5.6	When he says, "O Agni, do thou take the Soma," and pronounces the Vasat-call, then they consume the Soma that has been set aside. That is the Soma's Svishtakrit portion. He pronounces the Vasad-call.
3.6.1	This Vasat-call is indeed a thunderbolt. If one hates someone, he should think of him while pronouncing the Vasat- call. He places that thunderbolt on him alone.
3.6.2	He makes the offering six times, for there are six seasons; he thus establishes the seasons, he establishes the seasons, for all this follows the seasons, whatever this is.
3.6.3	He who knows thus stands firm.
3.6.4	Now indeed Hiranyadant Baiḍa said: "He establishes these six in this way: Heaven in space, space on earth, earth in water, water in truth, truth in Brahman, Brahman in austerity. These indeed are the established ones. All this which is here, whatever it is, follows the established ones.
3.6.5	"He makes the Vasat-offering with the word 'Vasat'. The Vasat-offering is indeed the seasons. He thus places him in the seasons, establishes him in the seasons. Whatever one does for the gods, the gods do for him in return.
3.7.1	There are three Vasat-offerings: the thunderbolt, the abode, and the empty.
3.7.2	The one to whom he offers the loud "Vasat!" is the thunderbolt.
3.7.3	He strikes him who is his enemy, his foe, the one who has hidden himself from him. He should offer the "Vasat!" to him who is his foe.
3.7.4	The one who is equal, continuous, and has a burning fire is the one who has the abode.
3.7.5	All creatures and cattle stand by him. Therefore, one who desires progeny or cattle should offer the Vasat-call.
3.7.6	But he who offers the Vasat-calls six times in succession becomes empty.
3.7.7	He impoverishes himself, he impoverishes the sacrificer. The one who offers the Vasāt-call becomes worse, the one to whom the Vasat-is offered becomes worse. One should not go to his house.
3.7.8	What is the good or bad of the sacrificer that he should be concerned with it? The one who is his Hotṛ-priest would be (concerned with it). Herein he should do as he wishes.
3.7.9	If one wishes that one who was born as a non-sacrificer should be born as a sacrificer, then as the Rk is recited for him, so he should pronounce the Vasat-call. He makes him similar.
3.7.10	If one wishes, "May he be worse," then one should recite his verse loudly and then offer the Vasat silently. One makes him worse.
3.7.11	If one wishes, "He may be better," then one should offer the Vasat loudly after reciting his verse silently. One places him in prosperity.
3.7.12	The recitation of the Vasat-call is continuous, for continuity.
3.7.13	He who knows this is united with offspring and cattle.
3.8.1	If the oblation is taken for a deity, one should meditate on that deity while performing the Vasat-invocation. One directly pleases that deity, and performs the sacrifice directly to the deity.
3.8.2	The Vasat-call is indeed a thunderbolt. It is hurled forth, not appeased, and it burns. Now, indeed, not all know the appeasement and the support of this. Therefore, even now, death is as if greater. Now, indeed this is its appeasement, this is its support. It is indeed speech. Therefore, having uttered the Vasat-call, one should recite the mantra "It is indeed speech" and it appeases him and does not harm.
3.8.3	"May Vasat not injure me, may I not injure Vasat. I invoke with the great mind, with the vital breath, the body. You are established. Go to the established. May I go to the established." One should recite the Vasat-verse thus.
3.8.4	Now indeed it is said: "This is the long, the firm, the powerful, the strength, the strength."
3.8.5	Thus one should recite the Vasatka-verse.
3.8.6	And the strength and the power are the two most beloved forms of the Vasat-call.
3.8.7	He thus makes him prosper with his own beloved form.
3.8.8	He who knows this prospers with his own beloved.
3.8.9	Speech and the two breaths, Prāṇa and Apāna, are the Vasat-call. They go out at each Vasat-call; one should recite after them: "Speech, strength, and strength in me, Prāṇa, Apāna." The Hotṛ thus establishes speech and the two breaths in himself, for all life, for all life.
3.8.10	He who knows this attains all life.
3.9.1	The sacrifice indeed fled from the gods. They sought it by means of the Prāṣaṇḍas. When they sought it by means means of the Prāsas, that was the Prāṣas's Prāṣaṇa-ness.
3.9.2	They proclaimed it by means of Purorucas. When they proclaimed it by means means Purorucas, that was the Purorucas's Puroruka-ness.
3.9.3	They found him in the Veda. That he was found in the Veda is the knowledge of the Veda.
3.9.4	They found him in the wealth (of the Veda) through the Grahas. That he was sought in the wealth ( of the Veda) through Grahas is the Graha-ness of the Grahas.
3.9.5	Having known it, they informed the Nivid-s. What they having known informed the Nivid, that is the Nivid's knowledge.
3.9.6	Indeed, one who desires much when he has lost much, or one who desires little, whichever of the two desires more, he alone of the two desires better.
3.9.7	He who knows the most recent injunctions, knows them best. For the injunctions are the most recent.
3.9.8	Therefore, standing low, one should give the injunction.
3.10.1-2	The Niviḍa verses are the embryos of the Uktha verses. Since they are placed before the Uktha verses at the morning pressing, therefore the embryos are placed in the reverse order. They are born in the reverse order.
3.10.3	Because they are placed at the end of the third pressing, therefore the foetus is born from below upwards for propagation.
3.10.4	He who knows this is born with offspring and cattle.
3.10.5	The Niviḍa is the most important of the Uktas. When they are placed before the Uktas at the morning pressing, it is as if one were to make the most important of them first. When they are in the middle at the midday pressing, it is like making the most important of it in the middle. When they are at the end at the third pressing, it is just as if one were making the most important at the end.
3.10.6	He who knows this shines forth with the splendour of the sacrifice in every direction.
3.11.1	The Niviḍa hymns are indeed the solar deities. When they are placed before the Upavasatha hymns, it is in the middle of the morning pressing, at the end of the third pressing. Thus they follow the vow of the sun.
3.11.2	The gods brought the sacrifice together from behind. Therefore the Niviḍa verses are recited from behind.
3.11.3	The gods, when they performed the sacrifice, made it out of that (horse), and therefore it is called a horse. Therefore they say, 'One should give a horse as a gift to the singer.' But indeed they give a boon.
3.11.4	One should not go beyond the place of the gift.
3.11.5	If one were to go beyond the place of the Nivida, one would create a gap in the sacrifice. If one were to create a gap in a sacrifice, the sacrificer would flow down and become more sinful. Therefore, one should not go beyond the place.
3.11.6	He should not step over the place of the Niviḍa. If he were to step over the place, the sacrificer would be deluded and would be ignorant. Therefore, one should not step over it.
3.11.7	He should not join the place of the Nivida. If he were so to join it, he would destroy the life of the sacrifice and the sacrificer would become short-lived. Therefore, one must not join it.
3.11.8	"This is Brahman, this is the Kshatra." These two are indeed united. For the sake of uniting the Brahman and the Kshatra, therefore the Brahman and the Kṣatra are united.
3.11.9	He should not recite more than three or four verses, for each verse is a step in the Niviḍa. The hymn is a verse. Therefore he should not recite more then three or four verses. For the praise is indeed in the Niviṭa.
3.11.10	He should place the Niviḍā at the third pressing, leaving out one verse.
3.11.11	If one were to leave two (cows) for the third pressing, one would injure the procreation and the offspring would be diminished. Therefore one should leave only one (cow) for the third Savana.
3.11.12	One should not go beyond the Niviḍa with a Sūkta.
3.11.13	If one were to go beyond the Nivid with a Sūktah, one should not return to it again. It is indeed a Vastu.
3.11.14	If it is another deity, then he should recite the appropriate hymn and offer it in that.
3.11.15	He recites the hymn "May we not go astray from the path" before the hymn.
3.11.16	One who is confused at a sacrifice goes astray from the path. "May Indra not go astray from Soma-offering" - thus he does not go astray from sacrifice.
3.11.17	"May the evil spirits not harm us." He thus removes the evil spirits.
3.11.18	"He who is the thread of the sacrifice, stretched out among the gods, may we obtain that offering."
3.11.19	The thread is indeed the offspring; he thus extends offspring to him.
3.11.20	"We invoke the mind with the Nārāśaṃsa Soma."
3.11.21	The sacrifice is indeed performed by the mind, it is done by the mind.
3.11.22	That itself is the atonement. Atonement.
3.12.1	The gods are to be imagined as being present at the sacrifice, they say. The Chhandas is to be established in the Chhandas. He calls out with the words "Shonasaum". At the morning pressing, he recites with the three-syllabled verse. The Adhvaryu responds with the five-syllabled "Shomdaivom". This becomes an eight-syllabled (verse). The Gayatri has eight syllables. Thus the Gayatri was established at the morning pressing.
3.12.2	Having praised the Udgitha, he says, "Udgitha is the speech." The Adhvaryu says, "Utkhasha." This becomes eight syllables. The Gayatri has eight syllables. It is thus that the Gayatri is established on both sides at the morning pressing.
3.12.3	"O Adhvaryu, let us sing" (thus) he calls out at midday with a six-syllabled (verse). The Adhvaryu responds with a five-syllabled verse. That becomes an eleven-syllabled one. The Tristubh has eleven syllables. It is the Tristubh that is arranged before and after midday. "Let us sing praise to Indra" (thus) one says after reciting. The Adhvaryus responds with a four-syllabled "O Ukthasah". That becomes an eleven syllable one. The Tristup has eleven syllables. That is the Tristub that is arranged before midday.
3.12.4	"O Adhvaryu, O Sosha, O Ansa!" thus he calls out at the third pressing with a seven-syllabled verse. The Adhvaryu responds with a five-syllabled "We praise the divine Savitar." Thus it becomes a twelve-syllabled (verse). The Jagati has twelve syllables. Thus the Udgitha was established before the third pressing. "O speech, to Indra and the gods!" thus he says after reciting the eleven-syllabled Udgitha. The Adhvaryu says "Om" which is one syllable. Thus it becomes a twleve-syllabled. The Jagati has twleve syllables. Thus the Udgiitha was established on both sides of the third pressing.
3.12.5	The sage, seeing this, recited:
3.12.6	"What is placed in the Gāyatrī, the Tristubh, or the Jagat, that is placed in the Jagatī. Those who know this attain immortality."
3.12.7	This indeed is the verse, he establishes it in the verse.
3.12.8	He who knows this establishes the divine classes.
3.13.1	Prajapati, having divided the sacrifice and the shares of the gods among the metres, allotted the Gayatri to Agni and the Vasus at the morning pressing, the Tristubh to Indra and the Rudras at midday, and the Jagati to the All-gods and the Adityas at the third pressing.
3.13.2	Now his own metre was the Anushtubh. He brought it to the Uddanta, and the Uddanta said to him, "Thou art indeed the most sinful of the gods, since I am thy own metre, and thou hast brought me to the Uddantas." He knew that, and brought his own Soma. He brought the Anushtubb to the front of his own Soma, and therefore the Anushtubha is the foremost and chief of all metres.
3.13.3	He becomes the foremost, he attains pre-eminence, he who knows this.
3.13.4	He himself created that for Soma. Therefore, wherever the sacrificer is in control, the sacrifice becomes established.
3.13.5	For that community, the sacrifice becomes well-established, where the sacrificer, knowing this, performs the sacrifice with control.
3.14.1	Agni was the Hotri of the gods. Death sat down in the Bahispavamana. He took up the Anushtubh oblation. He thus went round Death. He sat down in the oblation. He took up Prâga. He thus went around Death.
3.14.2	He (the Hotri) sat down at the midday Pavamâna, and obtained the Marutvatîya in the Anushtubh metre. He thus avoided death. At the midday Brihatîs he was unable to sit down. The Brihatîs are the vital airs; he was unable to obtain the vital airs. Therefore at the midday the Hotri obtains the Stotriya in the Brihatîs. The Brihatis are the vital airs. He thus obtains the vital airs.
3.14.3	He settled in the third Pavamāna (verse). He attained the Vaishvadev (verse) in the Anushtubh metre. He then went beyond death. He settled in the Yagnyagniya (verse). He then attained the Agni Marut (verse) in Vaishvānara (metre). He then went beyond Death. The Vaishvānariya (verse) is the thunderbolt, the Yagnyagnyiya (verse) is firm ground. By the thunderbolt he then pushes away death from the firm ground. He then overcomes all the snares, all the obstacles of death, and is liberated for good. He is liberated for good from the Hotṛ. He attains all life, for all life.
3.14.4	He who knows this attains the whole of his life.
3.15.1	Indra, having killed Vritra, thinking that there was no thirst, went to the farthest and most distant place. He went to the farthest place itself. The Anushtubh is the farthest place. Speech is Anushtubh. Having entered speech, he lay down. All beings, having divided him, desired him. The Pitrs found him on the previous day, the Devas on the next day. Therefore, on the previous day rites are performed for the Pitrs, and on the next day rites are performed to the Devas.
3.15.2	They said, "Let us drink it up. Then he will not come to the best." "So be it," they drank it up. "O Indra, come to this our chariot!" they turned him around. "This Soma, O Vasu, is pressed!" he appeared to them with the praise of being pressed. "Come here, O Indra!" they placed him in the middle.
3.15.3	He who knows thus, performs the sacrifice with Indra, and attains the sacrifice with Indra.
3.16.1	The gods, thinking that Indra, who was about to slay Vritra, would not be able to do so, all abandoned him, but the Maruts, his own friends, did not abandon him. The Maruts are the vital airs, and the vital airs did not abandon him, therefore he is the one who does not fall asleep, the one who sleeps, the hymn is praised for him, "May he sleep, with those who sleep."
3.16.2	If the Indra-verse is sung above, then everything is Marutvatīya. If the verse of sleep is sung, then it is of sleep with the verses of sleep.
3.17.1	He recites the verse of Brahmaṇaspati.
3.17.2	The gods, with Brihaspati as their priest, conquered heaven and the world in this world. In the same way the sacrificer, with Brihaspatī as his priest, conquers heaven and the world.
3.17.3	These two verses, though not sung, are sung again. They say, "What is not sung is not sung again. Why are these two verses sung again, though not sung?"
3.17.4	The Marutvatīya is indeed a Pavamāna hymn. He praises in six Gāyatrī verses, six Brihatī verses and three Tristubh verses. This is the Pavamāna hymn of the midday pressing, consisting of three metres and fifteen verses. They say, how does this Pavamāna hymn consisting of three metres, fifteen verses and the midday pressing become praised?
3.17.5	Those who are the subsequent verses of the Gāyatrī, and the Gāyatrīs that follow the Gāyatri, by them his Gāyatrīs are prescribed. By these two Gāyatrī verses, his Brhatī verses are prescribed.
3.17.6	In these Brihatis, the Sāman-singers sing again the Raurava and Yaudhajayas. Therefore, these two Pṛthagāthās, though they are in the main text, are sung again. Thus the Stotra is followed by the Sastra.
3.17.7	Those who are the two Tristubhs, the Tristubha Niviḍdhāna, by them his Tristubhs are followed.
3.17.8	Thus indeed, the Madhyandina Pavamana becomes the Trichandas, the fifteenth, for him who knows thus.
3.18.1	He recites the Dhayyas.
3.18.2	Prajapati, desiring this and that, created these worlds with the Dhayyas.
3.18.3	In the same way, the sacrificer, with the Dhayya verses, nourishes these worlds, whatever desire he may desire. He who knows this, and the Dhayya (verses).
3.18.4	Wherever the gods found a gap in the sacrifice, they filled it with the Dhayyas. That is why the Dhayyas are called Dhayya.
3.18.5	One who knows this, and who offers with a faultless sacrifice, becomes blessed.
3.18.6	The stitches of the sacrifice are the Dhayyas. Just as one would sew a garment with a needle, so does one who knows this, who offers with a sacrifice that has no fault, become blessed.
3.18.7	These are indeed the hymns of the Upasads. "The first Upasad is dedicated to Agni, with the words, "Agni leads the way." Its hymn is, "Thou, O Soma, with thy wisdom." The second Upasad is for Soma, with the words "Thou, O Agni, art the Soma-presser." Its hymn is "Thou, O Indra, art the Soma presser." The third Upasad is to Vishnu, with the words "Thou, O Agni art the Soma-preserver." Its hymn is "The waters swell."
3.18.8	He who knows this and who, knowing this, recites the Dhayyas, conquers the world which one conquers by performing the Soma sacrifice.
3.18.9	Some say: "One should recite the Mahas. We have heard that this is being recited among the Bharatas."
3.18.10	One should not pay attention to that.
3.18.11-12	If the lord of rain were to curse, one should recite this: "The waters swell." One should recite this: "The waters swell."
3.18.13	The Maruts are the place of rain. The Maruts are called the Maruts. They do not lead to the wrong path. What is like the controlled is like the controlled. What is like what is controlled is like what is valiant. What is like that which is valiant is like the Vaisnava horse. Indra is the horse. There are four places in this: the place of rain, the Marut, the Vaisnava, and the Indra.
3.18.14	Now this (cow) is the share of the third pressing, and is recommended at midday. Therefore the cattle of the Bharatas, having been in the evening pen, come to the midday pen. It is the Jagati (metre), for cattle are indeed the Jagati. The midday is the Self of the Sacrificer. Thus he places the cattle in the Sacrificer.
3.19.1	He recites the Marutvatīya Prathā. Maruts are cattle, Prathā is cattle. For the securing of cattle.
3.19.2	He recites the Sukta beginning with "The born, fierce, for the strong, for the swift." This Sukta is indeed the begetting of the sacrificer. By this he begets the sacrificer from the sacrifice on the divine womb.
3.19.3	It becomes a victory. He conquers both ways.
3.19.4	This is the Gaurīvitti. Shaktya of Neidhistam went to the world of heaven. He saw this hymn and conquered the world of heaven with it. In the same way, the sacrificer conquers the world of heaven by this hymn.
3.19.5	Having chanted half of it, he places the Nivita in the middle, leaving the other half.
3.19.6	The Nivita is indeed the growth of the world of heaven.
3.19.7	Now, this is the ascent to heaven, namely, the Nivita. One should recite it as if ascending it. It would be as if the sacrificer were being held back. One should recite the Nivita for one who desires heaven.
3.19.8	Now, if one who is attacking should desire, 'May I slay the people with the nobility', then he should recite the Niviḍa-hymn three times. The Niviḍa is the nobility, and the hymn is the people. With the nobility he slays the people.
3.19.9	If one should desire, 'I may slay the nobility with the people', then he should thrice recite the hymn with the Niviḍas. The Nivi is the nobility, the hymn is the peoples. With the people he slays the nobility.
3.19.10	He who desires to encircle him on both sides with the clans, should recite the two verses in reverse order. Then he encircles him on both sides.
3.19.11	This is for one who is practising sorcery. Otherwise, for one who desires heaven.
3.19.12	He recites the verse "The birds of prey have approached Indra" with the last verse.
3.19.13	The sages of Prajamedha have not been defeated.
3.19.14	"Remove the darkness," with this one should go mentally to that which one thinks is covered by darkness. Indeed, that is removed from him.
3.19.15	"First the eye," one should rub the eyes.
3.19.16	One who knows this becomes one with the eye and immortal.
3.19.17	"He has freed us from the noose, as if we were bound in a pit." The noose is a pit. He has freed us from it, as if we had been bound in a noose. That is what he means.
3.20.1	Indra, about to slay Vritra, said to all the deities, "Stand by me, call me." They said, "So be it." They ran to him to slay him. He said, "They are running to slay me. Frighten them." He breathed on them. The gods, being frightened by his breath, ran away. The Maruts did not leave him. They said to him, "Strike, O Blessed One, slay, be victorious." They stood by him, speaking this speech. The Rishi saw this and recited, "The gods, being frightened, left you, Vritra, as you breathed. Your friends are the Maruts. May your friendship with them be so. Then may you conquer all these armies." He knew, "These indeed are my advisers. They desired me. They have shared these praises among themselves." He shared them among them in this praise. Then both of them became the sole owners of the praises.
3.20.2	He takes up the Marutvatīya cup, sings the Marutvatlya Prastara, sings the Marutavatya Sūkta, places the Marutvatya Nivida, that is the share of the Maruts.
3.20.3	Having sung the Marutvattya Uktha, he offers with the Marutvattyā. Thus he pleases the deities according to their shares.
3.20.4	Those who have grown in the Ahīhuti, O Maghavan, those who in the Śāṃbara, those who in Hariva, those who in Gavishta, those who now rejoice in thee, O Brāhman, Indra drinks Soma with the Maruts and his retinue.
3.20.5	Wherever he has conquered with them, wherever he has performed heroic deeds, that he now makes known to them, and makes them drink Soma with Indra.
3.21.1	Indra, having slain Vritra, said to Prajapati, "I have become that which you are, I have become great." Prajapati said, "Then who am I?" He said, "What you have said." Then who became Prajapati? Who became Prajapati, since Indra became great? That is the greatness of Maheendra.
3.21.2	He became great and said, "Deliver me." Just as one wishes today, he who becomes and attains supremacy becomes great. The gods said to him, "Speak yourself what will be yours." He said this Mahendra cup, the midday session of the sacrifices, the sole of the hymns, the Tristubh metre, the back of the Samaveda, the gods delivered him.
3.21.3	They carry him up to the highest heaven, who knows thus.
3.21.4	The gods said to him, "You have told us everything. May we have a share in it?" He said, "No." They said, "How can we have a share?" He said, "Let there be a share for us, O Maghavan." He looked at them.
3.22.1	The gods said, "This is Indra's beloved wife. She is called Vāta-prasahā. We shall desire her." "So be it." They desired her. She said to them, "I shall speak to you tomorrow." Therefore women desire their husbands. Therefore a woman desires her husband for one night. They approached her in the morning. She did this only.
3.22.2	The one who is the most excellent of men, the one who is the best of men, the Indra who has many names, the one who has many names. He is the lord of the strong, the lord of the powerful.
3.22.3	Indra is the lord of those who are strong, the lord who is powerful.
3.22.4	He said, "If I am able to do it, then do it." He said, "Do it." He said this to them.
3.22.5	The gods said, "Let her be here too, she who does not know us in this world." They did so.
3.22.6	Therefore she is praised here too. "What is the most ancient, before the month of Āṣāḍha?"
3.22.7	The army or the wife of Indra, called Prāsaha, is the daughter-in-law. Who is the father-in-law? Prajapati. If the army of the one who desires to win should stand at half of that, cutting the grass on both sides, and should attack the other army, saying, "Who sees you, Prāsaha?" Just as a daughter-in-one is ashamed of her father-in- law and hides herself, so that army, being divided, hides itself. Where the one who knows this cuts the grass on both side and attacks the other army, "Who sees thee, Prāsahat" 
3.22.8	Indra said to them, "Let there be yours here also." The gods said, "The Viraj is the oblation for the one who is exclusively devoted to the thirty-three-syllabled (Viraj)."
3.22.9	The thirty-three gods, the eight Vasus, the eleven Rudras, the twelve Adityas, Prajapati, and the Vasat-call are the deities who receive the syllables. He makes each syllable. The deities drink it in turn. The deities are satisfied with the divine vessel.
3.22.10	If one desires (a person) to be without a home, one should offer to him with the Gayatri or the Tristubh or any other metre, saying "Vasat!" One makes him without a home.
3.22.11	If one desires (a man) to have a home, one offers to him with the verse, "Drink Soma, O Indra, may it delight you." One makes him with a home.
3.23.1	The Rk and the Saman were at first one. The Rk was called Sa, the Saman Amo. The Rk said to the Saman, "Let us be united for the sake of offspring." The Saman said, "No." The Rk said, "The Saman is greater than I am in greatness." They became two and spoke together. They did not agree. They became three and spoke together. By means of the three they became united. By means of three they became united, therefore they praise with three, they sing with three, for the Saman is united with three. Therefore a man has many wives, but a woman does not have many husbands. When the Sa and the Amo became united, that became the Saman. That is the nature of the Saman.
3.23.2	He who knows this becomes the Sama.
3.23.3	He who becomes the best, he becomes the Sama. For they censure one who is not the Sama.
3.23.4	They became the five and then became the five. The Ahavas, the Hinkara, the Prastara, the first verse, the Udgiatha, the middle verse, the Pratihara, the last verse, the Nidhana, and the Vasatkara.
3.23.5	When they became five and then became five again, therefore they say, "The sacrifice is fivefold, the animals are fivefold."
3.23.6	When they became united with Viraj and Dasini, therefore they say "The sacrifice is established in Viraj and Dasinī."
3.23.7	The Stotriya is the Self, the Praja is the Anurup, the wife is the Dhayyā, the cattle is the Pragātha, the houses are the Suktam.
3.23.8	He who knows this dwells in this world and the other world with his progeny, cattle and houses.
3.24.1	He recites the Stotriya. The Stotriya indeed is the Self.
3.24.2	He recits it in the middle voice. He thus purifies the Self.
3.24.3	He praises the Anurūpa (hymn) in accordance with the Anurūpā (hymn). The Anurūpa is in accordance with the subjects.
3.24.4	The Anurūpa should be praised higher and higher. He makes his own subjects better.
3.24.5	He praises the Dhayyā (hymn) for the wife is the Dhayyā.
3.24.6	The Dhayyā should be praised lower and lower.
3.24.7	The wife of the defendant becomes a wife in his house, where the learned one praises the low-born one thus.
3.24.8	He praises the Pragaatha.
3.24.9	He should be praised with a melodious voice. Animals are the melodious voice, animals are the Pragaatha, for the attainment of animals.
3.24.10	He praises with the verse, "I shall proclaim the deeds of Indra."
3.24.11	Now this is the dear abode of Indra, the sole, the golden stupa. By this hymn, the Angiras Hiranyastupa attained the dear abode of the Indra, and conquered the supreme world.
3.24.12	He who knows this goes to the dear abode of Upeendra, and conquers the supreme world.
3.24.13	The house is the foundation. The Sūkta is the foundation. It should be praised with the most established speech. Therefore, even if one obtains cattle from afar, one should go to the houses. The house is the cattle's foundation. The foundation.
3.25.1	Soma, the king, was in the world beyond. The gods and the sages studied him, saying, "How can this Soma, the king go to us?" They said, "You bring this Soma, the King." They said, "Yes." Having become Suparna, they flew up. Because they flew up having become Suparna is the reason why it is called Sauparna. Those who know the story say this.
3.25.2	The metres, indeed, were the Soma-juice, the king, moving about. They then had four syllables. The metres had four syllables. Then the Jagati, having four syllables, fell down first. Having fallen down, it went half the distance and became exhausted. It fell down, having become one syllable, taking away the consecration and austerity. It again fell down. Therefore, the consecration and austerity are known to be of it. He who has cattle has wealth. Cattle are indeed the Jagati. It brought them.
3.25.3	Then the Tristubh metre fell down. Having fallen, it went again half the distance and became tired. It lost one syllable and became three-syllabled. Taking the Dakshina, it again fell down. Therefore, at midday, the Dakshina is taken. The Tristubh is in the world of the Tristubh. It brought them.
3.26.1	The gods said, "You bring this Soma-king." She said, "So be it." They said, "You all should recite the Gayatri verse for her with all the auspicious rites." They said, "So be it." She went up. The gods recited the Gayatri verse with all the auspicious rituals for her. "Preti ceti ceti" - this is all the auspicious rites. One for whom this is dear, one should recite this for him. He goes well and returns well.
3.26.2	Having fallen, she frightened Soma-pāla and seized King Soma with her feet and mouth, and also seized the syllables of the other hymns that were not mentioned.
3.26.3	Then Soma-pāla, the son of the Sun, cut off the right foot of her, and that became the Salya. From that she flowed like a foot, and she became the Vasha. From that she became the Havi. The Salya that was, became the serpent. The army that was, became a snake. The leaves that were, became the Manthavala. The bath that was, became Gandopada. The ointment that was, became Andhahi. That became the arrow.
3.27.1	Whatever she grasped with her right foot, that became the morning pressing. That is the Gāyatrī. It made its own abode. Therefore they consider it the most prosperous of all the pressings. He becomes the foremost, the chief, the best, he attains supremacy, he who knows thus. And whatever she grasped with her left foot, that became midday pressing. That slipped away. It did not reach the earlier pressing. The gods then desired to know that. In that they placed the Tristubh metre, Indra the deity. By that it became equal in strength with the earlier pressing. He who knows thus, attains equality in strength with both pressings, equality in attainment, by the two. And whatever she seized with her mouth, that became the third pressing.
3.27.2	The Soma juice that was flowing down from it, did not reach the daughter-juice. At the first pressing, the gods sought to know it. They saw it in the animals. In that they pour down the Aśira, and perform with the animal and the clarified butter, thereby it became of equal strength with the two former pressings.
3.27.3	He who knows this, succeeds in all the sacrifices, in all the rites, in all the seasons, in all the months, in all the days, in all the times, in all the sacrifices. He who knows this, prospers in all the sacrifices.
3.28.1	They, the other two, approached Gāyatrī, but they did not know the syllables in the order of the wealth. "Gāyatrī said, "No!" "It is only as wealth." They went to the gods with the question. The gods said, "It is only in the order of wealth." Therefore even now they say in the case of wealth, "It is in the order of only wealth." Then Gāyatrī became eight syllables, Tristubh three syllables, and Jagatī one syllable.
3.28.2	The Gāyatrī with eight syllables was unable to rise up to the morning pressing. The Tristubh with three syllables was unable to arise to the midday pressing. The Gāyatrī said, "Let there be a place for me here also." She said, "So be it." The Tristubh said, "Let us join together with these eight syllables." She said, "So be it." She joined together with her. That is the midday of the Gāyatrī, which is the northern Pratipada of the Marutvatīya and the Anucharas. Having become eleven syllables, she rose up to the midday pressing.
3.28.3	The Gāyatrī could not raise the third pressing, which consists of one syllable. She said to the Jagatī, "Let there be a place for me here also." She said, "So be it." The Jagatī said, "Let us join together with eleven syllables." She said, "So be it." They joined together. That is the third pressing of the Gāyatrī. The first syllable of the Vaisvadev pressing is the Jagatī. The last syllable is the Anusvara. It becomes twelve syllables and raises the third pressing.
3.28.4	Then the Gayatri became eight-syllabled, the Tristubh eleven-syllabled and the Jagati twelve-syllabled.
3.28.5	He who knows this, succeeds in all the metres, in all the powers and in all the Jāmis.
3.28.6	One indeed, that became three. Therefore they say, "One should give to one who knows this." For one indeed, that became threefold.
3.29.1	The gods said to the Ādityas, "We shall perform this pressing for you." They said, "So be it." Therefore the third pressing is begun with the Ādityās. The Āditya-graha is at the beginning.
3.29.2	He offers with the verse, "The Ādityas and Aditi are pleased." The form of the third pressing is that of intoxication.
3.29.3	He does not offer the Anuvṣṭakāra, nor does he partake of the oblation. The Anuvṣṭkāra is a settled rite, and the partaking of the oblation is a settled rite. The Ādityas are the vital airs. He should not settle the vital airs.
3.29.4	The Ādityas said to Savitar, "We shall undertake this pressing with you." He said, "So be it." Therefore the first step is Savitri. The Savitri cup of the Visve Devah is taken first. He offers with the verse, "Savitar, the divine, the desirable, is the giver of wealth." With a verse containing the word "mad" and with a form similar to that of the Madhuvatī verse. The form of the third pressing is similar to that of Madhuvatī. He does not perform the Anuvshaṭ-karana or partake of the Anuvshak-offering. The Anuvshak is a cessation. The Anuvshāk-offering is a cessation. Savitar is the life-breath. He does not want to make the life-breath a cessation.
3.29.5	Now, Savitr drinks both the Savanas, the morning Savana and the third Savana. Therefore, the place of the Savitri offering is in front of the drinking (of Soma). The place of the Madhuvati offering is above. Thus he shares him in both the Savanas - the morning Savana as well as the third Savana.
3.29.6	Many Vāyu-hymns are sung in the morning, one at the third pressing; hence the upward-going breaths of man are more than the downward-going ones.
3.29.7	He recites the Dyāvāpṛthivi hymn; heaven and earth are the support; this one is the support here, that one is the support there. In that he recites the Dyava-pṛthivi (hymn), he establishes him in the supports.
3.30.1	He praises the Arbhava (Sutra).
3.30.2	The Rishis, by their austerities, won the Soma-drink among the gods. They wanted to speak at the morning pressing. Agni, with the Vasus, followed them from the morning pressing. They wanted to say something at the midday pressing. Indra, with the Rudras, followed them from midday pressing. They wanted something to say at the third pressing. The All-gods did not follow them. They said, "They will not drink here, they will not drink here." Prajapati said to Savitar, "These are your pupils. You yourself drink with them." He said, "So be it." Savitar said, "You drink them both ways." Prajapati drank them both ways.
3.30.3	These two verses, not mentioned in the Veda, are to be recited at the Prajapati-rite. They are to be recited for the sake of the Surupa-krina (the one who makes the beautiful) and for the sake of Vena. "The one with the tawny embryo has been urged by this one." Prajapati himself drinks them on both sides. Therefore, the best one shines in the vessel. He shines on whom he desires.
3.30.4	The gods were afraid of them, because of the smell of men. They put them in between the mother and the father.
3.31.1	He recites the Vaisvadevam (hymn).
3.31.2	Just as the people are so is the Vaishvadev (offering). Just as the people have a boundary so do the Sūkta hymns. Just as the forests are so are the Dhāyyā verses. Therefore, they are called the Dhāyyās on both sides. Therefore, they (the Dhāyyās) are in the forests and not in the forests. There are animals and birds. This is what is said.
3.31.3	Just as the Purusha is the most important of all beings, so the Visvadev is the most important among the hymns. Just as the limbs are the most important parts of the body, so the hymns are the most important among them. Just as the joints are the most important of the limbs, so the Dhayyas are the most important. He calls the Dhayyas from both sides. Therefore the joints of the Purusha are loose, but firm, for they are held by the Brahman.
3.31.4	The root of the sacrifice is the Dhayya and the Yajya. If they were to make the Dhayya different from the Yajya, they would make the sacrifice rootless. Therefore they should be the same.
3.31.5	This is the praise of the five classes of beings, namely, the gods, men, Gandharvas, Apsarases, serpents, and the Pitrs. This is the praise for all these five classes of beings.
3.31.6	All the five classes of people know him. Those who know this go to the five classes of men for their offerings.
3.31.7	Now, he who recites the Vaishvadev hymn is the Hotṛ of all the deities. One who is about to recite should meditate on all the directions. He thus places the essence in all the directions.
3.31.8	If there is someone whom he dislikes in any direction, he should not meditate on that direction. He thus takes away the strength of his enemy.
3.31.9	"Aditi is the sky, Aditi is the atmosphere." Thus he places her with the highest (verse). This is Aditi, this is the sky, this is the atmosphere.
3.31.10	"Aditi is the mother, he is the father, he is the son." This is the mother, this is the father, this is the son.
3.31.11	"All the gods are Aditi, the five people." All the gods are in this, the five people are in this.
3.31.12	Aditi is born, Aditi is the generator. This is born, this is the generator.
3.31.13	He places it twice at the back. Animals have four feet. For the securing of animals. Once in half-verses. For the sake of stability. Man is stable in two ways. Animals have four legs. He thus establishes the sacrificer who is stable in two forms in animals who have four legs.
3.31.14	He should always offer it with the five-fold offering, touching the ground. He should offer it on the ground on which he has collected the sacrificial materials. Thus he establishes it at the very end.
3.31.15	Having chanted the eulogy to the All-Gods with the words "May all the gods hear this invocation," he offers to the All-Devas. Thus he pleases the deities according to their share.
3.32.1	The first is offered to Agni with ghee, the second to Soma with Soma, and the third to Vishnu with ghee. "The verse "O Soma, in consultation with the fathers..." is offered to Soma with the fathers."
3.32.2	When they press the Soma, they kill it. They make this offering to it as a means of protection. The Soma offering is made to the Pitrs as a means of protecting them. Therefore one offers to the Soma with the Pitrs as the deity.
3.32.3	When they pressed the Soma, they killed it. They now restore it.
3.32.4	Again they are nourished by the form of the Upasads. Indeed, the form of the Upaṣads is that these deities Agni, Soma, and Vishnu.
3.32.5	Having accepted the Soma, the Hotṛ should look towards the east from the Chāndogas.
3.32.6	Now some take it before the Chandogas. One should not do so. The Vasat-utterer is the first to eat all the food. So said (the Veda). In that very form, therefore, the Vasat-utterers alone should look before and then take it from the Chandogas.
3.33.1	Prajapati, indeed, desired his own daughter. Some say that it was heaven; others say that it was Ushas. He approached her in the form of a lion, and she in the form of an antelope. The gods saw him and said, "Prajapati is doing what should not be done." They desired him, saying, "He who will be able to stop him, let him do so." They did not find him in each other. Among them, those who were the most terrible in form, they collected together in one place. Those collected ones became this god. That is his name "Bhūtavan".
3.33.2	He who knows this name of him becomes that.
3.33.3	The gods said to him, "This is indeed Prajapati. He has created what was not created. Direct him." He said, "So be it." They said, "Choose a boon from us." He said, "Choose." He chose this very boon, lordship over animals. That is his name, "Pashuman."
3.33.4	He who knows this name of it becomes possessed of cattle.
3.33.5	He (the hunter) came up to him and struck him. The struck one fell upwards. They call him the deer. He who is the deer-hunter, he alone is the deer. What is the red one, that is the red one. What is the arrow, that is the arrow.
3.33.6	That seed of Prajapati, when it was sprinkled, ran away. It became a lake. The gods said, "This is the semen of Prajapati. It has been spoiled." Because they said, "This semen of Prajapatı has been spoiled," it became Madusha. That is the reason for the name Madusha. That which is human is Madusha. They call it human, indirectly, because the gods love indirectness.
3.34.1	They enclosed it with Agni, the Maruts shook it, Agni did not open it. They enclosed it with the all-pervading Agni, the Marutas shook it, Agni all-pervader opened it. What first blazed forth from its seed, that became the sun. What was the second, that became Bhṛgu. Varuna seized him. Therefore that Bhṛgu is Vāruṇi. What third blazed forth, that became the Ādityas. Those who were the embers became the Angiras. What again blazed forth when the embers were extinguished, that became Brihaspati.
3.34.2	The animals which were of a dark colour became black; those which were of a reddish colour became red; and the ashes which were there became the grey colour. The animals which were white became white; the animals which were tawny became tawny; the animals which had a variegated colour became variegated; the animals which became of a reddish colour are the animals which are of a reddish colour.
3.34.3	The god then addressed them, saying, "This is mine, this is mine." They then addressed him with this verse, which is praised in the Rudra hymn:
3.34.4	"May your friendship with the Maruts come to me, O father. Do not separate us from the sight of the sun. You are our hero, you should be patient in the battle."
3.34.5	Thus one should say. The god is not angry, and his subjects are not angry.
3.34.6	One should say, "May we be born with Rudra's subjects." One should say, "Not with Rudra." To avoid this name.
3.34.7	He should recite the verse, "May that be auspicious for us," understanding it as "May there be peace." For peace from all men and women and cattle. Men are males, women are females. For peace from all.
3.34.8	It is the unuttered Rudra, peaceful, for all life, for all life.
3.34.9	He who knows this attains all life.
3.34.10	He recites the Gayatri verse. The Gayatri is indeed Brahman. He thus pays homage to Brahman with Brahman.
3.35.1	He proceeds to the Agni-Marut hymn with the Vaisvantarī verse. Vaisvantar has indeed deposited the semen in the east. Therefore, one proceeds to the Agni Marut hymn with the Visvantarī verse.
3.35.2	One who recites the Agni-Marut hymn crosses the Agni-s with the breath itself.
3.35.3	If one is studying and is about to be harmed, one should desire another reciter. Having made a bridge of that, one crosses.
3.35.4	Therefore, the Agni-Marut should not be recited separately.
3.35.5	He recites the Marut hymn. The Maruts indeed are the wind that blows and scatters the semen deposited. Therefore, he recites the Maruta hymn.
3.35.6	The Yajnas, the Yajnas, to Agni, the god who gives wealth. He recites the middle Yoni and Anurup. In that he recites the middle and Anurup, therefore the middle Yoni is held.
3.35.7	In that he recites two Suktas and then recites, he places the two foundations above for procreation for propagation.
3.35.8	He who knows this is born with offspring and cattle.
3.36.1	He praises the one who knows all.
3.36.2	Prajapati created the creatures. When created, they went away and did not return. He went around them with Agni. They returned to Agni. They still return to him. He said, "The creatures were created by this." Because he said, "The beings were created by this," it became Jātavedas. That is the Jātavedasa-ness of Jātavedā.
3.36.3	They were enclosed and restrained by Agni, standing there lamenting and grieving. He sprinkled them with water. Therefore, above the Jātavedas, he recites the Apōhiṣṭhya hymn.
3.36.4	Therefore, he pacifies it. The hymn should be recited. Having sprinkled them with water, he became silent.
3.36.5	In them he placed the lustre of the serpent, the unseen Garhapatya Agni. For this is the serpent, the Garhapatya fire. By means of the Garhapaty fire he placed the lustre in them, unseen. Therefore they say, "He who offers is better than he who does not offer."
3.37.1	The wives of the gods are praised, the wives of Agni, the householder. Therefore the wife sits near the householder.
3.37.2	They say that one should praise Raka first, because the first drink belongs to Jamai.
3.37.3	The wives of the gods are indeed the first to be invoked. He indeed deposits semen in the wives when Agni is the Gārhapatya. By Agni alone, by the Gārha-patya, he deposits semen in the wife openly. For propagation.
3.37.4	He who knows this becomes propagated with offspring and cattle.
3.37.5	Therefore, a woman who is the wife of a man of the same caste as her husband, and who is the wife (of a man) of the same caste, lives as a widow.
3.37.6	He recites the Rakā verse. Rakā indeed sews this garment of a man, which is on the penis.
3.37.7	Sons are born to him who knows this.
3.37.8	He recitess the Pavīravī verse. Sarasvatī is indeed Pavīravī. He thus places speech in speech.
3.37.9	They say, one should recite the Yamam first.
3.37.10	One should recite the Yama hymn first, saying, "This Yamam is your gift, may it come to you." The king's drink is first, therefore one should recite the Yamar hymn first.
3.37.11	The Kavya deities are sung in the reverse order, the Kavya deities are indeed sung in the reverse direction. The Kavya deities belong to the lower world, the Pitrs belong to the higher world. Therefore, the Kavya gods are sung in the opposite direction.
3.37.12	"The Pitrs are sung in the form, "May they rise up from below and from above."
3.37.13	"The middle Pitrs are the Soma-drinking ones."
3.37.14	Those who are inferior, those who are superior, and those who are in between, he satisfies them all without obstruction.
3.37.15	He recites the second verse, "I have known the Pitrs well."
3.37.16	"Those who sit on the sacrificial grass, with the sweet juice," this is their dear abode, for those who sit on the grass. With their dear abode, he thus honors them.
3.37.17	He who knows this prospers with his beloved wealth.
3.37.18	He recites the verse "Let there be salutations to the fathers today" at the end, hence salutations are made to the fathers at the end.
3.37.19	They say, "One should recite the Pitryajna in the Vyāhāva manner." One should recite it in the Vyāhava manner. The Pitryajna is indeed unsettled. He who recites the Vyāhava-manner establishes the Pitryajña in an unsettled manner. Therefore, one should recite it in Vyāhava manner.
3.38.1	The Indra-related verses are to be sung in the third pressing. Indra drank the Soma with these verses. That is why they are called Anupaniyas.
3.38.2	The deities were then intoxicated. The Hotri sings these verses. Therefore, one should drink in moderation at these verses.
3.38.3	The two of whose strength has cleansed the dust, thus he recites the verse of Vishnu and Varuna. Vishnu protects the ill-performed sacrifice, Varuna the well-performed. For the peace of both of them.
3.38.4	"Which of Vishnu's powers shall I praise?" thus he praises the Vishnu-verse. As Vishnu is the mind of the sacrifice, so he goes, doing what is ill-sown and ill-thought, what is well-sown and well-thought. Thus he goes, doing the ill-sung and ill-praised of the sacrifice, what is well sung and well praised. Thus he goes when the Hotri praises this verse.
3.38.5	"He who weaves the thread follows the light of the rays." He recites the Prajapati-hymn. The thread is offspring. He thus weaves offspring for him.
3.38.6	"Protect the path of Jyotismati, made by wisdom." The paths of the gods are luminous. He thus extends them for him, without weakening. "O Manu, be the leader of the waters, generate the divine people." Thus he connects him with Manu's offspring for propagation.
3.38.7	He who knows this is born with offspring and cattle.
3.38.8	"Indra, the bounteous, the powerful, the strong," he says with the last verse. This is Indra, the bounteous and powerful.
3.38.9	"The true, the protector of the people, the unerring," this is the true protector of the people and the unerring.
3.38.10	"Be thou the king of men, for us," this is the king of men.
3.38.11	"Adhi-shravas, Maahin, the sacrifice of the old man" (RV. 10, 10,1). Maahin is the sacrifice, Shravas is the sacrificer, the old man is the sacrificer. He thus prays for a blessing for the sacrificer.
3.38.12	He should touch the ground and place it there. Thus he establishes him at the very end in that very place where he has performed the sacrifice.
3.38.13	Agni, with the Maruts, the auspicious, the Rg-reciters. Having chanted the Agni-Marut hymn, he offers to Agni-Marut. Thus he pleases the deities according to their share.
3.39.1	The gods were about to fight with the Asuras for victory. Agni did not want to go along with them. The gods said to him, "Come, you are one of us." He said, "I will not go along with them." They said, "You are praised." He said, "I will not go." They went away from him and praised him. Having gone away and praised him, he went along with them.
3.39.2	He became three-fold in rank and three-fold in array, and went to battle with the Asuras for victory. "He made the metres three-fold in ranks, and the pressing-times three-fold in arrays. He overcame them by what was impossible to be overcome. Then the gods became victorious, the Asuras were defeated."
3.39.3	He who knows this becomes his own self, and his enemy, the sin, becomes his foe.
3.39.4	This is indeed the Gāyatrī, the Agniṣṭoma. The Gāyatrī has twenty-four syllables, and the Agniṣṭomas have twenty-four praises and prayers.
3.39.5	Now, they say, "The horse is well-nourished in the Soma-juice." It is indeed the Gāyatrī. The Gāyatrī does not rest in the sky. Indeed, it goes to heaven, taking the sacrificer with it. It is indeed the Agniṣṭoma. The Agniṣṭoma does not rest in heaven. Indeed, it (the Agniṣṭoma) goes to heaven, having taken the sacrificer with itself.
3.39.6	Now, indeed, the Agniṣṭoma is the year itself. The year consists of twenty-four half-months, and the Agniṣṭomah has twenty-four Stomas and Sastras.
3.39.7	All the sacrificial rites flow into it like the ocean.
3.40.1	The Diksaniyesti is performed; all the other rites flow into it.
3.40.2	He invokes Ida. The Ida-vidhas are the Pakayajnas. All those who are Pakayajnas go to the Agniṣṭoma.
3.40.3	They offer the Agnihotra in the evening and morning, they give the Vrata in the evening and the morning. They offer the Agnihotras with the word "Svāhā", they give the Vratas with the word "Svahā". He goes to the Agnihotra and the Agniṣṭoma with the word "Swāhā".
3.40.4	At the Prāyaniya (the first) sacrifice, he recites fifteen Sāmidhenī verses; at the Darsa-Pūrṇamāsa sacrifices, fifteen; the Darsa-Purnamāsa sacrifices are indeed a continuation of the Prāyaniyasa. The Agnistomas are a continuation of the Darsa- Pūrṇamāsas.
3.40.5	Soma is the king of medicines. They buy Soma, the king of medicines, with medicines. They heal him with medicines. When they heal him, all the medicines that are used in buying Soma, the king, go to the Agniṣṭoma.
3.40.6	They perform the Agni-sacrifice at the Atithya-rites, and the Agni-sacrifice in the Catu-rmasyas. The Catu-rmasya rites follow the Atithya rites. The Agnistoma is performed in the Catu~rmasyas.
3.40.7	They perform the Pravargya rite with milk, and the Dakshayagya with milk. The Dakshayagnya follows the Pravargya. The Agnisto-ma is performed in Dakshayagnas.
3.40.8	The animal sacrifice is performed on the Upavasatha day. All those who are bound to animal sacrifices follow that animal sacrifice.
3.40.9	The sacrifice called Iḍādadha is performed with curds. They perform the Iḍādadhatoma with curds. The Iḍādadhātoman follows the Dadhigharma.
3.41.1	Thus, in the beginning and at the end, the Stotras of the Pañcadaśa Ukthya are fifteen, the Sastras are fifteen. That month, the month-holder, the year, is prescribed. The year is Agni Vaisvānara, Agni is the Agnishtoma. The Ukthya indeed follows the Agnishtoma, the Vājapeya follows the Ukthya, for it becomes Ukthya.
3.41.2	The twelve nights are all the fifteen nights. Two and two make thirty. The twenty-first is the sixteen. The Trivrt (Stoma) is the junction. That is thirty. That is a month. The nights of the month are thirty. The year is prescribed. The year is Agni Vaisvānara. Agni is the Agniṣṭoma. The Atiratra follows the year. The Atirattra follows the Agniṣṭomah. The Aptojyāma follows the Atiratra. The Atiratras are followed.
3.41.3	Now, those who are in front and those who are above, all the sacrificial rites, they all go to the Agniṣṭoma.
3.41.4	Of that (Stoma) which is praised, there are ninety-one Stotriya (Stomas). Of those ninety-one, ten are Trivrt, and of those nine, ten are Ekavimsa. Of those ten, one is Stotriya. The Trivrt remains. That Ekavimsa is placed in between. It shines. This is the most extensive of the Stomas. Ten Stomas are below it, and ten are above it. This Ekavimsa in between is placed on both sides. It shines. That Stotriya which comes up, that is placed on it. The patron is the divine Ksatra, strength, power.
3.41.5	He attains the divine power, the strength, the might of the gods. He attains union, similarity, and the same world as him who knows this.
3.42.1	The gods, when they were conquering the Asuras, went upwards to the heavenly world. Agni, touching the sky, rose upwards. He closed the gate of the heavenly world. For Agni is the lord of the heavenly world, and the Vasus came first to him. They said to him, "Do not surpass us. Make room for us." He said, "I will not surpass you." They said, "Praise us." He said "So be it." They praised him with the Trivrt stoma. When praised, he surpassed them. They went to their respective worlds.
3.42.2	The Rudras approached him and said to him, "Do not go beyond us. Make space for us." He said, "I will not go beyond you." They said, "Do you praise us?" He said, "Yes." They said, "Let it be so." They praised him with the fifteen-fold Stoma. Having been praised, they went away as they had come.
3.42.3	The Adityas approached him and said, "Do not surpass us. Make space for us." He said, "I will not surpass you." They said, "Praise us." He said "Yes." They praised him with the seventeenfold Stoma. Having been praised, he surpassed them and they went away as they saw fit.
3.42.4	The All-gods approached him and said to him, "Do not surpass us. Make space for us." He said, "I will not surpass you." They said, "Praise us." He said "So be it." They praised him with the Ekavimsa stoma. Having been praised, he surpassed them. They went away as they saw fit.
3.42.5	The gods praised him with each of the Stomas. Those who were praised went to the world of light.
3.42.6	Then indeed he who performs sacrifice praises him with all these Stomas.
3.42.7	He who knows this goes beyond those who have gone.
3.42.8	He who thus knows goes beyond heaven.
3.43.1	Now, indeed, that Agniṣṭoma is Agni himself. Since he is praised, therefore it is Agniṣṭoma. They call that Agniṣṭomam Agniṣṭoma by a roundabout way, for the gods love the roundabout way.
3.43.2	The gods, in four groups, praised him with four Stomas. Therefore it is called Caturstoma. They call him who is Caturstoma by the name Caturstoma, for the gods love the indirect (way of speaking).
3.43.3	Now, when he praises him as being above, as having become light, then he is called Jyotiṣṭoma. They call him Jyotiṣṭomā, because the gods love the indirect (way of speaking).
3.43.4	That indeed is the new, the unprecedented, sacrificial rite, like the wheel of a chariot, as it is endless. The Agniṣṭoma is like that. As is its departure, so is its return.
3.43.5	This is the hymn of praise to the sacrifice: What was before, that is after; what was after, that is before. Like a snake crawling, they do not know which is the one beyond.
3.43.6	Just as his departure is, so is his return.
3.43.7	They say that the Trivrt is the going to the other world, the Ekavimsa is the return. By what do you equalize them?
3.43.8	He who is Ekavimsa, he is Trivrt. If one were to say that both are Trikas, they are Trikas, then by that.
3.44.1	He who shines here, he is the Agniṣṭoma, he is the Sahna. They should establish him together with the day. The Sahna is indeed the name.
3.44.2	Therefore, they should move quickly, as they do at the morning Soma-pressing, so also at the midday pressing, and so also at the third pressing. Thus indeed, the sacrificer becomes long-lived.
3.44.3	Now, when they perform the two earlier Savanas without haste, then the villages are mostly turned towards the east. But when they perform the third Savana with haste, then the long forests are turned towards the west. Thus the sacrificer becomes long-lived.
3.44.4	Therefore, they should not hurry. They should proceed as in the morning pressing, so in the midday pressing, and so in the third pressing. Thus indeed, the sacrificer becomes long-lived.
3.44.5	He should recite with the weaker voice at the morning pressing, for when the sun rises in the morning, it shines weakly. Then when it has gone, it shines more strongly, therefore he should recite with the stronger voice at midday. Then when it goes away, it shines most strongly, therefore he recites with the strongest voice at the third pressing. Thus he should recite, if he is master of speech, for speech is the weapon. If he is able to recite with increasing strength, he should recite with that. This is the most excellent recitation.
3.44.6	He never sets or rises.
3.44.7	When they think that he has set, he has reached the end of the day and then turns himself around and makes the night come before and the day after.
3.44.8	Now when they think that he rises in the morning, then having gone to the end of the night, he turns himself around and makes the day behind and the night in front.
3.44.9	He never sets.
3.44.10	He who knows thus, he attains union with him, similarity with him, and the same world as him. He who knows thus, attains union with him,
3.45.1	The sacrifice, indeed, fled from the gods for food. The gods said: "The sacrifice, indeed, has fled from us for food. We shall seek food in this sacrifice." They said: "How shall we seek?" They said: "By the Brahman and by the metres." They initiated the Brahman by the metres. They completed the sacrifice at the end of it. They also performed the Patnīsaṃyāja. Even now, at the Iṣṭi of the Dīkṣaṇīyā, they complete the sacrifice at the very end and also perform the Patnīsañyāja. They followed the right path.
3.45.2	They performed the Pravargya rite. The Pravargya rite followed them. They hastened to the rites. They made it the Shamyavana rite. Therefore even now the Pravargya is the Shamyavana. They followed the right path.
3.45.3	They performed the hospitality. He followed them with hospitality. They hastened with their duties. They made it an Iḍā-ending. Therefore even now hospitality is Iḍā- ending. They followed him with justice.
3.45.4	They performed the Upasads. He followed them in the Upasads, and they hastened to the rites. They recited three Sāmidhenī verses and offered to three deities. Therefore even now at the Upasads they recite three Sāmidhēnī verses and offer to three deities. He followed the right course.
3.45.5	They performed the Upasad rites. They performed them on the day of Upasad. Having performed them, they performed the concluding rites of the sacrifice. They also performed the Patnīsamyājya rites. Therefore even now they perform the concluding rites of sacrifice on the day of the Upasad and also perform the Patnīsamyājyā rites.
3.45.6	Therefore, one should recite these earlier rites slowly, slowly.
3.45.7	For they are like a wind blowing towards him. Therefore, one should speak as much as one desires on the Upavasatha day, for then one becomes accomplished.
3.45.8	Having obtained him, they said, "Stand for us to eat food." He said, "No." They said, "How can you stand for us?" He looked at them and they said, "Become united with the Brahman and the Chandas and stand for us to eat." He said, "So be it." Therefore even now the sacrifice, having become united, carries oblations to the gods, with the Brahman and with the Chandas.
3.46.1	Three things are done at a sacrifice: what is eaten, what is vomited, and what is thrown up.
3.46.2	Now that which is eaten is what one does when one expects to be given or to be asked for (a fee). But that does not at all benefit the sacrificer.
3.46.3	Now, indeed, this is the same as when one, being afraid, makes a priest perform (a rite) with the thought, "He will not injure me" or "He will not disturb my sacrificial rites." But that (rite) is indeed only a turning away (from the Yajamana). It does not at all injure the Yajamāna.
3.46.4-5	Now, indeed, that is the same as vomiting, when one makes a priest perform the rites while vomiting. Just as men are disgusted with a vomiter, so are the gods. Therefore, one should not perform the rites for one who has vomited. One should not perform the rite for one who has not vomited.
3.46.6	If any one of these three should be omitted, there is an expiation in the hymn to Vamadeva.
3.46.7	This is the hymn to Vāmadevya, the world of the sacrificer, the world of immortality, the world of heaven.
3.46.8	It is deficient by three syllables. Having approached that hymn, one should divide oneself into three parts with the words "purusha".
3.46.9	He places himself in these worlds, in the world of the sacrificer, in the world beyond death, in the world above. He overcomes all evil.
3.46.10	If the priests are prosperous, one should recite this.
3.47.1	The metres, having carried the oblation to the gods, stand in the last part of the sacrifice, being wearied. Just as a horse or a mule would stand in the place of a horse, so he should offer to them the animal-oblation for Mitra-Varuna and the oblations for the gods.
3.47.2	To Dhatri, a cake on twelve potsherds; he who is Dhatri is the Vasat-call.
3.47.3	The oblation to Anumati, she is Gayatri.
3.47.4	The oblation to Raka, she is Tristubh.
3.47.5	The obhalation to Sinivali, she is Jagati. The oblation to Kuhu, she is Anushtubh.
3.47.6	These are all the metres: the Gāyatrī, the Triṣṭubh, the Jagatī, and the Anushtubh. They are the others. For these are performed at the sacrifice as the first.
3.47.7	He who knows this, his sacrifice becomes performed by all the metres.
3.47.8	Now, they say, "In the Soma, the horse is well-nourished and well-placed." The Chhandas indeed are the Soma. In the Chhandas, it is indeed placed.
3.47.9	He who knows this conquers the world of the non-meditator.
3.47.10	Some say, "One should offer clarified butter before all the (sacrifices) to the creator. Thus one places the pair in all of them."
3.47.11	They say that this is a union of the sacrifice, where one offers on the same day with two identical verses.
3.47.12	If there are many wives, the husband is their union. When he offers to the creator in front of them, he establishes union among all of them.
3.47.13	Thus it is for the Devīkas.
3.48.1	Now for the Devīs.
3.48.2	The oblation to Surya is a cake on one potsherd. Surya is the creator, and he is the Vasat-call.
3.48.3	The oblation to Heaven is cooked rice. Heaven is Anumati. She is the Gayatri metre. The oblation to Dawn is cooked rice. Dawn is Raka. He is the Tristubh metre. The obolation to the Cow is cooked rice. The cow is Sinivali. She is the Jagati metre. The obilation to Earth is cooked rice. Earth is Kuhu. She is the Anushtubh metre.
3.48.4	These are all the metres: the Gāyatrī, the Triṣṭubh, the Jagatī, and the Anushtubh. They are the others. For at the sacrifice they are performed in the order of their names. He who knows this, his sacrifice is performed with all the metres. This is what they say: "The horse is well-fed on the Soma-juice." The metres are indeed the Soma-juice. The metres indeed feed him who knows this. He conquers the world of the non-thinking. This is what some say: "One should offer the ghee before all of them, before the Sun. Thus one establishes the union in all of them." But they say: "A union is made at the sacrifice where two verses are offered on the same day." If a husband is the union of many wives, then by offering the Sun before all of them he establishes the union in them.
3.48.5	Those who are these, they are those; those who are those, they are these. One attains the desire that is in both of them.
3.48.6	One should offer the oblations to the two groups of deities for one who desires offspring.
3.48.7	But not for one who is about to die.
3.48.8	If one were to offer it for one who is about to go on a journey, the gods would be angry with him, saying, "He has not enough for himself."
3.48.9	The two, Gaupalayana and Sucirvaks, the son of Vritadyumna, the son of Abhipratarin, performed the two kinds of sacrifices. When he saw Rathasrit approaching him, he said, "I have performed the two kinds, the divine and the human, for this king. Why does Rathasrit approach me like this?" His sons and grandsons were always sixty-four in number.
3.49.1-2	The gods, having resorted to the Agniṣṭoma, the Asuras to the Ukthas, they became of equal strength and did not turn back. The sage Bharadvāja saw them, "These Asuras are resorted to in the Ukthas, no one sees them." He urged Agni, "Come, I will tell you this and that song."
3.49.3	The other hymns are not of the gods.
3.49.4	Agni, rising up, said: "What will that lean, long-haired, grey-haired one say to me?"
3.49.5	Bharadvaja was indeed the lean, long-haird, grey-haired (sage).
3.49.6	He said: "These Asuras are hidden in the hymns; no one sees them."
3.49.7	Agni, having become a horse, ran after them. In that Agni, having become the horse, ran after (them), that became the Sama of the horse. That is the horse-ness of the horse.
3.49.8	They say, one should offer the Ukthas with the horse. Those Ukthas which are not offered elsewhere than the horse, they are not offered.
3.49.9	They say that one should lead with the most powerful. With the most powerful, indeed, the gods drove away the Asuras from the hymns.
3.49.10	He indeed says, "One should lead with the strongest." One leads with the strongest. One leads with the horse.
3.50.1	The Asuras then approached the Maitrāvaruṇa's hymn. He said, "Who will drive these Asuras away from here?" "I will," said Indra. "I will," replied Varuna. Therefore the Maitrāvaruņa recites the Indra-Varuna hymn at the third pressing. For Indra and Varuna drove them away.
3.50.2	Then the Asuras were driven away from there. The Brahmanaschansi (priests) took up the Upavasatha (ceremony). Indra said, "Who will drive these Asuras away from here?" Brihaspati said, "I will." Therefore, the Brahmanaschansi priest recites the Indra-Brihaspati hymn at the third pressing. Indra and Brihaspati drove them away then.
3.50.3	Then the Asuras were driven away from there. They took refuge in the Uktha of the Acchāvāka. He said, "Who will drive these Asuras away from here?" Vishnu said, "I will." Therefore the Acchāvaaka recites the Indra-Vishnu hymn at the third pressing. For Indra and Vishnu drove them away then.
3.50.4	The deities are mentioned in the dual form. The dual is the union. Therefore, from the dual, the union is born for the purpose of procreation.
3.50.5	One who knows this is born with offspring and cattle.
3.50.6	Then indeed these four seasonal sacrifices of the Potriyas and the Neṣṭriyas are the six verses, that is Viraj, the tenfold. They establish the sacrifice in Viraj, the one who is tenfold.
4.1.1	The gods, on the first day, brought the thunderbolt to Indra; on the second day they anointed it; on the third day they gave it to him; on the fourth day he struck with it. Therefore on the fourth day one recites the Sodashin (hymn).
4.1.2	The sixteen-fold verse is indeed a thunderbolt. When he recites the sixteen-fold verse on the fourth day, he strikes with the thunderbolt his enemy, his foe, and the one who is hostile to him.
4.1.3	The sixteen-fold verse indeed is a thunderbolt, the praises are the cattle. He recites it after the praises.
4.1.4	When he recites the Upavasatha hymns after the Ukthas, he thereby encloses the cattle with the thunderbolt, with the sixteenfold (hymn). Therefore cattle are enclosed with the thunderbolt, the sixteenfold (verse). They return to men. Therefore a horse, a man, a cow, an elephant, is enclosed. He who is cursed by speech returns of his own accord. Seeing the thunderbolt, the sixteenth (verse), he is enclosed with the thunderbolt. The thunderbolt is speech, the sixteenth (hymn) is speech.
4.1.5	They say, "What is the reason for the name 'Ṣoḍaśī'?" It is because it has sixteen praises, sixteen hymns, and sixteen syllables. It is taken up with sixteen syllables, recited with sixteen syllables, and the Niviḍa is placed with sixteen syllables. That is the reason for its name 'Ṣoḷaśī'.
4.1.6	The two syllables are in excess of the sixteen syllables of the Anushtubh verse. The two are the two breasts of speech. Truth and falsehood are the two.
4.1.7	He who knows this, truth does not harm him.
4.2.1	One who desires brilliance and brahmic lustre should perform the Gaurīvita Sāman. Brilliance and brahmic lustre are in the Gaurīvīta. One who knows this and performs the Gaurīvata Sāman becomes brilliant and has brahmic lustre.
4.2.2	They say that the Nānada should be sung in the Ṣoḍaśi metre. Indra hurled the thunderbolt at Vṛtra, but it struck him and rebounded. When it rebounded, it made a sound, and that became the Nānada Sāman. That is the reason for the Nānada being called Nānada. The Nānada Sâman is the slayer of enemies without enemies.
4.2.3	He who, knowing this, performs the Nānada-Ṣoḍaśī, becomes free from enemies and destroyer of enemies.
4.2.4	If they were to perform the Nānada, the Ṣoḍaṣī should be sung without interruption, for it is sung without interruption. If it is interrupted, the Ṣodaśī should be sung with interruption, for it was sung with interruption.
4.3.1	Now he arranges the metres in reverse order: "May the tawny ones bring thee, listen to the song." He arranges the Gāyatrī and Paṅkti metres in reverse order. The man is Gāyatrī, the animals are Paṅkti. He thus arranges the man with the animals, establishes him in the animals. The two are Anushtubh. Thus he does not go from the form of speech to the form of the thunderbolt.
4.3.2	If Indra, the one who is to be worshipped in battle, is yours, let him be victorious. He places the Uṣṇīṣa and the Brhatī verses alternately. The man is Uṣṇīsa, the animals are Brhatī. He thus places the man among the animals, establishes him among the animals. The Uṣṇīḥ and the Brhatīs are two Anushtubh verses. Thus he does not go from the form of speech to the form of the Anushtubh, from the form of the thunderbolt.
4.3.3	"The Brahman, O hero, is pleased with the Brahman-making (of the sacrificer). He places the two-footed and the Tristubh verses alternately. The man has two feet, the Tristubh is strength; he places the man in strength, establishes him in strength. Therefore the man is established in strength. Of all animals he is the strongest. The two-footed and twenty-syllable Tristubh are two Anushtubh verses. By that he goes from the form of speech to the form of the Anushtubh, from the form of the thunderbolt to the form of speech.
4.3.4	"This is Brahman. I shall praise thee in thy great assembly, O Hari." He arranges the Jagati verses with the Gāyatrī verses. The man has two feet, and the animals have the Jagatī gait. He thus arranges the man with the animals. He establishes him in the animals. Therefore the man eats the animals and stands over them. And he has control over them. The two Gāyatrī and the Jagatī have sixteen syllables. They are two Anushtubh verses. Thus he does not go beyond the form of speech and the form of the thunderbolt.
4.3.5	In the Trikaddrukas (sutra) he recites the Atichhandas (sutra) "Mahisha in the Yavashira, Puroratha for him." The essence of the Chhandas that had fallen away fell into the Atichhandasa. The Atichhandasa is made up of all the Chhandas. The Sodashi (sutra) is made up of the Chhandasa. When he recites the Sodashi, he makes it up of all the chhandas.
4.3.6	He who knows this, succeeds in the sixteen-fold (oblation) prepared from all the metres.
4.4.1	He performs the Upasargas of the Mahanama rites.
4.4.2	This world is the first Mahānāmnī, the sky-world is the second, and the world of heaven is the third. The Sodashin is made out of all these worlds. When he performs the rites of the Mahānāmnīs, he makes him out of all these world.
4.4.3	He who knows this, prospers with the Sodashin made out of all the worlds.
4.4.4	"Do you all praise the Tristubh for us, do you praise the one who has removed the evil! The Prajnatas sing the Anushtubh. It is as if one were to go by a path that is not the right one and then find the right path. That is why the Prajnatas chant the Anushtubhs."
4.4.5	He who thinks that he is afflicted by the evil one, should recite the sixteen-fold hymn in the reverse order. If one does not recite the hymns of the Vedas in the reverse order, then one is afflicted by the evils. But he who desires to remove the evil, should recite the hymn in the reverse. As a man is afflicted by the impurity, so he removes the evil and impurity.
4.4.6	He who knows thus, has destroyed sin.
4.4.7	"He places the last (brick) with the verse, "Thou hast ascended the highest heaven of the sky." The highest heaven of the atmosphere is indeed the heaven; he thus makes the sacrificer go to the heaven."
4.4.8	He offers with the verse, "
4.4.9	All the Savanas are combined in the Sodashin. When he says, "The Soma-juice of the former Savanas," he makes it as if drunk. The morning Savana is like that which has been drunk. He combines it with the morning Savana.
4.4.10	"This Savana is alone." The midday Savana is alone. He combines it only with the midday Savana.
4.4.11	"Indra, do thou rejoice in the sweet Soma." The third pressing is connected with intoxication; he thus makes it conform to the third pressing.
4.4.12	"He says, 'O Vrsan, do thou swell the belly.' The form of the Sodasi is that of Vrsan. He is dedicated to all the Savanas, since he is Sodasi. He says, 'O Apas, the drinkers of Soma, of the former ones,' he dedicates him to all the Savana.
4.4.13	He who knows this, obtains the sixteen-fold (wealth) by means of the sacrifice which is created for all the sacrifices.
4.4.14	He adds the five-syllabled prefixes of the Mahānāmnī verses to the feet consisting of eleven syllables. The Sodasi is created out of all the metres. When he adds the five-syllables prefixes of the Mahānnāmnī verses in the feet consisting of 11 syllables, then he creates it out of all the Metres.
4.4.15	He who knows this, obtains the sixteenth part of all the metres.
4.5.1	The gods took refuge in the day, the Asuras in the night. They were of equal strength and did not depart. Indra said, "Who will lead me to the Asuras here, following the night?" He did not find it among the gods. He was afraid of the night, of the darkness, of death. Therefore even now one is afraid of the night as if it were only a little distance. For the night is like darkness, and death.
4.5.2	Now, the metres themselves follow him. Because the metres themselves follow it, therefore Indra and the metres carry the night. There is no cessation, no fore-noon, no evening, no other deity. For Indra and the metres themselves carry the night.
4.5.3	They used to announce them by turns, and because they announced them by turns, they became known as Parāyas.
4.5.4	They used to announce them in the first watch of the night, in the middle watch of the night and in the last watch of the night.
4.5.5	"They said, 'We remember even the night.' The night is indeed the same as the Apisharvaras. They are the same as the metres. They indeed crossed Indra, who was afraid of the night, darkness and death. That is why the Apisharvara is called Apisharvara.
4.6.1	'We protect you at the feast' (RV 10.125.1) with the Anushtubh verse, one approaches the night.
4.6.2	The night is in the Anushtubh metre; this is the form of the night.
4.6.3	The Anushtubh verses are drunk, drunk, drunk, in the form of the Triṣṭubh; they are the offering verses, in the form that is auspicious. That which is auspicious at the sacrifice, that is prosperous.
4.6.4	They praise with the first section, and take up the first feet again; whatever horses and cattle they had, they take them back by that.
4.6.5	In the middle section he praises with the middle (verses) and again takes up the middle (verses). Whatever was their desire, that he gives them by that.
4.6.6	In the last section he praises with (the last) verses and again takes up (the last) ones. Whatever was their clothes, gold, gem, and inner self, that he gives to them by that.
4.6.7	He who knows this, drives him away from all these worlds.
4.6.8	They say, "The day is like Pavamāna, but the night is not like Pavamāna. How do both become like Pavamāna? By what do you become equal sharers?"
4.6.9	The same Indra, the same Soma, the same Soma that is pressed in the forest, the same Soma which is pressed with strength, the same Soma is praised and sung. By that the night becomes Soma-bearing, by that both of you become Soma-bearing, and by that you become sharers of the same.
4.6.10	The day is said to be fifteen stotras, not the night. How can both the day and the night be fifteen stotras? By whom are they made equal?
4.6.11	The twelve Stotras are also the Svara-s. The three deities are joined together by the Rathantara. By that the night becomes the fifteen Stotras. By that both become the fifteen Stotras, and thus they become equal sharers.
4.6.12	The limited is praised, the unlimited is commended. The limited is the past, the unlimited is the future. For the securing of the unlimited.
4.6.13	He praises the praise. The praise is beyond the self, the cattle are beyond the self. When he praises the praise, he secures for him what is beyond him, he secures it.
4.7.1	Prajapati gave his daughter Savitri to Soma, the king. All the gods came to her with their boons. She gave him a thousand cows to be milked. That is why it is called "Aśvinam" (the Aśvins). But it is not Aśvinam. If one were to milk more than a thousand cows, it would be Aśvinam.
4.7.2	Having drunk ghee, one should recite (the following): "Just as this chariot moves forward, so does the speech move forward."
4.7.3	One should call out like a bird about to fly.
4.7.4	The gods did not know that this was mine, that was mine. Knowing this, they said, "Let us compete for it. He who will win, his will be this." They made the sun the stake of Agni, the householder, the lord. Therefore the first step is dedicated to Agni. Agni is the Hotri priest of the Ashvina month, the householder, and the king.
4.7.5	Some say that one should offer Agni as the father, Agni as the water. One should attain it with this (verse).
4.7.6	"One attains the wood with the first verse itself, saying, "May the gods offer the bright Soma in heaven."
4.7.7	One should not pay attention to that. If someone were to tell him there, "One should offer Agni, Agni," he would always be like that.
4.7.8-9	Therefore, Agni is the Hotar, the Householder, and the King. One should proceed with this (verse). The Householder is endowed with offspring, peaceful, and has all life for all life.
4.8.1	When those deities were running in the race, Agni was the first to reach the goal. The Asvins followed him and said to him, "We shall win this." He said, "So be it." They said, "Let there be a share for us here." He said, "So be it." Therefore, the Agnimitra is offered to the Asvins.
4.8.2	They followed the dawn. They said to her, "We will win this." She said, "So be it." "Let there be for me here also." "So be it." They made it here also for her. Therefore, in the autumn, the Uṣas is sown.
4.8.3	They approached Indra. They said to him, "We two will conquer this." He did not dare to say, "Go away." He said, "So be it." He said, "Let there be a share for me here too." He said, "So be it." Therefore, the Aśvinī is dedicated to Indra.
4.8.4	The Asvins have won, the Asvins have attained. Because the Asvins have won and have attained, therefore it is called the Asvin.
4.8.5	One attains whatever one desires, he who knows this.
4.8.6	They say, "Why is this called the Asvin? It is indeed the Agni, the Uṣas, and the Indra. Why is it called the Asvin?" "Because the Asvins won it, and the Asvins obtained it. When the Asvins won, the Asvins obtained. Therefore it is called the Asvin."
4.8.7	He who knows this obtains whatever he desires.
4.9.1	Agni ran a race with a horse-drawn chariot. The Praja-pati opened the womb of those (mares). Therefore they do not give birth.
4.9.2	Usha ran a race with red cows. Therefore, when Usha has come, it shines like red. It is the form of Usha.
4.9.3	Indra ran in the chariot-race with horses, and he was heard from afar. The form of the Kshatriya is Indra's, for he is.
4.9.4	The Asvins, by means of a donkey-cart, won the race. The Asvins, when they won the race, obtained (the prize). Because the Asvins, when he won the race, got it, therefore he is the swiftest runner, the milker of milk, of all the vehicles now. His seed was not taken away. Therefore he is the horse with two seeds.
4.9.5	They say, "One should recite the seven solar metres, as in the case of Agni, as in the Uṣas, as in the Aśvins. The seven worlds of the gods are all the worlds of the gods. One attains in all the worlds of gods."
4.9.6	One should not pay attention to that. One should recite only three. There are three worlds here, three-fold. One attains these worlds.
4.9.7	They say, "He who is the knower of all, he is the sun." One should proceed with the Sūrya hymns.
4.9.8	One should not do that. It is like going and striking a post.
4.9.9	One should proceed with the verse, "May the sun protect us from heaven." It is like going to strike a post.
4.9.10	He recites the second verse, "We invoke that Jātavedas."
4.9.11	"The variegated army of the gods has risen," in Trishtubh metre. This is indeed the variegated army of the Gods that rises. Therefore he recites this.
4.9.12	"Salutation to the sight of Mitra and Varuna," in Jagatī metre. This is the benedictory verse. By this he blesses himself and the sacrificer.
4.10.1	They say, "The Sun is not to be praised too much, the Brihatī is not to be prasied too much. If one praises the Sun too much, one would transgress the Brahmic lustre. If one praises Brihatī too much, one transgresses the vital airs."
4.10.2	He recites the Indra-related Prathā verse, "O Indra, I bring the resolve."
4.10.3	"May we learn in this, O Puruhūta, in the Yama, the light of life."
4.10.4	This indeed is the light, by which he does not surpass the sun.
4.10.5	By the Barhaspatya hymn, he does not surpass Brihatī.
4.10.6	"He praises the Rathantara birth with the words, "O hero, we praise thee." He praises the Rathantara with the Rathantara Sāman. The Rathantara Sāma is the union of the two Aśvins. By praising the Rathantara birth, he makes the Rathantara Sāmā to be of the same birth.
4.10.7	"He is the lord of this world, the seer of heaven." He is indeed the seer of heaven. By that he does not surpass the sun.
4.10.8	By the Barhaspatya hymn, he does not surpass Brihatī.
4.10.9	Many are the eyes of the sun, thus they recite the Maitrāvaruṇa verse. Mitra is the day, Varuna is the night. He who performs the Atiratra rite, he indeed undertakes both the day and the night. In that they recite the Maitravaruna verse, he indeed establishes him in the day and the nigh.
4.10.10	"Sūracaksasa" (Sūrya, the eye) - thereby he does not exceed the Sun. The Barhaspatha (verse) - thereby he exceeds the Brihatī.
4.10.11	The earth and heaven are ours, for they are the earth and heaven, for the welfare of all. He recites the Dyavapṛthivīya verse. The earth and heaven indeed are the support. This one is the support here, that one is the support there. In that he recites the Dyāvapṛthivīy verse, he indeed establishes him in the supports.
4.10.12	The god, the goddess, the law, the sun, the pure, thus he does not exceed the sun.
4.10.13	The Gāyatrī and the Jagatī, those two are the Bṛhatī, thus he does no exceed the Bṛhat.
4.10.14	The goddess of the universe, the mother of the verses, she who is not angry or greedy, thus he praises the two-footed.
4.10.15	Now, indeed, they say of this Asvina (hymn), "It is the praise of the mind." When the Hotri is about to recite it, he says, "I shall release the noose of Nirriti." Then Brihaspati saw her in the form of a two-footed (animal). With the verse, "She who is not angry, not grasping," he released the nooses of Nirriti, the noose-bearer, from below. When the Hotri recites this two-footed (verse), he releases the nooses of the noose-bearing Nirriti from below. The Hotri is released safely. For all life, for all life.
4.10.16	He who knows this attains the whole span of life.
4.10.17	"The one who knows this is indeed like the one who worships, and therefore does not surpass the sun."
4.10.18	"The one with two feet is the Purusha-metre, and it includes all the metres. Therefore, he does not surpass the Brihatī."
4.11.1	He places it with the Brahmaspati-verse. Brihaspati is indeed Brahman. He thus establishes him in Brahman at the end.
4.11.2	One desiring offspring, desiring cattle, should offer with the verse, "O Pitr, to the All-gods, to Vrishni."
4.11.3	"O Brihaspati, may we be prosperous, having offspring and heroes." One who is prosperous in offspring, having heroes, is prosperous.
4.11.4	"May we be the lords of wealth."
4.11.5	One who knows this, and offers with this verse, becomes prosperous in offspring, cattle, wealth, and heroes.
4.11.6	One who desires brilliance, who desires brahmic glory, should offer it with the verse, "O Brihaspati, if the noble one surpasses the noble one," for he becomes more brilliant than others.
4.11.7	"It is brilliant," for brahmic glory shines like the sun. "It shines," for brahmic glow shines.
4.11.8	"If it shines, O progeny of truth," for brahmic brilliance shines.
4.11.9	"May that wealth be in us, O Indra, the variegated one." Variegated indeed is the splendor of Brahman.
4.11.10	He becomes one who has the splendor of Brahman, one who has the fame of Brahman, where he who knows this offers it with this (verse).
4.11.11	Therefore one who knows this should offer it with this (same verse).
4.11.12	Brahma-spatya (is the name of the verse). By this he does not surpass the sun.
4.11.13	When one recites the Tristubh three times, it includes all the metres. Therefore, one does not recite the Brihatī in excess.
4.11.14	One should recite the Vasat with the Gāyatrī and Tristubh.
4.11.15	The Gāyatrī is indeed Brahman, the Tristubh is valour. Thus, he unites Brahman with valour.
4.11.16	He becomes endowed with brahmic glory and fame, and powerful, when one who knows this performs the Vasat-call with the Gayatri and Trishtup meters.
4.11.17	"O Asvins, you two, with Vayu, the well-skilled, drink the Soma, O Asvins."
4.11.18	One should perform the Vasat-with the Gayatri and Viraj meters. The Gayatri is indeed Brahman, and the Viraj is food. Thus he unites Brahman and food.
4.11.19	He becomes endowed with brahmic glory and brahmic fame. He eats the food of Brahma. Where one who knows this offers the Vasat-call with the Gayatri and Viraj verses,
4.11.20	Therefore, one who knows this should offer the Vasat-calls with the Gayatri verses and the Viraj verses. "With the verses, "Your intoxicating draughts have been placed here. Both of you drink, O Asvins,"
4.12.1	This is the twenty-fourth day, the day of commencement.
4.12.2	They commence the year with this (day), with this they commence the Stoma and the Chanda, with this all the deities. That which is not commenced is the Chanda, that which is not commenced are the deities. If they do not commence on this day, then that is the reason for the commencement of the commencement.
4.12.3-5	The Stoma becomes twenty-four. That is the twenty-four-foldness of the twenty-four. Twenty-four are the half-months. They begin the year with the half-months.
4.12.6	It has fifteen Stomas and fifteen Sastras. The month is the same as the year. They begin the year.
4.12.7	It has sixty-three hundred Stotriyas. So many are the days of the year. The day is the same as a year. They begin a year.
4.12.8	They say that this day should be the Agniṣṭoma. The Agniṣṭoma is the year. No other day than the Agniṣṭomā supports or divides (the year).
4.12.9	If it is an Agniṣṭoma, then there should be thirty-eight Pavamāna verses, twenty-four other Stotras. Thus there are sixty-three Stotriya verses. There are as many days in a year. They begin the year with that day.
4.12.10	The sacrifice should be of the Ukthya kind, for the sacrifice is the means of attaining cattle, and the Sattra is the means of cattle. All the twenty-four Stotras are direct means of cattle. This day is the twenty-fourth. Therefore the sacrifice should be of Ukthya kind.
4.13.1	The Brhat and Rathantara are the two Sāman chants. They are the two boats of the sacrifice, which carry across. In that they are Brhat and Rathantara, they cross the year by means of them.
4.13.2	The Brhat and Rathantra are the feet, this day is the head. By means of the feet they reach the head, the prosperity.
4.13.3	The Brihat and Rathantara are the wings, this day is the head; thus he makes the head prosper by the wings.
4.13.4	Those who do not let go of both, and those who let go of both - just as a boat that has been cut from its moorings would float from shore to shore, so those who let go would float from one shore to the other. Those who let go of the two would float from one bank to the other.
4.13.5	If they were to release the Rathantara, then the Brihat would be released with both. If they were to let go the Brihat, then the Rathantara would be released with the two.
4.13.6	The Rathantara is the Vaimata, the Brihat is the Vaimantya, the Rathantara is the Shakvara, the Brihat the Raivata. Thus these two are not released.
4.13.7	Those who know this, and who perform this rite, having obtained the day, obtain the month, having obtained the month, obtain the half-month, having obtained the half-month obtain the Soma-drink, having obtained the Soma-drink obtain the Stoma and the Chanda, having obtained the Stoma and Chanda obtain all the deities, having obtained all the deities, they sit down to drink the Soma-drink for a year, being tormented by heat.
4.13.8	Those who perform the rites for a year or more, they place a heavy burden on themselves. A heavy burden indeed is a burden. It breaks down. But he who having performed the rites for a period of time, performs them again from the beginning, he indeed attains the end of the year in safety.
4.14.1	What is the twenty-fourth day, that is the Mahāvrata. The Hotṛ sprinkles the semen here with the Bṛhaddivā. That is generated by the Mahāvrati day. Semen is generated in a year. Therefore the Bṛhaddiva is the same as the Niṣkevalya. He who knows this and approaches this day, he approaches it after having attained it through the rites.
4.14.2	He who knows this attains the end of the year in safety.
4.14.3	He who knows the beginning and the end of the Samvatsara attains the end of Samvatsara in safety. The Atiratra is the beginning and the Udayaniya is the end.
4.14.4	He who thus knows attains the end of year in safety.
4.14.5	He who knows the closing and opening of the year, he attains the end of the year in safety. The Atiratra is the closing and the Udayaniya is the opening.
4.14.6	He who knows this attains the end of year in safety.
4.14.7	He who knows the Prāṇa and Udāna of the year, he attains the end of the year in safety. The Atiratra is his Prāyaṇīya, the Prāṇa, the Udayaniya, the Udāna.
4.14.8	He attains the end of year in safety, he who knows this, he who knows thus.
4.15.1	The worlds go by the Stoma-s, the heaven is Jyotiḥ, the earth is Gāuḥ, the atmosphere is Āyuḥ.
4.15.2	This is the same three-day ritual.
4.15.3	The three days are Jyotiḥ, Gauḥ, and Āyuḥ; the three days are Gauḥ, Āyuḥ, and Jyotiḥ.
4.15.4	This world is Jyotiḥ, the other world is Jyotiṣ. These two worlds are Jyotiḥs, they are both worlds.
4.15.5	By means of this sacrifice with two lights and six days they go. In that they go by means of this sacrifice, with two lights and with six days, they go to these two worlds, standing on both sides, in this world and in the other world, of both.
4.15.6-7	The Abhiplava is the circle of the gods. The two Agniṣṭomas at the beginning and the end of the six-day Abhiplava are the sky. The four Ukthyas in the middle are the heaven.
4.15.8	He who knows that which is the first six-day period, he attains the end of the year in safety. He who knows that, which is the second, he who knows that, whch is the third, he who knows, that which is the fourth, he who knows what is the fifth.
4.16.1	They proceed for the first six days. There are six days. There being six seasons, they thus attain the year by seasons. Proceeding by seasons, they go to the year.
4.16.2	They perform the second six-day rite. There are twelve days. There are twelve months. They thus attain the year by months. They proceed by months in the year.
4.16.3	They perform the third six-day sacrifice. There are eighteen days. They are divided into two groups of nine. There are nine vital airs and nine heavenly worlds. They attain the vital airs and the heavenly worlds. They proceed in the vital airs and heavenly worlds, being established.
4.16.4	They perform the fourth six-day rite. There are twenty-four days. There are twenty four half-months. They attain the year by half-months. Going in the year by half months, they proceed.
4.16.5	They go on for five days, making thirty days. Viraj has thirty syllables. Viraj is food. They go on, attaining Viraj month by month.
4.16.6	Those who desire food and drink perform the Sattra. They go to Viraj in each month, desiring food and drink. They go to obtain food and drink in each month, for this world and the other world, for both.
4.17.1	They go by the path of cows. Cows are the Adityas. They go by the path (of the) Adityas.
4.17.2	The cows were performing a sacrifice. They were desirous of the horns and the hooves. In the tenth month, the hooves and horns were born to them. They said, "For which desire did we initiate? We shall rise up for that." Those who rose up are the horned ones.
4.17.3	Now those who were going to spend the year together, they stood there. Through lack of faith their horns turned. They are these very same (cows). They did not obtain the strength. Therefore they, having obtained all the seasons, rise up afterwards. They did not obtain strength. All cows are the measure of all, they have gone to the beauty of all.
4.17.4	All that is measured, all that is beautiful, goes to him who knows this.
4.17.5	The Adityas and the Angirasas were competing for heaven, saying, "We will go first." The Adityas went to heaven first, and the Angirasa followed after sixty years.
4.17.6	Or, as in the case of the Prāyaniya Atiratra, the twenty-four Ukthya, all the Abhiplvas, the six days are performed, and other days are performed. That is the course of the Adityas.
4.17.7	Or, as in the Prāyaniyātiratra, the four Ukthya, the twenty-two, all the Prsthya, the six days, and other days, that is the course of Angiras.
4.17.8	Just as the Sruti is the same as the Anjasiyana, so the Abhipava six-day ritual is for the world of heaven. Just as the great path is the same as a carriage, so the Prsthya six-day ritual (is for the world of) heaven. When they go by both (ways), one does not lose by either. For the attainment of both desires, those of the Abhipava and those of the Prsthyas.
4.18.1	This is the twenty-first day, the day of the equinox, in the middle of the year.
4.18.2	By this twenty-first day the gods raised up the sun to the heavenly world.
4.18.3	This is the twenty-one.
4.18.4	His ten days are in the past, and ten in the future, and the middle one is twenty-one. He is established on both sides of Viraj, for he is established on both the sides of Viraj. Therefore he does not suffer in between these worlds.
4.18.5	The gods, fearing that the sun would fall from heaven, supported him from below with three heavenly worlds. The Stomas are three heavenly worlds. They feared that he would fall from the other side. They supported him from above with three heavenly worlds, the Stomas are three heaven-worlds. There are seventeen from below, three from above, and in the middle this one is twenty-one. It is supported on both sides by the Svarasāma-s because it is supported on both the sides by the Svarāsaṃa-s. Therefore, it does not get disturbed.
4.18.6	The gods, fearing that the sun would fall from heaven, supported him from below with the highest heavenly worlds. The Stoma is the highest heavenly world. They feared that he would fall from the highest heavenly world, and supported him from above with the highest heavenly world.
4.18.7	He indeed is the highest, above all that is and will be. He shines above all this, whatever there is. He who is above, he shines above.
4.18.8	He who desires to be above, he becomes above, he who knows this.
4.19.1	The Svarasama hymns are sung. These worlds are the Svarasama hymns. They touched these worlds with the Svarasama (hymns). That is why they are called Svarasama. When they sing the Svarasama, they honour him in these worlds.
4.19.2	The gods, fearing that the seventeen would be destroyed, surrounded them on both sides with all the Stotras and all the Prsthas, thinking, "They will not be destroyed, as if they were united." When the Abhijit is performed with all the Stomas on this side and the Vishvajit with all the Prstha on the other side, then they surround the seventeen on both sides for stability and non-destruction.
4.19.3	The gods, fearing that the sun would fall from heaven, raised him up with five rays. The Diwakirti stotras are the rays. The Mahadiwakirti stotra is the Pratihara. The Brahmasama stotra is the Vikarna. The Agnistoma stotra is the Bhas. The two stotras of Brihat and Rathantara are the Pavamana stotras. Thus they raise up the sun with five rays for stability and to prevent falling.
4.19.4	He who recites the morning Prastara when the sun has risen, makes the whole day of the Diwakirti rite.
4.19.5	They should offer a horse as a Saura animal, and a white goat as a Savaniya animal. This day is dedicated to Surya.
4.19.6	One should recite twenty-one Samidheni verses. This day is directly related to the number twenty-one.
4.19.7	Having recited one hundred and fifty or two hundred verses, he places the Nivida in the middle. He recites as many verses afterwards. Man has a life span of one hundred years, one hundred powers, and one hundred senses. He thus places his life span, power, and senses in the middle.
4.20.1	One ascends the Dūrohaṇa (heaven). The heaven is the Dūrohana.
4.20.2	One who knows this ascends the heaven.
4.20.3-6	The Dūrohaṇa is the one who shines yonder, and whoever goes there. When he ascends the Dūrohaṇa, he ascends him. He ascends with the verse, "The swan, the pure one." This is the swan, the pure. "The treasure in the sky," this is the treasure in the sky.
4.20.7	"The Hotṛ is seated on the altar" - this indeed is the Hotṛ seated on the altar.
4.20.8	"The guest is seated in the house" - this indeed the guest is seated in a house.
4.20.9	"Seated among men" - this indeed he is seated among men.
4.20.10	"Seating in the best" - this indeed it is the best, in which he is seated, shining.
4.20.11	"Seater in truth" - this indeed, he is seated in truth.
4.20.12	"This is the 'one who is in the sky', for he is the one who is in the heaven, in which he shines.
4.20.13	"This is the 'water-born', for he rises from the water in the morning and enters the water in the evening.
4.20.14	"This indeed is the 'cow-born'.
4.20.15	"This indeed the 'born of truth'.
4.20.16	"This is indeed the 'born from the mountain'.
4.20.17-20	"The truth" is indeed this (truth). This is indeed the truth. This is indeed all of them. This is indeed the most visible form of his metres. Therefore, wherever one may climb, one should climb with the Hamsa-vati. One should climb with the Tarksya for one who desires heaven.
4.20.21	The hawk, indeed, went along the former path, where the Gâyatrî, having become a hawk, brought the Soma. Just as one would appoint a guide to lead the way, so is it. The hawk, indeed is this (sun), who shines here. He is the carrier of the heavenly world.
4.20.22	"He is the swift, the divine-driven horse." This is the horse that is divine-driven.
4.20.23	"The strong, the swift-crossing, the chariots." This is the strong one, the swift-crosser, for he crosses these worlds quickly.
4.20.24	"The unvanquished-namer, the swift-born, the swift." This is the unvanquished namer, the swift-bor, the swift.
4.20.25	"May we be well." He wishes for well-being.
4.20.26	"He calls him by saying, 'We invoke Tarkshya here.'
4.20.27	'Like Indra, we invoke the gift of cattle for prosperity.' He wishes for prosperity.
4.20.28	'Like boarding a boat,' he ascends him for the attainment, accomplishment, and union of the heavenly world.
4.20.29	"The earth, the wide, the deep, may we not be harmed by these two, the coming and the going. He thus addresses them in praise, for the coming and the departing.
4.20.30	"He who by his power has today stretched out the five regions, like the sun with light," he praises the sun directly.
4.20.31	"He who has a thousand and a hundred, his friend does not want him, not the young woman with her love." He thus prays for himself and for the sacrificers.
4.21.1	He ascends after having called out. The world of heaven is the ascent. Speech is the call. Speech is Brahman. When he calls out, he ascends the world of heaven by means of Brahman.
4.21.2	He first ascends the last step, and then the first; he thus attains the world of heaven. Then by half-steps the air; he thus attains that. Then by three steps this world; he thus attains this. Then by the sole step he stands in that which shines here.
4.21.3	He descends by three steps, as if holding a branch. He stands in the other world in half-verses, in the atmosphere in the last verses, and in this world in the full verses. Having attained that heavenly world, the sacrificers stand in this world.
4.21.4	Now those who have one desire, who desire heaven, should ascend to the highest heaven. They would indeed conquer the heavenly world.
4.21.5	But they would not live in this world as if they were superior.
4.21.6	The hymns of the Mitra-Varuna pair are sung, and the Tristubh and Jagati metres. The animals are the Mitra-Varunapari, and the metres are the animals. For the securing of animals.
4.22.1	Just as a man has two shoulders, so the sun has two halves. The half which is to the south is like the right shoulder of a man, and the half which is to north is like the left shoulder of a man. Therefore they call the northern half of the sun 'Uttarāyana'. The head is the most important part of a man, just as the head is the most prominent part of the sun, so the head is the middle part of the sun. It is known as the middle part of a man.
4.22.2	They say, one should recite the verses on the day of the equinox. The equinox is the best of the eulogies. The equinox is indeed the best of the praises. They become equal. They attain the best position.
4.22.3	One should not pay attention to that. One should recite the verses in the year itself. They go to the year, depositing semen.
4.22.4	Those which are born in less than a year, those which are born in five months, those which are in six months, they are not fit for eating.
4.22.5	Those which are born in ten months, those which belong to the year, they are fit for eating. Therefore one should recite this verse only in the year.
4.22.6	This day is the year, for he attains the year. This day is attained by the year. This indeed is the one who has removed sin by the year. By the equinox he removes sin from the limbs. By the equinox of the head he removes sin by the months.
4.22.7	He who knows thus, removes sin by the year, and by the equinox.
4.22.8	They should offer the bull of Visvakarman as a supplementary animal at the Savaniya animal sacrifice. It should be of two colours. It is offered on the Mahavrata day.
4.22.9	Indra, having slain Vritra, became the creator of all things; Prajapati, having created the creatures, became the creator. He then attained himself in Indra, in Prajapati, in the year, in the creator. They then attain themselves in Indra, in the Prajapati, the year, the creator. They finally stand in Indra, in himself, in Prajapata, in the year and in the creator. He who knows thus, he who knows thus, stands firm.
4.23.1	Prajapati desired, "May I beget, may I be more." He performed austerities. Having performed austerities, he saw this twelve-day (rite) in his own body and in the vital airs. He divided it into twelve parts in his own body, in the limbs and in the vital breaths. He brought it, and offered sacrifice with it. Then he became self-existent, and was born with offspring and cattle.
4.23.2	He who knows this becomes self-existent, and is born with offspring and cattle.
4.23.3	He desired, "How can I, having conquered all with the Gāyatrī, attain all prosperity for twelve days?" He conquered all prosperity for twelve daus by conquering all with the Gâyatrî, with brilliance in front, with metres in the middle, and with syllables above.
4.23.4	He who knows this attains all prosperity.
4.23.5	He who knows the Gayatri, the winged, the eye-like, the light-like, the shining, goes to the heavenly world by means of the Gayatri, winged, eye-like, light-like, shining. This is the Gayatri, which is winged, eye- like, light-like and shining. The twelve-day sacrifice has two Atiratras at the beginning and at the end, which are the two wings. The two Agnistomas in between are the eyes. The eight Ukthyas in the middle are the body.
4.23.6	He goes to the heavenly world by means of Gayatri, Pakshini, Chakshusmati, Jyotishmati, and Bhasvatya. He who knows this.
4.24.1	And these three Tri-days are up to the tenth day, and two Atiratras, when it is the twelve-day (rite).
4.24.2	One becomes consecrated for twelve days, and by them one becomes fit for the sacrifice.
4.24.3	One performs the twelve-day Upasads, and by them he cleanses the body.
4.24.4	One who has been born again after twelve days.
4.24.5	Having become, having shed the body, pure, purified, he goes to the gods, he who knows this.
4.24.6	Now this twelve-day sacrifice is thirty-six days. The Brihatī has thirty-six syllables. The twelve-day sacrifice leads to the Brihatī. The gods attained these worlds with ten syllables, ten syllables, ten, and four syllables. The four directions are four. They settled in this world with two syllables.
4.24.7	He who knows this stands firm.
4.24.8	They say, "The other metres are greater and more numerous, then why is this called Brihatī?"
4.24.9	For by this the gods attained these worlds. They attained this world with ten syllables, the atmosphere with ten, heaven with ten, and the four directions with four. They established themselves in this world with two. Therefore it is called Brihatī.
4.24.10	One attains whatever one desires, he who knows this.
4.25.1	This twelve-day sacrifice is indeed the sacrifice of Prajapati. Prajapati performed this sacrifice in the beginning with the twelve-day sacrifice. He said, "Sacrifice to the seasons and months, not with the twelve-days." Having initiated him and having sent him without leaving, they said, "Give us, then we shall sacrifice to you." He gave them food and energy. That food and energy are deposited in the seasons and months. They sacrificed to him who gave. Therefore, one who gives is sacrificed to. They sacrificed to one who received. Therefore, one receiving is sacrificed to.
4.25.2	Both of them succeed, those who know this and offer sacrifices and cause sacrifices to be offered.
4.25.3	Those seasons and months, indeed, were afraid of the twelve-day sacrifice. Having accepted it, they said to Prajapati, "Sacrifice for us with the twelve-day (sacrifice)." He said, "So be it." They said, "Initiate yourselves." Those who were in the first half initiated themselves first. They removed sin. Therefore, they are like heaven, for they have removed sin like heaven. Those who were in second half initiated themselves later. They removed sin more. Therefore, they (are) like darkness, for they have not removed sin like darkness. Therefore, one who knows this, when initiating, should initiate first, first.
4.25.4	He who knows this, indeed, destroys evil.
4.25.5	Now this Prajapati was established in the seasons and months. Those seasons and months were established in Prajapati in the year. They are established in each other. Thus indeed he is established in the officiating priest who performs the twelve-day sacrifice. Therefore they say, "A sinful man should not be sacrificed to with the twelve-day (sacrifice), lest he be established in me."
4.25.6	The twelve-day sacrifice is the foremost of sacrifices. The one who performed it first among the gods was the foremost. The twelve-day is the best of sacrifices. The first one to perform it was the best among the gods.
4.25.7	One who is foremost and best should perform it. The good and the bad are equal here. One who is not a good person should not be sacrificed. "One should not think, "This will not be established in me."
4.25.8	The gods did not stand up to Indra, the eldest and the best. He said, "Sacrifice to me with a twelve-day sacrifice." He sacrificed to him. Then the gods stood up to him, the eldest and best.
4.25.9	Those who know this stand up to him, their own eldest and best. Their own stand up to him in the best position.
4.25.10	The first three days are upward, the middle ones are horizontal, and the last ones are downward. Since the first three days are upwards, this Agni blazes upwards, for this is the upward direction. Since the middle ones are horizontally, this wind blows horizontally, and the waters flow horizontally, for this is a horizontal direction. Since the last ones are downwards, this sun shines downwards, and the rain falls downwards, and the stars are downwards, for this is an inferior direction. These worlds are upright, and these three days are upright.
4.25.11	These worlds are well-arranged for us. He who knows this shines forth with glory.
4.26.1	Initiation went away from the gods. They yoked it with the two spring months. They did not obtain it with the two summer months. They yoked with the two rainy months. They yokened with the two autumn months. They yokned with the two winter months. They did obtain it with the winter months.
4.26.2	He obtains what he desires. He who knows this does not obtain what is hated.
4.26.3	Therefore, if one is to be initiated in the Sattrīya rite, one should be initiated in these two months of Śaiśira when they have arrived. If the initiation has already arrived, one is initiated directly. One directly accepts the initiation. Therefore, in these two months when they have arrived, and also the domestic animals and the wild animals, they are restrained in the form of the initiation.
4.26.4	He offers the animal dedicated to Prajapati before the initiation.
4.26.5	One should recite seventeen Sāmidhenī verses for him. Prajapati is seventeenfold; for attaining Prajapati.
4.26.6	His enemies become his sons-in-law.
4.26.7	They say, "Why is it that when the other animals are not liked, it is only in this one that they are not liked?"
4.26.8	Jāmadagnya is of all forms, and all prosperity. This animal is of all forms and all prosperity. Therefore, when they are Jāmadagnya, it is for the sake of being of all forms and having all prosperity.
4.26.9	His animal-sacrifice is dedicated to Vayu.
4.26.10	They say, "If the animal is dedicated to another deity, why is the animal-sacrifice dedicated to Vayu?"
4.26.11	One should say, "The sacrifice is Prajapati. It is for the completeness of the sacrifice." If it is dedicated to Vāyu, then it goes to Prajapati, because Vāyu is indeed Prajapati.
4.26.12	The sage has said this. Pavamāna is Prajapati.
4.26.13	If they were to perform a sacrifice after having set up the fires, all should be initiated and all should offer the Soma-juice. The spring season approaches. Spring is energy. He thus approaches energy.
4.27.1	The Chhandas-s, indeed, were thinking of each other's abode. The Gâyatrî and the Tristubh were thinking of the abode of the Jagatî. The Jagatî was thinking of the abode (of the Chhandas- s) of the Gâyatrî, and the Tristub. Then Prajapati saw this Vyuha-Chhandas sacrifice of twelve days; he brought it, and performed it. By it he attained all his desires.
4.27.2	He who knows this goes to all his desires.
4.27.3	He arranges the Chhandas for the sake of non-exhaustion.
4.27.4	He arranges the metres, just as the horses, the oxen and other animals, one after the other, go on without tiring, so also the metres, one after the another, go on without getting tired, and reach the world of heaven. The metres which he arranges.
4.27.5	These two worlds were together, but they separated. There was no rain, no equal heat. The five peoples did not know each other. The gods brought them together. They brought them together with this divine marriage. With the Rathantara she animates this one, with the Brihat that one.
4.27.6	The former (the sun) attracts the latter (the moon) by means of its light; the latter attracts the former by means of its smoke; the former attracts the latter by means of its rain; the latter attracts this (earth) by means of the sacrifice. The former (the moon) places the animals in the latter (the earth).
4.27.7	This (earth) places the sacrifice in the former (the moon), which is dark like the moon.
4.27.8	Therefore, in the waning fortnight, they perform sacrifices with the desire to attain this.
4.27.9	Uṣa, indeed, is this (earth). It is also the name of a cow. Kauṣeya said, "Uṣa is nourishment. Janamejaya is the name of a king." Therefore, even now, when discussing the cow, they ask, "Are there Uṣas there?" For Uṣa is nourishment.
4.27.10	Then indeed heaven and earth became, not heaven from the sky, nor the sky from the earth.
4.28.1	Now, at first, there were Brihat and Rathantara, and speech and mind. Speech is Rathantara, mind is Brihat. Brihat, the elder, created first, and Rathantara followed. Rathantara conceived a foetus, and that became Vaikrita.
4.28.2	They became two, and the Rathantara and the Vaivāddhajā, and the Brihat, passed over the Bṛhat, it deposited the embryo, it produced the Vaivāḍa.
4.28.3	They became two, and Brihat and Vaivāḍha, and Rathantara and Vaivāddha, passed over the Rathantara, it deposited the germ, it produced the Śākvara.
4.28.4	Those three became the Rathantara, the Vaivāhikam, the Shakaram, the Bṛhat, the Vairajam, and the Atirambhaṇam. The Bṛhat contained the embryo, and that became the Raivata.
4.28.5	Those three and the other three make six Prastara-s.
4.28.6	Then those three metres and the six Stoma-s did not attain (the desired result). That Gāyatrī conceived a child, she gave birth to Anushtubh. Triṣṭub conceived a child, it gave birth to Paṅkti. Jagatī conceived a child, that gave birth to Atichandas. Those three and those other three became the six metres and the six stoma-s. They came to an agreement thus: "The sacrifice will be successful.
4.28.7	That community is fit for him, in which he, knowing the arrangement of these metres and the Backs, consecrates himself, consecrates himself.
4.29.1	Agni is the deity of the first day, the Trivṛt stoma, the Rathantara Sāman, the Gāyatrī metre.
4.29.2	He succeeds according to the deity, according to the stoma, according to the sāman, according to the metre, he who knows thus.
4.29.3	Or, what is both coming and going, that is the form of the first day, what is like a chariot, what is like an arrow, what is like drinking, what is the deity mentioned in the first verse, what is this world risen, what is the Rathantara, what is the Gayatri, what is to be done, these are the forms of the first day.
4.29.4	The first morning's offering of butter is "Approaching the sacrifice."
4.29.5	"Pre" is the form of the first morning.
4.29.6	"O Vayu, come, I show you" is the form for the first morning.
4.29.7	"O Indra, come to this our song, O Indra, come to our praise." The first two verses of the Marutvatīya Sāman are the first two verses of this Sāman. The first verse is "O Indra, do thou come hither" and the second verse is "O Vasu, do thou drink this Soma which has been pressed." The first verse is the form of the first day of the first day.
4.29.8	"O Indra, come hither" is the Indra-nihav-prastara. The deity is mentioned in the first verse. The first verse of the first day is the form of first day.
4.29.9	"Brahmanaspati has gone forth" - this is Brahmanaspati. "Preti" is the form of the first day, the first hour.
4.29.10	"Agni is the leader, O Soma, you are the leader with the rites" - the deities are mentioned in the first verses of the Dhāyyas. This is the form of first day, the form of the firsthour.
4.29.11	"O Indra, the great one" is the Marutvatīya Prāgaṭha. "Pre" is the form of the first day.
4.29.12	"May Indra come to the house, to us" is the Sūkta. "Eti" is the form for the first day.
4.29.13	We invoke thee, O hero, we invoke thee, O drinker of the first (Soma). The Rathantara is the Sāman. The first day is the Rathantara day. The first day has the form of the first day.
4.29.14	The first (day) is the most ancient, the first (day) has the name of Indra, the slayer of Vrtra. It comes (to the first day). The first day has form of the first.
4.29.15	"Drink, O son, the juice of Soma" is the Sāman-verse. "Drinking" is the form of the first day.
4.29.16	"O ye, the strong, the divine-driven" is the Tarksya (verse). He recites it at the beginning of the Sūkta. Tarksya is for welfare.
4.29.17	He makes it indeed for welfare. He attains the end of the year safely, he who knows thus.
4.30.1	"Indra has come from afar, Indra has come near." This is the first verse of the first day, the form of the first day.
4.30.2	The two verses of the Nisthika and Marutvatīya are the Sampāta verses. In the Nidhana (the final section) Vamadeva saw these worlds and descended upon them with the Sampāta (verses). In that he descended upon them with Sampātas, that is the nature of the Sampātas. In that he recites the Sampāta on the first day, it is for the attainment, accomplishment, and union of the heavenly world.
4.30.3	We choose the Savitar's (blessing). Today, O god Savitar, is the verse of the Vaishvadev (rite). The two verses following it are the forms of the first day of the Rathantara (rite) and the first day of a month.
4.30.4	"They yoke the mind and they yoke the thought." This is the Savitar verse. It is yoked like the first day of Rathantara (rite). It is the form of the first day.
4.30.5	The heaven and earth have grown by sacrifices, true to their promise. This is the hymn to heaven and earth. This is the form of the first day.
4.30.6	"Here, here, O men, your minds are bound to us." This is the form of the first day. If everything were to be "pre" (i.e., "pre" + "ti"), then the sacrificers would have gone from this world. Therefore, when he says, "Here, here...," it is for the first day. This world is here, here. He delights them in this world.
4.30.7	The gods, the givers of great fame, the givers (of) welfare, are invoked. In the first place, the deities are mentioned. It is the form of the first day, the first day.
4.30.8	Those who live for a year or twelve days are going to a great journey. The first day is celebrated with the verse, "We invoke the gods for great fame and welfare."
4.30.9	He who knows this, he makes it auspicious, he attains the end of the year. He who knows this and for whom the Hotr priest recites this hymn to the gods for great fame and welfare, he recites the Vaishvadev hymn on the first day.
4.30.10	The verse "To Vaisvānara, the widely-praised, the divine" is the first verse of the Agni-Marut hymn. The deity is mentioned in the first verse. It is the form of the first day, the first day.
4.30.11	"The shining ones, the shining ones, the fierce ones" is the Marut hymn. "Pre" is the form of first day, the form of the firsth day.
4.30.12	"We offer Soma to Jātavedas" - thus he recites the first verse of the Jātavedasyā hymn. The Jātavedsyā is for welfare.
4.30.13	He indeed makes it for welfare. One who knows this attains the end of the year with welfare.
4.30.14	"We offer to Agni the new and old praise" - thus he says in the first verse of Jātavedasa. The first verse is the form of the first day.
4.30.15	The Agni-Marut-Stotra is the same as the Agni-Stotra. Whatever is done in common at a sacrifice, the progeny follows that. Therefore the Agni-Marut Stotra is the same.
4.31.1	Indra is the deity of the second day. The stoma is fifteenfold, the Saman is Brihat, the metre is Tristubh.
4.31.2	He who knows thus, attains according to the deity, according to the Stoma, according to the Sama, according to the Chanda.
4.31.3	What is not, what is not, what stands, that is the form of the second day. What is above, what is opposite, what is within, what is manly, what is increasing, what is in the middle, what is the deity, what is the atmosphere, what is the Bharata, what is the Tristubh, what is the doing, these are the forms of the second day.
4.31.4-5	The second day's Soma-pressing is done with the verse, "We choose Agni as our messenger." The second day' s Soma-pressing is performed with the verse, “Vayu, those of yours who are a thousand." The verse, "The Soma pressed for Indra, the increaser of truth," is sung in the second day's pressing.
4.31.6	The verse "Indra, the lord of the Vasus, the drinker of Soma, is one" belongs to the Marutvatīya Sāman. The two verses "Vridhanva" and "Antarva" belong to the second day, and are the form of the second day.
4.31.7	The verse "O Indra, come here now" belongs to the Acchāvaṭa Sāman. "O Brahmaṇaspati, rise up" belongs to the Brahmaspatya Sāman, and is the form of the upward-moving Sāman. It belongs to the second day and is the form for the second day.
4.31.8	Agni is the leader, O Soma, with the rites. The waters are being filled by the Dhāyyas, the unerring ones.
4.31.9	The Marutvatiya Prastara is sung to Indra in a loud voice. By which light he generated, the one who increases truth. The Vridhanvan is the form of the second day of the second day.
4.31.10	"O Indra, drink this Soma, O Soma-lord," is the verse. "With the Rudras, in accord, do thou delight in the three steps," is the verse with the word "vṛṣa" (bull). On the second day, the form of the second day.
4.31.11	"We invoke thee, O Indra, for thou art the leader," is the verse on the second day. The second day has the form of the Brihat (Sāman).
4.31.12-14	Or, "O Vāvāna, the one who has gone away, listen to both" is a Sāman-like composition. "What is today and what was yesterday" is the form of the second day of the second day. "O Vājin, the one who is yoked by the gods, the one who goes away" is the one from Tarkshya.
4.32.1	The verse, "That power of yours, the lowest and the highest, destroy the praises, make the Vrishni tribes go away," is the form of the second day, the second day of the week.
4.32.2	"The whole world is the path of the god, that of Savitar, the desirable one, the all-god, the lord," are the verses of the Visvadevya rite, the form of the first day, the second of the week.
4.32.3	The verse, "The God Savitr has risen up, golden-hued," is Savitri. It is upward-looking, the form of the second day, the second day.
4.32.4	"Those two, heaven and earth, are for all to enjoy." This is the Savitri verse. "The well-born one, the divine one, has entered within." This is the form of the third day, the third day.
4.32.5	"He is making the well-made chariot, the one who knows, the one who is without deceit." This is the Ārbhava. "The horses, the makers of the chariot, the bearers of Indra, the strong ones," this is the second day, the form of the second day.
4.32.6	"The lord of the sacrifice, the lord of the assembly, the lord of men," this is the Vaishvadeva. "The bull, the banner, the one who worships, the sky," this is the strong one, the second day, and the form of the first day.
4.32.7	Now, the Angirasas were performing a sacrifice for the attainment of heaven. They used to come back on the second day and get confused. The human Sharata recited this hymn on the second day. Then they knew the sacrifice and the heavenly world. In that the hymn is recited on the second day, it is for the knowledge of the sacrifice and the fame of the heavenly world.
4.32.8	The first verse of the Agni-Marut-Stotra is "O Agni, O Maruts, O Indra, O Varuna, O Rudra, O Vishnu, O Vrishna, O Aruhsa, O Nusha, O Sah" (RV 10.103.1). This is the form of the second day, the second day being the form of the Vrishanvat (verse).
4.32.9	The second verse of the Marut-Stotra (RV 1.103) is "To Vrishna, to Sharadha, to Sumkha, to Vedhas" (RV 2.103). This is the Vrishanavat verse of the Maruts, the form of the first day, the first day being the form.
4.32.10	"We offer Soma to Jata-vedas" (RV 9.1.1). This belongs to Jata-veda.
4.32.11	The second day is the form of the second day. The form of the day is the form.
5.1.1	The third day is carried by all the gods as the deity. The Stoma is seventeen, the Sama is Vairupa, the Chanda is Jagati.
5.1.2	One who knows this attains success according to the deity, according to the Stoma, according to the Sama, according to the Chanda.
5.1.3	What is similar to the third day, what is like a horse, what is like an end, what is repeated, what is danced again, what is like love, what is like the Parvastha, what is like three, what is like end, what is said to be the deity in the highest place, what is the world that has risen, what is the form of the third day, and what is the Krita age - these are the forms of the third day.
5.1.4	"O Agni, yoke the horses that are called the divine summons, as a charioteer yokes his horses." This is the offering of clarified butter for the third day.
5.1.5	The gods, on the third day, reached the heavenly world. The Asuras, the Rakshas, followed them. They said, "Let us become deformed." They reached the world. When they said, "Let's become deformed," they reached the world. That became the Vairupa Sama. That is the reason for the name Vairupa.
5.1.6	One who knows this becomes deformed by sin and destroys sin.
5.1.7	They indeed come to them, and are created together with them. Having become horses, they struck them with their feet. Because they struck them with feet, that is the horsehood of horses.
5.1.8	He obtains whatever he desires, he who knows this.
5.1.9	Therefore the horse is the swiftest of animals. Therefore the horse strikes with its feet from a distance.
5.1.10	He who knows thus, has destroyed sin.
5.1.11	Therefore this is the horse-like ghee, for the form of the third day.
5.1.12	O Vayu, come for the sacrifice. O Vayu, may you come with the auspicious (deities). May Indra and Vayu be among these libations. We (come) to Mitra, Varuna, and the Asvins. Come to us with the mountains. Come with the pressed (Soma) in union with all the gods. May our dear ones be dear to us. This is the Uṣṇihā Prauga with a common praise. It is the form of the third day of the third day.
5.1.13	"That great one is for your praise, the three Soma-offerings of Indra" (is the Anushtubh verse) in the Marutvatīya (Stotra). The two verses "Dancing thrice, thrice" are in the third pressing. They are in the form of the third pressing.
5.1.14	"O Indra, come hither" (is the verse) in the Acchäva-sastra. "Brahmanaspati has come down" (is the Brahmanaspatya verse) in the third pressing, in the form of third pressing.
5.1.15	Agni is the leader, O Soma, you are the leader with the rites. The waters are the unfaltering ones who fill (the oblations).
5.1.16	The one who is Sukdas has gone around the chariot. The Marutvatiya (verse) says, "I did not enjoy." The verse of praise has gone around in the third day. It is the form of the third day.
5.1.17	The hymn "O Aryaman, the god of men" is recited three times. It is the form of the third day, the third day.
5.1.18	The hymn "O Indra, if the heaven is yours, O Indra, as much as you are" is recited in the form of a Rathantera hymn. It is the third day, and the form of the fourth day.
5.1.19	"O Indra, if you are the one who gives" is the form of a Dhayya hymn.
5.1.20	"O hero, they praise thee" (is the verse) which is in the form of Rathantara. It is in the form Rathantara, because it is in the form (of the Rathantara).
5.1.21	"O Indra, the three-fold refuge" (is the hymn) which is in form of Saman. It is in form of the third day, because it is the form of the third (day).
5.1.22	"O ye, the swift, the divine-chariotted" (is the text) which is in Tarksya form. It is in Tarkshya form.
5.2.1	The hymn beginning with "He who is born, the first, the wise" is of similar import. It is the form of the third day.
5.2.2	This is the Sajanīya (hymn). The Sajanīya is Indra's power. When this is being chanted, Indra enters into Indra.
5.2.3	The Chandogas say that on the third day the Bahvṛcas chant Indra's power.
5.2.4	This is the Gārtsamada. By this Gārtsamad attained Indra's beloved abode, and conquered the supreme world.
5.2.5	He who knows this goes to Indra's beloved dwelling, conquers the supreme world.
5.2.6	We choose the Savitar's (blessing). Today, O god Savitar, is the verse of the Vaishvadev (rite). The Rathaantara (rite) is the third day. The third day is the form of the third day.
5.2.7	This is the Savitar'
5.2.8	The third day is the end, the great, the end of the third day, the form of the Rathaantara (Samiti).
5.2.9	"The heaven and earth are covered with ghee." This is the form of the third day, the third day.
5.2.10	"The horse is born, the invincible, the praiseworthy." This is the Ārbhava chariot. "The chariot has three wheels." This is the third day, in the form of the fourth day.
5.2.11-12	The Paravata (verses) are those who desire the waters. This is the Visvedevata (verses). The Paravata verses are the end. The third day is the end. This is the form of the third day.
5.2.13	He goes to the dear abode of all the gods. He conquers the supreme world, he who knows thus.
5.2.14	"The Agni-Marut hymn begins with the verse, "To Vaisvānara, the divine, the increaser of truth, the divine,"; the Agni-Marut is the end, the third day is the end, it is the form of the third day.
5.2.15-16	The Maruts of the stream, of mighty strength, is for the Maruts. Having uttered many times, it is the end. The end is the third day. The form of the third day is the third day.
5.2.17	"You, O Agni, are the first Angiras, the Rishi," (thus) the praise of Jātavedas is recited in the morning of the third day. The form of the third day is "you, you." He recites the last three days in succession for continuity.
5.2.18	Those who know this go with the uninterrupted three days in succession.
5.3.1	The Stomas are obtained, the metres are obtained. On the third day, this alone remains. It is indeed speech. This is indeed the syllable. The syllable is three-syllabled. Speech is one syllable. The syllable has three syllables.
5.3.2	This very same is the subsequent three-day (rite). Speech is one, a cow is one, heaven is one.
5.3.3	Then indeed speech carries the fourth day.
5.3.4	What they do to the fourth day, that they do to the syllable, they strive for it, they increase it, they make it grow, for the rising of the fourth day.
5.3.5	The New Moon is food. When they perform the rites of the New Moon, then food is produced. When they perform rites on the fourth day, they produce food. Therefore on the fourth day one should be like one who is born.
5.3.6	They say, one should make amends with the four-syllabled (verse). The animals have four feet. For the attainment of animals.
5.3.7	They say, one should (make amends) with the three-syllabled verse. These three worlds are threefold. For the conquest of these worlds.
5.3.8	"One should make amends with the one-syllabled (Om). This is what Langalayan Brahmana Maudgalyaya said. The one-syllable Om is indeed the speech. One who makes amends with the one syllable Om, indeed makes amends with the present."
5.3.9	One should make the Nyuṅkha with only two syllables, for the foundation is indeed the man who has two foundations. The animals have four feet. He thus establishes the sacrificer who has two foundations in the animals which have four feet. Therefore one should make the Nyiṅkha with only the two syllables.
5.3.10-11	He pours the Nyuṅkha-oblation from the mouth at the morning-recitation. The creatures eat food from the mouth. He thus places the sacrificer in the food from the mouth.
5.3.12	At midday he makes it fall from the mouth. From the mouth the creatures eat food. He thus makes the sacrificer the food-eater.
5.3.13	He takes it up on both sides, for the taking up of the food-eater.
5.4.1	The fourth day is the deity of speech, the Ekavimsa stoma, the Vairāja Sāman, the Anushtubh metre. He succeeds according to the deity, according to the stoma, according to the sāman, according to the metre, he who knows thus.
5.4.2	Or, it is the form of the fourth day, for what was the first day, that is this fourth day. What is yoked, what is chariot-like, what is swift, what is drinking, what is the deity mentioned in the first foot, what is this world risen, what is born, what is to be offered, what is bright, what is the form of speech, what is Vamada, what is Virfiti, what is the scattered, what is deficient and excessive, what is Vaimala, what is Anushtubh, what is to do, what is the first day, these are the forms of the fourth day.
5.4.3	The Hotr recites the Agni Svāṃ-vrkti verses. This is the butter for the fourth day. The fourth day is of the sage Virifiṭa, the son of Vimada. The fourth day has the form of the fourth day.
5.4.4	The hymn has eight verses and five lines. The sacrifice is fivefold; animals are fivefold. For the securing of animals.
5.4.5	Those ten Jagatī verses are the Jagatī verses of the morning pressing. This is the three-day (rite). This is the form of the fourth day.
5.4.6	Those fifteen Anushtubh verses are the Anushtubh verse of the fourth day (rite). This (verse) is the form of fourth day.
5.4.7	These twenty Gāyatrī verses are the Prāyaṇīya (verses) of the fourth day.
5.4.8	This is the praiseworthy, the praiseworthy, and the praiseworthy hymn. The sacrifice itself is the praiseworthy. When there is the offering of clarified butter in the fourth day, they make the sacrifice out of the sacrifice. They again take up speech for continuity.
5.4.9	Those who know this go with the three days of continuity without interruption. Those who know this go.
5.4.10	O Vayu, I am coming to you, O Vayu, the pure one, the one who is not to be defeated, the one who has a hundred steeds, Indra and Vayu, the one who knows these Soma offerings, the one with pure intentions, come to us with all your powers. That which is not to be destroyed, that which is to be destroyed, the enemy, the one who causes harm, the one who makes the rivers flow, the one who goes and comes, the one who speaks, the one who says, the one who belongs to the fourth day, the form of the fourth day.
5.4.11	"We invoke thee at the sacrifices." This is the first verse of the Marutvatīya hymn. The word "invoke" is like a challenge. This is the form of the fourth day.
5.4.12	This is the Soma, O Indra, drunk by Vasu. Come hither, let the Brahmanaspati go. Agni is the leader. Thou, O Soma, with the rites, swellest the waters. Let us go to Indra, the great. The first day and the fourth day are similar. The fourth day is the form of the fourth day.
5.4.13	Listen to my call, O Indra, do not be angry. This is the hymn of calling. The fourth day is the form of the fourth day.
5.4.14	O Indra, the bull, the lord of the Maruts, we invoke him here, the strong one, the giver of strength. This is the calling hymn. The fourth day, the form of the fifth day.
5.4.15	That is the Tristubh. With that he supports the pressing which is in the established place. He does not fall away from his abode by this.
5.4.16	"This one, the deceitful, I invoke." This is a praise. The fourth day is the form of the fourth day.
5.4.17	Those are the Gāyatrī verses. The Gāyatrī carries the midday of this three-day period.
5.4.18	That indeed is the metre in which it is placed, therefore he places the Niviḍa in the Gāyatrī verses.
5.4.19	"Drink Soma, O Indra, may it delight thee; hear the call of the drinker of Soma, the mountain." The Vairāja is the Prstha (verse). On the fourth day, the fourth day is the form of the fourth day.
5.4.20	"What is the name of the one who is called the Dhayya?"
5.4.21	"O Indra, we call thee" (he says) in accordance with the Brihatis. The fourth day is indeed Brihatis. In accordance with the place.
5.4.22	"O Indra, in thy impetuous course" (he says). This is a Sāman-Prathātha. "O son of Pratithi" (he says), because he is born. The fourth day has the form of the fourth day.
5.4.23	"O ye, the swift, the divine-coursed" (he says); this is the Tarksya. "The unfallen"
5.5.1	The verse "Where is Indra heard today?" is the Vaimata hymn, the Virfita hymn, the form of the fourth day, the form of fourth day.
5.5.2	The verse "Your bull, the lord of the herd, is fierce" is the fierce, profound hymn, the fierce hymn, the form born of the womb, the form of born of the womb. The verse "Your bull" is the form of the fierce hymn, of the fierce hymn.
5.5.3	That is the Tristubh (metre). By that (verse) which has the firm position, he supports the Soma-pressing (ceremony). By this (verse) one does not fall away from the abode.
5.5.4	"O ye who are in the assembly, I am the one who is not afraid." This is the verse of the fourth day. It is as if it is the day of exertion. By this (verse), it is the form of the fourth day.
5.5.5	Those are the Gāyatrī verses. The Gāyatrī metres carry the midday of this three-day rite. That metre carries on which the Nidhana is placed. Therefore he places the Nidhana in the Gāyatrīs.
5.5.6	The Visvadevam Satpati is the verse of the Visvadevah. The verses of the Visvadeva are the verses of the Visve Devas. The verses of Visve Devas are the verses of all the gods. The verses of all the Devas are the verse of the lord of all the Degas. The verses of Savitar are the verses of Savitar. The verses of Saritar are the verses that follow the first verse. The verses of Sarasvati are the verses of Sarasvati. The verses of Sara-svatl are the verses that are in the Sarasvati stoma. The verses of Indra are the verses of Indra. The verses of Indrah are the verses that come after the first verse.
5.5.7	The verse of Savitar is the verse of Savitar. Savitar is the god who comes with the good gem. This is the verse of Saritar. It comes on the fourth day, which is the form of the fourth day.
5.5.8	The first verse is addressed to heaven and earth, the second to the earth, the third to the heaven, and the fourth to both heaven and earth. Thus the fourth day is the form of the fourth day.
5.5.9	The first verse is addressed by the Rishis to the messenger, as if to speech, the second to speech, and the fourth is addressed to both. Thus the fourth verse is the form of speech.
5.5.10	The verse, "May the Goddess come with the bright (rays), with the mind" is addressed to all the gods. The word "pre" and "sukra" are in the fourth verse. This is the form of the fourth day.
5.5.11	There are verses with two feet and four feet. This is the nature of the fourth day.
5.5.12	"May we be in the good opinion of Vaishvanara." This is the first verse of the Agni-Marut hymn. "Born here" is the fourth verse, the form of the fourth day.
5.5.13	"Who has revealed them, the men with nests?" This is the Marut hymn. "For none knows their lineage." This is the fourth verse of the Marut hymn, the form of fourth day.
5.5.14-16	They are the metres. There are two-footed ones and four-footed ones. Thus it is the form of the fourth pressing. "We pour Soma to Jātavedas." Thus it is the fourth pressing. "Agni, men, with rays, from the kindling wood." Thus it is Jātavedasyam. "They generate the fourth pressing." Thus it is Jatavac. Thus it is form of the fourth day.
5.5.17	Those are the metres, those are the Virajas, those are the Tristubhs. Thus is the form of the fourth day.
5.6.1	The cow is the deity of the fifth day. The Trinava stoma, the Sakvara Saman, the Pankti metre, as per the deity, as per the stoma, as per the Saman, as per the metre, one succeeds by knowing this.
5.6.2	What is neither this nor that, what is established, that is the form of the fifth day.
5.6.3	What was the second day, that is again the fifth.
5.6.4	What is above, what is below, what is within, what is manly, what is increasing, what is in the middle, what is the deity, what is the heaven, what is the atmosphere, what is the earth, what is the sky, what is the space, what is the air, what is the fire, what is the water, what is the moon, what is the sun, what is the wind, what is the lightning, what is the thunder, what is the rain, what is the cloud, what is the rainbow, what is the darkness, what is the light, what is the day, what is the night, what is the morning, what is the evening, what is the dawn, what is the twilight, what is the past, what is the future, what is the present, what is the truth, what is the untruth, what is the good, what is the bad, what is the right, what is the wrong, what is the true, what is the false, what is the real, what is the unreal, what is the existent, what is the nonexistent, what is the known, what is the unknown, what is the seen, what is the unseen, what is the heard, what is the unheard, what is the thought, what is the unthought, what is the spoken, what is the unspoken, what is the done, what is the undone, what is the attained, what is the unattained, what is the
5.6.5	What is like milk, what is like a cow, what is like the cow, what is variegated, what is like intoxication, what is like an animal, what is like what is below, what is like animals, what is like cattle, what is like sheep, what is like goats, what is like cows, what is like horses, what is like asses, what is like camels, what is like birds, what is like beasts, what is like insects, what is like flies, what is like bees, what is like ants, what is like all animals, what is Jagata, for animals are Jagata, what is Bharata, for animals belong to Bharata, what is Panka, for animals are Panka, what is Vama, for animals are Vama, what is Havishmat, for animals are Havishmat, what is Vapusmat, for animals have Vapusmat, what is Shakra, what is Panaka, what is Kurva, what is the form of the second day, these are the forms of the fifth day.
5.6.6	This is the offering of the fifth day. The fifth day is connected with the Gayatri metre, and the animal sacrifice is in the form of the Gayatri. The fifth day has the form of the fifth day.
5.6.7	Come to our sacrifice that touches the sky. O Vayu, for our great deed, with your chariot of great speed, many of you, with the sun as your eye, these are your praises in heaven. Drink the juice of the pressed (Soma). For the sake of the god, for the sake of the gods, for the sake, of the god, the great, I sing. This is the Barhaspatya Prauga on the fifth day, the form of the fifth day.
5.6.8	The verse "Yat pañchajanayā viśe" is the first verse of the Marutvatīya hymn. "Pañchajanayai" means the fifth verse of the fifth day, which is the form of the fifth day.
5.6.9	Indra, the drinker of Soma, is one. Indra, come here. O Brahmaṇaspati, Agni is the leader. O Soma, with the rites, they swell the waters. The great one sings for Indra. On the second day, the same as the first, on the fifth day, the form of the fifth day.
5.6.10	The hymn "O Soma, thou art the drinker of the Soma juice, the Soma-presser, the Soma-sacrificer" is five-fold, consisting of five verses, and is the form of the fifth day.
5.6.11	The hymn "Thus indeed is Soma in his intoxication" is five- fold, consisting of five stanzas, and is the shape of the fifth day.
5.6.12	"O Indra, drink the Soma for thy joy." This is the Sukta. It is in the Tristubh metre. By this he supports the Savana in the established position. He does not fall away from his abode.
5.6.13	"O Indra, the son of Maruts, the son of Meha." This is the Parayasa. "No, not so." On the fifth day, it is the form of the fifth day.
5.6.14	Those are the Gāyatrī verses. The Gāyatrī meters carry the midday of this three-day rite. That is the meter that carries the rite in which the Nidhi is performed. Therefore, he places the Nidhi in the Gāyatrīs.
5.7.1	Here they praise with the Mahānāmnī verses and the Śākvara Sāman on the fifth day, the fifth day of the rite.
5.7.2	Indra, by means of these (verses), fashioned himself into the great (form). Therefore they are called Mahānāmnī. These worlds are Mahānāmnīs; these are great.
5.7.3	Prajapati, having created these worlds, was unable to do anything else. Whatever Prajapati, after creating these worlds, was not able to do, that became the Sakvaris. That is the reason for the name Sakvaris.
5.7.4	The gods, having gone upward, created the boundaries. Because they created the boundaries, they became boundaries. That is why they are called boundaries.
5.7.5	The sweet one, the one who is thus, the one who has the good, has come to us with the tawny ones. Indra has been increased by all. The Anurūpa, the one with testicles, the one with tawny hair, the one who drinks, the one who increases, on the fifth day, the form of the fifth day.
5.7.6	"The one who is thus" is the one who is called "the one who is thus."
5.7.7	"O hero, they praise thee" (is the verse) which turns back in the form of Rathantara. For this day is connected with Rathantara.
5.7.8	"O thou who art praised, O thou who art praised" (is the hymn) which is connected with the Sama-prastara. It is the form of the animal on the fifth day, the form of the fifth day.
5.7.9	"O ye, the swift, the divine-coursed" (is the text) which is connected to Tarksya.
5.8.1	"This is the hymn, 'I have come to the battle of Brahma and Vritra.' It is a five-verse hymn with five lines, the form of the fifth day.
5.8.2	"The hymn, 'Indra has grown for the sake of intoxication,' is intoxicating, with five verses and five lines, the fifth day's form.
5.8.3	The verse, "O Indra, thou art the giver of wealth to all men," is in the Tristubh metre. By this verse, which is in the position of the Stomas, he supports the Soma-pressing. He does not fall away from his abode.
5.8.4	"We invoke that Indra, the strong," is a Parāsa verse. "He is the bull, the male," is in the form of an animal. It is the form of the fifth day, the fifth day.
5.8.5	Those are the Gāyatrī verses. The Gāyatrī meters carry the midday of this three-day rite. That is the meter that carries the rite, therefore he places the Nidhi in the Gāyatrīs.
5.8.6	"We choose the Savitar of this day. Today, O god Savitar, for us." The first two verses of the Vaishvadev rite are the followers of the Rathantara rite on the fifth day, the form of the fifth day.
5.8.7	The god Savitar, the giver, has risen up. This is the Savitri verse. He gives much good to the worshipper. This is the form of the fifth day, the form of the fourth day.
5.8.8	The great heaven and earth are here the best. This is the Dyava-Pritbavi verse. The bull roars. This is the animal form on the fifth day, which is the form of fifth day.
5.8.9	"O Rāhu, O Vibhu, O Vāja, O Indra, be favourable to us." The Ārbhava (verse) is the form of cattle. The fifth day is the form of the fifth day.
5.8.10	"I praise the people of good conduct with new (verses)." The Vaishvadeva (verse) is a form of cattle. It is the form of a cattle. The fifth is the form of fifth.
5.8.11	The Agni-Marut hymn, "The Agni-Marut, the immortal, the knower of heaven," is the form of the fifth day, the fifth day.
5.8.12	"That form is indeed for the one who knows," is the form for the Marut-Vapus hymn on the fifth day, which is the form of that day.
5.8.13	"We offer Soma to Jātavedas," is the form in the Jātavedasa hymn.
5.8.14	Agni is the Hotar, the householder, the king. This is the form of Jātavedas, the animal-form, on the fifth day, the form of the fifth day.
5.9.1	The sixth day is indeed the field of the gods. Those who come to the sixth day come to the field of the Gods.
5.9.2	The gods do not dwell in each other's houses. They say that the dancer dwells in the house of the season. As the priests perform the seasonal sacrifices according to their respective rites, they do not pass on the tradition. As the people arrange the seasons according to their respective seasons,
5.9.3	They say that one should send forth with the Rtu-praisa, and offer the Vasat with the Rtupraisa. The Rtupraisa is obtained by speech. Speech is obtained on the sixth day.
5.9.4	If they were to offer with the Rtu-praisa-offerings, or if they were to pronounce the Vasat-call with the Rtupraisa-offer ings, they would reach speech which is worn out, exhausted, broken down, and worn out.
5.9.5	If they were not to send forth (the oblations) with these (verses), if they were not to consecrate them with these (verses) they would be excluded from the unfailing sacrifice, from the sacrifice, from life, from Prajapati, from the animals. They would be deprived.
5.9.6	Therefore, one should send forth the Rg verses, and one should make the Vasat call over the Rg verses. The Rg verses are not the speech that is exhausted, worn out, and carrying burdens, they do not go beyond the sacrifice, they do not deviate from the sacrifice, from life, from Prajapati, from the animals, they go to the low.
5.10.1	The Paruṣa-verses are recited at the two earlier pressings. The Paruṣas are the name of this metre. By this Indra ascended the seven heavenly worlds.
5.10.2	He who knows thus ascends the seven heavenly worlds.
5.10.3	They say that the fifth day has five feet and the sixth day has six feet. But why are the sixth day's feet seven?
5.10.4	By means of six steps only they reach the sixth day, as if cutting off the seventh day. They begin the seventh day with the seventh step. They again take up speech for continuity.
5.10.5	Those who know thus go with uninterrupted three days.
5.11.1	The gods and the Asuras fought for these worlds. The gods drove the Asuras from these worlds with the sixth day. They took the treasures that were in the Asuras' hands and went to the ocean. They took the treasure that was in the Asuras’ hands with this very metre. That which is this step and step again, that was the goad for taking possession.
5.11.2	He who knows this, he who gives wealth to the non-hating one, drives him away from all these worlds.
5.12.1	The sky is the deity, the thirty-third stoma carries the sixth day, the Raivata Sama, the Atichanda metre, he succeeds according to the deity, according to the stoma, according to the Sama, according to the metre, he who knows this.
5.12.2	Now, that which has the same effect is the form of the sixth day, for what was the third day is this again, which is the sixth. What has horses, what has an end, what is repeated, what is again danced, what has sex, what has been turned around, what has three, what has the form of the end, what is said to be the deity in the highest place, what is the world that has risen.
5.12.3	The Paruṣchepa, the Saptapad, the Nārāśaṃsa, the Nābhanediṣṭha, the Raivata, the Atichandas, the Kṛt, the form of the third pressing, these are the forms of the sixth pressing.
5.12.4	This is the oblation for the sixth day. The sixth day has the form of the sixth day.
5.12.5	Spread out the sacrificial grass for us, come to us, O Vītaha. May the chariot, with its many horses, come to us for the sacrifice. Come, O youthful ones, with the mountains, to the praises. O Aśvins, may we be praised by the singers. O Indra, O bull, O Indra, listen to us. O Agni, listen to us, you who are invoked. The gods who are eleven in heaven, the one who gave the gift, the one who fell into debt. This is the Prāga, the Pāruṣeṣa, the Atichandas, the Saptapada, the form of the sixth day.
5.12.6	The first one is called Mahānāmnā. The first foot of the Marutvatīya Sāman is the end. The sixth day is the end. In the sixth day, the form of the sixth day is.
5.12.7	Three are Indra's Soma-offerings. Indra, come hither! Now indeed the Brahman-lord, Agni, the leader, thou, O Soma, with the rites, swell the waters. The giver of good gifts, the chariot. On the third day the thread is stretched out. On the sixth day is the form of the sixth day.
5.12.8	The hymn "O Indra, the chariot which thou hast driven with thy mind" is the Paruchespa hymn, consisting of seven verses and six feet, the form of the sixth day.
5.12.9	The hymn "He who is a bull, equal to bulls" is the Samaudarka hymn, the form of sixth day.
5.12.10	"O Indra, do thou here protect the Soma with the Maruts." This is the hymn. "Do thou drink together with them, the eater of Vritra." The eater of Vritras is the end. The sixth day is the end. It is the form of the sixth day.
5.12.11	It is Triṣṭubh. By it he supports the pressing with the firm position. He does not fall away from his abode.
5.12.12	This is the final verse of the first day. The final verse of the second day is "This is the one by which." The final verse of this day is "The heaven won by the Maruts." The final verse is the end, the sixth day is the end, it is the form of the sixth day.
5.12.13	Those are the Gāyatrī verses. The Gāyatrī meters carry the midday of this three-day period. That meter carries what is placed in it, therefore he places the Nidhi in the Gāyatrīs.
5.12.14-16	The Rêvatîs are our most excellent friends. The Rêvatis are our most excellent friend. The Rêvata is the praise. The Barhaspatya is the Sâman. The Barhas-patya is the Sama. The Barhaspa-tya is the Sâma. The Barhasp-tya is the Sama. On the sixth day, the sixth day. On the sixth, the sixth. On the sixth. The sixth. The sixth day. The sixth day.
5.12.17	"Indra is the deity of the gods" - this is the Sama-pragatha (hymn) sung on the sixth day, in the form of the sixth day.
5.12.18	"O ye, the swift, the divine-chariot, the horse" - this is Tarksya, the unfallen.
5.13.1	"O Indra, come to us, from afar" - this is a hymn, a Parucchepa (hymn), with irregular metres, consisting of seven lines, sung on the sixth (day), in the form of sixth day.
5.13.2	The verse, "Indeed, his great greatness" is the same as the verse, "Indeed his great greatness." It is the form of the sixth day.
5.13.3	The verse, "I was one, O lord of wealth, among the wealthy" is the same verse, "I stand on the chariot, O brave one, the terrible one." The end is indeed the end. The sixth day is the end. It is the form for the sixth day.
5.13.4	That is the Tristubh (metre). With that (verse) he supports the pressing which is in the established place. He does not fall away from his abode.
5.13.5	"Obeisance to you with the tawny ones, the pressed (Soma)" - this is the common verse of praise. It is the form of the sixth day.
5.13.6	Those are the Gāyatrī verses. The Gāyatrī meters carry the midday of this three-day rite. That is the meter that carries the rite, therefore he places the rite in the Gāyatrīs.
5.13.7	"The verse "To that god Savitr, the giver of wealth," is the first verse of the Vaishvadev rite. The sixth day is the form of the sixth day.
5.13.8	The Savitar is the most desirable. The Dosha has come. The follower is the end. The sixth day is the end. On the sixth day, the form of the sixth day.
5.13.9	The Udgâtri recites the Savitrî verse, "The God Savitr has risen for the pressing," the last verse of the Savitrîs. "The Agni has stood," the end is the sixth day, the form of the sixth day is the sixth day.
5.13.10	"Which is the earlier, which the later?" The Dyaus-Prithivî verse is the same as the Savitrî. The form of the sixth is the sixth day.
5.13.11	What is the best, what is the most excellent? The Vājas do not come to our sacrifice. The Rbhukṣas (come) to the sacrifice. The Ārbhava Nārāśaṃsa (verse) is sung on the sixth day. The form of the sixth day.
5.13.12	Here is the Raudra (verse) with good words, those who are connected with sacrifice and Dakṣiṇā. The Viśvadev (verse) is recited.
5.14.1	The Nabhanediṣṭha (verse) is chanted.
5.14.2	The Brahmanas, the sons of Manu, having performed the Naishthita sacrifice, went to the spring season. Their brothers divided the wealth among themselves. He said, "Having come, what share is there for me?" They said, "This very one who instructs us in the right way." Therefore, even now they say, "The sons instruct the father in the right way.
5.14.3	He went to his father and said, "They have indeed cheated me." His father said, "Do not be angry, son. These Angiras are performing a sacrifice for the heavenly world. They come every sixth day and get confused. They recite those verses on the sixth day. Whatever thousand they give as a gift at the end of the sacrifice, that will be yours when you go to heaven." He said, "Yes.
5.14.4	"They approached him and said, "Do you know the man of good intelligence?" He said, "What do you want? Tell me." " "We want to know the sixth day." " He said, "The sixth day is known to me." " Then he said, "The thousand-fold rite of the Sattra is given to me by those who are going to heaven." " They said, "So be it." " He recited these verses on the sixth day. Then they knew the sacrifice and the heavenly world.
5.14.5	Now, the reason why he recites these verses on the sixth day is for the recognition of the sacrifice and for the fame of the heavenly world.
5.14.6	The gods, going to heaven, said this to him: "This thousand is yours, O Brahman." He was making it equal. A man with a black corpse on his head stood up in front of him and said: "This is mine, or this is mine, O Brahman." "This is mine," he said. "This is yours," he said. He said: "This belongs to us, but it is a question for your father." He went to his father. His father said: "Did not your son say: 'This is mine'?" "It is mine," he replied. "But that man with a black body stood up in front and said: 'This is yours, or this is yours, O son of Aditi.'" His father said: "That is yours, O my son. But he will give it to you." He came back and said: "This is yours, O revered one." "My father said so," he said. He replied: "I give it to you, since you spoke the truth."
5.14.7	Therefore, one who knows this should speak the truth.
5.14.8	This is the thousand-streamed mantra, namely, the Naabhanedistha.
5.14.9	He who knows this goes to heaven on the sixth day.
5.15.1	These are called the companions. The Valakhilyas call the Naabhanediṣṭha the Vrisakapi and the Evyamaruta. One should recite them together.
5.15.2	Whatever of theirs would be obstructed, that would be obstructed for the sacrificer.
5.15.3	If the Nabha-Neidhistam (obstruction) would obstruct his semen, if the Valakhilyas (obstruction) his life, if the Vrishakapi (obstruction) himself, if the Evayamarut (obstruction) the foundation, he would be obstructed by the divine and human (obstructions).
5.15.4	He sprinkled the semen with the Nābhānediṣṭha rite. He made it with the Vālakhilyas. He removed the womb with the Sukīrtim and Kāksīvan rites, as in the Urau. "Thou art the protector." Therefore, the elder embryo does not destroy the younger one, since it is established by Brahman. He makes it with the Etayai Maruts. By that everything here is made. Whatever this is.
5.15.5	The first day is called Krishna and the second Arjuna. This is the first day of Agni-Marut. The days are repeated again and again. The sixth day is the form of the sixth day.
5.15.6	"The name of your Maruts is Madhu." Having repeatedly mentioned Maruts, the end is the sixth day. The sixth day has the form of the fifth day.
5.15.7	We offer Soma to Jātavedas, the unerring.
5.15.8	He is born suddenly, in the old way. The sixth day has the form of the sixth day.
5.15.9-10	He who is holding, he who is holding, thus he praises. He feared the end might fall off. Just as one would bind the end again, or bind it again, or would strike a dart at the end for holding, so is it when he praises, 'He who is holding, he who is holding.' For continuity. Those who know thus go with continuous, uninterrupted, three-day rites. Those who know thus go, go.
5.16.1	Or, what is both coming and going, that is the form of the seventh day.
5.16.2	What was the first day, that is again this seventh day.
5.16.3	That which is connected with the chariot, that which is connected with speed, that which is related to drinking, that which is mentioned in the first foot as the deity, that which is the world of the rising sun,
5.16.4	that which is related to birth, that which is undefined,
5.16.5	Whatever is to be done, whatever is the form of the first day, these are the forms of the seventh day.
5.16.6	"The wave rises from the ocean, sweet," this is the butter for the seventh day. The seventh day is undefined. This is the form of seventh day."
5.16.7	The speech is the ocean; speech does not perish, nor does the ocean perish. In that there is clarified butter at the seventh pressing, they make the sacrifice continue from the sacrifice. They again take up speech for continuity.
5.16.8	Those who know this go with the three days of continuity, without interruption, those who know this go.
5.16.9	The Stomas and the metres are obtained at the sixth pressing. Just as the offerings are poured back into the ladle, so here also the Stomas and the Metres are poured back for non-exhaustion. This is the ghee of the seventh day.
5.16.10	This is the Tristubh, the morning pressing. This is the three-day (rite).
5.16.11	O Vayu, come to us, the drinker of pure (Soma), with your gifts, with your gifts, to the worshipper of the gods. With your hundred-fold gifts, with your hundred-fold, with your thousand-fold gifts, you have come to the sacrifice. Those who are your sons, the drinkers of Indra, who are your hundred gifts, who are your thousand gifts, when you, O Mitra-Varuna, are purifying, the Nasatyas, with the cow, with the chariot, come to us with your divine power, O strong one. The worshippers of the gods, praising you at the sacrifices, have come to you with their wealth, with their wealth. He goes to the Prauga and to the Praiti on the seventh day, the form of the seventh day. That is the Tristubh. The morning pressing is the Tristubb. This is the three-day (rite).
5.16.12	Come to thy car, as thou art wont, O Indra, to this Soma pressed. Come hither, O Vasu, come! Let the Brahmanaspati go forth, Agni be the leader. Thou, O Soma, with thy thoughts, swellest the waters. Let them go forth to Indra, the great. The first day is the same as the seventh. The seventh day is the form of the seventh day.
5.16.13	With what auspicious one, with the same nest, the same age? The hymn is recited. The unborn does not perish, the born does not perish. This is the form of the seventh day, the seventh day.
5.16.14	This is the hymn of Kya-shubhi. This is the continuity of the name, the hymn of Kyas-hubhi. By this Indra and Agastya knew the Maruts. When one recites the hymn of Kvas-hubhi, it is for the sake of recognition.
5.16.15	That is the life-giving (verse). He should recite it for him for whom he loves.
5.16.16	That is the Tristubh (verse). By means of that verse which is in the position of stability, he supports the Soma-pressing. He does not fall away from his abode.
5.16.17	"This is the verse: 'The sheep, the great, the knower of heaven.' The verse: 'The horse, the chariot, the offering.' The chariot is the form of the seventh day.
5.16.18	This is the Jāgara (verse), for the Jāgati (verses) carry the midday of this three-day period. That very metre carries it in which the Nidhi is placed, therefore he places the Nidhi in the Jāgatis.
5.16.19	The verses of the Mituna (group) are sung, the verses of the Trishtup (group) and the verses of the Jagati (group). The animals are in pairs, the animals are the Chandomas (verses), for the securing of animals.
5.16.20	"You are the one we invoke, you are the one who comes, O friend." The verse is sung on the seventh day.
5.16.21	What is the sixth day.
5.16.22	Whatever is the Rathantara, that is the Vaimata; whatever is the Brihat, that is the Vairāja; whatever is the Rathantara that is the Shaka; whatever is the Bṛhat, that is Raivata.
5.16.23	Whatever is the Brihat-pṛṣṭha, that is the Brihat itself. They establish the Brihat in return. There is no cutting of the Stoma.
5.16.24	If it were the Rathantara, there would be cutting.
5.16.25-28	Therefore, the Brihat should be performed. "The verse, "O Agni, do thou come to us, O Agni, do thou be near us," is the origin of the Rathantara. He turns back in accordance with the origin of the Rathāntara, for this is the Rathān-tara day." "The verse "Do thou drink the juice of the Soma," is a Sāman-verse. The drinker (of Soma) is the seventh day, the form of the seventh day.
5.16.29	"O Indra, the swift, the divine-driven, the hawk, the unerring one."
5.17.1	"I shall proclaim the deeds of Indra," is the hymn. The seventh day is the form of the seventh day.
5.17.2	That is the Tristubh metre. By that metre which is firmly established, he supports the Soma pressing. He does not fall away from his abode.
5.17.3	The verse beginning with "O Agni, the most invoked, the most praised, the most worshipped, the most honoured, the most praised" is the hymn. What is "yada va pra" is "abhi". On the seventh day, it is the form of the seventh day.
5.17.4	It is indeed the Jāgara (verse). The Jāgatis carry the midday of this three-day period. That indeed is the metre that carries the Nidhi (verse). Therefore, he places the Nidhi in the Jāgatis.
5.17.5	The verses of the Mituna (group) are sung, and the verses of the Trishtubh and Jagati (groups). Animals are in pairs, and the verses are animals. For the securing of animals.
5.17.6	"We choose the boon of Savitar, today. O god Savitar, for us." This is the introductory verse of the Vaishvadev (group). On the seventh day, the seventh day is the Rathaantara (Sutra).
5.17.7	"O god Savitar, thee, the invocation." What is meant by "O god Savita" is "thee." This is the form of the seventh day.
5.17.8	"Gone to the sacrifice for the sake of peace," this is the form of heaven and earth. "Gone" is the form of seventh day.
5.17.9	This is the form of birth of the god. This is the form for the seventh day.
5.17.10	"Come with the forest-grass" (is recited) in two feet. The man is two-footed, the animals are four-footed. The metres are animals. For the inclusion of animals. In that it is recited in two feet, it establishes the sacrificer in two foundations, in the four-footed animals.
5.17.11	"With these songs, O Agni, do thou come." This is the Vaishvadev (hymn). It is the form of the seventh day.
5.17.12	These are the Gāyatrī verses. The third pressing is Gāyatrī. This is the three-day (rite).
5.17.13	"Vaisvānara has generated the Maruts." This is the first hymn of the Agni-Marut (hymn). The form of the seventh and seventh days.
5.17.14	The Maruts are invoked with the verse, "We invoke your gift in the Tristubh metre." This is the form of the seventh day.
5.17.15	"We pour Soma for Jātavedas." This is the verse for Jātaveda.
5.17.16	"We invoke your messenger, the knower of all." This is the unformulated verse for Jātavīda on the seventh day, the form of the sixth day.
5.17.17	Those are the Gāyatrī verses. The third pressing is Gāyatrī. This is the three-day (rite).
5.18.1	What is not, what is not, what stands, that is the form of the eighth day.
5.18.2	What is the second day, that is again the eighth.
5.18.3	What is above, what is opposite, what is within, what is with the testicles, what is with wealth, what is in the middle place, what is the deity, what is the heaven that has risen up.
5.18.4	What is the two-fire, what is the great, what is the two-called, what is the renewed, what is the doing.
5.18.5	What is in the form of the second day, these are the forms of the eighth day.
5.18.6	The offering of clarified butter at the eighth pressing is "We invoke Agni, the god, with the Agnis, the agreeable ones." The eighth pressing has two Agnis. It is the form of the eighth pressing.
5.18.7	It is in the Tristubh metre. The morning pressing is in the Tristup metre. This is the three-day pressing.
5.18.8	O Indra, the wise one, come to the assembly, knowing, Agni, the upward-going one, has found the good mind. May Sarasvati be pleased with our praise. The assembly responds, the one who responds, the one responded to, the one who goes upward, on the eighth day, the form of the eighth day.
5.18.9	This is the Tristubh, the morning pressing. This is the three-day (rite).
5.18.10	"Indra, the lord of the world, the drinker of Soma, has come here. O Brahmaṇaspati, rise up! Agni is your leader. O Soma, with your rites, they swell the waters. Sing praises to Indra." On the second day, they are stretched out equally. On the eighth day, it is the form of the eighth day.
5.18.11	The hymn "O Indra, the great one, in whom all" is the form of the eighth day, the eighth day.
5.18.12	The hymn "O Indra! You are the great one, from whom these" is the form for the eighth day, for the eighth day.
5.18.13	Drink Soma, O fierce one, who presses it. The hymn is Urva, the great cow. Indra, the great one, on the eighth day, the form of the eighth day.
5.18.14	Indra, the great one like a man, the leader of men, on the eighth, the form of eighth day.
5.18.15	That is the Tristubh (metre). With that he supports the Savana in the established place. He does not fall away from his abode.
5.18.16	"This is his heaven and earth with consciousness." The verse is "When he was making greatness, Indra's power." The eighth day is great. The form of the eighth day is great.
5.18.17	The Jagatī is the middle of the day of this three-day sacrifice, and it is the metre that carries the Nidhi. Therefore he places the Nidhi in the Jagatīs.
5.18.18	The verses are in pairs, the Tristubh and the Jagatī. Animals are in pairs, and the Chandomas are animals, for the securing of animals.
5.18.19	The verses containing the word 'mahad' are recited. The sky is great. For the attainment of the sky.
5.18.20	Five verses are recited. The Pankti has five feet. The sacrifice is five-fold. The animals are five-fold. Animals are the Chandomas. For the attainment and protection of animals.
5.18.21-23	We invoke thee, O hero, we invoke thee, O drinker of the first (libations). The Rathantara is the Sāman on the eighth day. "He who has come to thee, O giver of wealth, " "We invoke thee, O giver, " He turns back in accordance with the source of the Brihatī, for this is the Brihatī day.
5.18.24	Listen to both. This is the Sama-pragaatha. What is today and what was yesterday, this is the form of the eighth day, the eighth day of the Barhaspatya sacrifice.
5.18.25	"O ye who are swift, the horse-winner, the god-winner," this is the Tarkshya Acchuta.
5.19.1	The verse beginning with "O Agni, the most ancient" is the hymn. The verse beginning with “For the great hero, for Indra, for Turāy" is the great hymn on the eighth day. It is the form of the eighth day. The verse beginning "O Indra, your fame is great" is the hymn on the eighth. It is the great hymn. It is the eighth day's form. The verse beginning “O Indra, you who are great, who have strength" is the hymn of the eighth. It has the form of the great hymn. The verse "O Indra, for you, the earth" is the hymn for the eighth. It belongs to the great hymn.
5.19.2	That is the Tristubh (metre). By that (verse) which has the firm position, he supports the Soma-pressing. By this (verse) he does not fall away from his abode.
5.19.3	"The greatness of this one shines forth from heaven." This is a verse. "Indra for greatness." The eighth day has greatness. The form of the eighth day.
5.19.4-5	The Jagati is the middle of the day of this three-day sacrifice, and it is carried by the Jagati verses. It is carried by that metre in which the Nidhana is placed, therefore he places the Nidhana in the Jagati verses.
5.19.6	The hymns containing the word "mahad" are recited; the great space is the heaven; for the attainment of heaven. Five hymns are recited; the Paṅkti metre has five feet; the sacrifice is fivefold; animals are fivefold; the animal-sacrifices are fivefold; for the attainment (of heaven) of animals.
5.19.7	Those two, and five others, and five others make ten. That is the Viraj of ten. Food is Viraj. Food is cattle. Cattle are the Soma-days. For the securing of cattle.
5.19.8	The Visvadevam Satpati is the verse of the Visvadevah. The two verses of the Visvadeva are the followers of the first verse. The eighth day is the eighth day. The eighth day has the form of the eighth day.
5.19.9	The Hiranyapani Utayah is the Savitar verse. The eighth is the eighth day, which is upward. The eighth day of the eighth day has the eighth form.
5.19.10	The earth and heaven are the same. This is the Dyaus-Pritvi hymn. The eighth day is the great one. This is the form of the eighth day.
5.19.11	The young ones are the fathers again. This is the Arbhava hymn. The eighth is the one that is again.
5.19.12	Which of these worlds do they support? The two-footed ones praise the four-footed ones. Man is two-footed, animals are four-footed, the metres are animals. For the attainment of animals. In that he praises the two-footed ones, he establishes the sacrificer in two foundations, in the four-footed animals.
5.19.13	The gods' great call is the Vaishvadev. The great call is the form of the eighth day, the eighth day.
5.19.14	These are the Gayatra verses. This is the three-day Gayatra-third-pressing.
5.19.15	The one with truth, Vaishvanara, is the first verse of the Agni-Marut. Agni Vaishvanara is great. The great call (is the form) of the eighth day.
5.19.16	"O Maruts, play, O Maruts, be impetuous!" (thus) the Maruts. "In the mouth of Rasas, he has grown." (thus) the one who has grown. On the eighth day, the form of the eighth day.
5.19.17	"We offer Soma to Jātavedas." (thus) Jātavedasy.
5.19.18	"O Agni, you are very kind." (thus) to Jātaveda. The one who is very kind. On the eighth (day), the form of the eight (days).
5.19.19	Those are the Gāyatrī verses. The third pressing is Gāyatrī. This is the three-day (rite). This is the three day (rite).
5.20.1	What has the same result is the form of the ninth day.
5.20.2	For the third day is the same as the ninth.
5.20.3	What is like a horse, what is limited, what is repeated, what is danced again, what is like a union, what is like an overturned, what is threefold, what is like the end, what is called the deity in the supreme state, what is the world that has arisen.
5.20.4	What is like purity, what is like truth, what is like cessation, what is like gone, what is like abode,
5.20.5	What was done, what is the form of the third day, these are the forms of the ninth day.
5.20.6	"One goes to the most excellent one with great praise" - this is the Ajya for the ninth day. One goes to the ninth day. This is the form of ninth day.
5.20.7	This is the Tristubh metre. The morning pressing is in Tristubh metre, this is the three-day (rite).
5.20.8	The pure ones, with the hero, have spread out. They, with the mind of truth, thinking, have gone to heaven, to the earth, to the sky. The all-knowing Asvins have gone to us. This Soma is being pressed for you, O Indra. The Brahmanas, the Angiras, are coming. The divine Sarasvati is being invoked. She is coming to us from the lofty mountain of heaven. O Sarasvati, do thou lead us to prosperity. The ninth day has the form of the ninth day.
5.20.9	That is the Tristubh. The morning pressing is in Tristubh. This is the three-day (rite).
5.20.10	"He comes to you, O Indra, for great gifts, the three Soma-offerings. Come now, O Indra, to this (rite). The Brahmanaspati Agni leads. You, O Soma, with the rites, swell the waters. The giver of good gifts (brings) the chariot." With the third day the nine days are connected. The ninth day is the form of the ninth day.
5.20.11	"Indra drinks the Soma, to whom belongs the Svāhā." The Svāhā-call is the end; the ninth day is the end. The ninth day is the form of the ninth day.
5.20.12	"The song is the Sama, the heavenly, like the Veda." The verse "Archama, indeed, the increased, like heaven" is the end; heaven is the end. On the ninth day is heaven. The ninth day has the form of the heaven.
5.20.13	The verse "Stand, O Hari, when the chariot is being yoked" is the last verse. The ninth day is the last. On the ninth day, the form of the ninth day is recited.
5.20.14	The verse "These have praised thee, O most generous one" is the last. The ninth day being the last, on the ninth day, it is the form of the nineth day.
5.20.15	That is the Tristubh (metre). With that (verse) he supports the Savana in the established place. He does not fall away from his abode.
5.20.16	"Obeisance to the wise, to the father, to the one who is to be praised." This is a verse with the same meaning as the previous one. It is the form of the ninth day.
5.20.17	The Jāgata metre is carried in the middle of the day of this three-day sacrifice. That metre is carried in which the Nidhana is placed. Therefore he places the Nidhana in the Jāgati verses.
5.20.18	The verses of the Tristubh and Jāgati metres are placed in pairs. Animals are in pairs. The Chandomas are animals. For the securing of animals.
5.20.19	Five verses are recited. The Paṅkti has five feet. The sacrifice is Paṅkti. The animals are Paṅkti. Animals are the Chandomas. For the securing of animals.
5.20.20	You are the one we invoke. You are the one who comes. The Bṛhatpṛṣṭha is recited on the ninth day.
5.20.21	Or, "O Indra, thou art the protector of the sacrificer, the protector of the sacrifice," he turns back to the source of the Rathantara, for this is the Rathantara day. "O Indra, the three-fold refuge," is the Saman-verse. The ninth day has three verses. "The swift one, the divine-chariot," is the Tarksya verse, the unfallen.
5.21.1	The verses, "O Indra, thou hast gone to the ancient songs" are the form of the ninth day.
5.21.2	The verses, "When thou, O Brahman, didst go to the places of the chariots" are the form, having the meaning of "going to the end", of the ninth day.
5.21.3	"May the truthful one go to Maghavan, the powerful one." This is the verse for the ninth day. The ninth day is the form of the ninth day.
5.21.4	"This is the supreme power, the supreme one." This is a verse for the end. The end is the supreme, the ninth day. It is the form of ninth day.
5.21.5	That is the Tristubh (metre). With that he supports the pressing which is in the established place. He does not fall away from his abode.
5.21.6	"I am the lord of wealth, the ancient one." This is the Sūkta. "I conquer the riches always." The end is victory. The ninth day is the end. On the ninth day he assumes the form of the ninth day.
5.21.7	The Jagati is the middle of the day of this three-day sacrifice. It is that metre which carries the Niviḍa, therefore he places the Niviḍas in the Jagatīs.
5.21.8	The verses of the Tristubh and Jagati metres are sung in pairs. Animals are in pairs, and the verses are in pairs. The verses are in pairs for the purpose of securing animals. Five verses are sung in each section. The Pankti has five feet. The sacrifice is in five sections. Animals are in five sections. The verses are for the purpose of obtaining animals. They are divided into two groups of five. Ten verses are completed. The Viraj has ten sections. Food is Viraj. Animals are food. The verses are animals. The verses are to secure animals.
5.21.9	We choose the Savitar's (blessing). Today, O god Savitar, is the verse of the Vaishvadev (rite). The two verses of the Rathaantara (rite) are the form of the ninth day.
5.21.10	The fault has come. The Savitar (rite) is the end. The ninth day is the end.
5.21.11	The great divine power of you two, O Heaven and Earth, is pure, as praised. The ninth day is pure. The ninth day has the form of the ninth day.
5.21.12	Indra may give us food. May he bestow on us riches. The ninth day belongs to the Ārbudas. The ninth day should be drunk three times. The ninth day consists of three. The ninth day resembles the ninth day.
5.21.13	The two verses beginning with "Bbhru" and ending with "Yuve" are sung by one who has two feet. Man has two feet, animals have four feet. Animals are the metres. For the purpose of securing animals. When he sings the two verses, he establishes the sacrificer in two foundations, in the four-footed animals.
5.21.14	Those which are thirty, three, and three, are the Vaiśvadevam (hymns). The Trivank (hymns) are the form of the ninth day.
5.21.15	Those are the Gāyatrī verses. This is the third pressing. This is the three-day (rite).
5.21.16	"Vaisvānara na ūtay" is the first verse of the Agni-Marut (hymn). "May he come to us from afar" is the last verse. The last is the form of the last day.
5.21.17	The Maruts are the ones who have gone to the end, hence the Maruts are those who have gone to an end. Having gone to the end of the ninth day, it is the form of the ninth day.
5.21.18	We offer Soma to Jātavedas. Jātavedasy is not to be omitted.
5.21.19	One should recite the speech to Agni. Jātaveda is the same as the ninth day. Having gone to an end, it is the ninth day.
5.21.20	"May it (the sacrifice) be a protection to us against the enemies." Thus he praises. In this nine-night sacrifice, whatever is done for protection, it is for peace. When he praises thus, "May it be a protection to all of us against the enemies," he thus releases them from all sins.
5.21.21	Those are the Gāyatrī verses. The third pressing is Gāyatrī. This is the three-day (rite).
5.22.1	They undertake the six-day (rite) of the Prsthya (Samhitā). The six-day (Samhitā) is like the face. The tongue, palate and teeth are in between the face. So are the Chandomas. The tenth day is that by which one speaks and by which one knows what is sweet and what is not sweet.
5.22.2	Just as the nostrils, so is the six-day Pañcadaśa; just as the space between the nostrils, so are the Chandomas. The tenth day is that by which one smells the smells.
5.22.3	Just as the eyes, so is the Pañcadaśin; just as the black space between the eyes, so are the Chandomas. The tenth day (is that) by which one sees.
5.22.4	Just as the Kārṇī is so is the Pañcadaśa. Just as the Kṛṣṇalī is so is this (Pañcadaśa). Just as the Kānī is so is (the Pañcadaśā). Just as the Kāṇī is so are the Chandomās. Just as the Śṛṇī is so the Dasamāha.
5.22.5	The tenth day is prosperity. Those who come to the tenth day come to prosperity. Therefore the tenth day is silent. "Do not speak ill of prosperity." For it is difficult to speak ill of the good.
5.22.6	They then move on.
5.22.7	They cleanse themselves.
5.22.8	They enter the wife's hall.
5.22.9	Of those who know this oblation, he who knows this should say, "Let us begin together." He should offer it.
5.22.10	"Here let us delight, here let us delight, Here is firmness, here is self-firmness, O Agni, svāhā! O Agni, svāhā!"
5.22.11	When he says, "May they delight here," he makes them delight in this world. When he says, "May they delight here," he makes them delight here. When he says "May they delight in this world," he makes the offspring delight in them. When he says "May they delight in the world, may they delight in the self-world," he makes the offspring and speech delight in the sacrificers. "O Agni, Vada" is Rathantara. "O Vada" is Brihat.
5.22.12	This is the union of the gods, namely, the Brihat and Rathantara. They obtain union with the union of the Gods. They are born with the union of Gods. For propagation.
5.22.13	He who knows this is born with offspring and cattle.
5.22.14	They move from there, they cleanse themselves, and approach the Āgnīdhra. He who knows this oblation should say, "Let us commence together." He should offer:
5.22.15	"Approaching the mother, the sustainer, the sustainer suckling, may the nourishment of wealth, food and energy be bestowed upon us, svāhā."
5.22.16	He wins for himself and for the sacrificers the nourishment, food and strength. Where he, knowing this, offers this oblation.
5.23.1	They then move forth. They approach the assembly. As the other priests move forth in due order, the Udgātṛs move forth. They praise the Rk of the Serpent King.
5.23.2	This is the mantra of the king of serpents. It was like a hairless head. It saw this mantra: "The spotted cow has come. This spotted color entered it. It has various forms, whatever desire it desired. Whatever herbs and trees there are, all forms.
5.23.3	The colour of Pṛśni enters him, and he becomes of whatever form he desires. He who knows this.
5.23.4	He praises with the mind, sings with the mind, repels with the mind, and praises with speech.
5.23.5	Speech and mind are the pair of the gods. They unite with the pair of the divine pair. They are born with the pair of gods. He who knows this is born with offspring and cattle.
5.23.6	Then the Hotṛ recites the four Hotr-s. That is the praise of that.
5.23.7	Now, the secret of the gods is the four Hotṛs. When the Hotṛ explains the four Hotṛ-s, he makes the secret of the deities manifest. He makes it manifest. He makes that which is manifest manifest.
5.23.8	He goes to the manifest, who knows thus.
5.23.9	If a Brahman student wishes to attain fame, he should go to a forest, tie up a bundle of darbha grass, and sit down to the right of the Brahman, and explain the four Hotr priests.
5.23.10	Now, the secret of the gods is the four Hotṛs. If one explains the four Hotṛ priests, then he makes the secret of the sacrifice of the gods manifest. He makes it manifest to him who knows this.
5.24.1	Then they commence the Udumbara (rite).
5.24.2	"One should commence with the wish for food and strength."
5.24.3	The Udumbara is indeed the food.
5.24.4	When the gods divided the food and strength, then the Udumbara came into being. Therefore it ripens three times in a year.
5.24.5	When they begin with the Udumbara, they begin with food and strength.
5.24.6	They restrain speech. Speech is the sacrifice. They thus restrain the sacrifice.
5.24.7	They restrain the day. The day is the heavenly world. They thus restrain that heavenly world.
5.24.8	They should not let loose speech during the day. If they let loose speech during day, they would be giving the day to their brother.
5.24.9	They should not utter words at night. If they do, they would be giving their share to their enemy.
5.24.10	If the sun is in the same zodiac sign, then they may utter words. They would be giving their portion to their enemy.
5.24.11	Then, indeed, when the sun has set, they should let loose speech, for they make their enemy, who is a part of darkness, to be a part of darkness.
5.24.12	Having approached the Ahavaniya fire, they should let go speech. The Ahavaniya fire is indeed the sacrifice, the Ahavaniya is the heavenly world. By means of the sacrifice, they go to the heavenly world.
5.24.13	They let loose the speech, saying, "What we have not done here, what we have exceeded, that we have done to Prajapati, our father."
5.24.14	Prajapati is the progenitor of creatures; creatures are born after Prajapati. Prajapati is the support of the deficient and the excessive; he does not injure them, neither the deficient nor the excessive.
5.24.15	Those who know this, and who speak thus, do not exceed Prajapati.
5.24.16	Therefore those who know this should speak thus.
5.25.1	When he is about to speak in the four Hotr-recitations, he calls out, "O Adhvaryu!" This is the form of the call.
5.25.2	"Oṃ, Hotr, and Hotr, thus the Adhvaryu responds at the end of each of the ten verses.
5.25.3	Their mind was the ladle.
5.25.4	Mind was the ghee.
5.25.5	Speech was the altar.
5.25.6	Learning was the sacrificial grass.
5.25.7	The leader was Agni.
5.25.8	Recognition was the Agnīdhra.
5.25.9	Breath was the oblation.
5.25.10	The Samadhvaryu was the Hotri.
5.25.11	Vacaspati was the Hotri,
5.25.12	Manas was the Upavasya.
5.25.13	They took this Graha, saying, "O Vacaspati, we desire to be named by you. We desire to be named. You desire to be named with our names. Go to heaven, where the gods, the lords of creation, attained prosperity. May we attain that prosperity."
5.25.14	Then the body of Prajapati runs after the Brahma-song.
5.25.15	Annada and Annapati, Annada is Agni, Annapati is Aditya.
5.25.16	Bhadra and Kalyani, Bhadra is Soma, Kalyani is cattle.
5.25.17	Anilya and Apaphaya are Anilya, for the wind never ceases. Apaphaya is death, for everything is afraid of it.
5.25.18	Anapta and Anapya are Anapta, for the earth is not to be grasped. Anapya is heaven.
5.25.19	Agni is the unassailable, the unassailablc; the unassailabic is the sun.
5.25.20	The unassailable is the mind, the unassail-able is the year.
5.25.21	These are indeed the twelve forms of Prajapati. This is the entire Prajapati. He attains the entire Prajapata. The tenth day.
5.25.22	Then they say, "Brahma is the householder." Some say, "Agni is the householder." He is the householder of this world. Some say, "Vayu is the householder." That is the householder of the world of the atmosphere. He is the householder, he who shines. The seasons are the houses. He who knows the householder as the god becomes the householder. He prospers. Those sacrificers prosper for whom he who knows the householder, the god, becomes the householder. The householder removes sin. He removes sin. Those sacrificers remove sin for whom he who removes sin, the god, the householder, becomes the householder.
5.26.1	He says, "Lift up the Ahavaniya" in the afternoon. Whatever good he does during the day, he lifts it up and places it in the safe place.
5.26.2	He says, "Lift the Ahavaniya," in the morning. Whatever good he did during the night, he lifts it and places it in a safe place.
5.26.3	The Ahavaniya is indeed the sacrifice, the Ahavaniya is the heavenly world.
5.26.4	He who knows this, places himself in heaven.
5.26.5	He who knows the Agnihotra, the Vaishvadev, the sixteen-fold, established in animals, prospers with the Vaishvadeva Agnihotra, the sixteen-folded, established in animals.
5.26.6	The Rāudra (cup) is placed on the cow, the Vāyavya is let loose, the Āśvina is being milked, the Saumya is being milked. The Vāruṇa is placed, the Pauṣṇa is being churned, the Māruta is being pressed, the Vaiśvadeva is being dropped, the Maitra is being taken up with a ladle, the Dyāvāpṛthivīya is being poured out, the Sāvitra is being taken away, the Vaiṣṇava is being carried, the Bārhaspatya is being brought near, the Agnihotra is offered to Agni, the Uttarāgnihotra is offered to Prajāpati, the Indra is offered.
5.26.7	This is the Agnihotra, the Vaiśvadeva, the sixteen-fold, established in animals.
5.26.8	One succeeds with the Vaiśvadev Agnihotra, the sixteen-part, established in animals, by one who knows this.
5.27.1	If one sits down while the Agnihotra cow is being milked, what is the atonement? One should recite this mantra:
5.27.2	Since you sit down out of fear, therefore make us fearless. Protect all our cattle. Obeisance to Rudra, the glorious.
5.27.3	One should make her rise up.
5.27.4	The goddess Aditi has risen up, placing life in the sacrificial thread. Making a share for Indra, for Mitra and Varuna.
5.27.5	Then he should take her water pot and put it in the water and in her mouth. Then he should give her to a brahmin. That is her atonement.
5.27.6	If the Agnihotra cow, while being milked, should be led away, what is the atonement? It is indeed at the time of eating that she is led away from the sacrificer. One should take her as food for peace. Food is peace. May she be blessed with good fortune.
5.27.7	If the cow, while being milked, shakes when the Agnihotra is being poured out, what is the atonement? Whatever she shakes there, having touched it, one should recite:
5.27.8	"Whatever milk was spilled on the earth today, whatever it spilled over the plants, whatever water, milk in the houses, milk in the cow, milk in the calves, may that be mine."
5.27.9-11	Whatever is left over, with that he should offer. Whatever is sufficient for the offering, that he should offer.
5.28.1	The sacrificial post is the sun, the altar is the earth, the grass is the plants, the wood is the trees, the sprinkling is the waters, the directions are the boundaries.
5.28.2	Whatever of his perishes, dies, or is lost, all that comes to him in the other world, just as a gift given on the sacrificial grass comes to him. So does he come to whom, knowing this, one offers the Agnihotra.
5.28.3	He leads both gods and men to the right, and all this that is here.
5.28.4	He leads men to the gods with the evening oblation, and all this which is here. They have merged, like the Okas, the men led to the gods.
5.28.5	He leads the gods to the men by the morning-oblation. All this, whatever there is, they fly up as if they were flying, saying, "To-day I shall do this, to-day I shall go there."
5.28.6	He who, knowing this, offers the Agnihotra, conquers as much of the world as one conquers by giving everything here.
5.28.7	He offers the evening Agnihotra to Agni, and it is accepted by speech, and speech is speech.
5.28.8	He who, knowing this offers the Agnihotra to Agni has his Agnihotra praised by Agni.
5.28.9	He who knows this, and offers the Agnihotra, is honoured by the sun.
5.28.10	Now, of that Agnihotra, there are seven hundred and twenty oblations offered in the evening, and seven hundred and twenty in the morning. So many are the bricks of Agni.
5.28.11	He who, knowing this, offers the Agnihotra, is worshipped by Agni for a year.
5.29.1	Vrsha-Susha, the son of Vata, said to Jatu-karna, "I am the speaker. What is that Agnihotra which is offered on two days? It is offered on one day now."
5.29.2	The maiden, possessed by the Gandharva, said this: "I shall tell you what is the Agnihotra. It was offered on two consecutive days. Now it is offered on one day only."
5.29.3	This Agnihotra is offered on the next day, when one offers in the evening after sunset and in the morning before sunrise. But this Agnihotra is offered both on the same day, when one makes the offering in the evening after the sun has set and in the morning after sunrise.
5.29.4	Therefore, one should offer in the morning.
5.29.5	In the twenty-fourth year, one who offers the oblation before sunrise attains the world of Gayatri. One who offers the oblations after sunrise attains the world in twelve years. When one offers the oblation twice in a year before sunrise, then one oblation is offered. When one offers after sunrise, one attains the world in a year. One who knows this and offers after sunrise attains the same world. Therefore, one should offer after sunrise.
5.29.6	He who offers in the evening after sunset and in the morning after sunrise, offers in the light of the day and night. The night is bright with the light of Agni, the day is bright with the radiance of the sun.
5.29.7	He whose offering is made in the light of day and night, he who knowing thus offers in the morning after sun-rise.
5.29.8	Therefore one should offer in the morning.
5.30.1-2	These indeed are the wheels of the year, namely, day and night. By them he goes to the year. He who offers before sunrise goes as if by one wheel. It is so. And he who offers after sunrise goes as if both wheels go. He quickly reaches the path. It is so.
5.30.3	This is the right thing to do, for the two verses, Brihat and Rathantara, contain all that has been and will be. Having installed the fires, the wise one should offer oblations at night and during the day.
5.30.4	The Rathantara is the night, the Bṛhat is the day, Agni is the Rathantara, Āditya is the Bṛhat. These two deities indeed lead him to the highest place of heaven, to the world of heaven, he who knowing thus offers at sunrise. Therefore one should offer at sunrise.
5.30.5	This is the hymn of praise to the sacrifice:
5.30.6	Just as one who is going on a journey would not do anything else, but would go on, so do many people go on, before sunrise, offering Agnihotra.
5.30.7	This deity, when she goes forth, all this follows her, whatever there is. For this deity has all this as her followers, whatever there is.
5.30.8	He who knows this becomes the follower of that (goddess).
5.30.9	He is indeed the one guest. He dwells among those who offer oblations.
5.30.10	That is why there is a verse:
5.30.11	"He who is sinful, he who is accused, he who is sinful by nature, he who steals, he binds the one guest in the evening. The thief has taken away the sugarcane."
5.30.12	This indeed is the one guest. He dwells among those who offer oblations. That deity which he obstructs, he is obstructed by that deity from both worlds, from this world and from the other world, if he does not offer the Agnihotra, though he is capable of doing so.
5.30.13	Therefore, one who is able to offer the Agnihotra should offer it.
5.30.14	Therefore, they say, "A guest in the evening should not be obstructed."
5.30.15	Now, indeed, he who knew this, Janashruti, the son of Nagari, said to Uditahomin, the one with eleven eyes, the one who was to be honoured: "We know him in the progeny, whether he offers knowing or not knowing." His progeny became like a kingdom, like a kingdom indeed does his progeny become, he who, knowing this, offers at sunrise. Therefore one should offer at sunrise.
5.31.1	The rising sun, indeed, unites the rays with the Āhavanīya fire. He who offers before sunrise, it is as if he were to offer milk to a young boy or calf before it is born. It is like that. But he who offers after sunrise, it is like offering milk to a young or grown up boy or calf. It is like this. When it is offered to him, the food of both worlds is offered to him from this world and from the other world, from both.
5.31.2	He who offers before sunrise, it is as if he were to give a gift to a man or an elephant. He should give the gift when the sun has risen. He who offers after sunrise, it is like giving a gift to a person or an elephant. It is like that. He who, knowing this, offers after sunrise, he takes that hand and places it in the heavenly world. Therefore, one should offer after sunrise.
5.31.3	The rising sun attracts all beings. Therefore, it is called Prāṇa. When one offers to it, the offering becomes successful. One who knows this and offers at sunrise, should offer at sunrise.
5.31.4	He who offers at sunset, saying the truth, offers in truth. At sunrise, he offers, saying, "Earth, Heaven, Space, Om, Agni is light, light is Agni." At sunset, he offers, "Earth, Space, Heaven, Om, the Sun is light, light the Sun." At sunrise, he who knows this, offers, saying the truth. His offering becomes true. Therefore, one should offer at sunrise.
5.31.5	This is the hymn of praise to the sacrifice.
5.31.6	In the morning, in the morning, they speak untruth. Those who offer Agnihotra before sunrise, praising the sun during the day and not praising it at night, say, "The sun is the light, but that is not their light."
5.32.1	Prajapati desired, "May I beget, may I be more." He performed austerities. Having performed austerities, he created these worlds - earth, sky, heaven. He heated those worlds. From those heated ones, three luminaries were born - Agni from earth, Vayu from sky, Aditya from heaven. He heated the luminaries. From those heated luminaries, three Vedas were born - Rig Veda from Agni, Yajur Veda from Vayu, Sama Veda from Aditya. He heated the Vedas. From those heated Vedas, three bright ones were born - Bhu from Rig Veda, Bhuva from Yajur Veda, Svar from Sama Veda.
5.32.2	He heated those semen-drops. From those heated ones, three castes were born: A, U, and M. He united them in one way. That is this Oṃ. Therefore, one recites Oṃ. Oṃ is indeed the heavenly world. Oṃ is that which shines.
5.32.3	Prajapati performed the sacrifice. He brought it and performed it. He performed the Hotr function with the Rig Veda, the Adhvaryu function with the Yajur Veda, and the Udgath function with the Sama Veda. That which is the bright (light) of these three Vedas, he performed the Brahma function with that.
5.32.4	Prajapati gave the sacrifice to the gods. The gods performed the sacrifice, brought it, and worshipped with it. They made the Hotr-priest with the Rig-veda, the Adhvaryu-priest with the Yajur-veda, and the Udgata-priest with the Sama-veda. Whatever is bright in these three Vedas, they made that the Brahmatva.
5.32.5	The gods said to Prajapati, "If our sacrifice is afflicted by the Rk, if by the Yajus, if by the Sama, or if by the unknown, what atonement is there for all calamities?" Prajapati said to the gods, "If your sacrifice is afflicted by Rk, offer it on the Garhapatya with 'Bhuvah'. If by Yajus, offer it on or near the Anvähäryapacani in the case of Haviyajnas with 'Bhuva'. If by Sama, offer it on Ahavaniya with 'Svar'. If by the unknown or all calamities, offer it on all with 'Bhuvar Svar'.
5.32.6	These are the means of uniting the Vedas, namely, these Vyāhrtis. Just as one would unite oneself with oneself, just as one would unite a mountain with another mountain, just as one could unite a membrane with skin, or anything else that is separated, in the same way, one unites the separated parts of the sacrifice with these. This is the atonement for everything, namely, these Vyahṛtis. Therefore, this alone should be done as atonement in the sacrifice.
5.33.1	The great sages have said that the Hotr-priest is performed by the Rc, the Adhvaryu-priest by the Yajus, and the Udgātṛ-priest by the Sāman. Thus the three Vedas are commenced. But by what is the Brahman-priest performed? One should say: By the three Vedas.
5.33.2	This indeed is the sacrifice, which blows here. Its two supports are speech and mind, for the sacrifice is supported by speech and mind. This indeed is speech, and that is mind. By means of the three Vedas they make one side pure; the Brahman makes it pure by means of the mind.
5.33.3	Now some Brahmanas, having recited the Stomabhāga verses at the morning-hymn, recite them while the Brahmanas are reciting. This is what the Brahmana says: "Seeing the Brahmanas reciting at the morning- hymn, half of the sacrifice is lost." Just as a man with one foot or a chariot with one wheel, going along, would break down, so does the sacrifice break down. The sacrificer breaks down following the breakdown of the sacrifice.
5.33.4	Therefore, one should observe silence from the time of the Brahma-offering until the morning recitation, from the time of offering to Upamśu and Antaryāma until the Pavamāna hymns are performed, and from the time of those hymns with their respective verses until the Vaṣaṭkāra. One should observe silence. Just as a person is protected from both sides, or a chariot moving from both sides is not harmed, in the same way, the sacrifice is not harmed, and the sacrificer is not harmed by the non-harm of the sacrifice.
5.34.1	They say, "He took away my Grahas, he performed my Ahuti-offerings, he sang my Sāman, he recited my mantras, he praised me, he made me perform the Yagya." The Dakshina is taken away for the Adhvaryu. "He went away from me" - for the Udgātṛ. "He recited to me, he praised me" - for Hotṛ. "He made me perform the Yaga" - for Brahman. "He did something for me" - for Potr. "He took away something from me" - the Dakshina is given to the Brahman.
5.34.2	This is the physician of the sacrifice, namely, the Brahman. Having made it a remedy for the sacrifice, he carries it.
5.34.3	Now, when he performs the priestly duties with the most abundant Brahmanic juice of the metres, then he is half of Brahman. He was the foremost of the other priests, and he was half of Brahman, and half of the other priests.
5.34.4	Therefore, if there is a calamity in the sacrifice due to the Ṛg Veda, if due to the Yajur Veda, if due due to the Sāma Veda, or if due to the unknown, or if it is a general calamity, they offer it to Brahman. Therefore, if there be a calamity in the Yajna due to the ṛg veda, one should offer on the Garhapatya with the words "bhūr". If due to the Yajus, one should recite on the Agnidhriya or Anvāhāryapacana. If due to the Sâma Veda, one should offer in the Āhavanīya with the words “svar”. If due to the unknown or if it is general calamity, one should offer to all with the words "bhur bhuvah svar" and then offer in the Āhavaniya alone.
5.34.5	He who is the Prastôtâ, having taken up the Stotra, says, "O Brahman, we shall praise you, O teacher." The Brahman says, "Bhuḥ." At the morning pressing he says, "You should praise Indra." At the midday pressing he says, "You should praise Indra." At the third pressing he says, "You should praise Indra." At the Uktha or Atiratra he says, "Bhur Bhuvah Svar. You should praise Indra."
5.34.6	When he says, "Sing praises to Indra," then Indra is the sacrifice, Indra is the deity of the sacrifice, thus he makes the Udgitha connected with Indra. "Do not go away from Indra, sing praises to Indra," thus he says to them.
6.1.1	The gods, all of them, sat down to perform a sacrifice. They did not destroy sin. Then Arbud, the serpent-sage, the son of Kadru, the creator of mantras, said to them, "There is only one Hotr for you. I will make it for you. Then you will destroy sin." They said, "Yes." At midday, they heard the sound of the stones being struck, and the serpent crawled up at midday.
6.1.2	Therefore, at midday, they praise the clouds at midday. That is imitation.
6.1.3	He went to where there was a pond. Even today, there is a place called Arbudodāsarpani.
6.1.4	The king made them drunk. They said, "The king is looking at us with a poisonous eye. We shall strike him with the turban on his eyes." They did so. Therefore they strike the turban on the eyes. They strike the turban on his head. This is the imitation.
6.1.5	The king made them drunk. They said, "He is reciting the mantra of his own (gravas). Let us recite other mantras to him." They said, "Let it be so." Then they recited other mantras to the king. Then the king did not make them drunk. Because they recited other mantrases to him, it is for peace.
6.1.6	They destroyed sin. The serpents destroyed sin in them. Those who have destroyed sin, having abandoned the old skin, go forth with a new one.
6.1.7	He who knows this destroys sin.
6.2.1	They say, "How many times should one recite?" They say, "One hundred times." They say, "Man has a life span of a hundred years, a hundred powers, and a hundred senses. He places his life span, power, and senses in it."
6.2.2	They say, "Thirty-three times." They say that he removed the sin of the thirty-three gods. The thirty-three gods are his.
6.2.3	He should praise with unlimited (verses). Prajapati is unlimited. This is the office of Prajapati, namely the Gravastotra. All desires are fulfilled in it. When he praises with unlimited (verses), all desires are fulfilled.
6.2.4	He who knows this obtains all desires.
6.2.5	Therefore one should praise with unlimited verses.
6.2.6	They say, "How should one recite?" (The answer is:) By syllables, by four syllables, by half-verses, by verses. If one recites by verses, that is not proper. If one recates by half-verses or by four syllables, that is also not proper. One should recite by syllables. If one recitates by syllables, the metres would be omitted and many syllables would be lost. One should recite only by half-verses for the sake of stability.
6.2.7	The man is two-footed, the animals are four-footed. He thus establishes the sacrificer in the two-footed and the animals in the four-footed. Therefore one should recite the half-verses.
6.2.8	They say, "Why does he recite the Gravas at midday itself? How is it recited at the other two Savanas?" When he recites with Gāyatrī verses, it is the morning Savana, and when he recites with Jagatī verses, it is Jagatī, the third Savana.
6.2.9	Thus, indeed, he who knows this, is praised at all the Savanas, when he is praised at midday at midday.
6.2.10	They say, "Why does the Adhvaryu instruct the other priests, but this one (the Hotri) does not instruct them?" The mind is the Gravastotra. This mind is not instructed. Therefore this one (the Hotr) takes it without being instructed.
6.3.1	Speech is the Subrahmaṇyā, and Soma is the calf of it. When Soma is bought, they call out to the Subrahmaṇa. Just as one would call out to a cow with its calf, so does speech yield all desires to the sacrificer with the calf of Soma.
6.3.2	Speech yields all desires to him who knows this.
6.3.3	They say, "What is the nature of Subrahmaṇyā?" One should say, "Speech itself." Speech is indeed Brahman and Subrahmaṇya.
6.3.4	They say, "But why do they call him Subrahmaṇyaka, though he is a man?" One should say "Speech is Subrahmaṇyak."
6.3.5	They say, "If the priests perform their priestly duties within the altar, and the Subrahmaṇyā outside the altar, how is her priestly duty performed within the altar?" They may throw out the altar from the altar. If he stands on the altar and calls out, he should say, "By that."
6.3.6	They say, "Why does he call out from the heap of earth?" The sages were performing a sacrifice. The one among them who was the oldest, they said, "Call out for us in the Subrahmaṇya (chant). You will call out to the gods from the oldest." They make him the oldest. Then he pleases the entire altar.
6.3.7	They say, why did they offer the bull as a fee? The bull is the male, the Subrahmanya is the female, that is the pair. For the propagation of that pair.
6.3.8	The Agnidhra priest offers the Patnivata silently. The Patnivata is semen. The sprinkling of semen is like silence.
6.3.9	He does not offer the Anuvṣṭakāra. The Anuvṣṭkāra is a settled rite. He thinks, "I should not settle the semen." Semen is unsettled and is settled by the Anuvṣṣṭkāra. Therefore he does not offer the Anuṣṭakāra.
6.3.10	Sitting on the seat of the Hotṛ, he eats. The Hotṛ is the Agni in the wives; he places the seed in the wives for procreation. He places the seed in his wives through Agni for procreation.
6.3.11	He who knows this is born with offspring and cattle.
6.3.12	The Subrahmaṇyā is performed to the south. Food is the Dakṣiṇā. Food is the Subrahmaṇya. They establish the sacrifice in food at the end. They establish it.
6.4.1	The gods were performing the sacrifice. The Asuras, who were approaching them, said, "We shall take away the share of the sacrifice." They approached them from the south. When they thought that the sacrifice had been performed by them, the gods, having become aware, surrounded them from the south with Mitra and Varuna. With Mitra and Varuna alone they killed the Asura-guardians from the south at the morning pressing. In the same way the sacrificer kills the Asura-guards with Mitra and Varunya alone from the south at morning pressing. Therefore the Maitrāvaruṇa recites at the morning pressing, for with Mitra and Varunā the gods killed the Asura guards from the south at dawn.
6.4.2	They were driven away to the south. The Asuras entered the sacrifice in the middle. The gods, having become aware, placed Indra in the middle. With Indra they themselves struck down the Asura-protectors in the middle at the morning pressing. In the same way the sacrificers strike down the Asura protectors with Indra in the middle at morning pressing. Therefore the Brahman-priest recites the Indra-verse at the morning pressing, for with Indra the gods struck down the Asuras in the middle at dawn.
6.4.3	They were driven out in the middle, the Asuras entered the sacrifice from the north. The gods, having become aware, drove them out from the north with Indra and Agni. They killed the Asura-protectors at the morning pressing with Indra and Agni alone from the north. In the same way the sacrificers kill the Asura-protec- tors at the morning pressing by means of Indra and Agni alone. Therefore the Adhvaryu recites the Indra-Agni hymn at the morning pressing. For the gods killed the Asura protectors at the morning pressing from the north with the help of Indra and Agni.
6.4.4	The Asuras were driven away from the north, and fled in the direction of the east. The gods, having recovered, placed Agni in front at the morning pressing. With Agni they slew the Asura-guardians in front at the Morning Pressing. In the same way the sacrificer with Agni slays the Asura-guards in front at theMorning Pressing. Therefore the Morning Pressing is connected with Agni.
6.4.5	He who knows this, indeed, destroys evil.
6.4.6	The Asuras, having been driven away before, entered from behind. The gods, having become aware, drove away the Asura-guardians from themselves at the third pressing with all the gods. In the same way the sacrificer drives away the Asura guardians from himself at the third pressing. Therefore the third pressing is for all the gods.
6.4.7	He who knows this, indeed, destroys evil.
6.4.8	The gods thus killed the Asuras, from every sacrifice. Then the gods became victorious, the Asuras were defeated.
6.4.9	He becomes victorious over his own self, his enemy, and his evil foe. He who knows this.
6.4.10	The gods, having thus performed the sacrifice, killed the Asuras and their evil, and conquered heaven.
6.4.11	He who knows this and he who, knowing this, arranges the Savanas, conquers his hateful, sinful enemy and wins heaven.
6.5.1	They make the Stotriya equal to the Anurūpa at the morning Savana. They make the day equal to the Anūrupa. They begin the higher day with the lower day.
6.5.2	Then, at midday, prosperity did not remain with him. Those backsides of him did not remain. If they would have made the Stotriya (verse) similar to the Stotriya.
6.5.3	By that very division, at the third pressing, they do not make the Stotriya similar to the Stotrya.
6.6.1	Now, indeed, the beginning is itself.
6.6.2	"May Varuna lead us in the right path." This is for the Maitrāvaruṇa. "May Mitra, the wise, lead us." The Maitrāvaruṇa is the leader of the Hotr-priests; hence this verse is in the form of a prayer.
6.6.3	"We invoke Indra from all sides." This is for Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin. "From the people." By this they invoke Indra everyday.
6.6.4	No one else can defeat them in battle, where the Brahman-priest, knowing this, recites this hymn every day.
6.6.5	"When Soma is pressed, O men" (is the call of the Hotri). Indra and Agni have called out. Indra and Agni are thus called out every day. No one else can call out to them. He who knowing thus, the Hotri recites this verse every day, 
6.6.6	These are the boats for crossing over to the world of heaven. They cross over to the world heaven by means of these.
6.7.1	Now, those for the Paridhāniya (rites).
6.7.2	"May we be in the god Varuna." This is the verse of the Maitrāvaruṇa. "May we be in prosperity." This world is prosperity. "May we in heaven." By this they undertake both worlds.
6.7.3	The Brahmanaschansi (chant) is the sky. He (the Adhvaryu) goes beyond the sky. This (verse) is the third of the three verses. By this he makes the heaven a world for them.
6.7.4	"When Soma was drunk, Indra broke the rock."
6.7.5	The initiated ones are those who are desirous of (heaven). Therefore this (verse) is powerful.
6.7.6	He who has come up from the Angiras, revealing the hidden ones, has driven away the lower one. He has indeed bound them with this (verse).
6.7.7	"With Indra, the shining one of heaven." The heavenly world is indeed the shining one of Indra.
6.7.8	"The firm, the firmest, and the stable ones, he does not drive away."
6.7.9	They go to heaven, and they go to the world of heaven, and they stand there day after day.
6.7.10	"He says, "I choose the speech of Sarasvati and of the two who have speech," for Sarasvati is speech, and this is what he says, "I select the speech of the two who are Indra and Agni." For this is the dear abode of Indra and Agni, namely speech; thus he satisfies them with their dear abode.
6.7.11	He who knows this prospers with his beloved wealth.
6.8.1	The two kinds of Paridhanas are used at the morning and midday pressing of the Hotr priests, the Ahina and the Ekāhika.
6.8.2	The Maitrāvaruṇa priest then puts on the Ekāhika Paridhanas, thereby he does not fall from this world.
6.8.3	The Ahina Paridhanas of the Acchāvāka are for attaining the heavenly world.
6.8.4	The Brahman-priest and the Sâmansinger, the Maitrâvaruna and the Âgnidhra, the Ahina and the Ekâha, the Agnishtoma and the Sanvatsara, thus he, performing both, goes to both worlds.
6.8.5	Then at that time the Hotr-priests' Paridhananiya verses are recited at the third pressing. The one-day (rite) is indeed a firm foundation. Thus they establish the sacrifice on a firm foundation at the end.
6.8.6	One should offer at the morning pressing without (the recitation of) the Anuvakya.
6.8.7	One should not praise more than one or two Stotras. Just as one would quickly give to one who is thirsty and hungry, so should it be done. And also, one should quickly give Soma-drink, the food of the gods, to the gods. One quickly establishes oneself in this world.
6.8.8	With unlimited (verses) at the two later pressings. The heavenly world is unlimited. For the attainment of the heavenly world.
6.8.9	The Hotr may recite the hymns as he pleases, if the Hotr-priests recite them on the previous day, or if the Hotr recites them and the Hotr- priests do not. The Hotr is the breath, the Hotr-priest are the limbs. This breath moves in accordance with the limbs. Therefore the Hotr may recite as he pleases, or if the Hotr-priests recite on the previous day or if the Hotrs recite and the Hotr priests do not.
6.8.10	The Hotṛ, having come, offers the final verses. Then at the third pressing the final verses of the Hotṛs are common. The Hotṛ is the self, the Hotṛs the limbs. The ends of the limbs are common. Therefore at the third pressing, the final verses of Hotṛs are the same.
6.9.1	"May the tawny ones bring thee hither" (thus) he recites at the morning pressing when the Soma is being pressed. The (verses) are "endowed with virility, drunk, pressed, and intoxicating, of equal form."
6.9.2	He recites the verses addressed to Indra. The sacrifice is indeed Indra.
6.9.3	He recites verses in the Gāyatrī metre. The morning pressing is indeed Gāyatrī.
6.9.4	He recitates nine less (verses) at the morning pressing. The semen is indeed deposited less.
6.9.5	Ten at midday, for the midday is the middle of the day. The seed is deposited in the middle of the woman, and becomes the largest.
6.9.6	Nine at the third pressing, for from the lesser are offspring born.
6.9.7	And because he recites these verses only about the embryo, he thus generates the sacrificer as an embryo, for the divine origin of the sacrifice.
6.9.8	They say that there are seven at the morning pressing, seven at the midday pressing, and seven at the third pressing. The Puronuvākyā-s are as many as the Yājyā-s. Seven offer to the east, seven pronounce the Vasat-call. Those who say that these are the Puronuvākyat.
6.9.9	He should not do so, for they would destroy the sacrificer's semen. The sacrificer himself is the sacrificer, for the sacrificer is the Sūkta.
6.9.10	The Maitrāvaruṇa priest carries him from this world to the world of the atmosphere by means of nine (verses), and from the world of the atmoshpere to the world beyond by means of ten (verses). For the world of the atmopshere is the most important. From the world beyond he carries him to the world of heaven by means of nine.
6.9.11	Those who have seven or seven times seven (verses) are not fit to carry the sacrificer to the world of Heaven.
6.9.12	Therefore, one should recite only the Sūktas.
6.10.1	Now he said, "The sacrifice is indeed Indra's, but why are the two who have set out at the morning pressing, the Hotṛ and the Brāhmaṇācchaṃsī, offering to Indra in the two visible Indra-offerings? The Hotṛ offers, 'This is thy sweet Soma,' and the Brāhmanācchaṃsin, 'We, O Indra, thee the bull.' The others offer to different deities. How do they become Indra's?"
6.10.2	"We call thee, O Mitra," says the Maitrāvaruṇa priest. "Thou art Soma-drinker," says the Varuna priest. Whatever is drunk is a form of Indra; thus he pleases Indra.
6.10.3	"He whose is the Maruts' abode," says the Potā priest. "He is the best of cowherds," says the Varunācārya priest. Indra is the cowherd; thus he pleases him.
6.10.4	"O Agni, bring here the wives" - the Hotri priest offers. "O Tvashtar, for drinking Soma" - Indra is Tvashtar. This is the form of Indra. Thus he pleases Indra.
6.10.5	"O giver of food, O giver of wealth" - the Agnidhra priest offers. "To the one with Soma-back, to the creator" - Indra is the creator. This is the Indra form. Thus he pleases
6.10.6	The morning hymns have come, the most desirable, with the gods, Indra-Agni, drinking Soma. Thus the self-accomplished Chāvāka (has sung).
6.10.7	Thus indeed these (hymns) become connected with Indra.
6.10.8	By being of different deities, he pleases other deities.
6.10.9	By being in the Gāyatrī metre, they are connected with Agni.
6.10.10	By these (hymnas) one indeed attains the three.
6.11.1	The Asavi hymn is recited at midday, when the sun is rising. It is recited thus: "The God of cattle, the brown one, the blind one." The verses are rich in form, full of semen, drink, and offspring, and full of intoxication.
6.11.2	The verses of Indra are recited. The sacrifice is of Indra. The verses of the Tristubh metre are recited. The midday pressing is of the Tristubha metre.
6.11.3	They say that it is the form of the third pressing itself. But why do they offer libations with Madhu at midday?
6.11.4	The deities seem to be intoxicated at midday, and they are really intoxicated at the third pressing. Therefore they offer libations to them with Madhu at noon.
6.11.5	They all perform the midday pressing.
6.11.6	Some perform with the verses recited in the middle of the pressing.
6.11.7	The Hotṛ recites the verse, "Do thou drink Soma, O fierce one, who art the destroyer."
6.11.8	The Maitrāvaruṇa recites the verse "Do thou protect him who is the destroyer, the strong one."
6.11.9	The Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin recites the verse,"Do thou protect him, O Prāthna, may he be pleased with thee.
6.11.10	"Come hither, O Soma, thou art desired." Thus the Pot-bearer offers.
6.11.11	"Thy Soma is here; come hither." Thus the Nestr offers.
6.11.12	"O Soma, known by Indra, come hither." Thus he who pours the Soma offers.
6.11.13	"The vessel is filled; svāhā." Thus the Agnidhra offers.
6.11.14	These are the songs that are sung at the midday pressing. Indra did not conquer at the morning pressing. He conquered the midday pressing with these very songs. Because he conquered, they are sung at the noon pressing.
6.12.1	"Come hither, O Indra, to the Soma-pressing, to the pressing of the Soma." Thus he recites when the Soma is being pressed at the third pressing. They are endowed with virility, drinking, giving, and intoxication, and are endowed with the fullness of form. They belong to Indra and Arbudi.
6.12.2	They say, "Why is it that one praises in the Arbava verses, and why is the Pavamana called Arbava?"
6.12.3	Prajapati, having made the mortal fathers of the gods immortal, divided them at the third pressing. Therefore one does not praise at the Arbhava (pressing). Then they call the Pavamana (pressing) Arbhava.
6.12.4	Then he said, "Why do you recite the Gāyatrī verses at the morning pressing and the Tristubh verses at the midday pressing, when the third pressing has the Jagatī metre?"
6.12.5	The third pressing is the essence of the Soma. This is the essence of Soma, the Shukriya metre, which is the Tristubh. One should say that it is for the essence of the pressing. Or one should say that he is sharing Indra in the pressing.
6.12.6	Now he said, "The third pressing is indeed connected with Indra and the Rbhus. But why is it that one offers to Indra and the R bhus at the third pressing, when the others are connected with different deities? The Hotr alone offers to Indra and Rbhus who have conquered the prize. How do they become connected with Indra and Rbh us?"
6.12.7	"O Indra and Varuna, drink this Soma, pressed by the pressers." Thus the Maitrāvaruṇa priest offers. "The chariot of the two of you is the sacrifice, the divine assembly." Thus are the many forms of the Rishis.
6.12.8	"O Indra and Brihaspati, drink the Soma." Thus the Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin priest offers. "May your drops enter us, O self-existent ones." Thus are the various forms of the Rshis.
6.12.9	The Pot-bearer recites the verse, "May the seven streams carry you; the Rghayas are the singers." The one who is to be offered sacrifices recites, "The Rghayas have won through their arms." This is the form of the Rbhus.
6.12.10	The one who is to offer sacrifices recites, "Come to us, O Suhava, for the offering." This is the offering." This too is the form of Rbhus.
6.12.11	"Indra-Vishnu, drink of this honey!" says the Acchāvāka. "Your streams of wine have reached us." Many are the forms of the Rishis.
6.12.12	"This praise is worthy of the All-knowing One." says the Agnidhra. "We unite like a chariot with the sage." Many are the form of the Rishas.
6.12.13	Thus indeed they become Indra-Arbuda.
6.12.14	By the different deities he pleases the other deities.
6.12.15	That it is the Jagat-prasahas, the third pressing is indeed the Jagat; for the fulfilment of the third pressing.
6.13.1	Then he says: "How are these Utkhinya (hymns) of him all equal and fulfilled, when the other Hotr hymns are different?"
6.13.2	The reason why they are called 'Hotr' is that they are equal.
6.13.3	The reason why the Ukthinas are different from the other Hotrs is that they are unequal.
6.13.4	Thus indeed, all these Ukthinas become equal and prosperous.
6.13.5	Then they say: 'They chant at the morning pressing, they chant at the midday pressing, the Hotr priests, how is it chanted at the third pressing?'
6.13.6	If he were to say, "Why do they chant two Sūktas at midday?" one should say, "Because of that."
6.13.7	Then he asks, "Why are the two-Sūkta Hotr and the two-Sûkta Hotr-assistants?"
6.13.8	If he were to say "Because they offer to the two-deity deities," one should say, "Because of that." "
6.14.1	Then he asks "Why are these three Ukhina Hotr-priests and the other Ukhina Hotrs?"
6.14.2-3	The Hotr, the Udgâtri, the Pratihartri, the Prastotri, the Acchâvâkin, the Nestr, the Agnîdh, the Maitrâvaruna, the Brâhmanâcchavin, the Pratiprasthâtri, the Sûdâga, the Prâsârin, the Sâman-chanter, the Adhvaryu, the Prati- adhvaryu, the Unnetr, the Subrahmanya, the Dhruva, the Upabarha, the Upavasanta, the Upavyâchârin, the Upabhṛt, the Upabâhu, the Upahasti, the Upastrin, the Upagrahin, the Upaghoshaka, the Upabhañjaka, the Upa- grayan, the Upagrâhin, the Uparâjin, the Uparajaka, the Uparaksha, the Uparodhaka, the Uparodhakin, the Uparudhi, the Uparudra, the Uparuddha, the Uparundhi, the Upavadya, the Upavadiya, the Upaviddha, the Upavi- dhyaka, the Upavîtin, the Upavishârin, the Upâs
6.14.4	Where Indra, having become the Suparna, brought down the Soma, he took away the praises of these Hotr-priests and gave them to the Hotr, saying, "You should call me, you should know this." They said, "We should praise these Hotr-priest with the gods." Therefore they have two invitations. They praised the Agni-priest with a verse. Therefore his Yagya becomes greater with one verse.
6.14.5	Then he says, "Do you (please) perform the Hotr-rite, do you (please) perfrom the Hotr- rite." The Maitrāvaruṇa sends forth to the Hotr. Why does he send forth to the Hotrs who are not Hotrs, who are not desirous of the Hotr-office?
6.14.6	The Hotr is indeed the breath, the breath is all the priests. He says, "Do perform the Hotr rite, do perform the Hotrrite."
6.14.7	Now he says, "Is there a call for the Udgātṛs?" He should say, "There is." This is their call, for when the Praśāstṛ has recited the Jāpa and says, "Praise!"
6.14.8	Then he says, "Is there a good speech for the Hotṛ?" He should say, "There is." The Adhvaryu says to him, "Hotṛ, speak what you have to say." This is his good speech.
6.14.9	Now he said, "Why are the Stotriya and Anurūpa hymns of Agni in the third pressing, when the Maitrāvaruṇa priest recites the hymns of Indra and Varuna?" "The gods defeated the Asuras with Agni as their mouth in the Utkas. Therefore the Stotriyaand Anurūpa are of Agni.
6.14.10	Then he said, "The Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin recites the Indra-Brhaspati (hymn) at the third pressing. The Āchāvāka recites the IndraVaisnava (hymn). How are the Stotriya and Anurūpa hymns of these two (hymns) Indra-related?" Indra indeed conquered the Asuras in the hymns. He said, "Who is there who knows me?" "I know you" - thus the deities knew him. Since Indra conquered him first, therefore the Stotriya-Anurūpa hymns are Indra-related. Since "I know you", thus the deities knew (him), therefore the hymns recited by them are of different deities.
6.15.1	Now they say, "The third pressing is the Vaishvadeva (pressing). Why then are these Iḍa (verses) sung at the beginning of the third pressing?" One should say, "They proceed beginning with Indra." And because the third pressing is the Jagat (pressing), therefore whatever verse is sung above that is all Jagat. If these Iḍa verses are sung at the beginning, they are all Jagat.
6.15.2	Then the Acchāvāka recites the Tristubh verse at the end, "Do you both unite for the rite." This is a praise of the rite that is to be performed.
6.15.3	"Do you both unite with the food." Food is the same as "food." For the securing of food.
6.15.4	"May we go by your untroubled paths." He recites this for the safety of each day.
6.15.5	Then he said, "The third pressing is indeed the Jāgata (Sāman). Why then are these Tristubh verses used as Paridhananiyas?" The Tristubh is indeed valour. They go to the end, having attained valour.
6.15.6	This is the verse for Indra and Varuna. The verse for the Maitravaruna is "May Brihaspati protect us from the west." The verse for the Brahmanaschamsin is "You both have won." The verse for Acchivasi is "Neither of you has won, nor will you win."
6.15.7	For both of them have won.
6.15.8	"Neither of you has conquered, nor will you conquer."
6.15.9	For neither of them has conquered.
6.15.10	Indra and Vishnu, when ye contended, ye divided the thousand into three parts.
6.15.11	Indra and Vishnu fought with the Asuras. Having conquered them, they said, "Let us make a pact." The Asuras said, "So be it." Indra said, "As far as Vishnu can stride three times, that is ours, and the rest is yours." He strode over these worlds, the Vedas, and speech. They say, "What is that thousand?" One should say, "These worlds, these Vedas, and speech."
6.15.12	"Do you sing, do you sing!" says the Udgātṛ at the Ukthya. He is the last there.
6.15.13	At the Agniṣṭoma and the Atiratra, the Hotr is the last there.
6.15.14	One should recite the sixteen verses. One should not recite them. One should recite them, they say. How does one recite them on other days? How does one not recite them here? Therefore one should recite them.
6.16.1	Then he says, "The third pressing is indeed the Nārāśamsa. Why does the reciter of the Acchāvasa recite the Nārāshansa verses at the end of the rites?"
6.16.2	The Nārāśaṃsa is a modification. What is it like? What is it like, indeed? The semen is modified. Then it becomes modified and generated. This is the softest metre, the loose one, which is the Nārāśamsa. This is the last one, which is of the Acchāvāka. It is for the sake of firmness. We shall be established in the firm.
6.16.3	Therefore the Acchāvāka recites the Anāraśaṃsī verses at the end of the Stomas for firmness, saying, "We shall be established in firmness." We shall be established in firmess."
6.17.1	Those who are to recite the Stotras on the next day perform the Anurūpa rite at the morning pressing for uninterrupted continuity.
6.17.2	Just as the one-day Soma-sacrifice is the son of the Soma-sacrifice, so the Ahiranya is the son of Soma-sacrifice. Just as the pressing of the Soma-juice in the one-day sacrifice proceeds uninterruptedly, so the pressing of the Ahiranya proceeds uninterruptedly. When they perform the Anurupasaman on the day of the Stotra, they continue the Ahiranya uninterruptedly at the morning pressing.
6.17.3	Those gods and sages desired, "Let us perform the same sacrifice together." They saw this as the same sacrifice, the same hymns, the same verses, and the same pentasyllabic verses.
6.17.4	Indra is the lord of the sacrifice, and wherever Indra goes first, the other one follows. It is for the sake of Indra's lordship over the sacrifice.
6.18.1	Now, it was Viśvāmitra who first saw these (verses). Having seen them, Vāmadevā created them. "O Indra, the wielder of the thunderbolt, whatever Indra approves of and whatever he approves of, how did the great one grow? Whose Hotṛ was it?" They quickly fell down. Because they quickly fell down, they became the Sampāta verses.
6.18.2	Viśvāmitra pondered, "Those who I saw as the Sāmpātas, Vāmadeva created them. Which hymns are the Sāmpatas? I shall create hymns similar to them." He created these hymns similar to the Sāmpata hymns. "Immediately born, the bull, the young one, Indra, the breaker of forts, has surpassed the Dāsa with his rays. This is the highest praise for him. The Soma-loving friends desire you. The fire has gone to the granddaughter of his daughter. Like a heated iron, the mind has been melted by the heat."
6.18.3	The one who is to be praised by the leaders, the one who is the sharp-horned bull, the fierce one, the one who makes the Brahmanas resound for fame, the one who comes to us for his own strength, the one who has the strength of the Turan.
6.18.4	These are the six Stotriya verses of the morning Savana. At the Madhyandina Savana, they recite the Ahina verses.
6.18.5	These are the verses of the Ahina sacrifice. May the truthful one come to us, the generous one, the powerful one. The Maitrāvaruṇa recites the verse, "May the truthful one come." "Let us now praise Indra, the swift one, for his favours." The Gotama sages have praised Indra. The Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin recites the verse. "Let us now recite the praises of Indra." The Acchāvāka recites the verse.
6.18.6	They say, why does the Acchāvāka recite this Sūkta like fire, both in the Parāñciṣu and Āhavasvīya rites?
6.18.7	This is the most vigorous of the many-verse hymns, and it is like fire. The fire carries the burden on which it is yoked. Therefore the Acchāvāka recites this hymn like fire at both times, in the distant and in the approaching days.
6.18.8	Those are the five days: the twenty-fourth, the Abhijit, the Viṣuva, the Viśvajit, and the Mahāvrata. These days are not deficient, for nothing is deficient in them. These days are going away, not returning. Therefore they recite them on these days.
6.18.9	Those who praise them, they obtain the heavenly worlds, all forms, all prosperity.
6.18.10	Those who praise them, indeed, they praise Indra for the sake of prosperity, like a bull.
6.18.11	Those who indeed praise them, they indeed continue the continuity of the Ahina.
6.19.1	Then the Maitrāvaruṇa recites these three Sāmans in reverse order, one each day.
6.19.2	"In the first day (he recites) "O Indra, the wielder of the thunderbolt, here...", in the second day "What Indra desired and what he did...", and in the third day "How did the great one grow, of which Hotṛ?"
6.19.3	The Brahman-priest recites the three Sampāta verses in reverse order on each day. The verses are: "Indra with his rays has surpassed the slave, he who is to be worshipped by the clansmen, he who is the fierce-horned bull."
6.19.4	The Acchāvaka recites three Sampāta verses, each on a different day, in the order: "I have come to this (Soma) for your protection, O Soma, for your enjoyment." On the first day, "Your friends, O Soma, desire you." On the second day, "The blazing fire has gone to his daughter's granddaughter." On the third day.
6.19.5	These are the nine.
6.19.6	Three are recited on each day.
6.19.7	Those twelve are accomplished. The year has twelve months. The year is Prajapati. The sacrifice is Prajapati, thus they attain the year, Prajapati, the sacrifice. They proceed in the year, Prajāpati, the sacrifice, day by day, standing firm.
6.19.8	They should sow between them.
6.19.9	The Vamadi verses of Viraj are recited on the fourth day, the Pankti verses on the fifth day, and the Paruchhepi verses on the sixth day.
6.19.10	Then if there are days of the Mahāstomas, the Maitrāvaruṇa should recite, "Who today is the god-loving man?" The Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin should recite, "He who has laid down in the forest, he who desires." The Āchāvāka should recite, "Come hither, O Arvā, to the seat of union."
6.19.11	These are the offerings. By these offerings the gods conquered the heavenly world. The sages (conquered it) in the same way. In the same way the sacrificers conquer the heavenly world by these offerings.
6.20.1	"The newly born bull, the calf," thus the Maitrāvaruṇa recites the verses in front of the Suktas every day."
6.20.2	This is the hymn of heaven. By this hymn the gods conquered the heavenly world. The sages did the same. In the same way the sacrificers conquer the heavenly world by this hymn.
6.20.3	This is the hymn of Visvami-tra. Visvami-tro was the friend of the universe.
6.20.4	He who knows this, and for whom this is known, becomes a friend to the world. The Maitrāvaruṇa recites the verses of the day in the morning, knowing this.
6.20.5	It becomes like the Rṣabha, having cattle, for the securing of cattle.
6.20.6	It consists of five verses. The Paṅkti has five feet. The Paṅktis are food. For the securing of food.
6.20.7	The Udgātṛ chants the Brāhmaṇācchaṃsa verses beginning with 'Udu brahmanyaira' and ending with 'Shravasyeti'. The Brāhmaṇacchaṃsa verses are full of Brahmanic power and prosperity. The Udgātā chants them every day.
6.20.8	This hymn is for attaining heaven. By this hymn, the gods conquered the heavenly world. The sages also did so. In the same way, the sacrificers also conquer the heavenly world by this hymn.
6.20.9	That is the Vasishtha. By this indeed Vasishtha attained Indra's beloved abode. He conquered the supreme world.
6.20.10	He goes to Indra's beloved world, he conquers the supreme world, he who knows this.
6.20.11	That is the six-verse (hymn). The seasons are six. For the attainment of the seasons.
6.20.12	Above that, he recites the Sampāta verses. Having obtained that, the sacrificers stand in this world in the heavenly world.
6.20.13	"The sage recites the verse, "Like a well-beaten out thought," for each day, for the sake of the form of the well-beaten out.
6.20.14	He touches the dear ones, the distant ones. The distant days are indeed the dear ones. They touch them, approaching them. The distant world is indeed the heaven world. He indeed addresses it.
6.20.15	I desire to see the wise ones, the intelligent ones.
6.20.16	Those who were the ancient sages, the departed ones, they are the poets. He indeed surpasses them.
6.20.17	That is indeed Vaishvamitra. Vaishvamitra was indeed the friend of the universe. To him the universe becomes a friend, he who knows thus.
6.20.18	He recites the unformulated Prajapati hymn. Prajapati is indeed unformulated. For the attainment of Prajapati.
6.20.19	He recites it once. By that he does not fall away from the Indra-form.
6.20.20	It has ten verses. The Viraj has ten syllables. The Viraj is food. For the attainment of food.
6.20.21	It has indeed ten verses. There are ten breaths. They attain the breaths. They place the breaths in themselves.
6.20.22	Then, after that, he recites the Sampāta verses. By means of that, the sacrificers attain heaven and stand firm in this world.
6.21.1	"Who is that Indra, the possessor of wealth? Who is the new one among the blue ones? Who has done this for him?" The verses ending with "ka" are recited every day as the beginning verses.
6.21.2	Who is Prajapati? For attaining Prajapati.
6.21.3	Whatever is in the form of the word "ka" (i.e. "kaṃ"), it is food. For the attainment of food.
6.21.4	Whatever is in the form "ka", they (the performers) proceed every day with the peaceful and unblemished Sūktas, and they pacify them with the verses in the form of "ka". Those (verses) become peaceful for them. They carry them to the peaceful heaven.
6.21.5	Those who know the Triṣṭubh verses should recite them.
6.21.6	Some recite the Prastara verses before the Hotr verses, saying that they are Dhāyyā verses.
6.21.7	One should not do so.
6.21.8	The Hotr is the nobility, and the Hotr-reciters are the common people. They would make the common people turn against the nobility, and cause misfortune.
6.21.9	One should know that these are Triṣṭubha verses.
6.21.10	Just as they who cross the ocean, so they who stay for a year or twelve days. Just as those who desire to cross would board a boat, so they mount these Tristubhs.
6.21.11	For this metre does not lead to heaven and return. It is the most vigorous.
6.21.12	One should not recite them, for they are of the same metre. And one should not say, "I am doing harm to the goddesses."
6.21.13	When they are praised with well-known verses, one should recite the verses in the proper order, thinking, "I am reciting the verses."
6.22.2	The Apāgas, the Abhibhūtas, the Apūtas, the Udicas, the Apūdicas, the Suradharas, the Apadharas, the Uras, as if in thy joy.
6.22.3	The form of the fearless one is like the fearless one, for whatever he desires.
6.22.4	"Thou art joined with Brahman, I join thee with Brahman." The Brahman-chanter recites this verse every day. "I join thee" means "I join thee with the yoked one," for the yoked one is like the unyoked one, and the form of the unyoked is like the unyokable.
6.22.5	"The wise one leads us to a wide world." The reciter of the Aharah-sutra says this every day. "Leads" means "goes" because the one who is not deficient is the form of the one who is deficient.
6.22.6	"Leads" means the form of the Sattrayana.
6.22.7	These are recited every day.
6.22.8	They are recited together.
6.23.2	"He has crossed the sky," (thus) he yokes; "Indra," (thus) releases.
6.23.3	"I am indeed the one who has Sarasvati," (thus) she yokes; "She is," (thus) the one who has not yoked.
6.23.4	"We shall be, O god Varuna, praised," (thus) one releases.
6.23.5	He indeed deserves to be yoked and released who knows how to yoke and release.
6.23.6	Now, when they are yoked on the twenty-fourth day, that is the yoking. And when they are released before the Udayaniya Atiratra, that is the releasing.
6.23.7	Now, if they were to perform the sacrifice on the twenty-fourth day with the one-day-sacrifices, then they would establish the sacrifice here and not perform a deficient rite. But if they were to perforin it with the rites of the deficient sacrifice, then the sacrificers would be injured, like a tired man who is not released. Therefore, they should perform it with both kinds of rites.
6.23.8	It is as if one were to go on a long journey and then rest.
6.23.9	They are continuous, and they are released from the sky.
6.23.10	One should praise the Stoma in one or two Savanas.
6.23.11	There are long forests where the Stoma is praised with many (Stotras).
6.23.12	At the third pressing, he should offer the Apamāna oblations. The heaven world is unlimited. For the attainment of the heaven world.
6.23.13	One who knows this and offers the Apamāna offerings becomes uninterrupted, uninterrupted, and not deficient. One who knows this and makes the Apamāna offering becomes uninterrupted, uninterrupted,
6.24.1	The gods saw the cattle in the Vala. They desired them by means of the sacrifice. They obtained them on the sixth day. At the morning pressing they made the Vala safe by means of the Nābhāk (verse). In that they made it safe, they made it firm. Then at the third pressing they made the cattle safe by means of thunder and the Vālakhilyas and the single foot of speech.
6.24.2	In the same way, the sacrificers at the morning pressing, with the Nābhākā verses, make the Vala tremble. When they make it tremble, they make it firm. Therefore the Hotr priests at the morning pressing chant the Nābhāka verses.
6.24.3	"He who holds the directions" (is the Maitrāvaruṇa). "Indra and Upamant" (is the Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin). "They bear the middle of the burdens" (is the Acchāvāka).
6.24.4	At the third pressing, they conquer the waters by means of the thunderbolt, by the Valakhilyas, by the edge of speech, by the single foot, having removed the obstacle.
6.24.5	The first half of the six Valakhilya hymns is recited in the reverse order, the second half in the order of the verses, and the third half in the reverse order. When reciting the Prastara, he should recite only one foot of the Prastara. That is the peak of speech.
6.24.6	These are the five single-foot verses, four from the tenth day and one from the Great Vrata.
6.24.7	Then, the eight-syllabled verses, the great names, and the verses, as many as they are, should be recited. One should not pay attention to others.
6.24.8	Then, reciting the verses in half-verses and the single-foot verses, and also the eight-syllabic verses, the great named verses.
6.24.9	Then, while dwelling in the Rk-verse, one should recite those single-footed verses and those eight-syllable verses, the Maha-nama-pada verses.
6.24.10	When he recites the first six Valakhilya hymns, he recites the vital breath and speech. When he recites (the second six), he recites the eye and mind. When he recitates (the third six), he recitates the ear and the self. He has attained the abode, he has attained the abode of desire, he has attained Valakhilya, he has attained to the corner of speech, to the one-footed, to the arrangement of vital breath.
6.24.11-12	And he recites the fourth verse without any break. The verses are cattle; for the securing of cattle.
6.24.13	If he were to place a single foot in the middle of the verse, he would be killing the animals of the sacrificer with a sharp edge of speech. If someone were to say to him, "You have killed the animals of the sacrifice with a sharp edge," then it would be so.
6.24.14	Therefore, one should not place a single foot there.
6.24.15	One should recite the last verse only, and that is their enjoyment.
6.24.16	Now this butter, the Sauvīra, told to Sauvala. He said, "I have taken away most of the animals belonging to the sacrificer. The Akāniṣṭhas will come to me." And he took it as if from the great priests. This is the praiseworthy and heavenly weapon. Therefore, this is praised.
6.25.1	The Brāhmaṇa text has been recited for the one who ascends the Dūrohaṇa.
6.25.2	One desiring cattle should ascend the Indra (stotra). Cattle belong to Indra.
6.25.3	It should be in the Jāgata metre. Cattle are in the Jāgati metre.
6.25.4	It should have the Mahāsūkta. It establishes the sacrificer in the majority of cattle.
6.25.5	One should ascend the Varuṇa (stotra). It is the Mahāsūktas and the Jāgata.
6.25.6	One who desires stability should ascend the Indra-Varuna (stoma). This is indeed the deity of the Hotra, and stability is the Indra-Varana. He thus establishes him in his own stable position.
6.25.7	Now, this is the Indra-Varuna (offering). Indeed, desires are obtained by means of the Indra-Varuṇa (offering). If one were to ascend the Indra-Varunā (offering), one should ascend the Supārṇā (offering). The desire obtained in the Indra-Varūṇā is obtained in the Supārṇyā.
6.26.1	They say, "Should one praise on the sixth day or not?"
6.26.2	They say, one should praise.
6.26.3	How does one praise others on other days? How does one not praise here?
6.26.4	But some say, one should not praise at all.
6.26.5	Heaven is the sixth day. The heaven world is not equal. One may reach the heaven world. If one were to praise, one should do what is equal. But if one does not praise, that is the form of the heaven world. Therefore one should not praise. What one does not praise,
6.26.6	The Stotriya is the Self, the Valakhilyas are the breaths. If one were to praise with these two deities, the breaths of the sacrificer would be lost. If someone were to tell him there, "The breaths of the sacrificers have been lost through these two deities," then it would be so. Therefore, one should not praise.
6.26.7	If he were to think, "I shall recite the Valakhilyas before the Dūrohaṇas," then he should not have such a hope.
6.26.8	If he were to find out through arrogance, he should recite many hundreds of verses above the Dūrohanas. If one were to do so for that purpose, it would be obtained here.
6.26.9	The Valakhilyas are the Indrani. Their verses consist of twelve syllables. Therein is the desire that is obtained. That which is in the Indra-related Jagat, then this is the Indra-Varuna hymn. The Indra-Varuna is the concluding verse. Therefore, one should not praise.
6.26.10	They say, "Just as the praise, so the hymn is performed. The Valakhilyan hymns are praised. The praise is performed, the hymn is not performed."
6.26.11	He should say, "It has been enjoyed" with the eight-syllabled (mantra). With the twelve-syllabled mantra, he says, "It has not been enjoyed."
6.26.12	They say, "Just as the sacrificial formula, so the offering verse. Three deities are praised: Agni, Indra, and Varuna. Then he offers to Indra and Varuna. How is Agni not excluded?"
6.27.2	The arts of the gods are the models for these arts. The art is attained here. An elephant, a pot, a garment, gold, a horse, a chariot, and a horse-cart are the arts.
6.27.3	The art is attained in this. One who knows this attains the art.
6.27.4	Whatever arts there are.
6.27.5	The arts are indeed the embellishment of the self. By these, the sacrificer embellishes himself with the essence of the Vedas.
6.27.6	He recites the Naabhane-distha hymn.
6.27.7	The Naabhane- distha is the semen; he sprinkles it.
6.27.8	He recites it in an undefined form. Semen is undefined; it is sprinkled in the secret place.
6.27.9	He becomes mixed with semen. "He sprinkled it, having joined with semen." By the prosperity of semen.
6.27.10	He recites the Sāman of Naraśamsa. The Sāman is speech. He thus places speech in the offspring. Therefore these offspring are born speaking.
6.27.11	Some recite it before (the Sāman) saying, "Speech is located before."
6.27.12	One recites it after (the Sāma) saying, " Speech is located after."
6.27.13	In the middle he recites, for this speech is in the middle.
6.27.14	Above, as it were, he recites, above, as it were is this speech.
6.27.15	The Hotṛ, having sprinkled the semen-like (water), hands it over to the Maitrāvaruṇa, saying, "Thou art his life."
6.28.1	He recites the Vālakhilyas, for the Vālakhilvas are the vital airs; he thus establishes his vital airs.
6.28.2	They are described as moving. These breaths move: Prāṇa moves in Apāna, Apāna moves in Vyāna.
6.28.3	He moves in the last verse of the first hymn, in half-verses in the second, and in verses in the third.
6.28.4	When he recites the first hymn, he recites both Prāṇa and Vāc; when the second, he recites the eye and the mind; when the third, he recites ear and the self.
6.28.5	Some recite the two hymns together, some recite the two hymns separately. This is the way of recitation. The desire is to recite the two hymns. The verses do not fit in.
6.28.6	He should indeed enjoy the Atimarśa. Thus the Pragaṭhas are performed. The Pragaṭhas belong to the Valakhilyas. Therefore, he should enjoy the Atimarṣa. What is Atimarṣa?
6.28.7	The Self is the Brihatī, the vital airs are the Satobṛhatī. He who praises the Brihatī is the Self, and the Satobṛhati is the vital airs. Then the Brihatī. Then the Satobṛhaṭī. Thus he goes around the Self with the vital airs. Therefore one should move beyond the reach.
6.28.8	The Ati-marsha is the Self, the Satobrhatis are the cattle. He who has the Satobrhati desires the Self, and the Satobrhats. Then the cattle, then the Brhati, then the Satobrhiti. Thus he goes around the Self with the cattle. Therefore one should perform the Ati-marsha.
6.28.9	He indeed is the one who is the most excellent in the Sūkta. He indeed is the enjoyment of both.
6.28.10	Having allotted the vital airs to the Maitrāvaruṇa, he hands them over to the Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin. "This one you should generate."
6.29.1	He praises Sukīrti. Sukīrti is the divine origin. He generates the sacrificer from the sacrifice for the divine origin.
6.29.2	The self is the bull-faced one. He praises the bull-faced (god). He makes it for himself.
6.29.3	He makes it crooked. Food is crooked. He gives him the food that has been born for him, as a mother gives milk to her son.
6.29.4	He becomes fivefold. This man is fivefold, divided into five parts: hair, skin, flesh, bone, and marrow. He makes the sacrificer as big as a man.
6.29.5	Having generated him, he hands him over to the Brahman-priest, saying, "You make this one firm."
6.30.1	He recites the Evayamarut hymn. The Evayamarut is a firm foundation. He thus establishes a firm foundation for him.
6.30.2	He makes it low. Low means food. He thus places food in him.
6.30.3	It blows in a regular or irregular manner. Everything here blows in a regular and irregular manner.
6.30.4	He is the Marut. The Maruts are the waters. The waters are food. He thus places food in front of him.
6.30.5	These are called the companions. The navel-born, the Valakhilyas, the Vrisakapi, the Evyamarut. One may chant them together or separately.
6.30.6	If one were to recite them separately, it would be as if one were to cut off the semen or the man. Therefore, one should either recite them together or not at all.
6.30.7	He, Bulīla Aśvatara, being the Hotṛ priest of the Viśvajit sacrifice, looked at them and thought, "This is the Viśva-jit of these arts. The two middle days are near. I will kill them. I will chant the Yamaruta in this way." He then chanted it in that way.
6.30.8	When the Hotr was reciting the Sastra, a cow came there. He said, "O Hotr, how did you recite the Sastra? It is floating."
6.30.9	What happened?"
6.30.10	"This is being recited by the wind from the north." He said, "Indra is at midday. How can you take Indra to midday?"
6.30.11	He said, "I am not taking Indra to midday."
6.30.12	This is the metre, the midday-breeze, the wind that blows in the morning or in the evening. All this is the wind that blows morning or evening. He is the wind, let us not censure him.
6.30.13	He said, 'O Amashavasu!' Then he gave him instruction.
6.30.14	He said, "Let the Indra-Vishnu hymn be chanted. Then you, O Hotri, chant this hymn after the Raudrya hymn and before the Marut hymn."
6.30.15	He chanted it in that way. Even now it is chanted in that way.
6.31.1	They say that when the Viśvajit is performed on the sixth day, the sacrifice is arranged, the offspring of the sacrificer is arranged. How is it that the Nābhanediṣṭha is not sung here? Then the Maitrāvaruṇa sings the Vālakhilyas. The semen is the breath first, then the breath. Thus the Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin does not sing the Nābhanedistha. Then he sings the Vṛṣākapi. The self is the semen first, then the self. How is the offspring of the Sacrificer arranged? How are the breaths arranged without being mixed up?
6.31.2	The sacrificer is indeed made to be like the embryo in the womb by this entire sacrificial rite. He lies down as if he were being born. But it is not that the entire being is born at one time. It is born as each part is born.
6.31.3	If all the sacrifices were to be performed on the same day, then the sacrifice would be possible, and the sacrificer would be successful. But the Hotr recites the hymn to the Maruts at the third pressing. That is the firm foundation of that (sacrifice). He thus establishes him at the end on that firm foundation.
6.32.1	The juice of the Chhandas, which had been taken in the sixth day, flowed over. Prajapati was afraid, "This juice of the Chhhandas will go beyond the worlds." He held it back with the Chhandas. With the Nārāshansa, the Gāyatrī, the Raibhya, the Tristubh, the Parākshya, the Jagatī, the Kāravyā, the Anushtubh. He again put the juice into the Chhandas.
6.32.2	By means of the charming metres, one attains what is charming. He who knows this, makes the sacrifice with charming metres.
6.32.3	He recites the Nārāśaṃsa hymns. Prajā (descendants) are Nara (man), and Śaṃsa (recitation) is speech. He places speech in the descendants. Therefore these descendants are born speaking. He who knows thus, that the Nārāsaṃsa hymns are.
6.32.4-7	The gods and the sages, praising, went to the heavenly world. In the same way the sacrificers, praising, go to the heavenly world.
6.32.8-10	The gods and the sages, indeed, having sung, went to the heavenly world. In the same way, the sacrificers, having sung, go to the heavenly world.
6.32.11	Agni indeed is the protector. Agni indeed protects these creatures. These creatures are protected by Agni.
6.32.12	He who knows this attains union with Agni, similarity to Agni, and the same world as Agni.
6.32.13	What is the protection?
6.32.14	The year indeed is the protector, the year indeed protects these creatures, the year is protected by these creatures.
6.32.15	He who knows this attains the same state, the same form, the same world as that of the year. He praises the Pragraha (hymn) as it is sung. The Vrsakapi (hymn) is the Vrsakapi. It comes to be in accordance with the Vrsakapins. He should not be dejected among them. He should not cry. He is the one who is dejected among them.
6.32.16	He praises the Karavyas.
6.32.17	The gods, when they performed any good deed, obtained it by means of the Karavya; and in like manner do the sacrificers, when they perform any good deed, obtain it by means of Karavya.
6.32.18	He praises them as the Vrsakapi, the Vrsakapins, the Vrsakas, for the Vrsakas are the Vrsakapis. He should not be deficient in them, for the Nivi is the deficient one among them.
6.32.19	He praises the directions as the Kalptis, he thus establishes the directions.
6.32.20	He praises them as five, for there are five directions, four horizontal and one vertical.
6.32.21	He should not be too low, nor too high, nor should he be too low or too high in these directions.
6.32.22	He recites them in half-verses, for the sake of stability.
6.32.23	He recits them in the form of the people, for the people are in the form of Janakalpas. Having thus established them in the directions, he establishes the people in them.
6.32.24	He recites them in half-verses, so that these creatures may not be deprived.
6.32.25	He recites the Indra-stanzas; the gods, by reciting the Indra-stansas, overcame the Asuras and conquered them. In the same way the sacrificer, by reciting the Indrastanzas, overcomes his hateful enemy and conquers him.
6.32.26	She recites them in half-verses, for the sake of stability.
6.33.1	She recites the Aitasa-prajapati.
6.33.2	The sage Aitasa saw the life of Agni, the limit of the sacrifice. Some say so. He said to his sons, "O sons, I have seen the life of Agni. Whatever I say, do not transgress it." They agreed, saying, "These horses are swimming in the opposite direction, in the opposite direction."
6.33.3	Then Agni Aitashāyana came to him and, out of season, seized him by the mouth, saying, "Do not injure our father."
6.33.4	He said to him, "Come, you have been lazy, you have killed my speech. I would have made a cow live for a hundred years, a man for a thousand years. I will make your offspring the most sinful, you who have done this to me."
6.33.5	Therefore they say, "The Aitashas are the worst of the Aurvas."
6.33.6	Some praise him more.
6.33.7	He should not stop him, but should say, "Praise as much as you like." The Aitashas' chatter is life.
6.33.8	He who knows this saves the life of the sacrificer.
6.33.9	What are the Aitashas' chatters?
6.33.10	The essence of the metres is this talk about the Aitas. He places the essence in the metres.
6.33.11	He who knows this, his sacrifice is performed with the essence of the metres, with the essence of metres.
6.33.12	The talk about the Aita
6.33.13	The sacrifice is not exhausted, the sacrifice is not exhausted.
6.33.14	He recites this Aitasa-prajapam in the form of a verse, as if it were a hymn.
6.33.15	He recits it with the last verse, as if reciting a hymn.
6.33.16	The Pravalhika hymns are sung. The gods, by means of the Pravalhika hymns, overcame the Asuras and then attacked them. In the same way the sacrificers, by means of Pravalhika hymns overcome their hated enemy and then attack him.
6.33.17	They are sung in half verses for the sake of stability.
6.33.18	The Ajigñāsani verses are sung for the purpose of subjugating the enemy. The gods subjugated the Asuras by means of the Ajigñāsaniya verses and then overcame them. In the same way the sacrificer subjugates his hated enemy by means of the same Ajigñāsanya verses and then overcomes him. They are sung in half-verses for the sake of stability.
6.33.19	He recites the Pratiraddhi verse. By means of the Pratiraddha verse, the gods overcame the Asuras. Then they overcame them. In the same way, the sacrificers overcome their hated enemy by means of the Prātrāddhi verse and then overcome him.
6.33.20	He praises the Ati-vāda (hymn) with the Ati-vādas, for with the Ati-vadas the gods overcame the Asuras and overcame them. So also the sacrificer overcomes his hateful enemy with the Ati-vadas. He praises it in half verses, for support.
6.34.1	He praises the Deyanītha (hymn).
6.34.2	The Adityas and the Angiras were contending for the heavenly world, saying, "We shall be the first to reach it." The Angiras saw the heavenly world on the morrow of the sacrifice. They were afraid of Agni, and said, "Agni is one with the Angiras, go to the Adityas and tell them that the heavenly world will be theirs on the morrow of their sacrifice." The Adityas, seeing Agni, saw the heavenly world immediately after the sacrifice. They came to him and said, "We shall tell you about the heavenly world on your morrow of sacrifice." They said, "Then we shall tell you about it immediately after our sacrifice. We shall go to heaven with you as our priest." He said, "So be it," and having been answered, he returned.
6.34.3	They said, "We have told you." He said, "I have told you." Then they said, "You have told us back." We do not know what to do. He said, "We know back."
6.34.4	He who comes with the office of officiating priest comes with fame. He who obstructs him obstructs fame. Therefore one should not obstruct.
6.34.5	If he were to win from this (sacrifice), he would win from this (world). If he were to be excluded from this (sacrifice) he would be excluded from this. If he were to offer himself, he would be excluded. From this.
6.35.1	They performed the sacrifice for the Adityas. When they had performed the sacrifice for them, they gave this earth full of sacrificial gifts. She was accepted by them and became hot. They rejected her. She became a lioness and wandered among the people. Her cries of distress were heard. Those were her cries of distress. Even now, before that, there are cries of distress.
6.35.2	Therefore they say, 'One should not accept a gift from one who has not given the sacrificial fee. Lest one who is pierced by grief should pierce one with grief.'
6.35.3	But if one were to accept it, one should give it to one's enemy, for one's enemy becomes worse.
6.35.4	Now that horse, having assumed the form of Tapati, and with his own self covered, went round this (earth) saying, "I am leading you." He is called Devānītha.
6.35.5	The Ādityas, O Jarti, led the Dakṣiṇā to the Angiras.
6.35.6	O Jarti, they did not return it, for they did not return this (earth).
6.35.7	They did indeed follow her, O sage, for they followed him.
6.35.8	They did not indeed seize her, O sage. For they did not seize her.
6.35.9	They did indeed seize her, o sage, for they seized him.
6.35.10	"They were not days, not conscious," for he is indeed the one who makes the days conscious.
6.35.11	The sacrifices are not without a leader. The Dakshina is the leader of the sacrifices. Just as a bull without a leader is lost, so also the sacrifice without Dakshina is lost. Therefore they say, "Dakshina should be given at the sacrifice, even if it is small."
6.35.12	May he be the swiftest with white horses.
6.35.13	May he be swiftest with the Padyas.
6.35.14	And they quickly nourish the honour of him.
6.35.15	The Adityas, Rudras, Vasus, and Tvashtri are praising.
6.35.16	"He is accepting this gift, O Angiras." He wanted to accept the gift.
6.35.17	This gift is great, extensive.
6.35.18	The gods give the boon.
6.35.19	May that be your good intention.
6.35.20	May it be yours every day.
6.35.21	He seizes him indeed.
6.35.22	He praises him as the divine guest, seizing him by the foot, as one would praise a guest, and he praises him with the last foot, as one praises a guest.
6.36.1	He praises the past.
6.36.2	The gods, concealing themselves in the form of the elements, attacked the Asuras. They did so by means of battle and by means of magic. The gods, concealing the form of the Asuras by means of the form of the (various) elements, then attacked them. In the same way the sacrificer, concealing the form (of his enemy) by means of the (various elements), then attacks him.
6.36.3	He recites them in half-verses, for the sake of stability.
6.36.4	He recites the Ahanasya verse.
6.36.5	From the Ahanas, semen is shed; from semen, offspring are born; he thus establishes propagation.
6.36.6	He recitess ten verses; the Viraj has ten syllables; the Viraj is food; from food, semen is shed, from semen, offspring is born; he thus establishespropagation.
6.36.7	He recites it with the word "nūṅkhā" (i.e. "nūṅkha"), for food is nūṅkha; from food is semen shed; from semen are offspring born; thus he establishes propagation.
6.36.8	He recites the Dādhīkri hymn; the Dādhṛs are the purifying of the gods; he speaks this speech when it is being purified; thus he purifies speech with the purifying of the god.
6.36.9	It becomes Anushtubh. Anushtubh is speech. Thus he purifies speech with its own metre.
6.36.10	He recites the Pavamana verses, "The most sweet-flowing ones."
6.36.11	The Pavamānas are the divine purifying (hymns). He speaks this speech in the form of the Pavamānas. He purifies speech with the Pavamāņas. They are in the Anushtubh metre. Speech is Anushtubh. He purifiees speech with its own metre.
6.36.12	"The drop stood on the shining (rays)," he recites the three verses of Indra and Brhaspati.
6.36.13	The goddesses, the Visvas, approaching, were yoked with Brihaspati. Indra was united with them.
6.36.14	Indra and Brihaspati were the gods who conquered the Asuras. Indra, with Brihaspati, drove away the Asuras who were approaching the gods. In the same way the sacrificer, with Indra and Brihas-pati, drives away the Asuras approaching him.
6.36.15	They say, "One should praise on the sixth day, one should not praise." They say, "He should praise." How does he praise on the other days? How does he not praise here? Some say, "He does not praise at all." The sixth day is indeed the heavenly world. The heavenly world is not attained. One attains the heavenly world. If he praises, he would make it equal. But if he does not praise, that is the form of the heavenly world. Therefore, one should not prais
6.36.16	These are the Udgīthas. The Nabha-Neḍiṣṭha, the Valakhilyas, the Vṛṣākapi, and the Evyāmarut. If one recites them, one will attain one's desires.
6.36.17	Indra is the bull, the ape, all the metres, the conversation of the Aitasa. There is the desire that is obtained in the Indra-Jāgara. Then this Indra-Brhaspati hymn, the Indra-Brhaspatī Pari-dhāniyā. Therefore one should not praise, one should not praise.
7.1.1	Now then, the division of the animal, we shall explain its division.
7.1.2	The tongue is the Pratihartṛ, the neck is the Udgātṛ, the throat is the Pratihartr, the right hip is the Hotr, the left hip is the Brahman, the right knee is the Maitrāvaruṇa, the left knee is the Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin, the right side is the Pratiprasthātṛ, the left side is the Prātīcīna, the left shoulder is the Pratiṣṭhātṛ, the right shoulder is the Prātītā, the right arm is the Agnīdhra, the left arm is the Ātreya, the right thigh is the Potr, the left thigh is the Achāvāka, the right thigh of the householder is the right thigh of his wife, the left thigh of the householder and the left thigh of his wife are the two thighs of the householder who gives the vow, the right foot of the householder and his wife are the right foot of his wife, and the left foot of the householder who bestows the vow are the two feet of the householder who confers the vow. The mouth is common to both. The householder himself should bestow it. The buttocks are taken away by the wives and given to the Brāhmaṇa. The three shoulder-bones, the three cheek-bones, the half of the right-side bone of the Uṇṇeṭṛ, the half of his right-side bone, the Klōma of the Śamitṛ, this should be given to the Brāhmana. If he is not a Brāhmaṇa, the head to the Subrahmaṇyā, the skin to him who announces the Śuṣasūti, the Ida to all, or to the Hotr.
7.1.3	These sixty-three steps carry the sacrifice. The Brihatī has sixty-three syllables. The heavenly worlds are related to the Brihatī. They attain the vital airs and the heavenly worlds. They proceed in the vital airs and in the heavenly worlds.
7.1.4	This is the heavenly animal, which they divide thus.
7.1.5	Now those who do otherwise, as for example, the Sela-ga or the Pap-krit, who kill an animal, they are like that.
7.1.6	Now that division of the animal, the Vedic Rishi Devabhaga knew, and he departed from this world without being told.
7.1.7	Then a human being told it to Girija Babhravya. Then the humans learned it from her.
7.2.1	They say, "If one who has established the sacred fires dies on the day before the sacrifice, how should his sacrifice be?" They say, "One should not perform the sacrifice for him," because he has not reached the sacrifice.
7.2.2	They say, if one who has the sacred fires dies while the Agnihotra oblations are being deposited or while the Saṁnāyya oblations are being offered, what is the atonement? One should place them in the same place as before, so that all are consumed. That is the atonement.
7.2.3	They say, if one who has the sacred fires dies when the oblations are near, what is the atonement there? One should offer them all in the Āhavanīya with the formula, "To those very deities to whom these oblations have been taken, svāhā." This is the atonement there.
7.2.4	They say, "If a householder with the sacred fires goes away and dies, how should his Agnihotra be offered?" One should offer it with the milk of a cow that has a calf of another cow. The milk of a cow with a calf of another is different from the milk of a calf of the same cow. The Agnihotra of a dead person is different.
7.2.5	Or one should offer it with milk from any source.
7.2.6	But they say that they are indeed offered in this way, without interruption, by the one who offers the oblations of the bodies.
7.2.7	If there were no bodies, they would take sixty-three hundred leaves and make a human-like form out of them, and then cover it with those. Then they would touch it with the bodies that have been brought and scatter it.
7.2.8	The thighs are half a hundred, the knees twenty-five, the shanks twenty, the rest above the head.
7.2.9	That is the atonement there.
7.3.1	They say, if the Agnihotra cow is let loose and sits down while being milked, what is the atonement there? One should recite this (verse):
7.3.2	Since you sit down out of fear, therefore grant us freedom from fear. Protect all our cattle. Obeisance to Rudra, the nourisher. She should be made to rise with the verse, "The goddess Aditi has risen, placing life in the lord of sacrifice, making a share for Indra, Mitra, and Varuna." Then she should be given a pot of water on the grass and on her mouth. Then she should be offered to a brahmin. That is the atonement.
7.3.3	They say, if the Agnihotra cow is milked and then goes astray, what is the atonement? It is indeed at the time of eating that she goes astray from the sacrificer. One should offer her as food for atonement. Food is indeed atonement. May she be blessed with good fortune. This is the atonement.
7.3.4	They say, if the cow for Agnihotra is milked and the milk spills, what is the atonement? Whatever spills, one should touch it and recite this: "Whatever milk spilled on the earth today, whatever it spilled on the plants, whatever water, milk in the houses, milk of the milch cow, may that be mine." Whatever remains there, one should offer with that. If there is enough for the offering, or if all is spilled, then calling another cow and milking it, one should offer it with that. One should offer it only for faith. That is the atonement.
7.4.1	They say, if the evening milk or the milk for the Saṁnāyya is spoiled or stolen, what is the atonement? Having divided the morning milk into two parts, having taken one part, one should offer sacrifice with it. That is the atonement.
7.4.2	They say, if the morning milk or the Saṁnāyya (milk) gets spoilt or is stolen, what is the expiation for that? One should offer an Indra or a Mahendra cake in its place and perform the sacrifice with that. That is the expiation.
7.4.3	They say, if all the Saṁnāyya is lost or stolen, what is the expiation? It is either the Indra or the Maheśvara. That is the expiation.
7.4.4	They say, if all the oblations are spoilt or stolen, what is the expiation? One should offer the oblations of clarified butter, assigning them to the respective deities, and then perform another Iṣṭi, not weak. The sacrifice is the expiation for the sacrifice.
7.5.1	They say, if the Agnihotra-oblation is defiled by something unclean, what is the expiation? One should sprinkle the entire ladle with water, and then, having gone forward, one should place the kindling-wood on the Ahavaniya. Then, having placed hot ashes on the north side of the Ahavaniya, one should offer the oblation. Or one should offer it mentally with the Prajapati-oblation. What is offered and what is not offered, if it is offered in one, or if it is offered to two, this is the rule. If one is able to remove it, having sprinkled the defiled, one should sprinkle the undefiled. One should offer it as it was offered. This is the expiation.
7.5.2	They say, if the Agnihotra has been placed and it spills or leaks, what is the atonement? One should place it with water for peace. Water is peace. Then, touching it with the right hand, he mutters:
7.5.3	The sacrifice went to the gods in heaven, the third; from there may it bring me wealth. The sacrifice went to men on earth, the third; may it bring me riches.
7.5.4	He recites the verse addressed to Vishnu and Varuna, "By whose power the dusts are scattered." Vishnu protects the ill-performed sacrifice, Varuna the well-performed. For the peace of both of them.
7.5.5	This is the atonement there.
7.5.6	They say, "If the Agnihotra has been placed and the sacrificer has gone forward or has slipped or fallen down, what is the atonement?" If he were to return, he would return the sacrificer from heaven. They should bring this Agnihotra-residue to him who is seated here. He should offer it according to the prescribed procedure. That is the atonement.
7.5.7	They say, "If the ladle breaks, what is the atonement?" One should take another ladle and offer with it. Then one should place the broken ladle in the Āhavanīya fire, with the handle facing east and the mouth facing south. That is the atonement.
7.5.8	They say, if the fire in the Ahavaniya is extinguished, and the Garhapatya is extinguished, what is the atonement there? If he were to take it up facing east, it would be as if he were to abandon his own abode. If he were to face west, it would be like performing a sacrifice for the Asuras. If he were were to churn, it would be to generate an enemy for the sacrificer. If he were follow it, the life-breath would abandon the sacrificer. Having completely mixed it with ashes, he should place it in the Garhapatyâs place, and then take up the Ahavaniya facing east. That is the atonement there.
7.6.1	They say, if one were to take out fire from the fire, what would be the atonement? If he sees, he should put down the former and take up the latter. If he does not see, he should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Agnivata. The Yajya and Anuvakya are: "Agni is kindled by Agni. For you are Agni, O Agni." He should offer the oblation into the Vahaniye with the formula, "To Agni Agnivata svāhā." This is the atonement.
7.6.2	They say, "If the Garhapatya and the Ahavaniya fires were to be mixed together, what would be the atonement?" He should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Vīta. The Yajya and Anuvakya verses are: "O Agni, come for the feast, to him who has Agni for the feast." One should offer the oblation in the Ahavaniya fire with the words, "To Agni Vīta, svāhā." That is the atonement.
7.6.3	They say, if all the fires are mixed together, what is the atonement? He should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Viśvakarman. The Yajya and Anuvakya verses are: "O Agni, you shine with the heavenly light, the dawn, the human beings praise you." One should offer a libation to Agni Viśva-karman with the words, "Svāhā." This is the atonement.
7.6.4	They say, if the fires are mixed with other fires, what is the atonement? He should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Kshamavata. The Yajya and Anu-yajya verses are: "Agni cried like the thundering sky, as our fathers have gone away." He should offer a libation to Agni Kshamavata with the words "Svāhā" in the Vahāvaniya fire. That is the atonement.
7.7.1	They say, if the fires are burnt by a domestic fire, what is the atonement? He should offer an oblation of eight potfuls to Agni Samvarga. The Yajya and Anu-yajya verses are: "O Agni, do thou, O good one, for our prosperity. Do not let us be deprived of this great wealth." He should offer the oblation to the Vahani Agni with the words: "To Agni Samvarga, svāhā." This is the atonement.
7.7.2	They say, "If the fires are united with the divine fire, what is the atonement there?" He should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Apasvita. The Yajya and Anuvakya verses are: "O Agni, in the waters, I have placed your abode, the wise, the pure, the skillful." He should offer a libation to the Vahani fire, saying, "To Agni Apasvita, svāhā." That is the atonement there.
7.7.3	They say, "If the fires of a man are mixed with the fire of a dead body, what atonement is there?" He should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Succhi. The Yajya and Anu-yajya verses are: "Agni, most pure in vow, O Agni, your purities." He should offer a libation to the Vahaniye Agni with the words, "To Agni Succhi, svāhā." That is the atonement there.
7.7.4	They say, if the fires were to be consumed by the forest fire, what would be the atonement? One should either re-establish them or release the kindling wood or the firebrand. If from the Āhavanīya, if from the Garhapatya, if one is unable to do so, one should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Samvarga. The Yajya and Anuvakya are prescribed. One should offer oblations to Agni Samvargāya svāhā in the Āhavanīyī. That is the atonement.
7.8.1	They say, if one who has the sacred fires were to shed tears on the Upavasatha day, what expiation would there be? One should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Vratapati. The Yajya and Anu-yajya verses are: "O Agni, you are the bearer of vows, pure, bearing the vows, the protector of vows, unassailable." One should offer a libation to the Vahani fire, saying, "To Agni Vratapati, svāhā." That is the expiation.
7.8.2	They say, if one who has the sacred fires should transgress the vow on the day of fasting, what is the atonement? He should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni, the lord of vows. The verses for offering are: "O Agni, you are the lord of vows; if we have transgressed the vows." He should offer a libation to the fire of the wind with the words: "To Agni, the lord, svāhā." This is the atonement.
7.8.3	They say, if one who has the sacred fires should transgress the new moon or full moon, what is the atonement? He should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Pathicrita. The verses of invocation and offering are: "You know the way, O Agni, you have gone the way of the gods." He should offer a libation to the fire of the wind, saying, "To Agni Pathicrita, svāhā." This is the atonement.
7.8.4	They say, "If all the fires were to be extinguished, what would be the atonement?" He should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Tapashvin, the people-loving, the fire-loving. The Yajya and Anu-yajya verses are: "Come with austerity to the people, come to us with austerity to the peoples." He should offer the oblation in the Ahavaniya fire with the verse, "To Agni Tapashvin the people-loving and fire-loving, svāhā." That is the atonement.
7.9.1	They say, "If one who has the sacred fires eats new grain without offering to Agni in the Āgrayaṇa rite, what is the atonement there?" One should offer a cake on twelve potsherds to Agni Vaiśvānara. The Yajya and Anuvākyā verses are: "Agni Vaiśvānaran generated in heaven, Agni generated in earth." One should offer a libation to Agni Vaiśvānarā in the Vahāvanīya fire with the formula, "Svāhā to Agni Vaiśsvānara." That is the atonement there.
7.9.2	They say, if a person who has the sacred fires should lose his pot, what is the atonement? He should offer a cake on two potsherds to the Asvins. The Asvins are the spokes of our wheel, the Nasatyas in the chariot, he should offer a libation to the Vāhavānī with the words, "To the Asvins, svāhā." That is the atonement.
7.9.3	They say, if the Pavitra of one who has installed the fire is lost, what is the expiation there? He should offer an oblation of eight potfuls to Agni Pavitravant. The Yajya and Anu-yajya verses are: "Thy Pavitra is spread out, O Brahmanaspati, the Pavitra is spread, the place of heaven." One should offer an oblution to the Vahaniye Agni with the formula, "To Agni Pavitravantu svāhā." This is the expiation.
7.9.4	They say, if a man who has the sacred fires should lose some gold, what is the atonement? He should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Hiranyavān. The verses to be recited are: "The golden-haired one, the spreading of the dust, the Suparnas have come to your offering with the arrows." He should offer a libation to the wind-god with the formula, "To Agni Hiranyavāt svāhā." This is the atonement.
7.9.5	They say, if one who has the sacred fires were to offer the Agnihotra before bathing in the morning, what would be the atonement? One should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni and Varuna. The verses to be recited are: "O Agni, you know Varuna. You are our protector from Agni and Varuna." One should offer the oblation into the Ahavaniya fire with the verse: "Svāhā to Agni and Varuda." This is the atonement.
7.9.6	They say, if one who has the sacred fires eats food from a house where a child has been born, what is the atonement? He should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Tantumata. The Yajya and Anu-yajya verses are: "He who weaves the thread, the shining one, follows the rays, the Soma-like ones, he weaves the threads." One should offer a libation to Agni Tantumate with the formula, "Svāhā." This is the atonement.
7.9.7	They say that when a householder who has the sacred fires hears the news of the death of a person, what is the atonement? He should offer an oblation of eight potfuls to Agni Surabhimata. The verses to be recited are: "Agni, the Hotar, has sat down, the most worthy, he has made the right rite. Today, O gods, may we offer oblations to the Agni Surabhimatas." He should offer oblations to Agni Surabhimața with the verse "Svāhā." This is the atonement.
7.9.8	They say, if a man who has the sacred fires, or his wife, or his son or daughter, should beget a cow, what expiation is there? He should offer a cake on thirteen potsherds to Agni Marutvat. The Yajya and Anu-yajya verses are: "The Maruts are his, for when he is destroyed, the last ones are like cattle." He should offer a libation to the Vahani Agni, saying, "To Agni Marutvat, svāhā." This is the expiation.
7.9.9	They say, "Should one without a wife offer the Agnihotra or not?"
7.9.10	They say, "One should offer."
7.9.11	If one does not offer, one becomes a person without light.
7.9.12	What is a person without light? He is neither a god, nor a manes, nor a human being."
7.9.13	Therefore, even one without a wife should offer the Agnihotra.
7.9.14	This is the hymn of praise to the sacrifice.
7.9.15	One who is without a wife or Soma should offer the Sautrāmaṇī sacrifice for the sake of repaying his mother and father, as stated in the text. This is the Vedic statement.
7.9.16	Therefore one should offer the Soma sacrifice.
7.10.1	They say, "How does one without a wife offer the Agnihotra?"
7.10.2	If the wife dies after the husband has settled down, or if she is lost, how does one offer the Agnihotra? One offers the Agnihotra.
7.10.3	They say that sons, grandsons, and great-grandsons are in this world and the other world. In this world, heaven is the heaven. He ascends to the heavenly world. He sustains the continuity of the other world. If he does not desire the wife of the one who has this (wife), then they perform the installation for the one without a wife.
7.10.4	How does one offer Agnihotra without a wife? Faith is the wife, truth is the sacrificer. Faith and truth are the supreme pair. By the pair of faith and truth, one conquers the heavenly worlds.
7.11.1	They say that one should fast on the days of the New and Full Moon sacrifices. The gods do not eat the oblation of one who is not fasting. Therefore one fasts, thinking, "May the gods eat my oblation."
7.11.2	One should fast on the earlier Full Moon day, says Pingala. One should fast on the later Full Moon day, say the Koustukas. The earlier Full Moon day is Anumati, the later is Raka.
7.11.3	The new moon which is in the east is called Sinivāli and the new moon which is towards the west is called Kuhu.
7.11.4	The new moon which is about to set or rise is called Tithi.
7.11.5	One should observe the fast on the full moon day before the new moon day, not knowing whether the new moon day will be before or after. When one approaches the moon and performs the sacrifice, they buy Soma with that. One should observe the subsequent fasts. The Soma is sacrificed in the subsequent days. The Soma is the deity of the Soma. The moon is the divine Soma. Therefore, one should observe the subsequent fasting.
7.12.1	They say that if the fire is not taken out and the sun rises or sets or is extinguished before the Homa, what atonement should be done?
7.12.2	Having placed gold in front, he should take it out in the evening. Gold is luminous and bright. He sees that very same luminous and bright light. Having covered silver, he should take out in the morning. This is the form of night. Before the shadows meet, he should take the Āhavanīya. Death is darkness and shadow. By that very light, he crosses death, darkness and shadow. That is the expiation there.
7.12.3	They say, if a man or a chariot or a dog should cross between the Garhapatya and the Ahavaniya, what is the atonement? They say, one should not think of it. For it is for his own good. But if one does think of it, one should carry a stream of water from the Garhapaty without interruption, saying, "Weaving the thread, I follow the light of the dust." That is the atonement there.
7.12.4	They say, how did he who was performing the Agnihotra rites offer the Anvāhārya-pācana? Did he offer it or not?
7.12.5	They say, "One should offer." Indeed, he who establishes the fires establishes the vital airs within himself. Of these, the Anvāhāryapacana is the one that provides food. In it he offers this oblation to Agni, the eater of food, the lord of food, with the formula, "Svāhā."
7.12.6	One who knows this becomes the lord of food, the lord of nourishment, and attains nourishment through offspring.
7.12.7	One who is about to offer between the Garhapatya and the Ahavaniya should move around with this (mantra). Indeed, the fires know him moving around thus: 'He will offer to us.' Indeed, when he moves around with this, the Garhapaty and the Ahavaniyas remove his sin. He, having removed the sin, goes upwards to the heavenly world. This is what is said in the Brāhmaṇa.
7.12.8	They say, how should one who is going to the fire-places attend upon them, or having gone away, return? They say, "Every day." They say, "One should attend upon them silently." They say, those who desire the best attend silently. They say, "These (fire-places) are afraid of the loss of faith and the flooding of the sacrificer every day. One should attend upon them, saying, 'May you be safe, may I be safe.' He indeed becomes safe for him.
7.13.1	Hariścandra, the son of a king, was a descendant of Ikṣvāku. He had a hundred wives, but he did not have a son. Parvata and Nārada were staying in his house. He asked Nārada:
7.13.2	"What do those who know and those who do not know desire for a son? What does one obtain by having a son? Tell me that, O Nārada."
7.13.3	He was asked one question and answered with ten.
7.13.4	"When a son is born, the father places his debt in him and goes to immortality. If the father sees the face of his living son,
7.13.5	"As many enjoyments as there are on earth, as many as there are in the fire, as many as are in the water, the animals, more than that is the father's in the son.
7.13.6	The fathers, always, have gone to their son, to the great darkness. The Self has been born from the Self, and he has crossed over the Irāvatī.
7.13.7	What is the impurity? What is the garment? What are the whiskers? What is the austerity? You desire the son, O Brahmins. He is the world, the one who speaks and is spoken to.
7.13.8	Food is the breath, clothing is the refuge, gold is the form, cattle are the marriages, the friend is the wife, the miser is the daughter, the light is the son, in the supreme sky.
7.13.9	The husband enters the wife as a foetus, and becomes born again in the tenth month.
7.13.10	She becomes the wife of him from whom she is born again. This is the truth, this is the seed, this is deposited.
7.13.11	The gods and the sages gathered together the great power. The gods said to the men, "This is your mother again."
7.13.12	The world is not for one without a son, so all animals know. Therefore a son mounts his mother and sister.
7.13.13	This is the path of the long-lived, the easy one, which the sons of the griefless ones tread. The animals and birds see it. Therefore they copulate even with their mothers.
7.13.14	Thus it is said.
7.14.1	Then he said to him, "Go to King Varuna and say, 'May my son be born, I shall worship you with him.'
7.14.2	" He went to King Varuna saying, "May my son be reborn, I shall worship him." "Yes," he said. Then his son was born, named Rohitas.
7.14.3	He said to him, "Your son is born. Perform the sacrifice with him." He said, "When an animal is ten years old, then it becomes fit for sacrifice. Let it be ten years old, and then I will perform the sacrifice for you." He said, "Let it be so."
7.14.4	He (the sacrificer) was indeed deprived of teeth. He said to him, "You have indeed become deprived of teeth. Sacrifice with this (toothless) one." He said, "When the teeth of an animal are born, then it becomes fit for sacrifice. Let his teeth be born, then I shall sacrifice to you." He said, 'So be it.
7.14.5	His teeth grew. He said to him, "Do you know that his teeth have grown? Perform the sacrifice for him." He said, "When the teeth of an animal grow, then it becomes fit for sacrifice. His teeth have grown. Then I will perform the sacrifice for you." He said, Yes.
7.14.6	His teeth fell out. He said to him, "Do you have a toothache? Perform a sacrifice for it." He said, "When the teeth of an animal grow back, then it becomes fit for sacrifice. Let his teeth grow back, then I will perform a sacrifice for you." He said, "Yes.
7.14.7	His teeth grew again. He said to him, "Do you know that his teeth have grown again? Perform the sacrifice for him." He said, "When a warrior becomes armored, then he becomes fit for sacrifice. Let him obtain armor. Then I will perform the sacrifice for him. " "Yes, let it be so."
7.14.8	He approached him with his armour. He said, "Did you approach with your armour? Perform the sacrifice with this." Having said "So be it", he addressed his son, "This one has given you to me. I will perform this sacrifice with you."
7.14.9	He said, "No" and taking up his bow, went to the forest. He wandered in the forest for a year.
7.15.1	Then indeed Varuna seized Ikṣvāku. His belly was born. That indeed Rohitashva heard. He came from the forest to the village. Indra, having gone around him in the form of a man, said: "There is prosperity for one who is tired. Rohitashva, we have heard that the wicked one, the best among men, is wandering. Indra is your friend."
7.15.2	The Brāhmaṇa said, “I am a wanderer.” Thus he wandered in the forest for a second year. He came from the forest to the village. Indra approached him in the form of a man and said, “The one who wanders, his feet are blooming, his self is nourished, and he grasps fruits. All his sins are destroyed by exertion, and they are destroyed on the path of wandering.”
7.15.3	The Brāhmaṇa said, “I am moving.” Thus he wandered in the forest for the third year. He came from the forest to the village. Indra approached him in the form of a man and said, “The Blessed One is seated while you are standing. The Blessed One is standing while you are seated. The Blessed One lies down while you are lying down. The Blessed One moves while you are moving. The Blessed One alone is moving.”
7.15.4	The Brāhmaṇa said, “I am wandering.” Thus he wandered in the forest for four years. He came to the village from the forest. Indra approached him in the form of a man and said, “Kali lies down, Dvapara is sleeping, Treta rises, and Krita is attained. Wandering, one is wandering.”
7.15.5	The Brāhmaṇa said, “I am wandering.” Thus he wandered in the forest for five years. He came to the village from the forest. Indra approached him in the form of a man and said, “One who wanders finds honey, one who wanders finds the sweet Udumbara fruit. See the greatness of the sun, one who wanders without laziness, one who wanders is indeed wandering.”
7.15.6	The Brāhmaṇa said, “I shall go forth.” Thus he went forth in the sixth year. He went to the sage Sūyavasi of Ajīgarta, who was fasting in the forest.
7.15.7	He had three sons, Shunahpuccha, Shunashépa, and Shunolangula. He said to him, "O Rishi, I give you a hundred. I redeem myself with one of them." When he was seizing the eldest son, he said, "Not this one." "Not this one" (he said) about the youngest. The mother made them agree on the middle one, Shunashépa. Having given him a hundred, he took him and went from the forest to the village.
7.15.8	He approached his father and said, "I shall redeem myself from this." He approached King Varuna and said, "May I sacrifice to you." Varuna said, "A brahmin is greater than a kshatriya." Varuna said to him, "Therefore, I will tell you this Rajasuya sacrifice." He anointed the man who was to be sacrificed in this sacrifice.
7.16.1	Now, his Hotṛ was Viśvāmitra, his Adhvaryu Jamadagni, his Brahman Vasiṣṭha, and his Udgātṛ was Āsī. When he was appointed, they could not find a Nāyaka. He said, "Sauyavasi of Ājīgarta has given me another hundred. I will appoint him." They gave him another hundred. He appointed him.
7.16.2	Therefore, they did not find the one who was to be killed for the one who was appointed, pleased, and set on fire. He said, "O Ajigarta Sauyavasi, give me another hundred. I will kill him." They gave him another hundred. He went to the blacksmith to have a sword forged.
7.16.3	Then indeed Śunaḥśepa looked (around) as if he would enter the non-human (world). "He thought, "They will certainly not let me in. I shall therefore approach the deities." He approached Prajāpati, the first deity among the deities, with this verse: "Who indeed is the one among the immortal ones?"
7.16.4	Prajapati said to him, "Agni is the most beloved of the gods. Approach him." He approached Agni with this verse, "We approach Agni, the first of the immortal ones."
7.16.5-6	Agni said to him, "Savitar is the lord of all that is born; approach him." He approached Savitar with the verse, "O god Savitar, etc." Savitar said to him, "You are appointed to King Varuna; approach him." He approached King Varuna with the thirty-one verses beginning with "Atu".
7.16.7	Varuna said to him, "Agni is the mouth of the gods, the most beloved friend. Praise him and then we shall release you." He praised Agni with the twenty-two subsequent verses.
7.16.8	Agni said to him, "You may praise all the gods, then I shall release you." He praised all the gods with this verse: "Salutations to the great ones, salutations to the young ones."
7.16.9	The All-gods said to him, "Indra is the strongest, the most powerful, the most capable, the best, the most capable of crossing among the gods. We shall praise him and then release you." He praised Indra with the verse, "Whatever truth you are, O Soma-drinker," and with this hymn and the fifteen verses of the northern direction.
7.16.10	Therefore, Indra, being praised, was pleased in his mind and gave him the golden chariot. He went with this (verse) always, "Indra is here."
7.16.11	Indra said to the Ashvins, "Praise us, then we will release you." He pleased the Ashvins with the next verse.
7.16.12	The Asvins said to him, "Praise Usha, and then we shall release you." He praised Usha with the next verse.
7.16.13	When the verse was recited, his fetters were released. He saw the belly of the younger Aikshvaka. When the last verse was recited, the fetters were released, and Aikshvaka became free from disease.
7.17.1	The priests said to him, "You yourself find out the conclusion of this day." Then he saw the Sunahsepa in the Anjasava. He offered him with these four verses, "If you are in the house, in the house." Then he brought him down in the Dronakalaśa with the verse, "The remnant of the pot." Then when he was engaged in it, he offered him with the four verses beginning with "Svāhā" and then brought him down in Avabhrtha with the two verses, "You, O Agni, knowing Varuna's..." Then he established him as the Ahavaniya fire from that time onwards with the verse, "Sunahsepa, the hidden one, from a thousand."
7.17.2	Then Shunahshepa approached Vishvamitra's lap. He said, "O sage, give me my son again." Vishvamitra replied, "No." "The gods have taken him away from me." He became Devratha Vishvamitra. His sons were Kapila and Babhruva.
7.17.3	He said, "O Ajiigarta, O Sauyavasin, do you know the means of removing distress?" He said, "Ajiigarta, Sauyavasin is known as Ajiigarta by birth, a wise one, from the ancestral lineage of the sages. Do not go away again. Come back to me." He said, "Shunahshepa, I saw you with a stick in your hand, when you did not find (a place) among the Shudras. You chose three hundred cows from me, O Angiras."
7.17.4	Ajīgarta Sauyavasis said, "Father, that evil deed which I have done, I confess to you. Let a hundred cows be given to you." Śunaḥśepa said, "One who commits a sin once should do it again. You have done something that cannot be undone. You have not gone to the Śūdras according to the law."
7.17.5	"Viśvāmitra said, "It is not to be agreed to." He said, "Bhima alone is the son of Sauyavasi. He has conquered the enemies by his power. Let the son of Maita be mine. Come and be my son!"
7.17.6	He said, "O son of a king, please instruct me as to how I can become your son, just as Angiras did." He said, "You will be my eldest son, and your offspring will be the best. You will inherit my divine inheritance. That is why I am instructing you.
7.17.7	He said, "One should speak to those who know. For friendship and for my prosperity, may I attain the status of your son, O bull among Bharatas." Then Vishvamitra addressed his sons, saying, "O Madhuchanda, listen! The bull, Renuk, and Ashtaka, and all the brothers who are here, may you all decide on him as the eldest."
7.18.1	Now, of those one hundred sons of Viśvāmitra, fifty were elder and were born of Madhuccandā, and fifty were younger.
7.18.2	Those who were the most numerous did not think that was good. He said to them, "May your subjects eat you." They became the Andhras, the Pundras, the Sabaras, the Pulindas, the Mutis. Many of them are called Vaishvamitra. The Dasus were the most numerous.
7.18.3	He said, "O Madhuchanda, we shall stand with the fifty along with our father. We shall all be in front of you. We are following you."
7.18.4	Then Vishvamitra, being pleased, praised his sons.
7.18.5	Those sons of yours will be endowed with cattle and heroes, who will follow my advice. Make them endowed with heroes.
7.18.6	The leaders, the heroes, the sons of Devāratta and Gāthina, all of you sons, may you be prosperous. This is your good advice.
7.18.7	This is your hero, Devāratta, the son of Kuśika. Follow him. You have come to me for the gift of knowledge that we know.
7.18.8	All the sons of Vaiśvānara, all with their allies, stood by Devāratta for firmness and supremacy, the sons of Gāthī.
7.18.9	Devāratta, the sage, studied both the legal systems, and became the lord of the Jāhnus and the Gāthins in the divine Veda.
7.18.10	This is the story of the hundred verses of the Pararśa, as told by Śaunaka.
7.18.11	The Hotṛ priest tells it to the consecrated king.
7.18.12	He who is seated recites to him who is seated. The golden one is fame; he thus makes him prosper with fame.
7.18.13	"The verse ends with "Om," the stanza with "Thus," Om is divine, thus is human. Thus he frees him from sin and distress by means of the divine and the human.
7.18.14	Therefore, if a king who has conquered (his enemies) does not offer sacrifices, he should still narrate this story of Shunahshepa. Nothing of his wealth is left out.
7.18.15	One should give a thousand to the narrator, a hundred to the respondent, and the white horse-drawn chariot to the Hotri.
7.18.16	Those who desire sons, if they recite this, will obtain sons.
7.19.1	Prajapati created the sacrifice. After the sacrifice was created, he created the Brahman and the Kshatra. After the Brahman and the kshatra were created, the two kinds of beings were created. The Brahman was created after the sacrifice, and the Kshatriya after the non-sacrifice. The Brahmanas are the ones who have been sacrificed to, and the Rajanyas, the Vaishyas, and the Shudras are the ones who are not sacrificed to.
7.19.2	The sacrifice fled from them. It followed the Brahman and the Kshatra. With the weapons of the Brahman it followed the Brahman, with the weapons of the Kshatra it followed the Kshatra.
7.19.3	The Kshatriya, not having been able to reach him, turned back from the weapons. His pursuer, having followed him, then found him. Having found him, he stopped him and stood behind him. The one who was found and stopped behind him, knowing that he was standing, returned his own weapons to the Brahmana. Therefore even now the sacrifice is established only in the Brahmana and in the Brahmanas.
7.19.4	Then the Kshatriya approached him, and he said, "Invite me to this sacrifice." He said, "So be it." He said, "Laying aside your own weapons, become Brahman, in the form of Brahman, with the weapons of Brahman, and approach the sacrifice." He said, "So be it." The Kshatriya laid aside his own weapons, became Brahman, in the shape of Brahman, with Brahman's weapons, and approached the sacrifice. Therefore even now a Kshatriya sacrificer, having laid aside his own arms, becomes Brahman, in the likeness of Brahman, with weapons of Brahman, approaching the sacrifice.
7.20.1	Now, then, the request for the sacrifice to the gods. They say that a brahmin, a royal or a vaishya, requests a kshatriya who is about to be initiated for the sacrifice to gods. Whom should a kshatriya request?
7.20.2	They say that he should request the divine kshatra. The divine kshatra is the sun. The sun is the lord of all beings.
7.20.3	When he is about to be initiated, he should stand facing the rising sun in the morning. "He says, "This is the best of lights, the supreme light. O divine Savitar, give me the divine sacrifice. Give me the divine sacrifice." He asks for the divine sacrifice."
7.20.4	When he is asked for it, he moves forward and says, "Yes, I will give it."
7.20.5	For him there is no misfortune, for one who has been consecrated by Savitr, the god, attains ever increasing prosperity. He attains the lordship and sovereignty over his subjects, if a Ksatriya, having approached and requested, undertakes the consecration.
7.21.1	Then, for the fulfilment of the sacrifice, the sacrificer, the Kṣatriya, should offer a libation before the initiation, taking four spoonfuls of clarified butter and offering it to the Āhavanīya fire for the fulfilment of what is to be accomplished.
7.21.2	May Indra, the generous one, give again, O Brahman! May the fulfilled and accomplished be given again, svāhā!"
7.21.3	Then with the Samitsya-yajus, he offers again to Anubandhya. "Then Agni, the knower of beings, may he give me the kingdom again. May he give me the desired and accomplished (kingdom). Svāhā."
7.21.4	This is the offering for the fulfilment of the promise of the Ksatriya sacrificer. These two oblations are to be offered.
7.22.1	Saujāt Ārāḍi said, "This is the way of the unvanquished. These two oblations are indeed the way of the unconquered." One should do as one wishes. One who gives instruction here should offer these oblations.
7.22.2	"One should say, 'I take refuge in Brahman. May Brahman protect me from the Kshatriya. Svāhā to Brahman.'
7.22.3	"That is so."
7.22.4	He who approaches the sacrifice approaches Brahman. The sacrifice is Brahman. He who is initiated is reborn from the sacrifice. The Brahman, approached by him, does not perish from the Kshatra. He says, "May Brahman protect me from the Kshatras." So that Brahman may protect him from the Kshatrathe says, "Svāhā to Brahman." Thus he pleases it. Thus pleased, it protects him from the Kshtra.
7.22.5	Then, with the Samitsya-yajus, for the Anubandhya-yajus.
7.22.6	"He says, "I resort to the Kshatra; may the Brahman protect me from the Kshatra." " "That is so." " He who resorts to the kingdom resorts to the Kshatras, for the kingdom is the Kshatra. The Brahman does not injure him who has resorted to the Kshatral "May the Brahman protect me." " He says, "May the Kshatra protect me." " He thus pleases it and it protects him from the Brahman.
7.22.7	Now, the non-abandoning of the unfulfilled sacrifice is the duty of the sacrificer, the Kṣatriya. Therefore, these two oblations should be offered.
7.23.1	Now, Indra is the deity, the Kshatriya is the caste, the Tristubh is the metre, the Pañcadaśa is the Stoma, Soma is the kingdom, the Rajanya is the relation. He who is being initiated approaches the Brahmanhood, when he puts on the black antelope skin, when he observes the vow of the initiated, when the Brahmanas approach him. When he is being initiated, Indra takes away his power, the Tristubha his valour, the Pañcadasa Stoma his life, Soma his kingdom, the ancestors his fame, and others say, "He has become a Brahman, or he has turned to Brahman."
7.23.2	Having offered a fore-oblation, he should attend upon the Ahavaniya fire.
7.23.3	I do not go away from Indra, the deity, from the Tristubh metre, from the Pañcadaśa Stoma, from Soma, the king, from the ancestral bond. Let not Indra take away my power, let not the Tristubh my valour, let not the Pañcadaša Stoma my life, let not Soma my kingdom, let not the ancestors my fame. I go to Agni with power, valour, life, kingdom, fame and kinship. I resort to the Gayatri metre, the Trivrt Stoma, Soma, the king and Brahma. I become a Brahmana.
7.23.4	Indra does not take away his power, the Tristubh does not take away the strength, the Panchashta stoma does not take away life, Soma does not take away kingdom, the Pitrs do not take away fame and glory. The Kshatriya who having offered this oblation, stands by the Ahavanīya fire, is initiated.
7.24.1	Now, when a Kṣatriya is consecrated, Agni is his deity, the Gāyatrī metre, the Trivṛt stoma, and the Brāhmaṇas are his kinsmen. When he is consecrated, he approaches the Kṣatriya state. When he is thus consecrated, Agni takes his splendour, the Gāyatri metre his valour, the Trivrt stoma his life, the Brāhmaṇa his Brahman, his fame and renown. Others say, "He has become different from us", or "He has become a Kṣatriyan", or "He is turning towards the Kṣatriyan state".
7.24.2	He should offer the oblation on the Āhavanīya fire after reciting the Samitsya-yajus for the Anūbandhyā (oblation).
7.24.3	I do not go to Agni, the deity, nor to the Gāyatrī metre, nor to the Trivṛt stoma, nor to the Brahmaṇabandhu. Let not Agni take away my brilliance, let not Gāyatrī take away my energy, let not Trivṛt take away my life, let not the Brahmins take away my fame and glory along with brilliance, energy, life, and fame. I approach Indra, the deity, the Tristubh metre, the Pañcadaśa stoma, Soma, the king, and the Kshatra. I become a Kshatriya. The gods are the fathers, the fathers are the gods. I am what I am, and I worship. This is my desired, this is my fulfilled, this is my rested, this is my offered. This Agni of mine is the observer, this Vāyu is the listener, this Aditya is the announcer. This am I, and I am what I truly am.
7.24.4	Agni does not take away his energy, Gāyatrī does not take away the strength, Trivṛt stoma does not take away life, Brahmanas do not take away the glory and fame of him who, having offered this oblation, stands by the Ahavanīya fire and retires at dusk. If he is a Kshatriya.
7.25.1	Now, they say, that the initiation of a Brahmin is announced by a Brahmin who has not been initiated, saying, "A Brahmin has been initiated." How should one announce the initiation of a Kshatriya?
7.25.2	Just as when a Brahmin is consecrated, they announce to him that a Brahmin is being consecrated, so also he should announce to a Kshatriya.
7.25.3	"That is this."
7.25.4	Having put aside his own weapons, he approached the sacrifice as Brahma, having become Brahma, with the weapons of Brahma, in the form of Brahma. Therefore, they should inform the consecration with the verse of the priest of the priest, and they should choose the best with the verse of his priest.
7.26.1	Now they say this about the share of the sacrificer: "The Kshatriya should eat the share of the Sacrificer, but not the Brahmana."
7.26.2	If he were to eat it, he would eat what has not been offered and would become worse. If he were not to eat it, then he would exclude himself from the sacrifice. The share of the Sacrificers is indeed the sacrifice.
7.26.3	It should be given to the Brahmana.
7.26.4	The Purohita is the abode of the Kshatriya. The Purohita is half of the Brahman. The Purohita of the Kshatriyas is the Purohita. He eats the food of the Kshatriyans indirectly, not directly.
7.26.5	Now, indeed, this is a sacrifice in the direct sense, because Brahma is Brahma. The whole sacrifice is established in Brahma. The sacrificer is in the sacrifice. They attain that sacrifice in the sacrifice. Just as water in water, just as fire in fire. That does not exceed it. It does not injure him. Therefore, he should give away to Brahma after having given away.
7.26.6	Some offer into the fire with the formula, "In the world called Vibhan of Prajapati, I place thee along with the sacrificer, svāhā." One should not do so. The sacrificer is the share of the sacrificer. He who says that to him, "The sacrificer has been offered into the fire, Agni will burn his vital breaths, the sacrificer will die," it would be so always. Therefore one should not go to his expectation. One should go to his expectation.
7.27.1	Vishvantar, the son of Sauṣadman, while looking after the Shaparnas, performed a sacrifice for Vishya Shaparna. The Shaparnas, having understood that, came to that sacrifice. They then sat down inside the sacrificial enclosure. Seeing them, he said, "These are the performers of sinful deeds, or they are the speakers of impure words. If the Shaparnas raise these, they will be inside the sacrificial enclosure." They said, "Yes," and raised them.
7.27.2	They were then raised up, and they roared. Those who were the black antelopes of those heroes of the departed spirits, and who had won the Soma-drinking of the Kasyapa race, at the sacrifice of Janamejaya, the son of Parikshit, and of Vikasya, they were the heroes there. Who among us is the hero who will win this Soma-drinking?
7.27.3	This is me, O heroes, said Rama, the son of Marga.
7.27.4	Rama, the son of the Marga family, the learned one, the son of Syaparna, said to those who were standing, "O king, do you not know that those who know thus are raised up by the Veda?" You know how to know the Brahman-bound one."
7.28.1	Where Indra, the gods, having surrounded him, worshipped him in his universal form, having slain Vritra, he gave the Maruts to the Salavrikas. He killed Arura. He defeated Brihaspati. There Indra was afflicted by the drinking of Soma. The nobility was afflicted by the decline of Indra's prosperity. Indra became afflicted by the drinking Soma. Having drunk Soma from Tvashtra's cup, that (Soma) was afflicted. Even today the nobility is afflicted by the drinking soma. He who knows that sacrifice, he who knows the nobility afflicted by the drinking the Soma, by whom the nobility prospers, how does he know it?
7.29.2	If he eats Soma, he will be able to nourish the Brahmanas with that food. Your subjects will be like Brahmanas. They will be able to take, give, and enjoy as they please. When a Kshatriya commits a sin, his subjects will be born in the form of Brahmanas. The second or third person who attains Brahmanhood will be able to enjoy it with the Brahmanas.
7.29.3	Now if you eat the curd of the Vaishyas, then you will prosper the Vaishyas with that food. Your subjects will be born in the Vaishya class. One will be the giver of gifts, the other the receiver. One will be able to enjoy as he wishes. When a Kshatriya commits a sin, his subjects are born in the Vaishy class. The second or third one becomes a Vaishya. He prospers through Vaishya-ness.
7.29.4	Now if you, by that food of the Sudras, were to nourish the Sudras, then your subjects would become like Sudras. The Sudra would be the servant of another, to be aroused by him as he pleases, to be killed as he pleases. When evil befalls the Kshatriya, his subjects become like Sudras, and the lord becomes the second or third. He who has become a Sudra by his Sudra-like conduct, seeks to be a Sudra.
7.30.1	These are the three kinds of food, O king, he said. The sacrificer-noble should not eat of these.
7.30.2	Now this is his own food: He should eat the fruits of the Nyagrodha, the Avrodha, the Audumbara, the Ashvattha, and the Plaksha. These he should eat. This is his own food.
7.30.3	The gods, having performed sacrifice, went to heaven and placed these cups there. They became the Nyagrodha trees. They are called Nyubja (i.e. inverted) even now. In Kurukshetra they are the first-born Nyagrodhas. From them were born the other Nyagrodhas.
7.30.4	Because they went down and ascended, therefore it is called Nyagroha. The Nyagroha tree is called Nyagrohad. The gods love the indirect (way of speaking).
7.31.1	Of those cups, the juice that went down became the Avardhas, and that which went up became the fruits.
7.31.2	This indeed is the Kshatriya who does not eat of his own food, who eats the fruits and leaves of the Nyagrodha tree. He obtains the Soma-drink indirectly, it is not eaten by him directly. The Soma-king is indeed indirect, the Nyagrodh is indirect. The form of Brahman is indeed indirect when the Kshatriya approaches it. By the Purohita, by the consecration, by the best (priests),
7.31.3	The Nyagrodha is the Kshatra among trees. The Kshatriya is like a tree, for when he dwells in the country he is like a tree. The Nyagrodhas are like a tree, they are firmly rooted in the earth.
7.31.4	When the sacrificer, a Kshatriya, eats the fruits and the branches of the banyan tree, he establishes himself in the Kshatriya class of trees.
7.31.5	He who is a Kshatriya, the sacrificer, eats this oblation, he establishes the Kshatra in himself and the Kshatra of the trees. Like the Nyagrodha, he stands in the country with the boundaries. His country becomes fierce and unshakable.
7.32.1	Now the Udumbara (tree) is the source of nourishment, the tree that sprang from the source of nourishment; the Udumbara is the source of food. He places in the Kṣatriya the source of food and the source of nourishment among the trees.
7.32.2	Now, as to why they are of the Aśvattha tree. This is the tree of the gods, the Aśvatthā, which was born from the splendour. The Aśvattha is the sovereignty of the trees. He places in the Kṣatriya that splendour and sovereignty of the trees.
7.32.3	Now the Plaksha is the tree of fame. The Plaksha was born from the tree of fame, and the tree of fame is the king of trees. And the tree of fame bestows on him sovereignty and prosperity among the trees. He places fame in the Kshatriya class, and sovereignty and prosperity among trees.
7.32.4	These are prepared for him in front. Then they buy Soma-juice. They move around the king's house, which is surrounded by houses, on the Upavasatha day. On the Upavasathayah day, the Adhvaryu should prepare these in front: the Adhishvana-skin, the Adhishvan-wood, the Dronakalaśa, the Dasāpavitra, the Adrim, the Pūtabhṛt, the Adhavanīya vessel, the Sthālī, the Udanjana, and the Camasa. When they press the Soma-juice in the morning, he should divide it into two parts. He should press the other parts in the afternoon.
7.33.1	When they would pour out these cups, then he should pour out the cup of the sacrificer. There should be two fresh darbha-blades placed in it. At the Vasat-utterance, he should first place the one within the enclosing sticks with this verse, "I have performed for Dādhīci" with the Svāhā-utterance, and at the Anuvṣat-utterance the other one with the verse, "By his strength, Dādhīca has conquered five regions."
7.33.2	When they bring in the cups, then he should bring in the cup for the sacrificer. When they take up the cups, then they should take up this one. When the Hotr calls out to the Adhvaryu, then he should eat the cup. Then he should eat it with this (verse).
7.33.3	Whatever of the Soma juice is left over, which Indra drank with Shachi, I now consume this king Soma with a benign mind.
7.33.4	This king Soma, which is benign, is consumed with a benign mind, and his kingdom becomes invincible. The king who consumes this oblation becomes invincible.
7.33.5	May it be well with thee, O Soma, in the heart, the yellow, for life, for thy life. The Soma is the saviour. This is a self-touching.
7.33.6	This indeed is the lord of man's life, which is not touched. It may take away the life of one who is not worthy. Therefore, when he touches himself with this, he wins back his life.
7.33.7	"May you grow, may you be united; may your streams be united, and may your forces be united." He makes the goblet grow with the two verses which are similar. What is similar at the sacrifice is prosperous.
7.34.1	At the place where they would place the cups, he should place the cup of the sacrificer. At the place where he would shake them, he should shake him. Then he should consume the brought (Soma). At the morning pressing, he should consume with the verse, "O Soma, the divine, consumed by the fathers with the Umā-s, I consume thee, known by thy mind." At the midday pressing, with the verse, “With the Urvasis." At the third pressing, with the Kavya-s.
7.34.2	Uma is the Fathers, Urva is the Midday pressing, Kavya is the Third pressing. Thus he makes the Fathers, the immortal ones, partakers of the pressings.
7.34.3	"Soma-water is indeed immortal," said Priyavrata. "He who is a partaker of the pressings is indeed immortal."
7.34.4	His fathers, who are immortal, become sharers in the libation. His kingdom becomes invincible. The sacrificer, a Kshatriya, who eats this oblation,
7.34.5	The touch of the self is common, and the nourishment of the goblet is common.
7.34.6	They should perform the Prātaḥsavana rite at the Prātahsavana, the Mādyandinasavana rite at the Mādyandinsavana and the Tṛtīyasavana rite at the Tṛtīsavana.
7.34.7	Thus did Rāma, the son of Marga, tell this rite to Viśvarāta, the son of Sauṣadman.
7.34.8	When this was said, he said, "O Brahman, I shall give you a thousand cows along with Śyaparṇa. My sacrifice is yours."
7.34.9	This Turu Kavasaeya taught to Janamejaya Parikshit. Parvatana and Narada taught it to Sahasena, the son of Soma, to Sahasena the son of Sahasena, to Babhru, the son of Daivaavridha, to Bhima, the son of Vaideha, to Nagnjit, the son of Gandhara. Agni taught it to Sanhrutya, the son of Arimdam, to Kratuvida, the son of Janaka. Vasishtha taught it to Sudasa, the son of Paijavana. All of them became great kings after eating this food. They shone like the sun, and were established in glory. They shone in all directions, bringing oblations.
7.34.10	Just as the sun shines with glory, so does he who, having brought oblations from all directions, eats this oblation. His kingdom becomes invincible. The sacrificer, the king, eats this obhalation.
8.1.1	Now, then, about the praise and the hymn.
8.1.2	The morning pressing is one-day-long, the third pressing is one- day-long. These are the pressings which are peaceful, established, and firm. The one-day-pressing is for peace, establishment, and firmness, and for not falling away.
8.1.3	The midday Pavamāna has been described. It is of both kinds, with Brihat and Pañcadaśa Sāmans, because both kinds of Sāmans are employed.
8.1.4	The Rathantara is the first verse, the Rathantara is the follower, Pavamana is the eulogy. This is the Marutvatīya. In this they make the Rathantara, the Brihat the second verse, for the purpose of increasing. This Rathantara is praised by these two verses, the first and the follower, in the Anushtubh metre.
8.1.5	Now, the Rathantara is indeed Brahman, the Brihat is indeed Kshatra. Brahman indeed is before Kshatra. "May my kingdom be invincible and firm." Now, the Rathantara is indeed food. He thus places food before him. "This earth is indeed the Rathantara. This indeed is the support. He thus places support before him."
8.1.6	The Indra-invocation is the same, undivided, the Brahman-priest's invocation, the same as the day-invocation. The form of the two-voiced (chant) is the same, for both the Sāmans are performed.
8.1.7	The Dhayyas are the same, undivided. They are the day-invocation
8.1.8	The Marutvatiya is the one-day (chant). The Prastara is the same.
8.2.1	"The verse "Be thou the most powerful, the most impetuous, the most vigorous" is in the form of the Kshatriya. The verse "The most powerful, the strongest" is in the shape of the Kshatra. The verse "Thou art the most abundant" is in the nature of the conqueror, for the purpose of conquering. It consists of eleven verses, for the Tristubh metre consists of eleven syllables. The Kshatriya is connected with the Tristubh. The Tristubh is strength, energy, and vigour. The Kshatriyas are strength, energy, vigour. He thus endows him with strength, with the Kshatra, with vigour. It is followed by the Gaurīvit. This is the Marutvatīya, which is prosperous. The Gaurīvit is prosperous. Its meaning has been explained.
8.2.2	"You, indeed, we invoke" (is the verse) with Brihat-pṛṣṭha metre. The Brihat is the nobility; verily by the nobility he prospers. The Brihat-pṣṭha is the self of the sacrificer, the sole and unique. In that it is the Brihat-pṭṣṭha, the Brihat is the noble; verily by the noble he prospers. In that it has the Brihat-prṣṭha, it is the eldest; verily by the eldest he prospers. It is the best; verily by the best he prospers.
8.2.3	"They make the Rathantara the Anurūpa (chant) with the words, 'To thee, O hero, we offer praise.' This world is the Rathantara, the other world is the Brihat. This world is the Anurūpā of that world, the other world of this world. In that they make the Rathantara Anurūpa, they make both worlds to be enjoyed by the sacrificer. Moreover, the Rathantara is Brahman, the Brihat is Kshatra. The Kshatra is indeed established in Brahman, the Brahman in the Kshatra. Moreover, for the similarity of the Sāman.
8.2.4	Or, as to why it is called "Dhayyā," the Brāhmaṇa has been stated.
8.2.5	"Listen to both" is a Sāman-verse. The form of both Sāmans is used, for both Sāmans are performed.
8.3.1	"Sing to him who has conquered with his strength" is a verse. The form is "conquering" for conquering.
8.3.2	"The mighty, the strong, the enduring, with these" is a verse about the mighty and the enduring. That is the form of the Kshatriya.
8.3.3	It consists of fifteen verses. The fifteen are strength, energy, and valour. Strength, energy, and vigour are the Kshatriya. He thus makes him prosperous with strength, energy, vigour.
8.3.4	It is in the Bharadvāja metre. Bharadvāja was the son of Brihat. He was the son of Arshya.
8.3.5	This indeed is the sacrifice of the Kshatriya, which is prosperous, and which has the Brihat as its Prstha. Therefore, wherever the Kshatriya performs a sacrifice, there should be the Brihat as the Prstha. That is prosperous.
8.4.1	The Ekāha sacrifices are the Hotr-priests. These are the peaceful, the established, the firm Hotr-priesthoods. The Ekāha is for peace, for establishment, for firmness, for non-falling. They become of all forms, of all prosperity. For all forms, for all prosperity. With all forms, with all prosperous Hotr-priestly offices, we may obtain all desires. Therefore, wherever there are Ekāha sacrifices without all Stotras, without all Prsthas, there should be Ekāha Hotr-prieṣts. That is prosperous.
8.4.2	They say that this should be the fifteen-day Utkhya. The fifteen-day Uktbya is strength, energy, and virility. Strength, energy, and viriliry are the Ksatriya. He thus makes him prosper with strength, energy, virility.
8.4.3	There are thirty hymns of praise for him. The Viraj has thirty syllables. Viraj is food. He thus establishes him in food. Therefore they say, "It should be the fifteenth."
8.4.4	The Agniṣṭoma should be the Jyotiṣṭoma.
8.4.5	The three-fold Stoma is Brahman, the fifteen-fold is Kshatra. Brahman indeed is before Kshatra. He makes his kingdom invincible and unassailable. The seventeen-fold is the caste of the Visas, the twenty-one-fold is the Shudra caste. They make him follow the Visas and the Shudra caste, and also the twenty-onefold is the Shudras. The three-fold is splendour, the fifteen- fold is vigour, the seventeen-fold is progeny, the twenty- one-fold is stability. He thus makes him complete with splendour, vigour, progeny and stability. Therefore one should perform the Jyotishtoma.
8.4.6	And for him there are twenty-four hymns of praise, for the year consists of twenty-four half-months, and in the year all food is included; thus he establishes him in all food. Therefore the Agniṣṭoma should be the Jyotiṣṭoma, the Jyotiṣtoma should be the Agniṣṭhoma.
8.5.1	Now then, of the consecration itself.
8.5.2	When a Kṣatriya consecrates himself, he is indeed consecrating his own Kṣatra. When he rises from the Avabhṛtha and performs the Anūbandhya sacrifice, he then rises from it. When the Upavasatha has been completed, they again consecrate him.
8.5.3	The following are the requisites for him: a stool of Udumbara wood, its legs should be of the size of a span, the head should be of the height of an arm, the covering should be of Muñja grass, the covering should consist of a tiger skin, the bowl should be of Udumbara, the branches should be of Udumvara. In this bowl are placed eight things: curd, honey, ghee, water from the sun and rain, tender grass, and Sura, and Dūrvā grass.
8.5.4	Now that this is the southern sacrificial grass-bunch with the handle, it is there that he places this eastern couch. Two of its feet are within the altar and two outside. This indeed is prosperity. Its limited form is what is within the altar, and the unlimited is what is outside the altar. In that two of its feet are inside the altar and two are outside, it is for the attainment of both kinds of desires, those within the altar and those outside.
8.6.1-2	The skin of a tiger is spread out with the hair turned upwards, with the neck towards the east. The tiger is the king of wild animals; the Kṣatriya is the king of men. By means of the Kṣatriyas he makes the Kṣatriyās prosper.
8.6.3	May Agni, yoked with the Gayatri, ascend the chariot of the metres; Savitar with the Trishtup, Soma with the Anushtup, Brihaspati with the Brihat, Mitra and Varuna with the Pankti, Indra with the Tristup, the All-Gods with the Jagati. I mount them for sovereignty, for supremacy, for lordship, for self-sovereignty, for Vaimateya, for Parameshthya, for sovereignty, for supreme sovereignty, for lordship, and for self-lordship.
8.6.4	Thus one should ascend this seat with the right knee forward and the left knee behind.
8.6.5	Thus it is said.
8.6.6	The gods, having become united with the four additional metres, ascended this prosperity, on which they are now established. Agni with the Gayatri, Savitar with the Tristubh, Soma with the Anushtubh, Brihaspati with the Brihat, Mitra and Varuna with the Paṅkti, Indra with the Jagati, the All-gods with the Jagati.
8.6.7	These are recited: "Agni became the Gayatri with two feet."
8.6.8	He who knows this attains prosperity, and attains the lordship and sovereignty over his subjects.
8.6.9	Then, while consecrating him, he makes him recite the peace of water.
8.6.10	"May you look at me with the auspicious eye, may you touch my skin with the auspicious body. I invoke all the Agni-s who dwell in water. May you place radiance, strength, and energy in me."
8.6.11	"There is no fear of the consecration being performed on him whose water is not peaceful, for the water takes away his energy."
8.7.1	Then he anoints him, covering him with a branch of the Udumbara tree.
8.7.2	"These waters are the most auspicious, these are the healers of all, these are the nourishers of the kingdom, these are the sustainers of the kingdom and the immortal ones."
8.7.3	With those waters with which Prajapati consecrated Indra, Soma, Varuna, Yama, Manu, with those waters I consecrate you. Be thou the king of kings.
8.7.4	The great one, the lord of the great ones, the lord of men, the goddess, the mother, has generated thee; the auspicious mother has generated thee.
8.7.5	With the impulse of the divine Savitr, with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of Pusan, with the brilliance of Agni, with the lustre of Surya, with the strength of Indra, I anoint thee for strength, for glory, for fame, for food.
8.7.6	If one wishes to eat food from this world, one should say "bhūr." If one wishes to have food from two worlds, one should say, "bhūr bhuvah." If one wishes for food from three worlds or from the unlimited, one should say: "bhūr bhur svaḥ svāhā."
8.7.7	Some say that this is the attainment of all, for these utterances are beyond all. By this he is anointed. By the impulse of the divine Savitr, by the arms of the Asvins, by the hands of Pusan, by the brilliance of Agni, by the lustre of Surya, by the power of Indra, I anoint thee for strength, for glory, for fame, for food."
8.7.8	Now they say that he is anointed with all speech, but the lord is anointed before his life ends. So said Satyaka Jabala, "He who is not anointed with these Vyahrtis."
8.7.9	"The lord has brought all life, he has obtained all by victory." So says the Hotr Uddalaka Aruni. He who is consecrated with these Vyahrtis, one should consecrate him with this alone: "In the impulse of the divine Savitar, with the arms of the Ashvins, with the hands of Pusan, with the brilliance of Agni, with the radiance of Surya, with the strength of Indra, I consecrate for strength, for glory, for fame, for food, for the earth, for the atmosphere, for heaven."
8.7.10	Now these (sacrifices) indeed are transferred from the sacrificer who is a Kshatriya. The Brahman and the Kshatra are the food, the nourishment, the sap of the waters and plants, the lustre of the Brahman, the prosperity, the offspring, the form of the Kshatra. And the sap of food, the plants, the Kshatra, the support, that which he offers here in front, that he places in the Brahman and the Kshtra.
8.8.1	Now, as to why the seat is of Udumbara wood, and the vessel of Udumbara, and the Udumbara branch, food is Udumbara, food and strength are Udumbara, he thus places food and strength in him.
8.8.2	And as to why there is curds, honey, and ghee, it is the sap of water and plants, he thus places in him the sap of water, and plants.
8.8.3	Now when the waters are heated and rain, then they are the radiance and the Brahmanic lustre. The heated and rainy waters are indeed radiance and Brahmanic lustre. He thus places radiance and Brahmanic luster in him.
8.8.4	Now when there are the grasses and the reeds, then they are Irá and nourishment. The grasses and reeds are indeed Irá and nourishment, and also procreation. He thus places Irá and nourishment in him, and also pro-creation.
8.8.5	Now, when there is Sura, that is the form of the Kshatriya. And the juice of food is the form of Kshatriya. He places it in him.
8.8.6	Now, as to why there is Dūrvā grass. The Dūrvā is the Kshatriya among plants. The Kshatriya is like a reed. The Kshatriyan, when he dwells in the country, is like a reed, firmly established. The Dūravā is like a reed firmly established on the ground. That is why there is Dūrva grass. It places the Kshatriya in the plants. It is also a firm establishment.
8.8.7	These are indeed those (sacrifices) which have gone out from him who is sacrificing; he places them in him, and with them he thus makes him prosper.
8.8.8	Then he places the cup of Soma in his hand, with the verse,
8.8.9	"Flow, O Soma, with the sweetest and most intoxicating stream, for Indra to drink, when pressed."
8.8.10	Having placed it, he makes the sacrificer recite the Sāntti verse.
8.8.11	The two of you have made a seat for the gods, do not quarrel with each other in the highest heaven. You are Sura, the shining one, and this is Soma, the king. Do not harm him, he is entering his own womb.
8.8.12	This is the distinction between drinking Soma and drinking Sura.
8.8.13	Having drunk, he should give it to him for whom he thinks it is suitable. That is the form of Mitra; he thus establishes it in Mitra itself. For in Mitra one indeed stands.
8.8.14	He who knows thus stands firm.
8.9.1	Then he descends with a branch of the Udumbara tree. The Udumbara is food and nourishment; he thus descends with food and nourishment.
8.9.2-3	Sitting on the ground, he places his feet on the ground and says, "I stand on the heaven and earth, I stand on the exhalation and inhalation, I stand on day and night, I stand on food and drink. I stand on Brahman, I stand on Kshatra, I stand on these three worlds."
8.9.4	At the end, he stands with his entire self. He stands in all of this. He attains ever-increasing prosperity. He attains lordship and sovereignty over beings. The kshatriya who is consecrated with this consecration descends.
8.9.5	Having thus descended, having placed the foot on the ground, having sat facing east, having saluted Brahma thrice, saying "Salutations to Brahma, salutations to Brahma, salutaions to Brahma", he releases speech, saying "I give the boon to Jiti, Abhijiti, Vijiti, Sanjiti".
8.9.6	When he thrice says, "Salutations to Brahman, salutations to Brahman, salutation to Brahman," then the kingdom comes under the control of Brahman. Where the kingdom comes under control of Brahman, that kingdom prospers, that kingdom is full of heroes, and a hero is born in it.
8.9.7	Then, when he gives the boon, he releases speech with the words, "To victory, to supreme victory, to conquest, to complete conquest." This is indeed the victory of speech when he says, "I give." Whatever is the victory of speech, may that be mine. May the rite be completed in accordance with that."
8.9.8	Having released speech, he rises and places a twig on the sacrificial grass.
8.9.9	"Thou art the kindling-wood; with the power of Indra, with the power of strength, Svāhā!"
8.9.10	He thus strengthens himself with the power of the power of Indra.
8.9.11	Having placed the kindling- wood, he steps forward three steps towards the east and north.
8.9.12	"Thou art the arrangement; arrange for me the gods; may there be for me prosperity, well-being, and safety."
8.9.13	Thus he stands in the direction of Aparajita, for victory and non-defeat. Thus it is.
8.10.1	The gods and the Asuras fought in these worlds. They fought in the eastern direction. The Asuras conquered them there. They fought in southern direction. The Asura conquered them there. The Asuras fought in the western direction. The Asures conquered them there. Then they fought in the northern direction. The Asuuras conquered them there. There they fought in the intermediate direction. Those who were in the east and north conquered them there.
8.10.2	If a kshatriya approaches him, when the two armies are about to fight, saying, "Do this so that I may conquer this army," and if he says, "So be it," then he should touch the seat of his chariot, saying, "O Vanaspati, may you be the protector of the army." Then he should say to him,
8.10.3	"Stand in this direction, facing it. The chariot, armed, should move forward. It is north, west, south, east, against the enemy."
8.10.4	One should turn him around with the verse, "With the oblation, I turn you around." Then one should examine him with the verse, "With the invincible weapon, with the Suparna weapon."
8.10.5	He conquers that army.
8.10.6	If he should attack him when about to engage in battle, saying, "Do it so that I may win this battle," he should lead him in that very direction. He wins that battle.
8.10.7	If he is being expelled from his kingdom, he should approach him and say, "Do this so that I may regain this kingdom." He should send him in that direction. Thus he regains his kingdom.
8.10.8	Having approached his friends, and having spoken the words of the removal of enemies, he enters his house, saying, "O Indra, may I drive away all the enemies." Thus he becomes free from enemies, fearless, on every side. He attains the ever-increasing prosperity. He attains the lordship and sovereignty over his subjects, he who, having spoken the words for the removal of enemies,
8.10.9	Having gone to his house, having sat down near the fire, having begun, the Adhvaryu offers three oblations of ghee with the ladle, the first three oblations to Agni, the second three to Indra, the third three to Agni, the fourth three to Indra, and the fifth three to Agni.
8.11.1	For the sake of the conquest of strength, for the sake of the attainment of strength, for overcoming the foes, for the sake (of attaining) the Brahman, the life, the immortal, this one, the shelter, the armour, the safety, for the sake, of prosperity, together with offspring, together with cattle, the destroyer of enemies, the destroyer of the wicked, thou goest not with debt. Svāhā.
8.11.2	For you, indeed, we drink the Soma juice. The great Brahman, the life, the immortal, resorts to this (Soma). This is the shelter, the armour, the safety for welfare, along with progeny, along with cattle, for the kingdom. O Pavamana, you go forth to the Soma juice. Svāhā.
8.11.3	Pavamana indeed generated the sun, the Brahman, the immortal breath, the protection, the armour, the fearlessness, the welfare, together with offspring, together with cattle, moving with the cow, the Gaja, the Purandhi, the Svāhā.
8.11.4	He who is not afflicted, not afflicted, not defeated, protected from all sides, moving through all directions in the form of the three Vedas, established in the world of Indra, he who offers three oblations of ghee taken four times with the ladle, offers the oblations of Indra at the end.
8.11.5	Then at the end he prays for the birth of cattle, horses and men: "Here may cattle be born, here horses, here men. Here may a hero sit down, who gives a thousand as a gift, and is protected."
8.11.6	He who prays thus at the end for the birth of cows, horses and men, becomes indeed rich in progeny and cattle.
8.11.7	He indeed is the Kshatriya who is not cut off, whom those who know thus sacrifice.
8.11.8	Then they drag him away, just as the Niṣādas or the Śelagas or the criminals seize a rich man in the forest and take his wealth and run away. So the priests take the sacrificer away and take his wealth. They do so to one whom they do not know thus.
8.11.9	Now, indeed, Janamejaya, knowing this, said: "They consecrate me, who know this, with the knowledge of this. Therefore I conquer the army of the Abhiitvaras. I conquer the army with the Abhiitvar army. No divine or human arrows will reach me. I shall live my full life. I shall be the sole ruler of the earth."
8.11.10	The divine and human arrows do not reach him. He goes to the end of his life. He becomes the owner of the whole earth. They perform the consecration for him who knows thus. They perform the rite.
8.12.1	Now, the great consecration of Indra.
8.12.2	The gods said, "This one is the most powerful, strongest, most capable, best, and most capable of crossing among the gods. Let us consecrate him." They said, "So be it." That indeed was Indra.
8.12.3	Therefore they placed this seat, called "verse" (ṛc), on it. They made the two feet in front, called "Brihat" and "Rathantara"; the two feet at the back, called "Vaikārin" and "Vaivātika"; the two feet in the middle, called "Śākvara" and "Raivata"; the two feet on the head, called "Naudhasa" and "Kāleyas"; the verses are stretched out towards the east, the Sāmans are stretched out towards all directions, the Yajus-verses are stretched out towards above, the glory is the covering, the prosperity is the covering-cloth. Savitar and Brihaspati held the two feet in frōnt; Vayu and Pūshan held the two feet at back; Mitra and Varuna held the two feet on head; the two feet on top, called "Naudha" and "Kāleya"; the two feet below, called "Śāka" and "Raive"; the two feet above, called "Śakvara" and "Raiva"; the two feet of the head, called "Naudha" and "Kāleya"; the two feet below called "Śāke" and "Raie"; the two feet called "Śākvare" and "Raivate"; the two feet "Naudha" (and) "Kāleya" on the head; the two "Śāke” and “Raie” below; the two "Naudha" on the head and "Kāleye" below; the two “Śāke” on the head and “Raie" below; the "Śākvare” and “Raivate” above; the two "Naudha" on the head, and "Kāle" below; the “Śāke" on the head "Raie" below, the "Śākvara” and “Raiva” above; the "Naudha" at the head, and the "Kāle" at the bottom; the "Śāke", "Raie" at the head; the "Śakvara", "Raiva" at the bottom. He ascended this seat.
8.12.4	May the Vasus, with the Gayatri metre, the Trivrt stoma, and the Rathantara Saman, ascend thee. I ascend them for the sake of sovereignty. May the Rudras, with the Trishtup metre, the Pañchadash stoma, and Brihat Saman, ascend Thee. I ascend them, for the sake of lordship. May the Adityas, with the Jagat metre, the Saptadaśa stoma, and Vaivavata Saman, ascendthee. I ascend them. For the sake of self-sovereignty. May the All-gods, with the Anushtup metre, Ekavimsa stoma, and Vairāja Saman, ascendThee. I ascend themfor the sake of Vairāja. May the Sadhyas and Aptyas, with the Pañchaka metre, Trinava stoma, and Shakvara Saman, ascend you. I ascend themforthe sake of kingship. May the Maruts and Angiras, with the Atichhandas metre, Trayastrimsa stoma, and Raivata Saman, ascendyou. I ascend them fort he sake of supreme kingship, lordship, and self-sovereignty.
8.12.5	The All-gods, while he was seated on this seat, said to him, "Indra is not able to perform his heroic deed without being cheered. Let us cheer him." He said, "So be it." The All-gods cheered him. "The gods have cheered him, the king, the lord of kings, the lord of lords, the self-king, the lord of self-kings, the king of kings, the father of kings, the supreme king, the lord supreme, the lord of the supreme, the lord, the father of the lord, the lord of heaven, the father of heaven, the lord of earth, the father of earth, the lord of men, the father of men, the lord of cattle, the father of cattle, the lord of plants, the father of plants, the lord of water, the father of water, the lord of fire, the father of fire, the lord of wind, the father of wind, the lord of space, the father of space, the lord of light, the father of light, the lord of darkness, the father of darkness, the lord of time, the father of time, the lord of truth, the father of truth, the lord of law, the father of law, the lord of righteousness, the father of righteousness, the lord of sacrifice, the father of sacrifice, the lord of oblations, the father of oblations, Indra, the lord of Indra, the father of Indra, the lord, father, grandfather, great-grandfather, the lord of all, the father of all, the lord of everything, the father of everything, the lord of beings, the father of beings, the lord of creatures, the father of creatures, the lord of creation, the father of creation, the lord of birth, the father of birth, the lord of life, the father of life, the lord of death, the father of death, the lord of rebirth, the father of rebirth, the lord of food, the father of food, the lord of wealth, the father of wealth, the lord of happiness, the father of happiness, the lord of sorrow, the father of sorrow, the lord of joy, the father of joy, the lord of grief, the father of grief, the lord of pleasure, the father of pleasure, the lord of pain, the father of pain, the lord of love, the father of love, the lord of hate, the father of hate, the lord of desire, the father of desire, the lord of anger, the father of anger, the lord of fear, the father of fear, the lord of courage, the father of courage, the lord of delusion, the father of delusion, the lord of wisdom, the father of wisdom, the lord of knowledge, the father of knowledge, the lord of ignorance, the father of ignorance, the lord of good, the father of good, the lord of evil, the father of evil, the lord of virtue, the father of virtue, the lord of vice, the father of vice, the lord of merit, the father of merit, the
8.12.6	Prajapati, about to consecrate him, addressed him with this verse:
8.13.1	Varuna, firm in his vows, sat down for the sake of sovereignty, lordship, supreme sovereignty, Vaisharadya, Parameshthya, kingship, maharajya, lordship, self-control, and standing. He is Sukratu.
8.13.2	While seated on this seat, Prajapati, standing in front of him, facing the west, sprinkled him with these waters through a moist Udumbara branch with leaves, and a filter made of gold, saying, "These are the most auspicious waters." With this three-verse hymn and the Yajus verse "For the sake of the god," and with these Vyahrti verses "Bhuvah, Bhuvah, Svarah."
8.14.1	Then the Vasus, the gods of the eastern direction, consecrated him with six and twenty-five days, with this Trica, with this Yajus, and with these Vyahrtis, for sovereignty.
8.14.2	Therefore, those kings of the eastern countries who are consecrated for sovereignty in this eastern direction are called 'emperors' after their consecration, following the course of the gods.
8.14.3	Then the Rudras, the gods, anointed him in the southern direction with six and twenty-five days, with this Trici, with this Yajus, with these Vyahrtis, for sovereignty. Therefore, those who are kings of the Satvatas are anointed for sovereignty in the southern direction. They are called anointed as Bhojya. They follow the course of the gods. Then the Adityas, the gods, consecrated him in the western direction with six and five twenty-five days with this Trici with this Yajush with these Vyahrits for self-sovereignty. Therefore, those kings of the Nica and Apaca are anointed for self-sovereignity in the western direction. They are anointed as Viraj. They follow the path of the gods. Then the Vishvas, the gods, the Sadhyas and the Aptyas consecrated him in the northern direction with six and seven twenty-five days. They are anointed for sovereignty. They are called Rajas. They follow the way of the gods. They are anointed in the northern direction. They are Rajas. They are anointed. They follow the ways of the gods. Therefore, those of the Kurupanchala and Savashoshina kings are anointed for sovereignty.
8.14.4	He, having been anointed with this great consecration, Indra conquered all the victories, obtained all the worlds, stood in the foremost position of all the gods, attained the highest position, sovereignty, enjoyment, self-sovereignty, Vaikuntha, supreme sovereignty, great sovereignty, lordship, having conquered in this world, he became self-existent, self-sovereign, immortal, in that heavenly world, having obtained all desires, he became immortal, he became.
8.15.1	He who desires to know this, may anoint the Kshatriya with this Indra-like great consecration, saying, "May he conquer all the enemies, may he conquer all the worlds, may he stand as the foremost of all kings, may he attain the supreme state, may he attain sovereignty, lordship, self-sovereignty, Vairaja sovereignty, Parameshtha sovereignty, Maharaaja sovereignty, supremacy, may he be all-pervading, may he be the lord of all, may he be from the end of the half-period to the end of the world, may he be one king over the earth extending to the ocean."
8.15.2	The day on which you were born and the day on which you died, all that time between, may your good deeds, your life, your progeny, and your wealth increase, if I have done anything wrong.
8.15.3	He who wishes to know this, 'I am a Kshatriya, I shall conquer all, I shall win all worlds, I shall be the foremost of all kings, I shall attain the supreme, I shall attain sovereignty, enjoyment, self-sovereignty, Vairaja sovereignty, Parameshtha sovereignty, Maharaaja sovereignty, lordship, I shall be all-pervading, universal, having universal life, from the end of the half-period to the other half-period, I shall be sole king over the earth extending to the ocean.' He should not doubt. He should say with faith, 'Whatever night I was born and whatever night I have passed away, between those two, my desired and accomplished, may I obtain the world of the righteous, life, progeny, and may you not injure me.'
8.16.1	Then he would say, "Gather the four kinds of wood - from the Nyagrodha, Udumbara, Ashvattha, and Plaksha trees."
8.16.2	The Nyagrodha is the Kshatriya among trees; when they collect Nyagrodha wood, they place the Kshatriya in him. The Udumbara is the Bhaujya among trees; when one collects Udumbara wood, one places the Bhaujya in him. The Ashvattha is the Samrajya among trees; when one collects Ashvattha wood, one places Samrajya in him. When one collects wood of the Plaksha, one places in him both self-sovereignty and sovereignty over the Virajas. The Virajas are the trees.
8.16.3	Then he should say, "Gather the four kinds of medicines prepared from barley, wheat, millet, and rice."
8.16.4	The barley is the army of the plants; when they collect the barley-straw, they place the army in it. The millet is the sovereignty of the plants; when they collect the millet-straw, they establish sovereignty in it. The Priyangu is the wealth of the plants; the Priyangu-straw is collected; they establish wealth in it. The Yava is the army of plants; when they gather the Yava-straw, they put the army in it.
8.17.1	Then they prepare the stool of Udumbara wood. The Brāhmaṇa text on it is known. The vessel is of Udumbara, or a plate, or a branch of Udumbara. Having prepared these materials, they should pour them into the vessel of Udumbara or the plate or the vessel. When they are poured, having brought curd, honey, ghee, and water from the sun and rain, and having placed them, one should recite this mantra over the stool:
8.17.2	May your two feet be Brihat and Rathantara, Vaivara and Vaivara, the two feet, Vaisharad and Vaisharad, the two feet; the two feet, Shakra and Raivata, the two feet. The two feet, Shirsha and Naudha, the two feet are the two feet, Kalaya and Anoocha, the two feet.
8.17.3	Then he should make him ascend this seat.
8.17.4	May the Vasus, with the Gayatri metre, the Trivrt stoma, and the Rathantara chant, ascend thee; may they ascend thee for the sake of sovereignty. May the Rudras, with the Tristubh metre, the Pañcadaśa stoma, and Brihat chant, ascend thee, may they ascend thee, for the sake of lordship. May the Adityas, with the Jagati metre, the Saptadaśa stoma and the Vaivāta chant, ascend thee. May they ascend thee for self-sovereignty. May the All-gods, with the Anushtubh metre, the Ekavimsa stoma, and Vaishvadev chant, ascend thee: may they ascend thee. May the Maruts and the Angirasas, with the Ati-chanda metre, the Trayastrimsa stoma, and Raivata chant, ascend thee for the supreme sovereignty. May the Sadhyas and the Aptyas, with the Pañca-chanda metre and the Trinava stoma, and Shakra chant, ascend thee - may they ascend thee - for kingship, for great kingship, for lordship, for self-lordship, for standing, for ascending. Thus should he ascend the couch.
8.17.5	The king-makers should say to him seated on this seat, "The Kshatriya has not yet been proclaimed. He is worthy of performing the heroic deed. We shall proclaim him." He says, "So be it." The king-makers proclaim him. The people proclaim him. The king proclaims the emperor. The emperor proclaims the lord of the earth. The lord of the earth proclaims the lord of wealth. The lord of wealth proclaims the lord of cattle. The lord of cattle proclaims the lord of his own. The lord of his own proclaims the lord of Viraj. The lord of Viraj proclaims the lord of Vaisharad. The lord of Vaishara proclaims the lord of Parameshthin. The lord of Parameshthi proclaims the lord of kings. The lord of kings proclaims the lord of Kshatra. The Kshatra is born. The Kshatriya is born. The lord of all beings is born. The giver of wealth is born. The destroyer of enemies is born. The protector of Brahmanas is born. The guardian of Dharma is born.
8.17.6	He who knows this should consecrate him with this verse.
8.18.1	Varuna, firm in his vows, sat down on the seats for the sake of sovereignty, lordship, self-sovereignty, Vaírajya, Parameshtha, kingship, Mahara- jya, lordship, self lordship, and supremacy. He who knows thus, standing in front of him seated on this seat, facing the west, with a moist Udumbara branch with leaves, and with a golden strainer, sprinkles him with these waters, saying, "These are the most auspicious waters." With this verse and the Yajus "For the sake of the god," and with these Vyahrtis "Bhuvah, Bhuvah, Svarah."
8.19.1	In the eastern direction, the Vasus, the gods, with six and twenty-five days, anoint thee with this Trici, this Yajus, and these Vyahrtis, for sovereignty. In the southern direction, the Rudras, the gods, anoint thee, with six and five-twenty days, with this Trici and this Yajus and these Vyahrti, for lordship. In the western direction, the Adityas, the gods, annoint thee with six and five twenty days, with this Tricī, this Yajūs, and these Vyāhrtis, for self-sovereignty. In the northern direction, the Visve Devas, the gods, the Maruts and the Angirasas, with six and fifty-two days, anoint you with this Trici this Yajus this Vyahrti for Vaïrajya. In the upward direction, the Maruts, the Angirasas and the gods, with the six and twenty- five days, anoint him with this Trici with this Yajus with these Vyahrtis for Paramesthyam. In the eastern direction the Sadhyas and the Aptyas, the gods with six and twenty five days anoint him with the Trici with this yajus with these vyahrtis for kingship for maharaajya for lordship for self lordship for authority. He becomes Paramesthi, the son of Prajapati.
8.19.2	The Kshatriya who is consecrated with this Indra-like great consecration conquers all victories, obtains all worlds, attains the highest position among all kings, attains sovereignty, lordship, self-sovereignty, supreme sovereignty, great sovereignty, lordship, and having conquered in this world, becomes self-existent, self-sovereign, immortal, in the heavenly world, obtains all desires, and becomes immortal. He who consecrates a Kshatriya with this Indra-type great consecration.
8.20.1	This is the power in this world, namely, curd. When he anoints with curd, he places power in him. This is the sap in plants and trees, namely, honey. When he anoint with honey, he places sap in him. This, namely, ghee, is the lustre of cattle. When he anoincts with ghee, he places lustre in him. This water is the immortality in this world. When he anointes with water, he places immortality in him.
8.20.2	He should give gold to the officiating priest who has performed the consecration. He should give a thousand (cows). He should give a field with four legs. Or they say, he should give an incalculable and unlimited (amount). The king is unlimited. He is bound by the unlimited.
8.20.3	Then he makes him take the Sura-kamsa in his hand, with the verse, "Flow on with the sweetest and most intoxicating stream, O Soma, for Indra to drink, when pressed."
8.20.4	The drinker drinks what is left of it. What Indra drank with the Shachi-s, that he drank. With this mind of mine, I now consume the Soma king here with a benign mind. I offer you the Soma, O Indra, with the hymn. I offer you the Soma with the verse. I offer you Soma with the praise. I offer you, O Indra, the Soma with the prayer. I offer to you, O Indra. I offer to you, the Indra of the Indra-s. I offer to the Indra of the Indras. I offer to Indra, the Indra of Indra. I offer the Soma to Indra, the lord of the Indra-like ones. I offer the Soma to the Indra of Indra, the lord. I offer the Indra-like Soma to the Indra-like Indra. I offer the lordly Soma to the lordly Indra.
8.20.5	The Soma-juice which has entered into the Sura, is eaten by the Ksatriya who is consecrated with the great consecration of Indra. It is not Sura.
8.20.6	Having drunk it, one should recite the mantra, "May Soma be auspicious to us."
8.20.7	Just as a beloved son or a beloved wife touches the father or husband with happiness and well-being, so does the king who is anointed with this Indra-like great consecration touch the food and drink, whether it is wine or Soma or any other food, with happiness and well being.
8.21.1	By this great consecration of Indra, Turu Kavasa consecrated Janamejaya Parikshit. Therefore, Janamejaya Parikshita, conquering the whole earth, went round it with a sacrificial horse.
8.21.2	This is the hymn sung at sacrifices.
8.21.3	He bound the horse, the son of Rukshin, with a golden bridle, to the golden post, with a golden halter, with a golden bit, with a golden rein, with a golden saddle, with a golden crupper, with a golden girth, with a golden whip, with a golden bell, with a golden tail-guard, with a golden head-guard, with golden trappings, with a golden canopy, with a golden flag, with a golden banner, with a golden parasol, with a golden seat, with a golden couch, with a golden bed, with a golden pillow, with a golden garment
8.21.4	By this great consecration of Indra, Chyavana Bhargava consecrated Sharata Manava. Therefore Sharata Manava, conquering all directions, went to the entire earth. He offered a sacrificial horse and became the householder at the sacrifice of the gods.
8.21.5	By this great consecration of Indra, Soma-Sushrus, son of Vajaratna, consecrated Shatanika Satrajit. Therefore Shatanika Satraji, conquering all the earth on every side, went to the sacrifice with a pure horse.
8.21.6	By this great consecration of Indra, Parvata and Narada consecrated Ambasthya. Therefore Ambasthya, conquering all directions, went round the whole earth. And he offered a horse-sacrifice.
8.21.7	By this great consecration of Indra, Parvata and Narada consecrated Yudhañshrausti of the Agrasainya clan. Therefore, Yudhañshrauṣṭi of the Agrasainya clan, conquering all directions, went around the entire earth. And he offered a horse sacrifice.
8.21.8	By this great consecration of Indra, Kashyapa consecrated Vishvakarman Bhauvana. Therefore, Vishvakarman, Bhauvana, conquering all directions, went around the entire earth with a sacrificial horse.
8.21.9	They say, "The earth has gone."
8.21.10	No mortal can give me, O Vishvakarman, O Bhauvana, you are giving me. I shall perish in the middle of the water. This is in vain. This is the battle for Kashyapa.
8.21.11	By this great consecration of Indra, Vasishtha consecrated Sudasa Paijavana. Therefore Sudasa Paijavan conquered the whole earth and offered a horse-sacrifice.
8.21.12	By this great consecration of Indra, Samvarta Angiras consecrated Marutta Avakshita. Therefore Marutta Avakshirta, conquering all the earth on all sides, went around with a sacrificial horse.
8.21.13	This verse was also sung:
8.21.14	The Maruts, the protectors, dwelt in the house of Marutta, the son of Avikṣit, who was devoted to love. All the gods were present at the assembly.
8.22.1	By this great consecration of Indra, Udāmaya Ātreya consecrated himself. Therefore, he conquered the entire earth in all directions, and offered a sacrificial horse.
8.22.2	He said, "I will give you ten thousand cows and ten thousand female slaves. O Brahman, invite me to this sacrifice."
8.22.3	These verses were also sung:
8.22.4	With those cows, Praiyamedha performed the sacrifice. Two thousand cows were given by Atreya in the middle.
8.22.5	The king Vairocana gave to the officiating priest, when he was performing a sacrifice, eight thousand white horses, which were his own property.
8.22.6	The Atreya gave ten thousand of the most beautiful daughters of the wealthy, who had been brought from various countries.
8.22.7	Having given ten thousand elephants, Atri said to Avaknuka: "The brahmin Anga, exhausted, reached Parikut, having given (them) in charity."
8.22.8	"A hundred to you, a hundred to you!" he is indeed pleased. Having said, "A thousand to you," he regains his life.
8.23.1	By this great consecration of Indra, the son of Dīrghatamas, the son of Matamā, consecrated Bharata, the son of Duṣyanta. Therefore Bharata, the grandson of Duṣyanța, having conquered the whole earth, went round it. And he offered sacrifices with horses and with sacrificial animals.
8.23.2	These verses were also sung:
8.23.3	The king of the Bharatas gave a hundred deer, golden-coloured, with white tusks, to the sage Masha, and seven more.
8.23.4	This is the fire of Bharata, the son of Dusshanta, which was kindled in the Sachiguṇa forest, where a thousand Brahmanas divided the cattle of the king of the Bharata tribe.
8.23.5-6	Bharata, the son of Dusshanti, bound seventy-eight horses along the Yamuna. The king Dusshanti, the son of Bharata, bound three hundred and thirty horses along the Ganga. The king, the son of Duhshanti, the son-in-law of the king of the Matsyas, bound five hundred horses along the Ganga.
8.23.7-8	The great deeds of Bharata were not done by the people of the past or the future. The five men raised heaven and earth with their hands. This great consecration of Indra was indeed taught by the sage Brihad-uktha to Durmukha, the king of Panchala. Therefore, Durmukha, being a king, conquered the entire earth by his knowledge.
8.23.9	Now, indeed, this great consecration of Indra was taught by Vasishtha Satyahvya to Janantapya, the son of Atri. Therefore, although he was not a king, Janantapya, by his knowledge, conquered the whole earth on all sides.
8.23.10	Satyahavy Vasishtha said, "You have conquered the whole earth. Do not go too far." Atyarati Janantapi said, "When the Brahmana conquers Uttarakuru, then you will be the king of the earth. I will be your commander-in-chief." Vasishtha Satyahavy said, "That is the domain of the gods. No mortal can conquer it. You have conquered this for me." Then King Shushmin of Shaibya, the son of Atarati Janantapi, killed Atarati Jantavi, who had lost his energy and seed, and was burning his enemies.
8.23.11	Therefore, one should not injure a brahmin who knows this, who is thus learned, thinking, 'I should not fall from my kingdom, I should not lose my life.'
8.24.1	Now, then, about the Purohita.
8.24.2	The gods do not eat the food of a king who does not have a Purohita. Therefore, a king who wishes to perform a sacrifice should appoint a brahmin as his Purohita, thinking, 'The gods will eat my food.'
8.24.3	He who makes the Purohita to be the sacrificer, makes him to be the sacrificers of the heaven-reaching fires.
8.24.4	His Purohita is the Ahavaniya, his wife the Garhapatya, and his son the Anvähäryapacani. When he makes an offering to the Purohita, he makes it to the Ahavaniya; when he makes an offering for his wife, he makes it for the Garhapaty; when he makes it for his son, he makes it in the Anväharyapacani. They carry him to the heavenly world, peaceful, well-offered, well-pleased, with the nobility, strength, kingdom, and people.
8.24.5	Those very ones, with their anger not appeased, not offered to, not pleased, push him away from the world of heaven, from the king, from the army, from the country, and from the people.
8.24.6	Now this Agni Vaiśvānara is the five-fold fire. The Purohita is his five-fold fire, and of him one part is in the voice, one in the feet, one in the skin, one in the heart, one in the navel. He comes up with these burning, shining parts, to the king. When he says, "Where, O Lord, did you stay?" and brings him grass, then he appeases that part of his which is in the voice. When they bring him water for washing the feet, then he appeasess that part of his that is in the feet. When they adorn him, then he appeassess that part of him that is in the skin. When they feed him, then he appeasses that part of him which is in the heart. When he dwells in his house without being restrained, then he appeasses that part of him whch is in the navel.
8.24.7	He, being offered to him with a peaceful body, being pleased, carries him to the heavenly world, to the kingdom, strength, country and clan. He, being not offered to him with an unpeaceful body, being not pleased, drives him away from the heavenly world, from the kingdom, strength country and clan.
8.25.1	This Agni Vaisvānara is the king of the five fires. When the Purohita stands holding the king, he is like the ocean holding the earth.
8.25.2	The king's kingdom becomes youthful. Before his life ends, he does not die. He lives until old age, attains the full span of life, and does not die again. For him who knows this, the Brahmanical Purohita is the protector of the kingdom.
8.25.3	The Kshatriya conquers the Kshatriya, the Bala conquers the Bala, the one who knows this, the Brahman, the protector of the country, the priest,
8.25.4	To him the people know, facing him, with one mind, the one who is known thus, the Brahman, protector of the country and priest.
8.26.1	This was also said by the sage.
8.26.2	He, indeed, the king, stands over all the enemies with his strength and valour.
8.26.3	The enemies, the haters, the brothers, the kinsmen - he indeed stands over them with his strength and vigour.
8.26.4	Brihaspati is the one who bears the well-offered. Brihaspati is indeed the priest of the gods, and other human kings follow him. The one who bears the welloffered Brihaspati is what he says. He says, "The one who bears the priest who is well-offered."
8.26.5	He sings and praises the one who receives first. This is indeed a praise to him.
8.26.6	He is indeed well-settled in his own home. The home is the abode. He is well-settled in the own homes.
8.26.7	Therefore, Ida nourishes all-giving. Food is Ida. To him it becomes nourishing food, always.
8.26.8	To him the Visas themselves bow down. The Visas are the kingdoms; he thus makes the kingdoms themselves bow down to him.
8.26.9	"He who is the Brahman-priest of the king who goes before," he thus says to the Purohita."
8.26.10	"He conquers the riches without being opposed," the riches are the kingdoms; they conquers them without being opposed.
8.26.11	The Janyas are those that are against the people, the Sapatnas are those that are for the people. The enemies, the Sapatna, are the Janyas. He conquers them who is not conquered.
8.26.12	"He who makes the best, to Avasiya." He says this. He means to say, "He who makes the most excellent, to the most excellent."
8.26.13	"The king to Brahma, the gods to him." He thus praises the Purohita.
8.27.1	He who knows the three priests and the three officiating priests is a Brahman priest. He may say: Agni indeed is the priest, the earth is the officiating priest, the wind indeed is the priest and the sky is the officiating priest; the sun indeed is the priest; heaven is the officiating priest. He who knows this is indeed the priest. But he who does not know this is indeed the hidden one.
8.27.2-3	The king becomes his friend, and he overcomes his enemies. For the learned Brahman who is the protector of the kingdom and the priest, He conquers the kingdom with the kingdom, and obtains strength with strength. For the learned Brāhman who is the protector and the priest of the kingdom, The people know him, and they are united in one mind. For the learned Brahmana who is the protector, and the priest of this kingdom.
8.27.4	Earth, Bhuva, Svaha, Oṃ, I am Amo. You are that. You are that, I am Amo, I am heaven, you are earth, I am Sama, you are Rk, we two shall bring together the ancient ones from this great fear. You are the body, protect my body.
8.27.5	The many plants, the queens of Soma, the hundred-eyed, may they grant me here on this seat unbroken protection.
8.27.6	The plants, the queens, the Soma, spread out over the earth, may they grant here on this seat to me unbroken protection.
8.27.7	In this country I establish prosperity. I see the goddesses, the waters.
8.27.8-9	I place the right foot in the right foot, I increase the left foot in the left foot, the right foot in this country, I place the right hand in the right hand, I increase the right foot in right foot, the left foot in this country. I place the right eye in the right eye, I increase the two eyes in the two eyes, the right eye in this country, the left eye in this country. The two ears in this country, both ears in this country. Both nostrils in this country, two nostrils in this country. Two lips in this country, lips in this country. Tongue in this country, tongue in this country. Teeth in this country, teeth in this country. Head in this country, head in this country. Body in this country, body in this country. Hands in this country, hands in this country. Feet in this country, feet in this country. Eyes in this country, eyes in this country. Ears in this country, ears in this country.
8.28.1	Now, then, about the limit of Brahman. He who knows the limit of Brahman, his enemies and adversaries are destroyed.
8.28.2	This is Brahman, namely, what blows here. These five deities are destroyed by it: lightning, rain, moon, sun, and fire.
8.28.3-6	When lightning strikes, it enters the rain and disappears. They do not know it. When one dies, it disappears, and then they do not know it.
8.28.7	When the rain enters the moon, it disappears. They do not know it. When one dies, then it disappears, and then they do not know it." He should say, "When the rain dies, may my enemy die and disappear, and may they not know him." They quickly do not know him.
8.28.8	The moon enters the sun at the time of the new moon. Let him disappear. When he dies, then he disappears. Then they do not know him. He should say, "Let my enemy die when the moon dies. Let him disappear, and let them not know him." They quickly do not know him.
8.28.9	When the sun sets, it enters the fire and disappears. They do not know it. When one dies, then it disappears, and they do not know it anymore. He should say, "May my enemy die when the sun dies, may he disappear, and may they not know him." They quickly do not know him anymore.
8.28.10	Agni, when he is about to die, enters the wind and disappears. They do not know him. When he dies, he disappears, and then they do not know him." He should say, "May my enemy die when Agni dies, may he disappear, and may they not know him." They quickly do not know him.
8.28.11	These are the deities that are born again from this very (fire).
8.28.12	From Vayu Agni is born, for when churned from the breath and strength, he is born. Seeing him, one should say, "May Agni be born. May not an enemy be born to me. May he be born from this very (place). May he be born away from this very ( place)." From this very (place) he is born away.
8.28.13	The sun is born from Agni. Seeing it, one should say, "May the sun be born. May no one who hates me be born." From this very thing, he is born away.
8.28.14	The moon is born from the sun. Seeing it, one should say, "May the moon be born. May no one who hates me be born." From this very thing, he is born.
8.28.15	The rain comes from the moon. Seeing it, one should say, "May rain come. May the enemy not be born from me." From this very thing, he is pushed away.
8.28.16-17	The lightning is born from rain. Seeing it, one should say, "May the lightning be born." "May the enemy not be born from me." From that very thing, he is repelled.
8.28.18	Maitreya, the son of Kauśārava, having heard this, told it to the king Bhārgava, who was seated in the assembly. The king, having heard it, went away.
8.28.19-20	If one who is not angry sits down before him, and thinks that he is standing, he should stand. If one who is angry sits down before one who is not, and thinks that one is sitting, one should sit. If one who does not sleep sleeps before one who is awake, one should sleep.
