1.1.1.1	For you, O Agni, for the well-being.
1.1.1.2	You are the Vāyu deities.
1.1.1.3	May the god Savitar impel you to the best deed.
1.1.1.4	Nourish yourselves, O blameless ones, for the gods, for Indra's share.
1.1.1.5	May no thief injure you, may no evil-speaking one. Be many firm ones in this protector of cattle.
1.1.1.6	Protect the animals of the sacrificer.
1.1.2.1	You are the seat of cows, the Rakshas is repelled, the hostility is repelled.
1.1.2.2	The mind has gone to the grass, made by Manu, established by its own nature, by it the poets have struck in front.
1.1.2.3	You are the portion of the gods, the portion of Vishnu, the portion of the cows, the portion of Agni, the portion of Soma, the portion of Indra, the portion of Varuna, the portion of Yama, the portion of Mitra, the portion of Aryaman, the portion of Sarasvati, the portion of Pusan, the portion of Savitr, the portion of Brhaspati, the portion of Parjanya, the portion of Dhruva, the portion of Anala, the portion of Vayu, the portion of Nirriti, the portion of Bhava, the portion for the gods, the share of the gods, you are the portion of heaven, the portion of earth, the portion of heaven and earth, the portion for heaven and earth, you are the share of heaven and earth.
1.1.2.4	From here, O Barhi, grow with a hundred shoots, may we grow with a thousand shoots.
1.1.2.5	May the womb of Aditi be your womb, the girdle of Indra's wife, Pūṣan may bind your knot. May it not remain with you. I lift you up with Indra's arms, I bring you down with Brihaspati's head. May you be on the path of the sky. I place you on Aditi's back.
1.1.3.1	Purify yourselves for the divine rite. You are the purifier of the Vasus, with a hundred streams, with a thousand streams, with an unpierced body.
1.1.3.2	You are heaven, you are earth, you are the heat of the sun, the lord of all.
1.1.3.3	You have settled in the abode of the universal Hotri.
1.1.3.4	For nourishment thee, O Aditya, thou art the stalk. What thou hast cleansed, that be all-life. What thou hast cleanse, that be all existence. What thou hast cleaned, that be all creation. The offered drop, the offered spark, O Agni, guard me from the stains. The well-cooked offering for the gods. For thee, O Agni, the great, the heavenly, hail! To heaven and earth thee. For thee, Indra, I offer the portion with Soma. O Vishnu, guard the offering. Be awake, be watchful.
1.1.4.1	For your appearance, for your action, for your good deeds, O goddesses, the waters, the leaders, the foremost, the foremost of this sacrifice, you have gone to the beginning of the sacrifice, lead the sacrifice to the beginning, lead the lord of sacrifice, Indra chose you in the battle against Vritra, you chose Indra in the battle against Vrtra, sprinkled, may the divine clans be seated, you are of the forest, you are of heaven, you are of earth, you are of water, you are of fire, you are of wind, you are of space, you are of time, you are of light, you are of darkness, you are of day, you are of night, you are of dawn, you are of evening, you are of morning, you are of noon, you are of afternoon, you are of twilight, you are of all seasons, you are of spring, you are of summer, you are of autumn, you are of winter, you are of growth, you are of increase, you are of prosperity, you are of abundance, you are of plenty, you are of fullness, you are of fulfillment, you are of completion, you are of accomplishment, you are of success, you are of victory, you are of conquest, you are of sovereignty, you are of lordship, you are of power, you are of strength, you are of might, you are of greatness, you are of glory, you are of fame, you are of renown, you are of praise, you are of worship, you are of adoration, you are of honor, you are of respect, you are of reverence, you are of veneration, you are of offering, you are of oblation, you are of sacrifice, you are of consecration, you are of initiation, you are of invocation, you are of prayer, you are of benediction, you are of blessing, you are of grace, you are of favor, you are of kindness, you are of compassion, you are of mercy, you are of forgiveness, you are of pardon, you are of purity, you are of cleanliness, you are of cleansing, you are of purification, you are of sanctification, you are of holiness, you are of sanctity, you are of sacredness, you are of truth, you are of reality, you are of veracity, you are of honesty, you are of sincerity, you are of uprightness, you are the truth, you are the reality, you are the veracity, you are the honesty, you are the sincerity, you are the uprightness, you have been chosen by the gods, you are the chosen one, you are the one who is chosen, you are the choice, you are the selection, you are the option, you are the alternative, you
1.1.5.1	You are the most brilliant, the most shining, the most praised, the most worshipped, the most invoked of the gods. You are the unerring Havirdhāna. Be firm, do not tremble. You are the step of Vishnu. You are the wide-breathing. With the eye of Mitra, with the eye of Varuna, with the eye that is yours, I look. With the impulse of the god Savitr, with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of Pusan, may they protect you. May the five protectors protect you. To the protector of cattle, to the protector of men, to the protector, to the protector from above, to the protector below, to the protector on all sides, to the protector in the middle, to the protector at the end, to the protector who is the best, to the protector Narayana, to the protector Agni, to the protector Varuna, to the protector Yama, to the protector Indra, to the protector Aryaman, to the protector Mitra, to the protector Varuṇa, to the protector Dhruva, to the protector Ananta, to the protector Vishnu, to the protector Prajapati, to the protector Rudra, to the protector Bhava, to the supreme protector, to the supreme lord, to the supreme god, to the supreme Brahman, to the supreme truth, to the supreme bliss, to the supreme light, to the supreme knowledge, to the supreme consciousness, to the supreme being, to the supreme soul, to the supreme self, to the supreme person, to the supreme one, to the supreme, to the supreme of the supreme, to Narayana, to Narayana. May you be released from Varuna's noose through the heaven and earth. May you be released from the noose of Yama through the heaven and the earth. May you attain the shining light of the all-pervading fire. May you attain to the heaven and the sky. I place you on Aditi's lap.
1.1.6.1	May the god Savitar purify you with the stainless purifying (stream), with the rays of the shining Vasu.
1.1.6.2	I sprinkle for Agni what is agreeable to him, for you what is agreeable to the gods. Whatever impurity has touched you, purify it. You are the skin of Aditi. The Rakshas has been driven away, the enemy has been driven away. You are the hide of Aditi. May the hide of Adityā protect you. You are the large stone, you are the tree. May the hide Aditi protect you. You (are) the tongue of Agni, the discharge of speech. For your life, you are the large stone. You are the tree. You are the tongue of Agni. May the hide Adityā protect you. The stone is large, you are the plant. You are the stone, you are a tree. You are Madhujihva. By you we may conquer every group of enemies. Bestow food, bestow strength, bestow prosperity. You are the stone, the tree. You (are the stone) that is the stone, the Madhujihva (stone). By you we may overcome every group of enemies, bestow food, bestow strength. You are the one who bestows prosperity.
1.1.7.1	You are the one who grows with the years. May I, who grows with the year, know you. The Rakṣas is driven away, the Rakṣas is destroyed. The Rakṣa's share is cast aside. You are the skin of Aditi. The Rakṣasa is driven away, Rakṣas is cast aside. The Rakṣā's share is driven away. You are the hide of Aditi. You are the one that is known. You are the discerning one. You are the mountain. May I, the mountain, know you. You are the discernment. You are the Mountain. May I, Mountain, know you. May I, mountain, know you, the discerning one. May I,mountain, know you,the discerning one. You belong to Aditi. You belong to the mountain. You are the pillar of Aditi. You are the grain. You are the grain. Bestow the gods. For your breath. For your out-breath. For your through-breath. May you touch the long-drawn-out. For your life. May you look with the eye of Mitra. May the god Savitar, with golden hands, receive you.
1.1.8.1	Burn the Rakshas, burn the enemies. Do not burn the ocean. You are firm. Stabilize the earth. O Agni, drive away the raw Agni. Drive away the carnivorous one. O Agni, carry the divine sacrifice. You are firm, stabilize the atmosphere. You are the supporter, stabilize the sky. You are the law, stabilize all things. You are the knower, you are the knower of all directions. Settle down in all directions. Surround this sacrificer with his kinsmen. May the kinsmen surround this sacrificer. May the Vasus, Rudras, Adityas, Bhrigus, Angiras, and the heat of Gharma torment you with their heat.
1.1.8.2	The skulls which the wise ones collect in the summer, those also, O Indra-Vayu, release them as a vow.
1.1.9.1	I pour with the impulse of the divine Savitar, with the arms of the Ashvins, with the hands of Pusan.
1.1.9.2	May the divine Savitar purify you with the flawless purifier, with the rays of the shining Vasu Surya.
1.1.9.3	May the waters go together with the plants, may the plants go together with the juice, may the auspicious Revatī and Jagatī verses go together with the auspicious ones. May the water go together with the water.
1.1.9.4	May the clans be united for the mother. You are the Hotar, the life of all. O Hotar, be united with the Hotar. May your lord of sacrifice spread widely. May your body be united with your body.
1.1.9.5	Vāja-pati, the wise, Agni, has gone to the offerings, bestowing treasures on the giver.
1.1.9.6	May the god Savitar melt you, the highest in the sky, on the earth. O Agni, take the Brahman.
1.1.10.1	In the impulse of the divine Savitr, with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of Pusan, I take thee. Thou art the right arm of Indra, thousand-armed, hundred-rayed, sharp-rayed, Vayu, the earth is the place of sacrifice, may I not injure the roots of the plants. Go to the village, to the cattle-pen, may the rain fall for thee. Bind, O divine Savitr, him who hates us and whom we hate, with a hundred fetters in the farthest distance. Let him not loose thee from this. May the auspicious plants not injure the roots. Go to the cattle-shed, to the village, may the rain pour for thee. Bind him who hates us, and whom we hate with a hundred fetter in the farthest distance, let him not loose thee. Let not thy drops fall on heaven. Go to the house, to the cattle pen, may the rain shower for thee. Bind with a hundred fetthers in the farthest distance him who hates us or whom we hate. Let him not loosen thee. The Vasus take thee round with the Gayatri metre, the Rudras take thee round with Trishtup metre, the Adityas take thee round with Jagat metre, the Apararu, the place of sacrifice of the gods, thou art the place of truth, thou art the abode of truth, thou are the abode of heat.
1.1.10.2	In olden time, Virupa, the cruel, having taken the earth from the Jīradānu, came to it with the Svadhās in the moon. The wise poets, having directed it, worshipped it.
1.1.11.1	Thou art the destroyer of Rakshas, thou art the destroyer of foes. Do not destroy my life, do not destroy my breath, do not destroy sight, do not destroy hearing, do not destroy speech, do not destroy cattle, do not destroy sacrifice, do not destroy progeny. Thou art splendour, thou art brilliance, thou art light, thou art immortality, thou art all-gods.
1.1.11.2	Thou art the oblation, the all-pervading, the one with uplifted lustre, the one with true lustre, thou art strength, thou art the conqueror of foes, thou art the conquerer of the foe.
1.1.11.3	Thou art the one with a thousand powers, do thou strengthen me. Thou art the butter of butter, the oblation of oblation. Thou art the truth of truth, the butter of truth. With truth I anoint thee, with the unerring eye I look upon thee for the sake of wealth, for prosperity, for good offspring.
1.1.11.4	The Dhama is the dear one of the gods, the unassailable divine sacrifice. I take you for the divine Vidyut.
1.1.11.5	The goddesses, the waters, are pure. You are pure. We are pure. We have been well-protected. May we be your protectors. May the black one be the best of the stones. O Agni, be the ghee. You are the altar. I sprinkle you for the sacrificial grass. You are the sacrificial grass. I sprinkle you as agreeable to the altar. Svāhā to the Fathers who are heated and shining.
1.1.12.1	May Pūṣan loosen thy knot. Thou art the pillar of Vishnu. Spread widely. Thou art the soft wool, resting in the heaven. Thou art the Gandharva, the all-possessing one, drawing from all sides, the boundary of the sacrificer, the invited one, the praised one. Thou art the right arm of Indra, the boundary of sacrificer, the invoked, the praised one; may Mitra-Varuna guard thee from the north. Thou art the boundary of the Sacrificer, the invoked and praised one.
1.1.12.2	We invoke thee, O Hotr, the eternal, the wise, the bright, the shining.
1.1.12.3	May the sun protect thee from the east with his rays, from every curse. Thou art the support of all men, of the Vasus, Rudras, and Adityas. Thou art the seat of the Srucas, the womb of the Sruvas. Thou art heaven, by birth; thy name is Juhu. Thou art dear to the gods by thy dear name. Sit thou on the firm seat. Thou art the atmosphere, by birth; thine name is Upasruti. Thou art dear unto the gods by thy name. Sit thou in the firm seat. Earth is thy birth; thy name Dhruva. Thou art dear by thy dear name to the gods. Sit thou in thy firm seat. Thou are the bull, the Shakra, I place thee in the measure of the Vashat-call.
1.1.12.4	They have taken their place in the womb of truth, in the world of the righteous. Protect them, O Vishnu.
1.1.12.5	Protect the sacrifice, protect the lord of sacrifice, protect me, the sacrificer.
1.1.12.6	You are Vishnu's, you are the abodes of Vishnu, you are the offspring of Prajapati.
1.1.13.1	May Agni and Vishnu, well-covered, well-covered by me, be victorious. Do not injure me. Make the world for me in the making of the world. Do not injure my own self. Protect me. Be auspicious to us today. Vishnu was seated. Indra, standing, performed heroic deeds, beginning with the deities.
1.1.13.2	The sacrifice of the Lord of sacrifice, the sacrifice that touches the sky, the sacrifice that is not shaken, the sacrifice that belongs to Indra, the sacrifice that has Indra, the sacrifice of great light.
1.1.13.3	Pour out the Soma, the honey, the ghee, the oblation, the light with light.
1.1.13.4	Indra seized the prize of the race with the upward-grasping, and then with the downward-grasping he brought down his enemies.
1.1.13.5	Udggraha and Niggraha, the Brahman-god has increased. Now may Indra-Agni, my enemies, who are far away, be destroyed.
1.1.13.6	You are Vasu, you are Upavasu, you are Visvavasu. Having gone away with the waters, may the Vala, having become the spotted one, go to the Maruts. Come to us with rain.
1.1.13.7	The gods who are the most excellent, the most excellent in the assembly, the most excellent on the grass, singing this speech, all together, may the gods, the immortal ones, rejoice.
1.1.13.8	The gods who know the path, having found the path, may they find the path, O Mind-lord, may they find this sacrifice in heaven among the gods, in the wind, svāhā.
1.2.1.1	O divine waters, purify me. May you be sweet and full of sweetness for the sake of the divine sacrifice.
1.2.1.2	O plant, protect him, O one who is self-established, do not harm him. With that form of yours which is most auspicious, touch him.
1.2.1.3	O one who hears the gods, let these be poured out. May there be well-being for the one who is to come.
1.2.1.4	The golden-hued, pure, shining waters have gone forth, having abandoned sin. The hundred purifying waters have spread out. May the god Savitar purify me with them.
1.2.1.5	May the waters, my mothers, purify me with ghee. May the ghee-knowers purify me with ghee, may the goddesses carry all the filth. I come forth from them, pure and purified.
1.2.1.6	You are the protector of Vishnu, protect me. For you, O Agni, is the milk of the great ones, the sap of the waters and plants. You are the giver of radiance, give me radiance.
1.2.1.7	You are the tip of Vritra, the protector of my sight. I have placed my enemies and ill-will within you, with the great mountain. You are the protector, protect my sight.
1.2.1.8	May the Lord of Mind purify you, may the Lord of Speech purify you.
1.2.1.9	May the god Savitar purify you with the stainless purifying (rite), with the rays of the golden Surya.
1.2.1.10	O Lord of Purification, may I be able to purify you with that purifying (rite) for whom you purify.
1.2.2.1	To Akriti, to Pratiti, to Agni, svāhā! To Medha, to Manas, to Agni, Svāhā! To Dikṣā, to Tapas, to Agni,Svāhā! To Sarasvatī, to Pūṣan, to Agni,svāhā!
1.2.2.2	The goddesses, the great, the all-shining, the heaven and earth, the space in between, may Brihaspati increase us with oblations, svāhā!
1.2.2.3	The mortal has gone to the friendship of the Lord of the world, the universal one, seeking wealth and prosperity. Choose the splendour, you prosper. Svāhā.
1.2.2.4	You are established in the art of Ṛk and Sāman. I begin with you. Protect me from all calamities. You are the protection of Viṣṇu. Grant me protection. Obeisance to you. Do not harm me.
1.2.2.5	O God, teach me this wisdom, O Varuna, the wise, by which we may cross all evil. I would ascend the boat of the good saviour.
1.2.2.6	The Sun, the Fire, Heaven and Earth, the Sky, the Plants, the Lords of Initiation, may they call me to the Initiation. O God Savitar, thou art the Lord of Initiation. Protect me thus, as thou art. The Angiras's energy, the one with the golden locks, may it bestow energy on me. Thou art the womb of Indra. Protect me. To thee be reverence. Do not harm me.
1.2.2.7	Make agriculture very fruitful, make the plants very fragrant. Bind the knot of this (cow) which is in her heart, which is in her mind.
1.2.2.8	You are the great one, you are the one belonging to the forest, you are the bright one. Give brightness to the sacrificer. Protect from the shining of the stars.
1.2.2.9	We invoke you, O gods, for the good, for the sacrifice, for what you, O gods are ready to give. We invoke you, the gods, who are worthy of sacrifice.
1.2.2.10	Svāhā to the sacrifice, Svāhā to the mind, Svāhā from heaven, Svāhāfrom the earth, Svāhāto the sky, Svāhā, I take from the wind. Svāhā.
1.2.3.1	From the proximity of the stars, may you perform the vow.
1.2.3.2	We desire the divine mind, the gentle, for our prosperity, the giver of splendour, the carrier of sacrifice, the giver of good ford, may it be in our power.
1.2.3.3	Those gods who are born of mind, who are yoked with mind, who are skilful, who are the fathers of skill, may they protect us, may they guard us, to them salutations.
1.2.3.4-5	May the waters be auspicious for us, your own, in our bellies, auspicious, with plenty of food, with plenty of wealth, with plenty of offspring, with plenty of life, with plenty of strength, with plenty of light, with plenty of radiance, with plenty of happiness, with plenty of joy, with plenty of peace, with plenty of prosperity, with plenty of good fortune, with plenty of goodness, with plenty of bliss, with plenty of well-being, with plenty of welfare, with plenty of safety, with plenty of protection, with plenty of freedom from harm, with plenty of health, with plenty of healing, with plenty of success, with plenty of victory, with plenty of growth, with plenty of increase, with plenty of abundance, with plenty of nourishment, with plenty of enjoyment, with plenty of pleasure, with plenty of delight, with plenty of satisfaction, with plenty of contentment, with plenty of love, with plenty of affection, with plenty of friendship, with plenty of harmony, with plenty of concord, with plenty of unity, with plenty of union, with plenty of communion, with plenty of fellowship, with plenty of companionship, with plenty of togetherness, with plenty of oneness, with plenty of non-separation, with plenty of absence of separation, with plenty of presence, with plenty of nearness, with plenty, with plenty of everything, with plenty of all, with plenty of the whole, with plenty of every part, with plenty of each part, with plenty, O Agni, of everything, with everything,
1.2.3.6	Again the mind, again the life, again the breath has come, again the intention has come. May the invincible Vaisvānara, the protector of the body, remove all evils.
1.2.3.7	You, O Agni, are the protector of vows, O god among mortals. You are to be worshipped in sacrifices. Hold the vow in us.
1.2.3.8	Pusan, the lord of the shining ones, Soma, the lord of gifts, may he, the giver, be exalted by giving. May we be exalted by life and radiance. May Soma give more and more. The god Savitar, the bestower of wealth, Vayu, the protector, Tvashtri, the lord, Pusan, the receiver, the goddesses, the waters, the foot of the waters, the wave, the one who is powerful, the most intoxicating, him I approach. Those of the animals, those of speech, those of the bull, those of the sun, those of the bright one, those I send forth according to your share. May the auspicious ones return to us. To Vayu thee! To Varuna thee! To Rudra thee! To Nirriti thee! To Indra thee! To the Maruts thee!
1.2.4.1	This is thy body, O Shukra, this is thy lustre. By it, O shining one, go to the light. Thou art held by the mind, approved by Vishnu. May the true offspring of her, the womb, be thine. Svāhā! Thou art Shukra, thou art Chandra, thou art Amrita, thou art Vaishvadeva, thou art Chit, thou art Mana, thou art Dhī, thou art Dakshina, thou art Yajnya, thou art Kshatriya, thou art Aditi, thou art the one with two heads. May she be auspicious for us, auspicious for us. May Mitra bind thee on the path, may Pūshan protect thee on the way. May thy mother, thy father, thy brother born of the same womb, thy friend, thy companion, O Goddess, may she approach the God. May Rudra turn thee back to Indra, the Soma. Return safely with the Soma. Thou art Vasu, thou art Rudra, thou art Adithi, thou art Aditya, thou art Chandra. May Brihaspati delight thee with good fortune. May Rudra with the Vasus praise thee. I have sought thee on the head of the earth, in the place of the Yajnya, of the Ida, the one with ghee. Svāhā. May thou delight in us. Thy wealth, thy wealth, thy wealth. Do not be separated from the prosperity of wealth. We praise thee, O Tvashtri, the one with the Vasus.
1.2.5.1	The eye of the sun, the tip of the eye of Agni, when thou art led by the Etasas, shining, by the wise,
1.2.5.2	We have found the path, the path of welfare, the path of no toil, whereby one may encompass all foes, and win wealth.
1.2.5.3	Thou art ours. Thy cup is bright. Hail! To thee from the wise.
1.2.5.4	I worship that God Savitar, the giver of wealth, the giver of truth, the giver of gems, the giver of good counsel, whose counsel shines upward in the light, in the light of the sun, the giver of gold, the giver of compassion, the giver of heaven.
1.2.5.5	For the creatures, for you, may the creatures follow you. Protect the creatures. The bright one, for you, the bright one, the bright one for the bright one, for the bright one. The moon, for the moon, the moon for the moon, for the nectar, for the nectar. I buy the nectar, O divine Soma, for your power. The moon, the moon, the nectar, the nectar. The moon, O Soma, for the moon. The moon, I buy the moon. The nectar, I buy the nectar. The nectar, the nectar, for you. The moon, your form, is the body of Tapas, the color of Prajapati. The thousand-nourishing ones are growing. Buy with the supreme animal. Buy for us. Your friend, the good-speaking, the good-bearing, the good-carrying, the good-holding, the good-supporting, the good-shining, the good-burning, the good-glowing, the good-blazing, the good-radiating, the good-luminous, the good-bright, the good-brilliant, the good-splendid, the good-glorious, the good-resplendent, the good-shimmering, the good-sparkling, the good-flashing, the good, the good-looking, the good-seeing, the good-viewing, the good-observing, the good. These are your Soma-buying ones. Protect them, lest they be harmed. May the evil eye not harm you.
1.2.6.1	Thou art thine own, thou art thine own, born for our work. I take thee with truth; protect us with truth. Come, O Mitra, to the good friend, with the nourishing of wealth. Enter the right thigh of Indra, the shining one, the shining one; the pleasant one, the pleasant one.
1.2.6.2	With the life of the plants, with the juice of the plants, from the abode of Parjanya, from the immortal, have I come.
1.2.6.3	Go to the heaven of Aditi.
1.2.6.4	The bull supported the heaven, he measured the atmosphere, he settled the extent of the earth. He settled all the worlds, the emperor. All those are the ordinances of Varuna.
1.2.6.5	In the forests he spread the space, the strength in the steeds, the milk in the cows, the mind in the hearts, Varuna in the directions, Agni in the sky, the sun in heaven, Soma in the mountains.
1.2.6.6	You are the bearer, O bearer, bear him who has borne us, and whom we have borne, bear him.
1.2.6.7	You are Varuna's (noose). May Varuna strengthen you. You are Varuna’s pillar.
1.2.6.8	Go forth, O Lord of the world, to all the worlds. May not those who are hostile to us, or those who are hostile, or those who wish us ill, know you.
1.2.6.9	Having become a hawk, fly away to the house of the sacrificer, prepared for the drinking of the gods.
1.2.6.10	Obeisance to Mitra and Varuna, to the great god, to the one who sees, to the one whose sight is far-reaching, to the leader of the divine race, to the son of heaven, to Surya, praise him.
1.2.6.11	You are Varuna's, may Varuna establish you. You are the raising of Varuna's pillar.
1.2.6.12	The noose of Varuna is loosed, the noose of Varun is loosed. Obeisance to the noose of varuna. Thou art the body of Agni, for Vishnu thee. Thou art the Body of Soma, for Vishnu thee, Thou art the hospitality of the guest, for Vishnu thee; Thou art for Agni, for the giver of wealth, for Vishnu thee Thou art for the hawk, for the bearer of Soma, for Vishņu thee. Thou art Varuna, thou art Varuna, the upholder of vows. Thou hast taken thy seat in the abode of truth of Varuna. For Varuna thee.
1.2.7.1	You are the womb of Agni, you are the testicles, you are Urvashi, you are life, you are Pururava, you are the Gayatri, you are the Tristubh, you are the Jagati.
1.2.7.2	Be of one mind, of one desire, of one thought, of one intention.
1.2.7.3	Do not injure our sacrifice, do not injure our sacrificer. O you two who know all, be auspicious to us today.
1.2.7.4	Agni, Agni moves forward, entered by the sages, this son of the king.
1.2.7.5	To him we offer oblations, may we not miss our share among the gods.
1.2.7.6	I take thee for the falling down, I take thee for falling down, for Tanunaptra, for the strong, for the strong one, for the strongest, for the unassailable, for the unassailed, for the strength of the gods, for the one who protects from curses, for the one not cursed.
1.2.7.7	May the lord of vows approve of this vow of mine, may the lord of consecration approve of this consecration of mine. I have approached the truth in the right way. Do thou, O Agni, lord of vows, bestow on me good fortune. This body of mine is in thee, O Agni, the lord of vows. This body of thine is in me. Together with thee, O lord of vows, may the vows of us both be fulfilled. The juice has been increased for thee, O divine Soma, for Indra, the knower of one wealth. Thou hast been increased for Indra. Indra has been increased for you. Do thou increase thy friends with wisdom. May the divine Soma bestow on thee good fortune. May thy pressing be auspicious. May thy goal be auspicious. May the desires be auspicious. May our desires be auspicious. Do thou send forth the boons. To Bhaga, to the speakers of truth, salutations. Salutations to heaven, salutations to earth.
1.2.7.8	O Agni, the body that is most excellent, most hidden, that is thine, the fierce speech thou hast removed.
1.2.7.9	O Agni, the body which is thine, which is thine, O Agni, which is thine. O Agni, the Rudra body, by that protect us. To that be svāhā.
1.2.8.1	You are my protector, you are my protector. Protect me from distress, protect me from affliction. O Agni Angiras, who is above this earth, come with your life and name. May the Vasus take you with the Gayatri metre. May you be blessed by the lord of sacrifice. Whatever is your inviolable abode, by that I have placed you. O Agni Angira, who is above the second earth, come with life and name. The Rudras take you with the Tristubh metre. May you prosper by the lord of the sacrifice. Whatever is thy inviolable abode, thereby have I placed thee. O Agni Angiras, who is above that third earth, come with thy life and name. Let the Adityas take thee with the Jagati metre. May you flourish by the lord of sacrifices. Whatever is thy inviolate abode, thereby have placed thee. O Vidyut Agni, whose name is Nabha, thou art the lioness, thou art the she-buffalo. Purify for the gods, purify for the gods. May the Indra-voiced ones protect thee from the east with the Vasus. May the fathers protect thee from the south with the mind's speed. May the Rudras protect thee from the west with the Pracetasas. May Visvakarman protect thee from the north with the Adityas. Thou art the lioness. Thou art the destroyer of enemies. Svāhā! Thou art the lion-ess, thou art desirous of wealth and prosperity. Svāhā. Thou art the she-lioness, thou art desiring good offspring. Svāhā, thou art the She-lioness, desiring the Adityas, desiring one's own people. Svāhā thou art the She lioness, bring the gods to the sacrificer who worships. Svāhā to the beings. Thou art the universal life. Thou art the firm earth. Thou art the steady earth. Thou art firm in the sky. Thou art the unshakable earth. Thou art heaven. Thou art Agni's ash. Thou art Agni’s dung. Thou art Agniʼs nest.
1.2.9.2	They yoke the mind, they yoke the thoughts, the seers, the wise, of the great seer. One, knowing the ways, has taken up the office of the Hotri. The great praise of the god Savitar.
1.2.9.3	Drive away the fear of the young. Do not turn back. Go to the house of Soma. Go to the place prepared by Indra.
1.2.9.4	This is Vishnu, who strode thrice, and placed his foot in three places. He has covered the dust of this earth.
1.2.9.5	The earth, the giver of food, the giver of wealth, the giver of cattle, the giver of happiness, the giver of fame to Manu, the one who has covered the heaven and earth, O Vishnu, you have spread the earth with your rays.
1.2.9.6	O god, speak well, O one who is difficult to conquer, O one who conquers the enemies.
1.2.9.7	May the hero be born to us, the one who is skilled in his work, the protector from censure, the one who does not censure, the one whom many support, the one who controls many.
1.2.9.8	You are the Vishnu-weapon. May Vishnu protect you.
1.2.9.9	O Vishnu, from heaven, or from earth, or from the great expanse of Vishnu, the sky, stretch forth thy hands, with many gifts, and give from the right and from the left.
1.2.9.10	What are the deeds of Vishnu shall I relate? He who measured the earthly regions, who stretched out the upper abode, the three-fold, mighty, and far-reaching one.
1.2.9.11	Thou art the back of Vishnu, thou art the belly of Vishnu, thou standest in the ship of Vishnu, thou are the thread of Vishnu, thou the firm of Vishnu, thou of Vishnu, thou belongest to Vishnu.
1.2.9.12	That Vishnu is praised by his valour, the fierce beast, the most excellent of mountains, whose three strides cover all the worlds.
1.2.10.1	With the impulse of the divine Savitr, with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of Pusan, I take thee. Thou art the pestle, thou art the pestle-woman. I cut off the neck of the Rakshas. I cut off his neck who is hostile to me, whether he be my friend or not. Thou art great, thou art the great one, thou art the Great One. Speak to Indra the speech that destroys the Rakshas, that destroys the Vala, that belongs to Vishnu. Thou art the overlord, the slayer of foes. I cut off those Vala-snares which my friend or my foe has laid for me. The Vala-snare that was laid for the ankle is cast out. Thou art the self-ruler, the slayer of the hostile. I cut off these Vala-snakes which my kinsman or my non-kinsman has laid for me, the Vala-snagre that was laid for my knee is cast out. thou art the overlord of the sacrifice, the slayer of reproach. I cut off this Vala-snaire which my enemy or my non-enemy has laid for me; the Vala-snake that was laid for me at my navel is cast out. The overlord of all, the slayer of him who is hostile, I cut off these Valas which my relative or my non-relative has laid for me.
1.2.10.2	Touch these for life and radiance. You are the treasure of the gods, the destroyer of enemies. Destroy all the enmities that we have created.
1.2.10.3	This is the treasure of the Gods, whatever is hidden. Now, making the four directions, make the enemies go down.
1.2.11.1	For earth thee, for the atmosphere thee, for heaven thee, may the worlds where the Fathers dwell be purified. Thou art Yava, thou hast driven away our foes, thou hast driven off our enemies. I spread thee on the world where the Fathers dwell.
1.2.11.2	Grow up, O tree, with the divine grass, the Maruts have pressed thee down. May Mitra-Varuna press thee down with the firm law.
1.2.11.3	I enclose thee in the region of Brahman and in the region of the Kshatra. Firm up Brahman, firm up Kshatra, firm up the prosperity of wealth, firm up progeny, firm up the kinsmen for this sacrificer.
1.2.11.4	O heaven and earth, be filled with ghee. You are the shade of all people.
1.2.11.5	May these songs of thine, O lover of praise, be on all sides, for the aged, may the agreeable ones be agreeable to the aged.
1.2.11.6	For Indra thee, thou art the thread of Indra, thou art the firm one of Indra, thou belongest to Indra. I sprinkle thee, the destroyer of Rakshas and Valagas, belonging to Vishnu. I besprinkle thee, the destroyer, etc. I besprinkte thee, the destroyer. I spread thee, the destroyer belonging to Vishnu. The destroyer of Rakshasa and Valagas, I spread thee, belonging to Vishnu.
1.2.12.1	Thou art Vibhu, thou art Pravahana, thou art Agni, thou art Havyavahana, thou art Svatra, thou art Praceta, thou art Tutha, thou art Vishva Veda, thou art Avayu, thou art Duvasva, thou art Anghari, thou art Bambhari, thou art Ushis, thou art Kavi, thou art Shunthyu, thou art Marjalyu, thou art Samra, thou art Krsanu, thou art Parishadyu, thou art Asthayu, thou art Nabha, thou art Pratakva, thou art Asammast, thou art Havisudana, thou art Sagara, thou art Vishvavedas, thou art Ritadhama, thou art Svarjyotis, thou art Samudra, thou art Vishvavya, thou art Aja, thou art Ekapat, thou art Ahi, thou art Budhnya, thou art Kavya, thou art Kavayavahana, protect me with the Rudra army, O Agni, increase me, salutations to thee, do not injure me.
1.2.13.1	O Soma, thou art the protector from the harm done by others, from the harm done to one's own body. Thou art the protector from all harm. Svāhā.
1.2.13.2	May he who is pleased accept the ghee. Svāhā
1.2.13.3	O Agni, lead us by the good path, O God, knowing all ways, and having known all paths, do thou remove our sin, the sin that we have committed knowingly or unknowingly. We shall offer thee the greatest praise.
1.2.13.4-5	O Vishnu, extend yourself widely, extend yourself widely for our prosperity. Drink ghee in the ghee-filled forest. O Agni, go to the lord of sacrifice. Svāhā. O Agni! Worship Varuna, the great, the worthy of praise, the guardian of immortality. May he grant us protection with three shelters. May the heaven and earth protect us from above.
1.2.13.6	The sky, the heaven, is the womb of Aditi. May it always be for us. O god Savitar, this Soma is thine. Guard it. May not the evil-eyed harm thee. May not the ill-wisher harm thee. This Soma, O god, is thine. May it be for us. This man is thine. May he be for us. May it be with us. May it not be without us. May it come to us. May it go to us. May we be with it. May it be ours. May it be in us. May it belong to us. May the Soma be ours. May we be the Soma's. May we be in the Soma. May the Soma belong to us. O god, may we be in thy heaven. May we be thine. May we be thy heaven. May the heaven be ours. May the heaven belong to us. We are the heaven. May the Soma, the heaven, be ours. May heaven be ours. We are heaven. May heaven be thine. May heaven belong to thee. May heaven be in thee. May heaven belong unto thee. May heaven come to thee. May we be heaven. May heaven belong 
1.2.14.1	I have gone beyond others, I have not gone to others. I have found you before others, above others, below others. We enjoy you for the sake of divine worship. For Vishnu, for Vishnu, for you.
1.2.14.2	O Vishnu, expand yourself widely. Make room for us widely. Drink ghee in the ghee-forest. Go to the lord of sacrifice. Svāhā.
1.2.14.3	O plant, protect him, O one who is self-established, do not injure him. With that form of yours which is most auspicious, touch him.
1.2.14.4	The one who is self established, with sharp radiance, has directed you to great good fortune. Do not injure him with the front part towards heaven, with the middle part towards the atmosphere, and with the rear part towards the earth. Come into being. Go to the shining. O tree, grow with a hundred branches, with a thousand branches, may we grow.
1.2.14.5	May the worlds, the seats of the Fathers, be purified for thee. Thou art Yava. May Yava remove our hatred, may Yava remove our enmity. I spread thee on the world which is the seat of the Fathers.
1.2.14.6	Thou art the leader of thy own people. Thou shalt stand on him who is the leader of the leaders. May he prosper thee.
1.2.14.7	O Agni, do thou fill the heaven and earth with ghee. May the divine Savitar anoint thee with honey.
1.2.14.8	Thou art the cup of Indra. Make the plants very sweet. Thou hast filled the heaven with thy front, the atmosphere with thy middle, and thou hast strengthened the earth with thy rear.
1.2.14.9	We seek your abodes for the sake of going. Where the cows are of many horns, without weariness, there shines the supreme abode of that Vishnu of many forms.
1.2.14.10	Behold the deeds of Vishnu, from where he saw the vows, the friend of Indra, yoked to his chariot.
1.2.14.11	I enclose thee in the region of Brahman, in the region of the Kshatra. Firm up Brahman, firm up Kshatra, firm up the prosperity of wealth, firm up offspring, firm up the kinsmen for this sacrificer.
1.2.14.12	That is the supreme place of Vishnu, the wise see it with Sachi, as the eye is stretched out in the sky.
1.2.14.13	You are the fire of the sacrifice. May the divine classes of people go around you. May the human beings go around this sacrificer, along with the prosperity of wealth and progeny. May your smoke go to heaven from the heavenly regions. May the light go to the atmosphere. May the ashes go to the earth. Svāhā.
1.2.15.1	I have taken thee for the Iṣa. Thou hast gone up to the gods, to the divine hosts, to the bright, wise fires. O Brihaspati, with thy support, thou hast taken the treasures. Thy offering has been gratified. O god Tvaṣṭr, thou hast taken treasures. May the Revatī (stars) rejoice in the fight. I have taken thee in the impulse of the god Savitr, in the arms of the Asvins, in the hands of Pūṣan. With the noose of the god-offered truth, I release thee. For him whom thou dost delight, I have taken thee. The human beings have taken thee. I sprinkle thee, agreeable to the waters and plants. May thy mother think of thee, thy father, thy brother born of the same womb, thy friend, thy companion, thy kinsman. Thou art the leader of the gods. Thou art the god. Thou art the sacrificer. Thou art the waters. Thou art the great one. Thou art the agreeable offering. May the divine waters be gratified. May thy Vāyu go with the wind. May thy limbs go with the sacrifices. May thy lord of sacrifice go with the blessing. Anointed with ghee, may ye protect the cattle.
1.2.15.2	Those who, when he was being bound, looked on with mind and eye, the god Agni, the first, released him, Prajapati, desiring offspring.
1.2.15.3	O Revati, O Pradha, enter the lord of sacrifice, the lord of the atmosphere, with the god Vata.
1.2.15.4	With your own self, with this oblation, may you be the younger of the younger, may you be in the lord of sacrifice. May you be in the sacrifice.
1.2.15.5	You are the knower of heaven, having known heaven, go to heaven, heaven for me, heaven for the cattle. You are the know-er of the world, having known the world, go to the world, world for me, world for the cattle. You are the knower-of-the-lord, having known the lord, go to the lord, lord for me, lord for the cattle. Knower of the path, having known the path, go to the path, path for me, path for the cattle.
1.2.15.6	You do not die, nor will you die. You seek the god in the auspicious paths. Where the well-doers go, not the ill-doers, there may the god Savitar place you.
1.2.15.7	The pacifiers have approached the sacrifice, connected with the gods. Release the animal from the noose, the lord of the sacrifice from the bondage.
1.2.15.8	Aditi has loosed these bonds. The bonds of the animal, from the Lord of Animals, he who hates us, may he fall down. On him we loose these bonds.
1.2.16.1	Obeisance to you, O Goddesses, the Waters, who are not to be crossed, go forth to the sacrificer along the stream of ghee, with the nourishment of wealth. You are the pure Goddesses, the waters. You are the purifiers. We are the purifiers, the protectors. May we be your protectors. Do not injure his speech. Do not injure this his breath. Do not injure the eye of this (sacrificer). Do not injure the ear of this (sacrificier). Whatever is harsh and whatever is fixed in him, may he purify it with this (water). May he be pure for the gods. Do not injure any part of his body. Do not injure its movements. Do not injure (his) navel. Do not injure penis. Do not injure anus. Be auspicious to the waters.
1.2.16.2-3	O herb, protect him, O one who is self-established, do not injure him. With that form of yours which is most auspicious, touch him. You are the share of the earth, the Rakshas. This I am repelling, this I am leading to the lowest darkness. For Indra, for Agni, for Soma, for Vishnu, for Varuna, for Yama, for Aryaman, for Mitra, for Vivasvat, for Savitar, for Sarasvati, for Pusan, for Rudra, for the Maruts, for the Vasus, for the Adityas, for the Rudras, for the Vishvas, for the All-gods, for the All, for the All Gods, for the All. For Indra, for Agni... For the All-gods... For the Vasus... For the Vishvas... For the Rudras... For the Maruts... For the Adityas... For the Visvas... For all the gods... For the all... For the earth... For the sky... For the heaven... For the sun... For the moon... For the stars... For the wind... For the waters... For the plants... For the herbs... For the trees... For the fruits... For the grains... For the food... For the drink... For the cattle... For the sheep... For the goats... For the horses... For the donkeys... For the camels... For the elephants... For the birds... For the fish... For the bees... For the insects... For the snakes...
1.2.16.4	May the heaven and earth be anointed with ghee. For him, thee, agreeable, salutations to the sight of the sun.
1.2.16.5	Go to the firm sky. The Rakshas is repelled, the enmity is repelled. The Vayu's embryos are released. The hostilities are released. Svāhā. Go to the upward sky, to the Marut, the divine, the going.
1.2.17.1	The offering is agreeable to the gods, with ghee. For him it is agreeable. You are Agni. May Agni receive you. The waters have united you. For Vāta's speed, for Pūshan's course, for warmth, for the waters, for the plants, for the sap, for the ghee, for the ghee-drinkers, for the fat, for the fat-drinkers, you are the oblation of the atmosphere. Svāhā to you, O Vāta, to the directions, to the intermediate directions, to the quarters, to the quarters above, to the quarters below, to the quarters around, to the quarters in front, to the quarters behind, to the quarters on the right, to the quarters to the left, to the quarters of the east, to the quarters belonging to the east, to Indra's out-breath, to the limbs, to the limbs. Indra's in-breath, to all the limbs, to all the parts, to the limbs has been established. Indra's through-breath, to every limb, to every part, has been established.
1.2.17.2	O Tvashtra, may thy good be abundant, and thy form be perfect, as thou goest to the gods. Thy friends, thy mother and thy father, may they rejoice in thee.
1.2.18.1	Go to the ocean, svāhā. Go to the atmosphere, svāhā, Go to the god Savitar, svāhā; Go to the day and night, svāhā Go to Mitra and Varuna, svāhā ; Go to heaven and earth, svāhā . Go to the metres, svāhā , Go to Soma, svāhā.; Go to the sacrifice, svāhā .; Go to the divine sky, svāhā ., Go to Agni Vaisvānara, svāhā., Control the mind and heart, for you to the plants.
1.2.18.2	O Varuna, O king, from this sin, from this sin of ours, do thou, O Varuna, release us. We have sinned against the waters, the sinless ones. From that, O Varuna release us.
1.2.18.3	Do thou, O Varupa, loosen the highest noose from us, the lowest, and the middle one for good. Then may we, O Aditya, be without sin in thy vow, and be free from sin towards Aditi.
1.2.18.4	May the good friends, not the bad friends, be the plants. May the bad friends be to him who hates us and whom we hate.
1.3.1.1	These waters are full of oblations, the oblation-bearing god is the sacrifice, the oblation is the dwelling, may the sun be full of oblations.
1.3.1.2	I place you in the seat of Agni, the one with the house of serpents, the portion of the gods. You are the portion of Indra and Agni, the portion of Mitra and Varuna, the portion of all the gods. You who are friendly, give friendship to the friendly.
1.3.1.3	To your heart, to your mind, to you the sky, to you the sun, this sacrifice upward, in the heaven, you present the office among the gods.
1.3.1.4	May Agni hear my invocation with the kindling-sticks, may the Waters and the Goddesses of Intellect hear, may the Stones hear, may the knowing Gravas hear my sacrifice, may the God Savitar hear my invocation.
1.3.1.5	The Goddesses, the Waters, the Waters' foot, the Wave, the most powerful, the most intoxicating, that is for the Gods, for the Shukra-drinkers, for those to whom belongs a share, Svāhā. You are the Karṣa. You have come to the Ocean, to the Unfailing, to the Vasus, to the Rudras, to the Adityas. You are the Pannijanis. The Vasus, the Rudras, the Adityas have stood by you, the Pannijanīs, on the Ocean, on the Gandharva-guarded, on the path of the Wind. The Wave, the most intoxicating of yours, the entire seed, is in your sight. The Wave follows in your sight.
1.3.1.6	O Agni, you have won the mortal in contests, you have won him in the races. He is the one who always knows the right time.
1.3.1.7	May I be agreeable to speech, may I be agreeable to the lord of speech. To that which is sweet in speech, svāhā! Svāhā to Sarasvatī!
1.3.2.1	O Nigraha, O Devashruta, do you satisfy me. Satisfy my life. Satisfy my breath. Satisfy my out-breath. Satisfy my through-breath. Satistify my sight. Satisfy my hearing. Satisfy my mind. Satisfy my speech. Satisfy my self. Satisfy my progeny. Satisfy my house. Satisfy my cattle. Satisfy me with my groups. Do not let me be thirsty. Satisfy me.
1.3.3.1	With the impulse of the divine Savitr, with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of Pusan, I take up the stone, the maker of sacrifice, for the gods. Make this sacrifice deep.
1.3.3.2	For Indra thee, the most excellent, the sweet, the milky, for Indra thee, the slayer of foes, for Indra thee who is rich in wealth, who is under the care of Rudra, for Indra thee under the care of the Adityas.
1.3.3.3	For Agni thee, for the giver of wealth, for Vishnu thee, for the hawk, for the Soma-bearer, for Vishnu thee.
1.3.3.4	Ye are the wives of the immortal, ye are the destroyers of Vritra, ye are the givers of wealth, ye are the goddesses, ye are the wives of heaven. Bring ye these goddesses to this sacrifice, invited, and drink ye Soma.
1.3.3.5	Whatever light of yours is in heaven, whatever is on earth, whatever is in the middle of the sky, thereby do thou make the lord of sacrifice rich in great wealth. To the one who is above, do thou say: "Do not be afraid, do not be anxious. Do thou bestow strength, do thou bestow strength upon us. O Dhishana, O Dhishana who is invoked, do thou invoke. Do thou bestow power, do thou bestow power upon us. May I not injure you. May you not injure us."
1.3.4.1	Flow for Vācaspati, purified by the rays of the sun, through the two rays of the sun.
1.3.4.2	You are the divine purifier of the gods, for whom you are a share.
1.3.4.3	Make the wishes sweet.
1.3.4.4	You are taken up.
1.3.4.5	Go to the expanse of heaven.
1.3.4.6	To all the divine and earthly powers.
1.3.4.7	May your mind be firm.
1.3.4.8	Svāhā to thee, O good-giver, to Surya.
1.3.4.9	To the gods, to thee, to the Marīci-s.
1.3.4.10	To Prāṇa thee.
1.3.4.11	To Soma, to thee, the name of Ādābhya, to that of thee, O Soma, to Soma, Svāhā.
1.3.4.12	The directions East, West, South, North, these directions may run towards thee.
1.3.4.13	O Amba, do not forget, do thou know thy friend.
1.3.5.1	Thou art taken with the Upayāma-mantra.
1.3.5.2	O Maghavan, do thou restrain within thee, protect the Soma, and be victorious in the rays of light, and offer the oblations.
1.3.5.3	I place within thee the heaven and earth, I place within thee the sky, the atmosphere, in union with the gods, the lower and the higher. O Maghavan, be thou pleased within the Antar-yamas.
1.3.5.4	O Agni, to thee, O Agni, to the Agni of the east, to the Agni in the east, to Agni, to the lord of the east, O Agni, O Agni, svāhā.
1.3.6.1	O Vayu, come to us with thy pure gifts. Thy thousand gifts, O universal giver, I approach thee, the drink which thou, O god, didst grant to the first drinker.
1.3.6.2	Thou art taken with the Upayāma-graha for Vayu.
1.3.6.3	Indra-Vayu, these are your draughts. Come with your bright rays. The drops of Soma praise you.
1.3.6.4	You are taken with the Upayāma-formula. For Indra-Vayu you are taken. This is your birthplace. For you who are of the same accord.
1.3.7.1	This Soma has been pressed for you, O Mitra-Varuna, for the growth of truth. May it be heard here.
1.3.7.2	You are taken with the Upayāma formula, for Mitra and Varuna, this is your birthplace, for the truthful ones.
1.3.8.1	The whip which is yours, O Asvins, is sweet, full of truth, with it you have mixed the sacrifice.
1.3.8.2	You are taken with the Upāyama formula, for the Asvins, this is your birth-place, for the sweet ones.
1.3.9.1	Thou art taken with the Upayāma formula for the gods. Thou art taken with Upayāma for the All-gods. Thou art taken for the All-Gods. For the All-Gods thee.
1.3.9.2	I have performed for the sons of Diti, for Aditi, for the widely-ruling, for the great, for the protectors, for those whose names are fixed in their abodes, for the living, for the world, by the minds of those who worship.
1.3.9.3	You are taken with the Upayāma formula. I take (Soma) in the great strides of Viṣṇu. This Soma is for you, O Viṣṇu of great strides. Protect it. May the evil-eyed not injure you. This is your wealth, the wealth in front, the protector of speech. May it protect my speech. This is your treasure, the treasure of knowledge, the protector of sight. May it protect sight. This is your possession, the possession of union, the protector of hearing. May it protect hearing.
1.3.10.1	This Vena was urged by Prsnigarbha, the luminous one, the son of Jarayu, in the chariot of the rays. This child, at the confluence of the waters and the sun, the Brahmins lick with their minds.
1.3.10.2	You are taken with the offering. This is your birthplace for heroism.
1.3.11.1	Him, the ancient, the former, the all-knowing, the most excellent king, the seat of sacrifice, the seer of heaven, the leader of the people, thou dost honour with thy speech, the swift conqueror, whom thou dost follow in the increase.
1.3.11.2	Thou art taken with the Upayâma-graha; this is thy birthplace; for the creatures thee.
1.3.12.1	May the two, Śaṇḍa and Marka, be removed with him, whom we hate. O Soma, O God, may we be the receivers of your unbroken, of your prosperity, of your good fortune.
1.3.12.2-3	Thou art the thunderbolt, the destroyer of the people. May the gods, the givers of light, unite thee. Thou art the thunderbolt. May the gods who give strength unite thee. Thou, the destroyer of people, art invincible. May the gods unite thee. Thou hast destroyed the people. Thou art the destroyer of the unvanquished. Thou art the invincible destroyer of the people, the destroyer of those who are not to be conquered. Thou art the irresistible destroyer of the people who are not to conquer. Thou art the indestructible destroyer of the people.
1.3.12.4	The two gods, shining like the sun, have united in the day. May they bestow life at the sacrifice, life at the sacrifice to the lord of sacrifice. May they place a male embryo in the womb of the cows. May they give life to the animals. You are the foundation of Sukra, you are the foundation of Mantha. The eunuch is banished, the impotent is banished, together with him whom we hate.
1.3.12.5	The first culture in this sacrifice, the highest, the most excellent, the most knowing, the middle one, Varuna, Mitra, Agni, to him Indra, to him Surya, offer the pressed (Soma).
1.3.13.1	The gods who are eleven in heaven, eleven on earth, eleven in the water, eleven in the great, those gods, may they enjoy this sacrifice.
1.3.13.2	This is the Upāṁśu-graha. Thou art the foremost, thou art the foremost of the sacrifice. Thou art the most excellent, thou art the most excellent of the sacrifice. Do thou stimulate the sacrifice, do thou stimulate the lord of sacrifice. Do thou protect the pressing-stones. May Viṣṇu protect thee from here. Do thou protect with thy power. This is thy birthplace. Thee to all the gods.
1.3.14.1	Thou art taken with the Upāṁshu-graha.
1.3.14.2	For Indra, for the great, for the giver of wealth, for the one who is worthy of praise, for the one whose life is the sacrifice, for the one to whom thy great life belongs, for Vishnu thee.
1.3.14.3	This is thy birthplace. Taken for Indra, thou art taken for the gods. I take thee for the gods, for the life of the gods. Thou art the renewed oblation. For the gods, for life of the gods, I fill thee for the life of sacrifice.
1.3.15.1	The head of heaven, the delight of earth, Vaiśvānara Agni born of truth, the wise, the sovereign, the guest of men, the gods have placed near the vessel.
1.3.15.2	You are taken with the Upayāma-graha. For Vaiśvānaran thee.
1.3.15.3	You are the firm one, the firm one of the firm ones, the most firm of the unmoving ones, the most unmoving of the firm ones. This is your birthplace. For Vaisvānara you.
1.3.15.4	We lead Soma with the firm oblation for you, as all people may be well-disposed towards us at the meeting.
1.3.15.5	In heaven, the heavenly ones; in the atmosphere, the atmospheric ones; on earth, the earthly ones.
1.3.16.1	Thou art taken with the offering-spoon. For Madhu thee, for Madhu thee, For Sukra thee, for Sukra thee, For Nabhasa thee, for Nabhasa thee, For Usha thee, for Usha thee, For Urja thee, for Urja thee, For Sahas thee, for Sahas thee, For Tapas thee, for Tapas thee.
1.3.17.1	Indra and Agni, the two have come to the offered Soma, the most desirable in heaven, to be drunk by those who desire it.
1.3.17.2	Thou art taken with the Upayâma-graha. This is thy birthplace. To Indra and Agni thee.
1.3.18.1	The Omas, the holders of the tribes, all the gods, have come to the Soma of the giver of gifts, the giver.
1.3.18.2	You are taken with the Upayāma formula. For all the gods thee. This is thy birthplace. For all the Gods thee.
1.3.19.1	O Indra, here protect the Soma as thou didst drink it at Śāryāta, according to thy will. The wise, the givers of good gifts, O hero, find shelter in thy protection.
1.3.19.2	Thou art taken with the Upayāmas. For Indra thee, for Indra the lord of Maruts. This is thy place. For Indra thee the lord of Marutas.
1.3.20.1	The mighty one was born, the strong, the swift, the gentle, the most powerful, the most abundant, the most exalted, the Maruts have increased Indra here. The mother has produced the hero, the most productive one.
1.3.20.2	Taken with the Upayāma formula, for Indra thee, for Indra thee who has the Maruts. This is thy place, for Indra thee with the Maruts.
1.3.21.1	The Marut-possessed, bull, the grown, the unvanquished, the divine, the ruling Indra, the all-powerful, in the new assembly, the fierce, the strong, him I invoke here.
1.3.21.2	Taken up with the Upayāmas, for Indra thee, for Indra thee who is the lord of the Maruts, this is thy birth-place, for Indra thee the lord of the
1.3.22.1	Maruts. O Indra, lord of the Marut hosts, bull for battle, drink the Soma, day after day, for joy. Pour down the wave of honey in thy belly. Thou art the king of the pressed juices.
1.3.22.2	Taken with the Upayāma formula, for Indra, for thee, for Indra, the lord of Maruts, this is thy birthplace, for Indra, lord of Maruts.
1.3.23.1	O Indra, with the Maruts, thy companion, drink Soma, O slayer of Vritra, O hero, O wise one, slay the enemies, drive away the foes, and then make us free from fear on all sides.
1.3.23.2	Taken with the Upayāma, for thee Indra, for thee Indra with the Maruts, this is thy birthplace, for thee Indra and the Maruts.
1.3.24.1	I am Indra, who with strength, like Parjanya with rain, has grown with praises of the calf.
1.3.24.2	Taken with the Upayâma, for thee Mahendra, this is thy birth-place, for thee Mahândra.
1.3.25.1	Indra, the great, like a man, the leader of men, with his two forms, with his irresistible strength, has grown in our midst for strength. May he be wide, mighty, great, for the doers of good deeds.
1.3.25.2	Thou art taken with the Upayāma-graha. For Mahendra thee. This is thy birthplace. For Mahendra, thee.
1.3.26.1	O Indra, you are never stingy. You bestow on the worshipper. O bountiful one, will you come near? Or will your gift be given away by the god?
1.3.26.2	You are taken up with the Upayāma-mantra. For the Ādityas you.
1.3.26.3	You never let go. You protect both births. The fourth is the Āditya-pressing. That is your power. The immortal stands in heaven.
1.3.26.4	You are taken with the Upayāma formula for the Ādityas.
1.3.26.5	May the sacrifice be agreeable to the gods, may the Ādityās be propitious to you, may your good intention turn towards you, even if it is beyond the reach of evil.
1.3.26.6	I am beyond, I am below, I am the king of the universe. I saw the sun on both sides. What is the sky, that became our father.
1.3.26.7	Lift up the earth, break the sky, the divine heaven. The lord of the divine sky, the lord of the shield, has risen.
1.3.27.1	O Savitar, with your unfailing and auspicious protectors, do thou today protect us for growth. With your golden tongue, for the new light, may the evil-wisher not injure us.
1.3.27.2	You are taken with the Upayāma formula. You are Savitra, the generator of people. Generate the sacrifice, generate the lord of sacrifice. Protect the pressing (of Soma). May Vishnu protect you from here. You protect with power.
1.3.28.1	You are taken with the Upāyama formula.
1.3.28.2	You are Suśarman, the well-established one. Obeisance to the great-breasted one.
1.3.28.3	This is your birthplace. For all the gods.
1.3.29.1	You are taken with the Upayāma formula, for the son of Brihaspati, for Indra, the lord of Indra.
1.3.29.2	I shall take the Patnīvāntha Graha for prosperity.
1.3.29.3	O Agni, with your wife, drinking together with Tvashtri, drink Soma.
1.3.30.1	You are taken with the Upāyama formula, you are Hari, the one who yokes Hari, the one with Hari, the one standing for Hari, the praised Stoma, the praised Uktha, the praised Yajus.
1.3.30.2	May I attain the Graha of Harivanta, the one who is taken by Harivata, the one who has Hari.
1.3.30.3	The Soma-pressed juices of the tawny ones, the tawny ones, for Indra, for wealth, for nourishment, for you.
1.3.31.1	O Agni, with the Pavamāna (chant) you have brought the life-giving juices, the strength and food. Do thou ward off the evil-doers.
1.3.31.2	Thou art taken with the Upāṁśu formula. For Agni, the long-lived one, this is thy birthplace. For Agni, for the long-lived.
1.3.32.1	The strength of this one, the brilliance, which he has brought together, Indra, like a shield, over the two worlds.
1.3.32.2	You are taken with the Upayāma-mantra, for Indra, for your strength. This is your birthplace, for Indra, your strength.
1.3.33.1	The signs of this one were seen, the rays, shining like fires, following the people.
1.3.33.2	You are taken with the Upayāma formula, for Surya, for you who shine, this is your birthplace, for Surya, you who shine.
1.3.34.1	Indra, the blazing one, the bearer, of invincible strength, the praises of the sages and the sacrifices of humans.
1.3.34.2	You are taken with the Upāyama formula, for Indra, for you who delight in the Hari, this is your birth place, for Indra, you who delight in Hari.
1.3.35.1	You are taken with the Upayāmas. For Prajapati thee, for the luminous one, I take the luminous one, the true one for the gods, for Daksha, for the one who increases Daksha, for Agni-invokers, for the ones with true life, for Indra-chieftains, for Varuna-rulers, for the wind-blowers, for the ones whose self is Parjanya, for the earth, for the atmosphere, for the sky, for the waters, for the plants, for the trees, for the breath, for the out-breath, for the through-breath, for existence, for non-existence, for the existent, for the non-existent, for the one by whom the offspring were born without a break, to him thee, to Prajapati, to the one of all work, to the one who has all forms, to the one with all space, I offer the extensive portion, svāhā.
1.3.35.2	The three kindling-sticks of Agni, the son of Parjanya, the wise ones made for the immortal. Of them they placed one in the mortal world, and two went up to the world of the mortals.
1.3.36.1	May Agni from the morning pressing protect us, the all-pervading, the all-prosperous, the all-generating, may that purifier bestow wealth on us. May we be long-lived and have food together.
1.3.36.2	I offer thee to Agni with the Gayatri metre. I offer thee to Indra with the Triṣṭubh metre. I offer Thee to the Ādityas with the Jagatī metre. I offer the Rishis to thee in the path of the Rishis. I offer the Mandas to thee in the Path of the Mandas. I offer the Bhandanas to thee in the Bhandana path. I offer the Pūtanas to thee in Pūtanas path. I offer thee the Pastyas in the path of Pastyas. I offer thee Madhughas in the path of Madhughas. I offer thee Devayānas in the path of Devayānas. Thou art taken with a support. I take thee, O bright one, for the bright one, in the rays of the sun, in the form of the day.
1.3.36.3	The streams of heaven have flowed down to the sea.
1.3.36.4	The form of the bull shines in the directions, great, in the minds of the Vasus, in the work of the Rudras, and in the minds of Adityas. I offer you to Indra, the lord of the universe, O Soma, the god. O Soma, the lord, approach the abode of Agni with the Gayatri metre. O Soma, approach the abode Indra with the Trishtup metre. O Soma the god, approach the path of the beloved of all the gods with the Jagat metre.
1.3.37.1	The bearers carry the god Jātavedas, the Sun, for all to see.
1.3.37.2	The wondrous army of the gods has risen, the eye of Mitra, Varuna and Agni. He has embraced the sky, the earth and the atmosphere. The Sun is the self of the moving and standing world.
1.3.37.3	Go to heaven, go to heaven. I approach you with your form by your form, by your age by your age. May Tutha, knowing all, divide it. On the highest heaven of earth.
1.3.37.4	This is your gift, O Agni, that has fallen from Soma. Lead it by the path of Mitra.
1.3.37.5	May this Agni be our protector, may he go forth conquering the foes, may he conquer the enemies, rejoicing, may he win the prize in the contest for the prize.
1.3.37.6	Following the path of truth, with gifts of moon-light, may I prosper today, the Brahman, the fatherly, the father-possessed, the Rishi, the Rishis' son, the giver of good gifts.
1.3.37.7	May you see the heaven, may you strive for the atmosphere. May you go to the gods with the sweet-voiced Sadasyas. May you enter the giver. May you not abandon us. May you be seated on the path leading to the gods. May you be settled in the world of the virtuous. That is our sanctification.
1.3.38.1	May Dhātar, Rati, Savitar, Prajāpati, Varuna, Mitra, Agni, Vishnu, Tvashtri, desiring this, and seeking to protect the offspring, bestow wealth on the sacrificer.
1.3.38.2	O Indra, do thou lead us with thy mind, with cattle, with the Sūribas, with the Harivās, with prosperity, with the divine Brahma, with whatever is, with the good opinion of the gods who are worthy of sacrifice.
1.3.38.3	May we be united in splendour, in milk, in bodies, in mind, in auspiciousness. May Tvashtri, the bountiful, arrange us. May the Vasus grant us wealth.
1.3.38.4	May I make your seats, O gods, easy to approach, for those who have come to this libation, the eaters and drinkers, all the Vasus, may they grant us wealth.
1.3.38.5	O Agni, the god, you have brought the gods, you have sent them to their own place. Carrying and bearing the oblations, they have come to the heat, to the heaven.
1.3.38.6	What today we have chosen you, O Agni, as the Hotar at this sacrifice, may you prosper, may you prosper. Knowing, understanding, you should come to the sacrifice.
1.3.38.7	Go to the sacrifice, go to the lord of sacrifice, go to your own place, svāhā. This is your sacrifice, O lord of sacrifice, with the recitation of the Sūkta and the good heroes. By that, may you prosper. Go to the shining. The gods who know the path, having known the path, may they know the path. O Mind-lord, may you spread this sacrifice among the gods in heaven. In the wind, may it be. Svāhā.
1.3.39.1	The king Varuna has made a wide path for the sun to follow. He has placed the feet in the wrong place to be corrected. And he is the one who speaks, the one who knows the heart.
1.3.39.2	O king, may your hundred physicians, your thousand, may your good counsel be deep and vast. May you drive away misfortune with your own power. May you release the sin that we have committed.
1.3.39.3	He entered the army of Agni, he protected the waters from the Asuras.
1.3.39.4	O Agni, you have accepted the kindling wood in the fire, your tongue has drunk the ghee.
1.3.39.5	Your heart is in the ocean, in the waters, may the plants and waters enter you. We offer the praise to you, O lord of sacrifice, as prescribed. Svāhā!
1.3.39.6	Avabhrtha, Nicunchuna, Nicerur, thou art Nicunchuna. House, house, may we be protected by the gods from the sin committed against the gods, and by the mortals from the sin committed by mortals. O god, protect us from the sin committed in the house. Thou art cleansed in the water, O god Soma, praised by men. The feast that is thine, O god, is of cows, and that is of horses. I invite that which is invited. The noose of Varuna is loosed. The noose is turned back. Homage to the noose of Varunna. The Uddhatar is more powerful than the Uddhatar. Do not lead away the invited.
1.3.39.7	Your songs, O Indra, the sweetest, are sung by the Stotras, the conquerors of foes, the givers of wealth, the imperishable, the winners of prizes, like chariots.
1.3.39.8	Like Kanvas and Bhrigus, like suns, they have spread out all that is to be spread out. They have come forth, bearing offspring and splendour. We have sought you for wealth and for sacrifice.
1.3.39.9-10	Chant the Gayatri metre. May we be fragrant in our homes. You are the kindling, we kindle you. You are the fire-wood, we kindle you.
1.4.1.1	O Agni, may my lustre be in contests. We, the givers of oblations, may nourish our bodies. May the four directions bow down to me. With you as our protector, we shall conquer in battle.
1.4.1.2	O Agni, lord of vows, I shall undertake a vow. I shall tell you that. May you protect it. May I be able to do it.
1.4.1.3	I invoke Agni, the Hotar, the gods worthy of sacrifice, whom we shall worship here. May the gods come to my oblation, may the gods come with good intentions.
1.4.1.4	I yoke thee with divine Brahman, O Jatavedas, for carrying oblations. May the kindlers of thee, O Jatavedasa, be well-born, well-endowed with heroes, and may we live long, being offered to thee.
1.4.1.5	May Indra bestow power on us, may the wealthy ones be with us for wealth. May our blessings be fulfilled.
1.4.1.6	We call the blessings, desiring to milk, with Indra, so that we may milk offspring and food.
1.4.1.7	May my true blessing go to the gods, to the most agreeable, to the most marketable.
1.4.1.8	O Areḍata, go to the gods with your mind. May the sacrifice go to the gods. May the sacrifice reach the gods.
1.4.1.9	I release your reins, I release your rays, I release your yokes and fastenings. May he give us wealth. May he tell me good things. May he be a giver of shares among the deities.
1.4.1.10	The sacrifice is dear to the Bhrigus, giving wealth to the ascetics, giving blessings to the Vasus. The Angirasas have prepared this sacrifice with the morning prayers.
1.4.1.11	May Vasu, the sacrifice, the one who has wealth, come to me from the place where the sacrifice, which was performed and completed, has gone. May Vasu, who has wealth, the one who is wealthy, come to me. May it come to me.
1.4.2.1	The lord of sacrifice is united with the blessing.
1.4.2.2	You are real.
1.4.2.3	May I be real.
1.4.2.4	You are full.
1.4.2.5	May I become full.
1.4.2.6	You are all.
1.4.2.7	May everything be mine.
1.4.2.8	You are inexhaustible.
1.4.2.9	May I be inexhaustible.
1.4.2.10	The gods, the priests, may they cleanse in the eastern direction.
1.4.2.11	The months, the ancestors, may they cleanse themselves in the southern direction.
1.4.2.12	The houses, the cattle, may they cleanse them in the western direction.
1.4.2.13	The waters, the plants, the trees, may they cleanse the northern direction.
1.4.2.14	May the sacrifice, in the upward direction, be purified by the year.
1.4.2.15	Vishnu spread on the earth with the Gayatri metre.
1.4.2.16	He who hates him is excluded.
1.4.2.17	Vishnu spreads in the sky with the Tristubh metre.
1.4.2.18	He is excluded who hates him.
1.4.2.19	Vishnu has spread in heaven with the Jagati metre.
1.4.2.20	The one who is devoted to him, we hate.
1.4.2.21	We have gone to heaven.
1.4.2.22	We have become united with light.
1.4.2.23	I am offering this life of so-and-so.
1.4.2.24	You are brilliance.
1.4.2.25	I am united with offspring.
1.4.2.26	My offspring are united.
1.4.2.27	I am joined with cattle.
1.4.2.28	My cattle are united.
1.4.2.29	O Agni, the householder, may I be a good householder through you, the householder.
1.4.2.30	May you be a better householder than I am.
1.4.2.31	The two of us, without stiffness, have lit the domestic fire.
1.4.2.32	We have sprinkled the gifts, the gifts that are not sprinkled, on our bodies.
1.4.2.33	May the divine thread not be cut off from me.
1.4.2.34	May the human one not be cut off.
1.4.2.35	Do not cut off from the divine realm, do not cut off from human.
1.4.2.36	For the science of astrology.
1.4.3.1	Those gods who are the destroyers of sacrifice, who dwell on earth, may Agni protect us from them. May we go to those who have done good.
1.4.3.2	Those gods, who are the destroyers, who dwell on the earth, may Agni, protect us from them, may we go to those, who have done good.
1.4.3.3	O Savitar, those nights of yours, O god, which have been united with the thousand-sacrificing (rite), and which have been united in the beginning with all the houses and with progeny, moving through the sky, crossing the regions,
1.4.3.4	Those gods who are the destroyers of sacrifice, who dwell in the atmosphere, may Vayu protect us from them. May we go to the well-doers.
1.4.3.5	Those gods who dwell in the sky, who are present at the sacrifice, may Vayu protect us from them. May we go to the well-doers.
1.4.3.6	We have come to Mitra and Varuna for the choice, the share of the nights that is yours, grasping the heaven, in the third back, on the shining heaven.
1.4.3.7	The gods who are the destroyers of sacrifice, who sit in heaven, may Surya protect us from them. May we go to the well-doers.
1.4.3.8	The gods who are the enjoyers of sacrifice, who are in heaven, may the sun protect us from them.
1.4.3.9	With that, O Agni, you have brought the milk of Indra to the highest with the most excellent oblation, O knower of beings. With that, O Agn, do you increase me and place me in the midst of my kinsmen as the best.
1.4.3.10	You are the Veda, the Veda has brought me. I am satisfied, you are satisfied.
1.4.3.11	May the Veda give me the horse, the one with ghee, the one with the nest, the one with prosperity, the one with a thousand, the one with strength.
1.4.3.12	Burn out the hater, burn out the hater, the Rudras have stretched thee out, the Adityas have spread thee out.
1.4.3.13	O Agni, the cow-possessor, the sheep-possessor, may the sacrifice be with men as a friend, always unassailable, the eater of oblations, the Asura, the procreator, the long-lasting, the wide-bottomed, the natural, the wealth-possessor.
1.4.3.14	May the wife and husband go to good deeds, may they be yoked to the highest duty of the sacrifice, may they delight in each other, may they cast off enmity, may they attain the highest light in heaven. Svāhā.
1.4.3.15	This is your world, O wife, may you be honoured by me. Do not harm me. To her who is Sarasvatī, the one who bestows beauty, Svāhā. To her who bestows beauty.
1.4.3.16	May we be devoted to her who bestows the beauty of garments.
1.4.3.17	O Agni, may I be free from injury and free from blame. You are the truth. You are free from injury. Being free from injury, I am cut off by the mind. Being free from harm, I offer oblations. Be free from injury to us. Bestow healing. Svāhā.
1.4.4.1	The sacrifice went to the people of the gods.
1.4.4.2	From there may the blessing of the sacrifice come to me.
1.4.4.3	The sacrifice has gone to the people of fathers.
1.4.4.4	From there, may the blessing of sacrifice come to me.
1.4.4.5-11	The sacrifice went to the human race. From there may the blessing of the sacrifice come to me. The sacrifice went to the plants, the trees, the race. From that may the blessing of sacrifice come to me The sacrifice went into the five races. From there, may the blessing of Yajna come to me. I take you for the support of the five winds.
1.4.4.12	I take thee for the protection of the five directions.
1.4.4.13	I take thee for the five waters.
1.4.4.14	I take you for the protection of five backs.
1.4.4.15	I take thou for the protection of all the five people.
1.4.4.16	I take for the protection of Charo and Panchabila.
1.4.4.17	The Dhama-vessel is the dear one of the gods, the unassailable divine sacrifice. I take thee for the divine Vidyut.
1.4.4.18	The earth is ours.
1.4.4.19	The offering of the gods.
1.4.4.20	The blessings of the sacrificer.
1.4.4.21	I take thee with the deities for the deities.
1.4.5.1	The Darsha-Paurnamasa sacrifices are indeed the united sacrifice.
1.4.5.2	Whose deities come to the sacrifice, and whose do not?
1.4.5.3	When many people are performing sacrifices on the same day, the one who takes up the fire the previous day performs the sacrifice with the deities the next day.
1.4.5.4	"May my radiance be in the contests."
1.4.5.5	He takes up the fire first.
1.4.5.6	The deities took it up the previous day.
1.4.5.7	They offer them on the next day.
1.4.5.8	At the Full Moon they undertake the vow with grass, at the New Moon with calves.
1.4.5.9	Before the calves are let loose, the couple should eat.
1.4.5.10	Having washed the hands, one should stand to the right of the fire,
1.4.5.11	saying, "O Agni, lord of vows, I undertake the vow."
1.4.5.12	Agni is the lord of vows of the gods, the Brahman is the upholder of vows.
1.4.5.13	Having addressed the lord of vows, one offers the vow.
1.4.5.14	"Agni, the Hotar, I invoke him."
1.4.5.15	One should touch that with which one is going to pour the oblation.
1.4.5.16	This is the grasping of the deities.
1.4.5.17	The deity has grasped this.
1.4.5.18	"I yoke thee with divine Brahman."
1.4.5.19	One should say this when the paridhi-sticks are being placed around.
1.4.5.20	This is Agni's union.
1.4.5.21	He yokes Agni.
1.4.5.22	He carries the oblation for him.
1.4.5.23	May Indra bestow power on us."
1.4.5.24	One should speak this when Ida is being invoked.
1.4.5.25	This is Ida's milking.
1.4.5.26	This is the milking of Ida.
1.4.5.27	And Ida is indeed the power.
1.4.5.28	He places power in himself.
1.4.5.29	Those who are desirous of milking, they are desirous of blessings.
1.4.5.30	Thus, those who are desirous of blessings approach the sacrificer.
1.4.5.31	They stand on the southern side of the world of the sacrificer.
1.4.5.32	Those who do not know this, like cows that have not been milked, depart from these blessings.
1.4.5.33	But those who know this, they do milk the blessings.
1.4.5.34	When the sacrificial grass is being spread, one should say, "May my true blessing go to the gods."
1.4.5.35	Having sent the true blessing to the gods, one should then choose a boon.
1.4.5.36	Now they say, Janashruta Upavi, having performed a thousand sacrifices, said, "What is better than this?"
1.4.5.37	"Perform a thousand sacrifices."
1.4.5.38	This is what he said.
1.4.5.39	"I release your reins and your rays."
1.4.5.40	One should say this when the boundary-stones are being removed.
1.4.5.41	Having established the deity in the heavenly world, he has made it firm.
1.4.5.42	"The sacrifice is dear to the Bhrigus."
1.4.5.43	This is the milking of the sacrifice.
1.4.5.44	One should milk the sacrifice.
1.4.5.45	Now, this was said by Kapivana Bauvaayana:
1.4.5.46	"What is the use of sacrificing with a sacrifice, if one does not milk the sacrifice like a cow?"
1.4.5.47	"For the cow is the best milker."
1.4.6.1	The sacrificer eats the share of the sacrificer, saying, "May the lord of sacrifice be satisfied."
1.4.6.2	The sacrificer is indeed the lord of sacrifice.
1.4.6.3	The sacrifice is the share of the sacrifice.
1.4.6.4	When the sacrificer eats the sacrificer's share, he establishes the sacrifice in the lord of sacrifice itself.
1.4.6.5	If he were to depart, he should offer together with the Samit-offering.
1.4.6.6	He establishes the sacrifice in Agni.
1.4.6.7	When one about to offer oblations heats them in the fire, he creates the sacrifice of Agni.
1.4.6.8	When one about to offer the oblations announces to the sacrificer, he creates the sacrificial rite in the name of the lord of sacrifice.
1.4.6.9	Agni indeed burns more.
1.4.6.10	The sacrificer indeed crosses this world when these waters are let loose.
1.4.6.11	The flowing of the water should not be cut off. The sacrificer thus conceals himself in the fire.
1.4.6.12	Two kinds of gods come to the house of the sacrificer: those who drink Soma and those who do not drink Soma, those who have offered oblations and those who have not offered oblations.
1.4.6.13	Those who have not offered the oblations are the gods, namely the Brahmanas.
1.4.6.14	Those who belong to these gods are those who have performed the Puranija sacrifice.
1.4.6.15	These are the lords of his progeny and cattle.
1.4.6.16	When they are not pleased, they take away his food and strength and depart.
1.4.6.17	When he offers the Anvähärya, he pleases them with that.
1.4.6.18	He says to those who are sitting on the right side, "Take it around."
1.4.6.19	One performs the sacrifice facing south.
1.4.6.20	By means of oblations, one pleases the gods who have been offered.
1.4.6.21	They bestow on him the food and strength.
1.4.7.1	"You are the good, may I be good."
1.4.7.2	These are indeed blessings.
1.4.7.3	He indeed obtains them.
1.4.7.4	"You have been filled, may I be filled."
1.4.7.5	Indeed, one is born there with the limbs filled.
1.4.7.6	"You were all, may I be all."
1.4.7.7	Indeed, he is born there with all the limbs.
1.4.7.8	May it be inexhaustible for him. May it be inexhaustible to me.
1.4.7.9	Thus, indeed, he is born with his limbs in the inexhaustible world.
1.4.7.10	The gods, the priests, may they cleanse in the eastern direction.
1.4.7.11	These are the cleansings of the sacrifice.
1.4.7.12	These are pacifications.
1.4.7.13	They were known by the Baidavas.
1.4.7.14	Their sacrifice became cleansed and pacified.
1.4.7.15	Pasupati does not harm the animals.
1.4.7.16	He who knows this, his sacrifice becomes pure and peaceful.
1.4.7.17	Pasupati does not harm animals.
1.4.7.18	"Vishnu spread on the earth with the Gayatri metre."
1.4.7.19	The gods, having pushed the Asuras out of these worlds through Vishnu's mouth, went to heaven.
1.4.7.20	Thus, the sacrificer, with Vishnu as his mouth, having pushed aside his enemy from these worlds, goes to the heavenly world.
1.4.7.21	"He goes to the heavenly (world), saying, "We have gone to heaven."
1.4.7.22	"He becomes united with light and earth, for the heavenly world is indeed light."
1.4.7.23	"Thus, I am enclosing the life of so-and-so."
1.4.7.24	Thus, he encloses his life.
1.4.7.25	Thus, it turns around.
1.4.7.26	Thus the sacrifice is completed.
1.4.7.27	And also this is the turning around of the sun's unseen world.
1.4.7.28	He says, "You are brilliance."
1.4.7.29	For Agni is brilliance.
1.4.7.30	He goes to heaven, leaving behind his offspring and cattle.
1.4.7.31	He says, "May I be united with offspring, may offspring be united with me; may I be united with cattle, may cattle be united with me." He thus establishes himself in offspring and cattle.
1.4.7.32	"O Agni, lord of the house, may I be a good householder through you, the householder; may you be a good householder by me, the householder." They both become old without being taken.
1.4.7.33	All life is from here.
1.4.7.34	He is not led to distress.
1.4.7.35	He takes the name of his son.
1.4.7.36	He follows the progeny.
1.4.7.37	He indeed returns to the human (world).
1.4.7.38	He takes the human name.
1.4.7.39	What he says, 'The divine thread is cut, may the human not be cut,' he follows both the divine and the human.
1.4.7.40	"Do not be cut off from the divine world, do not be cut off form the human world." Both of them conquer this world.
1.4.7.41	They become together with the heavenly world.
1.4.8.1	Thus, those gods who are the destroyers of sacrifice and the enjoyers of sacrifice on earth, having crossed them, ascend the atmosphere.
1.4.8.2	Those gods who are the destroyer of sacrifice and the enjoyment of sacrifice in the atmosphere, having crossed them go to heaven.
1.4.8.3	He who is the same as the gods, the destroyer of sacrifice and the consumer of sacrifice, having crossed them in heaven, he established himself in the midst of his own people.
1.4.8.4	The sacrificial cake is indeed the head of the sacrifice.
1.4.8.5	The Veda is the hair.
1.4.8.6	When one smears the sacrificial cake with the Veda, it is for the completeness of the sacrifice and for its being fit for offering.
1.4.8.7	The sacrifice became hidden from the gods.
1.4.8.8	The gods found him by means of the Veda.
1.4.8.9	That is the Veda's Veda-ness.
1.4.8.10	He who knows what is to be known by the Veda, he finds the sacrifice.
1.4.8.11	He gives the Veda to his wife.
1.4.8.12	The sacrifice is difficult to follow after.
1.4.8.13	He finds the sacrifice for him.
1.4.8.14	He gives it three times.
1.4.8.15	For the gods are threefold.
1.4.8.16	He sits down near her.
1.4.8.17	The man becomes her knee.
1.4.8.18	The Veda is indeed the animals.
1.4.8.19	For these are indeed the plants.
1.4.8.20	This indeed is the world of animals, that which is between the two fires.
1.4.8.21	The sacrificer seizes the animals of his enemy in his own world.
1.4.8.22	The sacrifice is interrupted every half-month. He goes on sprinkling from the Āhavanīya for the continuity of the sacrifice.
1.4.8.23	He offers it continuously in the northern half of the month.
1.4.8.24	"O Agni, the cow, the horse, the sacrifice."
1.4.8.25	Thus he made the sacrifice to be with cows, horses and the horse.
1.4.8.26	"This is the one who has the sun, the Asura, the one who has offspring, the long wealth, the one who is vast and deep, the one who exists by nature."
1.4.8.27	Thus he blessed.
1.4.8.28	May the wife go with her husband to the good deeds. This is the wife's participation in the sacrifice.
1.4.8.29	They become together in the heavenly world.
1.4.8.30	The wife who is his follows him after.
1.4.8.31	If she follows him after, she would burn his offspring.
1.4.8.32	When he says, "O wife, this is your world," he makes it her world.
1.4.8.33	His progeny is not consumed by fire.
1.4.8.34	She who is Sarasvati, the one who bestows beauty, bestows beauty.
1.4.8.35	She bestows beauty on him.
1.4.8.36	And those who are alive and of the same caste worship him.
1.4.8.37	We worship the speech of this Brahman or this Kshatriya.
1.4.8.38	But they should not cook meat.
1.4.8.39	If they cook in that fire, they make it a carnivorous one.
1.4.8.40	For in that fire they do not cook meat in which they offer oblations.
1.4.8.41	"The fire is called "Aya". It is the beloved form of Agni."
1.4.8.42	"They say, "It is the beloved form because of its being the boundary."
1.4.8.43	And whatever is done here in the sacrifice and whatever is not done, and whatever expiation of the sacrifice we know and whatever we do not know, this is the expiation of both.
1.4.9.1	"One should recite the verse, "The sacrifice has gone to the people," over the spilled (Soma).
1.4.9.2	The sacrifice goes to the people when it spills.
1.4.9.3	The people are above us.
1.4.9.4	He seizes the blessing of the sacrifice which has gone to the people.
1.4.9.5	"He seizes (it) for the protection of the five Vātas." The sacrifice is fivefold.
1.4.9.6	He seizes as much as the sacrifice is.
1.4.9.7	This indeed is the sacrifice which flows.
1.4.9.8	He seized it first.
1.4.9.9	"He takes it with the formula, "I take thee for the protection of the five directions." He takes these five directions.
1.4.9.10	"He takes it with, "I hold thee for the protection from the five waters." The waters are the cattle.
1.4.9.11	He takes the cattle.
1.4.9.12	"He holds it with, " "I take thee for protection from the five backs." He takes the backs.
1.4.9.13	Therefore, his Darsha-Purnamāsa sacrifices are continuous and uninterrupted.
1.4.9.14	"He says, "I take thee for the support of the five people." The five people are the five metres."
1.4.9.15	He took the metres.
1.4.9.16	"He (the Adhvaryu) says, " I take thee for the protection of the five-holed pot." The five-holed is the world."
1.4.9.17	He took possession of these very worlds.
1.4.9.18	"The ladle is the beloved of the gods, the unassailable divine sacrifice. I take you for the divine Vīti."
1.4.9.19	Thus the Agnīdhra goes along the path with the known ladle-grasp.
1.4.9.20	"He says, "May there be prosperity for us, for the gods, for the blessings of the sacrificer." He indeed wishes for prosperity for himself."
1.4.9.21	"He says "May there he oblation for the gods, blessings for the sacrificer."
1.4.9.22	"To the deities thee, I take thee with the deities." He took him with the deities to the deities.
1.4.10.1	This is the abode of the deities, namely the Ahavaniya.
1.4.10.2	The animals are between the two fires.
1.4.10.3	The Garhapatya is of men.
1.4.10.4	The Odanapacana is of the Pitrs.
1.4.10.5	All the deities come to his sacrifice when he knows this.
1.4.10.6	He who has spread the fire on both sides says:
1.4.10.7	"The nine-ending is for men."
1.4.10.8	He makes it nine-ending for the sake of being worthy.
1.4.10.9	He pours down the oblation with the words, "Thou art the tongue of Agni, the release of speech."
1.4.10.10	This is the cup of the deities.
1.4.10.11	The gods have taken this.
1.4.10.12	This was said by Āharuṇa Aupaveśya:
1.4.10.13	"I am going to the gods with oblations in oblations not yet offered,
1.4.10.14	with the sacrifice having come to an end."
1.4.10.15	He who knows this goes to the gods with the oblations offered, with the sacrifice having cometo an end.
1.4.10.16	With the two pestles, with the two stones, with the two pestles they strike the stones, saying, "Come, O maker of oblations." The gods drove away the Rakshas from the sacrifice.
1.4.10.17	When they strike the stones with the two pestlers, saying, "O maker of oblations, come," it is for the sake of driving away the Rakshasa.
1.4.10.18	Having taken the water, he restrains speech.
1.4.10.19	With the mind, indeed, Prajapati created the sacrifice.
1.4.10.20	The Adhvaryu and the sacrificer should restrain speech when the two Ulukhalas are lifted up.
1.4.10.21	They create the sacrifice mentally, becoming Prajapati himself.
1.4.10.22	All the sacrificial implements are not to be lifted up together.
1.4.10.23	That is done by man.
1.4.10.24	Not one by one.
1.4.10.25	That is for the Pitrs and the gods.
1.4.10.26	Two by two are to be lifted up.
1.4.10.27	The form of the Yajya and Anuvakya is observed.
1.4.10.28	By that one obtains both kinds of animals, domestic and wild.
1.4.10.29	If one eats the domestic animal, one obtains the domestic animals.
1.4.10.30	And if one eats the wild animal, one obtains wild animals.
1.4.10.31	And the wild animal is indeed the strength.
1.4.10.32	One places strength within oneself.
1.4.10.33	One should not eat beans.
1.4.10.34-39	Masha beans are not fit for sacrifice. One should not eat in the evening if one is going to sacrifice in the morning. The gods became more powerful by not eating the oblation. The Asuras were defeated by eating the oblation.
1.4.10.40	He who performs a sacrifice without faith becomes worse.
1.4.10.41	Water is faith.
1.4.10.42	They are not grasped by speech or by the Yajus. They indeed surpass speech and Vritra.
1.4.10.43	But they are not surpassed by the mind.
1.4.10.44	When one is about to grasp water, one should then meditate on this with the mind.
1.4.10.45	This is indeed the vessel of these.
1.4.10.46	He seized her by this very (river).
1.4.10.47	Having seized faith, one performs the sacrifice.
1.4.10.48	One does not become worse.
1.4.11.1	Brahmin scholars say:
1.4.11.2	They offer the fire-wood, they offer the oblation.
1.4.11.3	Fire-wood is the first of the oblations.
1.4.11.4	Why are there invocations and responses for other oblations?
1.4.11.5	Why not for fire-wood?
1.4.11.6	Recite for Agni being kindled.
1.4.11.7	Thus is the Puronuvākyā.
1.4.11.8	The Sāmidhenī verses, the Yājyā verse, the Upavāka verse, and the Vasat-utterance.
1.4.11.9	Wherever in the sacrifice something is done in excess, that becomes excess in the sacrificer's self.
1.4.11.10	If the sacrifice is performed without attaining the goal, the sacrificer becomes poor.
1.4.11.11	He places the Paridhāniya (brick) on the top of the kindling wood of the Samidhenī verses.
1.4.11.12	The sacrificer becomes free from injury.
1.4.11.13	Nothing excessive is born in him.
1.4.11.14	He who knows Prajapati as the seventeenth (brick) in the sacrifice, his sacrifice does not fail.
1.4.11.15	He stands firm in the sacrifice in Prajapati.
1.4.11.16	O hear!
1.4.11.17	This is the four-syllabled (verse).
1.4.11.18	Let it be heard.
1.4.11.19	This is the four-syllabled (hymn).
1.4.11.20	We invoke him.
1.4.11.21	This is five-syllabled.
1.4.11.22	The Vasat-call is two-syllabled
1.4.11.23	This indeed is Prajapati, dependent on the seventeenfold sacrifice.
1.4.11.24	If it goes to the Anuvakya, if it goes to the Yajya,
1.4.11.25	If it does not go from there, his sacrifice is not afflicted.
1.4.11.26	He stands firm in Prajapati with the sacrifice.
1.4.11.27	We do not know if we are Brahmanas or non-Brahmanas, if we are of that Rishi or of another whose we proclaim.
1.4.11.28	He who offers sacrifice to him whom he proclaims, approaches him as his desired one.
1.4.11.29	He does not approach the other.
1.4.11.30	One should say this when the best is being chosen.
1.4.11.31	The gods are the fathers, the fathers are the gods.
1.4.11.32	I am he who am, I offer sacrifice.
1.4.11.33-39	He who am, I do. May what is good, what is peaceful, what is done be good for me. Thus, whoever he may be, he who sacrifices, he approaches that which is good for him. He does not approach the other. I take you with the Gayatri, the Trishtup, the Jagati, the Anushtup, the Brhat, the Rathantara, the Vamadevya, the Shakalya, the Shakamukha, the Shakamatya, the Shaka, the Shaka-matya, the Shakama, the Shakamadhya, the Shakamaya, the Shakamayi, the Shakamaye, the Shakamayani, the Shakamaye, the Shakamayanta, the Shakamayama, the Shakamaya, the Shakamanta, the Shakamadanta, the Shakamata, the Shakamada, the Shakamam, the Shakamadi, the Shakamade, the Shakamakhi, the Shakamaka, the Shakamaki, the Shakamakin, the Shakamake, the Shakamakanta, the Shakanta, the Shakani, the Shakanam, the Shakanami, the Shakaname, the Shakanani, the Shakanaye, the Shakanayanta, the Shakanamaya, the Shakanamayi, the Shakanamaye, the Shakanamayani, the Shakamanta, the Shakamandi, the Shakamande, the Shakamanam, the Shakamanami, the Shakamaname, the Shakamanani, the Shakamanaye, the Shakamanayanta, the Shakamanantam, the Shakamanantama, the Shakamananami, the Shakamananame, the
1.4.12.5	O Anga, please explain the sacrifice to us.
1.4.12.6	Thus he explained the sacrifice to them.
1.4.12.7	They said:
1.4.12.8	"May the sacrificer become inferior to his brother-rival by means of this."
1.4.12.9	They said: "So be it."
1.4.12.10	"We shall arrange the sacrifice in such a way that the sacrificer will overcome his brother-rival."
1.4.12.11	Thus they established the oblations as the sacrifice.
1.4.12.12	Then Keshi conquered the Sandhika and the Audbhari.
1.4.12.13	He who knows this conquers his enemies through the sacrifice.
1.4.12.14	The offering of the oblation is the breath.
1.4.12.15	It should be offered in the eastern half.
1.4.12.16	He places the breath in the mouth of the sacrifice.
1.4.12.17	Offering of the oblation means breath.
1.4.12.18	It is to be offered in the middle.
1.4.12.19	He places the breath in the middle of it.
1.4.12.20	One should offer the most abundant libation.
1.4.12.21	The libation is the breath.
1.4.12.22	He makes his breath the most abundant.
1.4.12.23	One should make the libation continuous.
1.4.12.24	The libations are the breath.
1.4.12.25	For the continuity of the breath.
1.4.12.26	One should perform the libation upwards for one who desires heaven.
1.4.12.27	The sacrificer is the offering.
1.4.12.28	He makes the sacrificer go to heaven.
1.4.12.29	If one hates someone, one should offer the offering to him.
1.4.12.30	He becomes worse.
1.4.12.31	The one-time offering is for one who is advancing.
1.4.12.32	The one that is offered when one is retreating is for one who has settled down.
1.4.12.33	The one offered when one is advancing is the one that is offered for one who is progressing.
1.4.12.34	The one is offered when one retreats is the one that offered for one who has retreated.
1.4.12.35	The one who stands in the same place and offers is established.
1.4.12.36	If one desires, "May he be more powerful and better than me," one should offer while advancing towards him.
1.4.12.37	By that, he becomes more powerful and better.
1.4.12.38	If one wishes, "May he become inferior and worse," one should offer by retreating from him.
1.4.12.39	By this, he becomes inferior and worse.
1.4.12.40	Now, if one wishes that he should not be more or less powerful, one should offer it while standing at the same place.
1.4.12.41	By that he does not become more or less powerful.
1.4.12.42	The Prajās are indeed the seasons.
1.4.12.43	One should offer at the same place for the establishment of the seasons.
1.4.12.44	The Agnihotra should be offered in the northern half.
1.4.12.45	The northern one is the one belonging to the Rakshas.
1.4.12.46	The offering to Soma should be made in the southern half.
1.4.12.47	Then the offering to Dakṣiṇā is for the Pitṛs.
1.4.12.48	This is the world of the offerings between the two fires.
1.4.12.49	The offerings are made as before, as much as is possible. He who knows this
1.4.12.50	The offering to smoke is offered in darkness.
1.4.12.51	Then the sacrificer becomes invisible.
1.4.12.52	The oblation which is offered on the embers is the oblation of the blind.
1.4.12.53	Then the eyes of the sacrificer become blind.
1.4.12.54	Both the oblations should be offered in the Jyotishmati (fire).
1.4.12.55	The sacrificer becomes radiant.
1.4.12.56	His eyes do not become blind.
1.4.12.57	The oblation which is eaten by a non-Brahmana is the fallen oblation.
1.4.12.58	Vasishtha alone prescribed the expiation for it.
1.4.12.59-64	Protect, O Brhaspati! Thus one should touch the sacrificial cake. May I be a sharer of those who share, not a non-sharer. This oblation is for the Brahmanas, for the Soma drinkers, for the Soma-drinkers. Here there is no place for a non-Brahmana. May my doing not be hindered. May my giving not be hindered. Thus he establishes the sacrifice among those who are worthy of receiving, without loss, without disturbance.
1.4.12.65	The food that a non-Brahmin eats is as if offered in the fire.
1.4.13.1	The oblation that the ghee falls down without being poured is called Citra.
1.4.13.2	Then the sacrificer's life becomes uncertain.
1.4.13.3	The Citra oblation should be given.
1.4.13.4	That itself is his expiation.
1.4.13.5	The oblution that falls down after being poured is called Skanna.
1.4.13.6	Then the sacrificer becomes one who has lost his life.
1.4.13.7	A boon should be given.
1.4.13.8	That itself is his atonement.
1.4.13.9	Now if the two sacrificial cakes are badly cooked, that oblation is dedicated to Yama.
1.4.13.10	When that oblation is completed, then having cooked rice in four pots, he should offer it to the Brahmanas as if it were living rice.
1.4.13.11	That itself his atonement.
1.4.13.12	Now, if the sacrificial cakes get spoilt, Varuna seizes that sacrifice.
1.4.13.13	When the oblation is completed, then one should offer that very oblation.
1.4.13.14	For the sacrifice is the atonement for the sacrifice.
1.4.13.15	Now, he who performs a sacrifice without giving gifts, one should know that sacrificer.
1.4.13.16	For this sacrifice is performed without giving gifts.
1.4.13.17-22	If he becomes less powerful, then the fertile and prosperous one should be given. That itself is his atonement. If his skull is broken, then he should join it. I join you with the Gayatri of a hundred syllables. The Gayatri is indeed speech, with a hundred syllables. With speech alone he joins it.
1.4.13.23	Now, he who loses his skull, him this (earth) conceals from the heavenly world.
1.4.13.24	When that oblation is completed, one should offer a cake on twelve potsherds to Agni Vaiśvānara.
1.4.13.25	This Agni is Vaiśvānaran.
1.4.13.26	He approaches this (earth) with this oblation for the non-concealment of the heavenly world.
1.4.13.27-34	Now, if an oblation falls outside the sacrificial enclosure, it is an oblation for the living. One should tell the Agnidhra: "Offer this after collecting it." Agni is all the deities. Thus, his oblation is offered with all the deities. The full vessel should be given to the Agnidhra. That itself is his atonement. The sacrificer is the Juhu.
1.4.13.35	The Upabṛt is the enemy.
1.4.13.36	One should not offer it as if it were being consumed.
1.4.13.37	If one were to offer it as if being consumed, one would consume the sacrificer.
1.4.13.38	One should offer it as if one were to be wounded.
1.4.13.39	The oblations are indeed the enemies of the gods.
1.4.13.40	One should then mentally think of the one whom one hates.
1.4.13.41	He is wounded by the enemies of the deities.
1.4.13.42	One should indeed offer it.
1.4.13.43	The oblatioins are indeed the animals.
1.4.13.44	Rudra is Agni, the well-done.
1.4.13.45	One should not offer together.
1.4.13.46	If one were to offer together, one would cause Rudra to take away one's cattle.
1.4.13.47	One should offer in the northern half of the eastern half, so that the offerings are not mixed.
1.4.13.48	And thus Rudra becomes less hostile towards one's cattle.
1.4.14.1	One who is about to perform the Darsha-Paurnamasa sacrifices should offer an oblation of eleven potfuls to Agni-Vishnu.
1.4.14.2	Agni is all the deities, Vishnu is the sacrifice.
1.4.14.3	Having obtained the deities and the sacrifice, one performs the Darsha-Purnamasa sacrifices.
1.4.14.4	They offer you the Jyas.
1.4.14.5	The gods and the Asuras were competing.
1.4.14.6	Prajapati saw these Jyas.
1.4.14.7	He gave them to Indra.
1.4.14.8	With them he conquered the Asuras in battle after battle.
1.4.14.9	He who offers these conquers his enemies in battle after battle
1.4.14.10	Aakoota and Aakooti.
1.4.14.11	Thus the sacrifice is Aakoota and the Dakshina is Aakooti
1.4.14.12	Chitta and Chitti.
1.4.14.13	Thus the mind is Chitta and speech is Chitti.
1.4.14.14	What is known and what is to be known.
1.4.14.15	Thus, the Rg Veda is what is known and the Sama Veda is what is to be be known.
1.4.14.16	What is understood and what is to understand.
1.4.14.17	Thus, what is understood is the Rg Veda and what is to understood is the Sama Veda.
1.4.14.18	Bhaga and Kratu.
1.4.14.19	Thus, Bhaga is Prajapati and Kratu is the sacrifice.
1.4.14.20	Darśa and Pūrṇamāsa.
1.4.14.21	Thus, Darśa and Pūrnimāsa are the twelve.
1.4.14.22	The twelve months are a year.
1.4.14.23	Having obtained the year, he bestows it.
1.4.14.24	Prajapati gave the victories to Indra, the strong one, the conqueror in battles.
1.4.14.25	With them we shall conquer the strength, with them we shall conquer all the battles.
1.4.14.26	One should offer the thirteenth oblation with this verse.
1.4.14.27	There is a thirteenth month.
1.4.14.28	He thus wins him by means of this (verse).
1.4.14.29	"O Agni, O thou who art strong, O thou who hast power, give me strength to tread on him who curses, by him who is not cursed."
1.4.14.30	"To the best of this people, svāhā."
1.4.14.31	One should offer thus where one desires.
1.4.14.32	"May I be distinguished in this people."
1.4.14.33	He becomes distinguished in that people.
1.4.14.34	But his own self becomes variegated.
1.4.15.1	One who desires to be blessed and a consumer of food should offer oblations to Agni Bhaga on eight potsherds.
1.4.15.2	Prajapati is Bhaga.
1.4.15.3	Yajna is Kratu.
1.4.15.4	He protects these beings with Bhaga.
1.4.15.5	Therefore, everyone thinks,
1.4.15.6	"Bhaga will protect me. Bhaga will protect me."
1.4.15.7	He who takes the Agnihotra, obtains the blessing directly.
1.4.15.8	He becomes the bestower of food.
1.4.15.9	Having offered both the Darśa and Pūrṇamāsa together,
1.4.15.10	One is released from the other horn.
1.4.15.11	The Darśa is prior to the Pūrṇamāsas.
1.4.15.12	Then they offer the Pūrṇimāsa first.
1.4.15.13	This is done contrary to the former practice.
1.4.15.14	One who is performing the Full-moon sacrifice should offer a cake on twelve potsherds to Sarasvati and a cake on twelve potsheds to Sarasvata.
1.4.15.15	Sarasvati is the New-moon sacrifice.
1.4.15.16	Sarasvata is the Full-moon.
1.4.15.17	Having arranged them as before, he offers them both for prosperity.
1.4.15.18	One prospers, and also for the sake of a pair.
1.5.1.1	We approach the sacrifice, we proclaim the hymn to Agni, to him who listens to us and to him who hears.
1.5.1.2	Agni is the head of heaven, the lord of earth, he is here.
1.5.1.3	He quickens the seed of waters.
1.5.1.4	Both of you, O Indra and Agni, are invoked, both of you are givers of wealth, both of you for rejoicing together.
1.5.1.5	Both of vou are givers of food and wealth, both of vou are invoked for the attainment of strength.
1.5.1.6	This is the first to be praised by the creators, the most worthy to be worshipped at sacrifices, whom the Apnavana (priests) have praised in the forests, the bright, all-pervading one in every place.
1.5.1.7	The Ahrayas have milked the bright light of his ancient (existence), the milk of the thousand-streamed one, the Rishi.
1.5.1.8	This is your womb, the seasonal one, from which you were born and shone forth. Knowing that, O Agni, ascend it, and from there increase our wealth.
1.5.1.9	I have performed the Dādhica rites for the victorious horse, the steed. May it make our mouths fragrant, and may it lead us to long life.
1.5.1.10	O Agni, with the purifying (rites), may you bestow long life, strength and food on us. Drive away the evil ones.
1.5.1.11	Agni is the sage, Pavamana is the priest of the five clans, we seek that great benefactor.
1.5.1.12	O Agni, flow forth with your own power, bestowing upon us radiance, good strength, nourishment, and wealth in me.
1.5.1.13	O Agni Pavaka, with your shining, gentle, divine tongue, do you bring the gods and do you bestow them.
1.5.1.14	O Agni, bring here the god who shines for us. May he come to our sacrifice and our oblation.
1.5.1.15	Agni, most pure in vow, pure, the sage, pure, the knower, pure, the one who is offered, shines.
1.5.1.16	O Agni, your pure lights, bright and shining, your luminaries, your flames, 
1.5.1.17	O Agni and Soma, do ye both listen to my call, O ye two mighty ones. Do ye come to the hymns of praise, and be ye givers of wealth to the worshipper.
1.5.1.18	Agni, fierce, with fierce lustre, may he burn up the foe, and destroy the evil-wisher.
1.5.1.19	O Agni, slayer of foes, do thou slay my foes. Let not the one who wishes to injure me injure me.
1.5.2.1	You, O Agni, are the radiance of the sun. Join me with life and radiance. Join me with the light of the sun, O Agni.
1.5.2.2	Join me with the praise of the sages, with the beloved abode, with life, with radiance, with offspring, with prosperity of wealth. May I go.
1.5.2.3	We kindle thee, O Agni, with a hundred bright flames, with the flames of the kindling-wood, with the flames that are to be kindled, with the flames which are to be made, with the flames made, with the most powerful flames, with the most mighty flames, with the strongest flames, with the strong flames, with the firm flames, with the very firm flames, with flames that are to burn, with flames that burn, with flames which are to burn, and with the flames that burn. O Agni, thou art the destroyer of foes, the most heroic, the invincible.
1.5.2.4	Thou art the kindling of Agni, protect me from the curse. Thou art the kindler of Soma, be thou near to me. Thou art the Agni of Yama, protect me from death. Thou art the life-giving Agni, give me life. Thou art the splendour-giving Agni, bestow splendour on me. Thou art Agni, the protector of sight, protect my sight. Thou art Agni the protector of hearing, protect my hearing. Thou art Agni protector of the body, protect my body. Whatever is lacking in my body, that do thou fill up for me. With whatever heat there is in thee, Agni, with that do thou burn him who hates us and whom we hate. With whatever radiance there is in thee Agni, with that shine upon him who hates us, and whom we hate With whatever light there is in thee. Agni, with that light upon him who hates Translation: Thou art the kindlet of Agni, protect us from the curse. thou art the kindler-of-Soma, be thou near unto us. Thou art the Yama-Agni, protect us from death. Thou are the life-giving-Agni, give us life. Thou art Agni giving splendour, bestow splendour on us. Thou art Agni protecting sight, protect our sight. Thou art the protector of hearing. Agni, protect our hearing. Thou art the body-protector, Agni, protect our body. Whatever is wanting in our body, that do Thou fill up for us. With whatever heat is in thee, O Agni, with that burn him who hates and whom we hate, With whatever radiance is in thee, o Agni, with that illumine him who hates us. and whom we hate.
1.5.2.5	"Rejoice, O Revatī, in this womb, in this pen, this is your kinsman. Let him not go away from here. Be many, do not be few."
1.5.2.6	"You are united, of universal form, of great strength, of cattle-keeping, of progeny, of prosperity."
1.5.2.7	"May your wealth be established in me. May I enjoy your prosperity for a thousand years."
1.5.3.1	O Agni, we come to you with homage, day by day, with our thoughts, to be covered by your rays.
1.5.3.2	The shining one, the guardian of sacrifices, the shining one of truth, growing in his own abode,
1.5.3.3	He, like a father to his son, O Agni, be a good protector to us. Be with us for our welfare.
1.5.3.4	O Agni, thou art our protector, our saviour, thou art the most auspicious, the most friendly. We invoke thee, O thou most brilliant, for our pleasure, for our friends.
1.5.3.5	Agni is wealth, Agni is the bestower of wealth, the most brilliant, the most auspicious. May he grant us wealth, may he hear our call, may he protect us from the wicked, from all evil.
1.5.3.6	I have conquered all the enemies, Agni has said it, Soma has said it, Brihaspati, Savitar, Indra, Pusan has said it, he has not placed it in the world of the righteous.
1.5.3.7	With energy I see you, with energy may you see me; with wealth I see you, may you see me with wealth.
1.5.3.8	I see all the offspring, the offspring of Ida, the human ones, may they all be in our house.
1.5.3.9	O Ida, you are the maker of honey, you are the kind one. May the thousand-nourishing Madhu enter us.
1.5.3.10	You are the world, the nourisher of a thousand. May you bestow that on us. May we be devoted to that of yours. You are Ida, the upholder of vows. In you is the vow. You are the upholder of the vow.
1.5.4.1-3	May the great three, the mighty, the shining, the noble, the hard to assail, of Mitra, Aryaman, and Varuna, For their truthfulness, their power, their strength, their might, their greatness, their glory, their majesty, their splendor, their wealth, their fame, their renown, their goodness, their kindness, their grace, their mercy, their compassion, their love, their affection, their friendship, their favor, their grace, and their blessings, For their power, their might, and their strength, their truthfulness, and their truth, their truthfulness and their truthfulness, For their greatness, their greatness, and their greatness, their majesty, and their majesty, their majesty and their majesty, For their splendor, and their splendor, their splendor and their splendor, For their wealth, and their wealth, their wealth and their wealth, For their fame, and their fame, their fame and their fame, For their renown, and their renown, their renown and their renown, For their goodness, and their goodness, their goodness and their goodness, For their kindness, and their kindness, their kindness and their kindness, For their grace, and for their grace, their grace and their grace, For their mercy, and for their mercy, their mercy and their mercy, For their compassion, and for their compassion, their compassion and their compassion, For their love, and for their love, their love and their love, For their affection, and for their affection
1.5.4.4	O Brahmanaspati, make Soma the one who is praised, the one who is from the family of Kakshivat.
1.5.4.5	He who is Reva, who is the carrier of no harm, the giver of wealth, the enhancer of prosperity, may he, who is auspicious, embrace us.
1.5.4.6	The fame of the god Mitra, the upholder of the people, is the splendor of the divine one, the most famous of the colorful ones.
1.5.4.7	Never are you a thief, never do you fight.
1.5.4.8	May your chariot, O Dūdbha, be near us from all sides, by which you protect the giver.
1.5.4.9	You are the lower one, I am the higher one. I am the gentle one, he who hates us and whom we hate. You are the overlord, I am the overlord. I am the overpowerer, he who hates Translation: You are the lower, I am the upper one. I am gentle, he who hates and whom we hate is the overlord, he who hates
1.5.4.10	May Pūṣan, the protector of paths, protect me; may Pūṣan the protector of cattle protect me; may the eastern direction, Agni the deity, protect me. May that one who harms me from that direction reach Agni. May the southern direction, Indra the deity, protect. May that one reach Indra. May the western direction, the Maruts the deity, protect May that one reach the Maruts. May the northern direction, Mitra-Varuna the deity, protect; may that one reach Mitra-Varuna. May the upward direction, Soma the deity, protect, may that one reach Soma. May Dharma protect me from Dharma, may Vidharma protect me from Vidharma. May Ayus and Pra-Ayus, Chaksus and Vichaksus, Pra-Ang and Apa-Ang, Uruku and Uruku-sya, may we go together with your speech and devotion, O Agni, the householder.
1.5.5.1	For him whose Agnihotra is in tune with the Stoma, heaven is attained.
1.5.5.2	Where the Stoma is not in tune, that is no sacrifice.
1.5.5.3	"The verse "Approaching the sacrifice" is a praise."
1.5.5.4	He yokes Soma from here.
1.5.5.5	He yokes this very Stoma.
1.5.5.6	He yokens the Stoma of those creatures who are named and follow.
1.5.5.7	"He shines with the ancient light", the ancient light is this world; he thus joins the Stoma from here.
1.5.5.8	And the gods are the ancient ones; he thus joins them with the Stoma.
1.5.5.9	He joins the Stoma on both sides, from here and from there.
1.5.5.10	He who has joined the gods goes to heaven.
1.5.5.11	What is said here, O Maghavan, is the praise.
1.5.5.12	He stands firm in this very (earth).
1.5.5.13	And when he says 'the step of the Upavasatha', he joins the Stoma with those beings who will be born.
1.5.5.14	"Your chariots, O Dūdbha, have gone around." In this way he encloses the Stoma from both sides, from here and from there.
1.5.5.15	Agni is the head, heaven; by this he is the head of heaven. He is the lord of the earth, this; by this he has the earth as his wife. He is the fertilizing of the waters, the one who fertilizes; by this he fertilizes the waters. He is the one who fertilizing, the one who is fertilizing; by this he makes the waters fertilizing. He is the cattle-possessing, the one who possesses cattle; by this he possesses cattle. He is the prosperous, the one who prospers; by this he prospers.
1.5.5.16	He has resorted to the Gāyatrī.
1.5.5.17	For Agni is Gāyatrī, and the Gāyatrīs are the metres.
1.5.5.18	He has thus resorted to him with his own metre.
1.5.5.19	"Both of you, O Indra and Agni, are invoked," for both of them enter him when he is in the daytime. Therefore he shines by day. He enters her when he is in darkness. Therefore he shines at night. When he says, "Both of you," he invokes them both without hesitation. He shines in both worlds, in this one and the other.
1.5.5.20	He has taken up the Tristubh metre.
1.5.5.21	"Here he first came, the Creator, with the creators," for Agni was first created here.
1.5.5.22	"The Hotri, most worthy, at the sacrifices, is to be praised," for he is the Hotri, most deserving, at the sacrifices.
1.5.5.23	The Bhrigus, the Apnavans, have praised him, for the Bhrigus have praised him, the Apnavan.
1.5.5.24	In the woods, the variegated, the all-pervading, the all-embracing, for he has pervaded all this world.
1.5.5.25	His ancient radiance, for heaven is the ancient.
1.5.5.26	He indeed stands in heaven.
1.5.6.4	The Prāṇāpāna (breath) is indeed taken out of the mouth of the sacrifice.
1.5.6.5	"Here he first moves, with the creators," he places the embryo."
1.5.6.6	"He shines after its ancient light," he places it on the Uddhṛti (vessel)."
1.5.6.7	"This is your womb, O Rtvīya," he generates and increases."
1.5.6.8	One should attend with six (verses).
1.5.6.9	There are six Prstha (verses).
1.5.6.10	He recited the verses backwards.
1.5.6.11	He stands up with the Dādhīkravāti verse.
1.5.6.12	This is Agni's beloved form, connected with cattle, and fully prosperous.
1.5.6.13	By means of this he approaches Agni's beloved abode.
1.5.6.14	And he becomes possessed of cattle.
1.5.6.15	And by means of this the sacrificer purifies himself.
1.5.6.16	He offers with seven (verses).
1.5.6.17	The Shakvari has seven feet.
1.5.6.18	Shakvari is cattle.
1.5.6.19	He indeed wins cattle.
1.5.6.20	This (fire) indeed perishes when it is set up.
1.5.6.21	For Agni is cattle.
1.5.6.22	One should offer these oblations of the setting up of Agni every year.
1.5.6.23	By that he does not perish.
1.5.6.24	By that (oblation) he makes him new.
1.5.6.25	Therefore, one should not be afraid of it.
1.5.6.26	One should perform the Agni-installation ceremony with the Agniye Pavamāni verses.
1.5.6.27	By this, he does not age.
1.5.6.28	By this he makes him new again.
1.5.6.29	One performs the ceremony with twelve verses.
1.5.6.30	Twelve months make a year.
1.5.6.31	Having attained the year, one obtains it.
1.5.6.32	The Agniṣṭoma should be performed on the thirteenth day of the month.
1.5.6.33	There is a month of thirteen days.
1.5.6.34	One obtains it by this (rite).
1.5.7.1	The theologians say:
1.5.7.2	Why do they attend upon Agni in the evening and not in the morning?
1.5.7.3	The sun shines in the evening.
1.5.7.4	Therefore they attend upon him in the evening.
1.5.7.5	This is the morning offering.
1.5.7.6	Therefore, they do not rise in the morning.
1.5.7.7	Therefore, if the Agnihotra is not offered in the evening, it should not be eaten by one who offers Agnihotra.
1.5.7.8	Therefore, it should be eaten in the morning if not offered in the morning. 
1.5.7.9	Therefore, in the evening, the guest is offered with the Prāṇāgnihotra.
1.5.7.10	But they give in the morning because of its auspiciousness.
1.5.7.11	One should be attended in the morning with the Prātaravanega.
1.5.7.12	If the hands are being lowered while the Soma is being poured out, one should lower them.
1.5.7.13	There one should recite four verses of Vihavya at the morning pressing and four at the evening pressing.
1.5.7.14	One attains what has not been attained by the morning pressing.
1.5.7.15	One obtains what has not been obtained.
1.5.7.16	One attains only what has not been gained.
1.5.7.17	One obtains only what has not yet been obtained.
1.5.7.18	He who has been raised up is indeed afraid.
1.5.7.19	The gods strew him with the metres.
1.5.7.20	When he approaches, he strews him with the metres;
1.5.7.21	he makes him safe from fear.
1.5.7.22	One should approach the new moon with the Agni-Soma (rite).
1.5.7.23	The new moon is indeed Agni-Soma.
1.5.7.24	He gives him over to the new moon.
1.5.7.25	One should attend the waning moon with the rite for Indra and Agni.
1.5.7.26	The dark fortnight is the Agni-Indra.
1.5.7.27	He gives it to the former fortnight.
1.5.7.28	All the deities, having given him over, protect him without any expectation, he who, knowing this, worships Agni.
1.5.8.1	"You are Agni, O Surya, with lustre," he desires a better and more prosperous blessing.
1.5.8.2	"May you unite me with life and lustre," he desires himself.
1.5.8.3	"Thou art united with the light of Surya, for then these two lights were united.
1.5.8.4	"Thou art united with (the light) of the Rsis' praise," for the praise of the Rsis is the metres.
1.5.8.5	He unites him with the metres.
1.5.8.6	"Thou are united with the dear abode," for the oblations are the dear abode of Agni.
1.5.8.7	He unites it with the oblations.
1.5.8.8	"May I be united with life, with radiance, with progeny, with prosperity!" Thus he prays for blessings.
1.5.8.9	"The kindlers, a hundred winters." This is a call to the victor in battle.
1.5.8.10	One should stand near him with this.
1.5.8.11	When the warrior wins in battle, then he becomes
1.5.8.12	One should stand close to the king.
1.5.8.13	For everyone desires to conquer in battle.
1.5.8.14	All desire to prosper.
1.5.8.15	Manu had ten wives, one of whom had ten sons, another nine, another eight, another seven, another six, another five, another four, another three, another two, and the last one son.
1.5.8.16	Of those who had nine sons, one died.
1.5.8.17	Of those with eight sons, two died.
1.5.8.18	Of the seven, three died.
1.5.8.19	Of six, four died.
1.5.8.20	Then indeed there were five only.
1.5.8.21	They, the five, divided these five among themselves, whatever was Manu's own.
1.5.8.22	Therefore they indeed ran to Manu.
1.5.8.23	Manu was helpless.
1.5.8.24	To them he gave these kindling-sticks.
1.5.8.25	With them they burned them.
1.5.8.26	With them he destroyed them.
1.5.8.27	He who, knowing this, offers these kindling-sticks, makes his evil-doing enemy perish.
1.5.8.28	"He says, "Thou art the kindling-stick of Agni; protect me from the curse!" He protects him from the curse.
1.5.8.29	" "He says, "You are the kindling-stiok of Soma; protect me from injury!" He protects from injury.
1.5.8.30	" "he says, "Thou are the kindling stick of Yama; protect me from death!" He protects against death."
1.5.8.31	This is what Narada said.
1.5.8.32	"This is indeed the Agnihotra, "he says, "it protects him from being cursed."
1.5.8.33	It becomes his own.
1.5.8.34	It protects him from death.
1.5.9.1	"O Agni, you are the giver of life, give me life," he says; he indeed bestows life on him.
1.5.9.2	"O Agn, you are the bestower of radiance, give me radiance," he says, he indeed bestows radiance on him.
1.5.9.3	"O Agni, thou art the protector of the eye; protect my eye." He protects his eye.
1.5.9.4	"O Agni, thou are the protector of the ear; protect my ear." He protects his ear.
1.5.9.5	"O Agn, thou art the protect of the body; protect my body." He protects his body.
1.5.9.6	"Whatever is deficient in my body, O Agni, do thou fill it up." Whatever is deficient in his own self, in his progeny, in his cattle, that he fills up with this.
1.5.9.7	He fills it up.
1.5.9.8	"Whatever is thy heat, O Agni," these are the luminous forms of Agni.
1.5.9.9	Now, indeed, this was said by Āharuṇa Aupaveśin,
1.5.9.10	He says, "I am sending away my enemies, the most wicked and harmful, with the luminous bodies of Agni."
1.5.9.11	He sends away his enemies, the most sinful and harmful, who knows this, worships Agni.
1.5.9.12	O Agni, lord of light, salutations to your light. Place light in me. Thus he places light in himself as a means of peace.
1.5.9.13	One becomes lustrous and endowed with brahmic glory.
1.5.9.14	O Citravasu, may you be well. May I cross over to the other shore.
1.5.9.15	Night is Citravasu.
1.5.9.16	Day is Arvavasu.
1.5.9.17	Night is Agni.
1.5.9.18	Day is the sun.
1.5.9.19	These two are the two halves.
1.5.9.20	They are the bricks.
1.5.9.21	He says three times.
1.5.9.22	The gods are three times.
1.5.9.23	One who knows this, his sacrifice or his Brahman shines.
1.5.9.24	"You are the waters, may we eat the waters." The waters are these.
1.5.9.25	"You belong to the great, may we eat what belongs to the great." The great are these.
1.5.9.26	You belong to energy, may we eat energy. Energy is these.
1.5.9.27	"May the prosperity of the Rāyas be here. May we enjoy the prosperity of the Rayas." For the prosperity of the rays is indeed these (cows).
1.5.9.28	"May you rejoice in this womb, in this cattle-pen." He places them in their own womb, in their own cattle-pen.
1.5.9.29	"This is your kinsman. May he not go away from here. May you be many. May you not be lost." He prays for a blessing.
1.5.9.30	He offers the calf.
1.5.9.31	Animals are fond of their calves.
1.5.9.32	This is the lord of a thousandfold prosperity.
1.5.9.33	It prospers a thousandfold.
1.5.9.34	One who knows this does not fall short of a thousand.
1.5.9.35	"You are the collection, O you of universal form." By form after form indeed is this collection.
1.5.9.36	By forms alone he prospers it.
1.5.9.37	He took up their names.
1.5.9.38	He made them his friends.
1.5.9.39	For when he takes the name of a friend, he makes him a friend by it.
1.5.10.1	Seven bricks are laid in the fire-altar, which are related to each other.
1.5.10.2	They are the seven village-bricks for the other world.
1.5.10.3	They should be laid here.
1.5.10.4	A cow, a horse, an ass, a goat, a sheep, a man.
1.5.10.5	When one offers a cow, the oblations become offered by the cow.
1.5.10.6	And they are offered on the cow itself.
1.5.10.7	He goes to heaven by means of the metres, and mounts one metre after another.
1.5.10.8	When he worships with this Gāyatrī verse, "To thee, O Agni, to heaven, to heaven," he worships in this Gāyatrī, and stands firm in this (earth).
1.5.10.9	"O Agni, thou art our protector." This is Agni's dear and protective form.
1.5.10.10	He goes to her alone.
1.5.10.11	He does not injure him.
1.5.10.12	He approaches with four verses in two feet.
1.5.10.13	Cattle have four feet.
1.5.10.14	The sacrificer has two feet.
1.5.10.15	The house is the Gārhapatya.
1.5.10.16	and in the houses and cattle.
1.5.10.17	"He sees you with energy, may you see me with energy." He sees them with energy.
1.5.10.18	They see him with energy.
1.5.10.19	"He says, "I see you with wealth, may you see with me with wealth." He sees them with wealth."
1.5.10.20	They see him wealth.
1.5.10.21	I see the offspring of Ida, the offspring of Manu, may all be in our house.
1.5.10.22	Thus these are the offspring of Ida and Manu.
1.5.10.23	They indeed are the ones who have been won.
1.5.10.24	They are the first ones who have been created.
1.5.10.25	"You are the Ida-s, the honey-makers," for these are the Ida-honey-makers.
1.5.10.26	"You have entered the sweet, the intoxicating," for these are sweet and intoxicating.
1.5.10.27	You are the world, the nourisher of a thousand, the nourisher. The world is indeed the nourisher of thousands.
1.5.10.28	May we be your devotees. He prays for blessings.
1.5.10.29	You are the Ida, the upholder of vows. The Ida indeed is the upholder of the vows.
1.5.10.30	You are Vratabharit in you. Vratabharid is indeed this one.
1.5.11.1-8	"May there be great prosperity for the three." He stands with the three-verse Prajapati hymn. These creatures are of Prajapati. He wins them. They are the first ones created. He approaches Prajapati. He stands firm among the deities. "He stands with the Soma hymn, "O Soma, the purifier." He stands with the Brahmanaspati hymn." He stands firm in Brahman.
1.5.11.9	Then indeed he attains to the lustre of Brahman.
1.5.11.10	He who competes with one established in Brahman, falls behind him.
1.5.11.11	At the Agnihotra, the deities of both (worlds) hope (to receive offerings), from those to whom he offers and from those to whom not.
1.5.11.12	"To Mitra, the holder of the people," thus he stands up for Mitra.
1.5.11.13	He has thus made Mitra on both sides, from here and from there.
1.5.11.14	At some time he stands with the two Brihatī verses addressed to Indra.
1.5.11.15	Cattle belong to Indra.
1.5.11.16	He wins them.
1.5.11.17	He makes them the first.
1.5.11.18	"The chariot of your Dūdbha (chariot) is around you." The sun is the Dūdbha chariot.
1.5.11.19	It unites both these worlds.
1.5.11.20	He encloses everything with it.
1.5.11.21	"Thou art the lowerer, I am the lowerer; I am the soft one, he who hates us and whom we hate." He should hold it with his heel if he is competing with a sinner.
1.5.11.22	If one were to compete with a similar person, one should grasp the right foot with the words, "May I be superior to him who hates us and whom we hate."
1.5.11.23	If one were to compete against a better person, one should seize the right foot with "You are superior, I am superior to him who dislikes us and whom we dislike."
1.5.11.24	He overcomes all of them.
1.5.11.25	He overcomes all of them completely.
1.5.11.26	He overcomes them all.
1.5.11.27	"He protects me, the path-protector," this is the earth itself.
1.5.11.28	"He, the cattle-protector," this means the atmosphere itself.
1.5.11.29	"The lord-protector," this refers to the sky itself.
1.5.11.30	He approaches these worlds.
1.5.11.31	He protects himself from these worlds for the sake of non-injury.
1.5.11.32	The eastern direction is Agni, the deity. He places them in the directions of the body.
1.5.11.33	Then whoever competes with him or transgresses against him, those very deities first defeat him.
1.5.11.34	There are seven great powers in a man.
1.5.11.35	They are indeed his own.
1.5.11.36	They are the seven sages.
1.5.11.37-43	The seven sages are the vital airs. One indeed binds the vital airs. One indeed binds one's own vital airs. He seizes the vital airs of his enemy. He who knows this, does not get afflicted. He seizes his enemy. May Dharma protect me from Dharma. May Vidharma protect me from Vidharma.
1.5.11.44	Ayus, Pra-yus, Chaksus, Vichaksus, Pran, Apana, Uruka, this is the Uruka.
1.5.11.45	This divides.
1.5.11.46	What he divides, that he again divides into this.
1.5.11.47	O Agni, the householder, the sacrificer kindles the fire.
1.5.11.48	This indeed is the sacrificer's own, namely, the fire.
1.5.11.49	This is the Agni of the sacrificer.
1.5.11.50	This is indeed like a dwelling place.
1.5.11.51	One should say while sitting between the fires, "For the light, for the thread."
1.5.11.52	He places the blessing he desires in front and behind on himself.
1.5.12.1	"Giving to me" is indeed given.
1.5.12.2	One who offers Agnihotra indeed gives.
1.5.12.3	Whatever he may desire, he should ask the Agnihotra fire for it.
1.5.12.4	It then bends down to him.
1.5.12.5	They say, "He who asks for them at the time of their appearance, does he not reach the gods?"
1.5.12.6	Therefore, one should not approach it.
1.5.12.7	Yama died.
1.5.12.8	The gods said to Yama, "Yama!"
1.5.12.9	When they asked her, she said,
1.5.12.10	"Today is the day of death."
1.5.12.11	They said:
1.5.12.12	"This (day) does not tolerate him like this."
1.5.12.13	"Let us create night."
1.5.12.14	Then there was only day, not night.
1.5.12.15	Those gods created night.
1.5.12.16	Then there was dawn.
1.5.12.17	Then she could not tolerate him.
1.5.12.18	Therefore they say, "The day and night are indeed the two who forgive sin."
1.5.12.19	That night was created, and it gathered together the animals.
1.5.12.20	The gods found the animals by means of the metres.
1.5.12.21	They summoned them back by means of the meters.
1.5.12.22	When he stands up, he sees the animals by means means of the metres.
1.5.12.23-27	He again calls them with the metres. They say, "Varuna indeed, having become night, swallows the animals." The gods indeed released them from Varuna with the metres. They again called them with the metres.
1.5.12.28	He again invokes them with the metres.
1.5.12.29	The sacrifice, the sacrifice prospers.
1.5.12.30	Now those who know not the truth think that Soma alone prospers. One should recite four verses before the Agniṣṭoma and Viṣṇu offerings.
1.5.12.31	One should recite two Yajya and Anuvākyā verses for the Agniyeya cake.
1.5.12.32	By this alone one should touch the oblations.
1.5.12.33	One seizes the sacrifice of another.
1.5.12.34	No one seizes his sacrifice.
1.5.12.35	He becomes a sacrificer, the other is not a sacrificer.
1.5.13.1	Those who perform the new and full moon sacrifices, they build the fire altar.
1.5.13.2	For them the bricks are indeed the days and nights.
1.5.13.3	Where one should stay for five nights, one should offer that.
1.5.13.4	Five nights are five days, and that makes ten.
1.5.13.5	That should not be done like that.
1.5.13.6	That is not proper.
1.5.13.7	One should offer the last one on the tenth night.
1.5.13.8	Then it is done properly.
1.5.13.9	One should not offer when all are yoked.
1.5.13.10	One should make an offering to the owner of the land.
1.5.13.11	The yoking is not done on the unsuitable ones.
1.5.13.12	All other yokes should be suitable.
1.5.13.13	The right one should be suitable for the Agniṣṭha.
1.5.13.14	The yoke for the left one is removed.
1.5.13.15	Then one should offer.
1.5.13.16	One does not offer on the ground.
1.5.13.17	The yoking is done with effort.
1.5.13.18	That should not be guarded.
1.5.13.19	One should offer on all the suitable ones.
1.5.13.20	This is indeed the Vasat-offering.
1.5.13.21	One should not offer a deficient oblation.
1.5.13.22	For it is offered to Rudra.
1.5.13.23	If one were to offer a deficient obiation, one would be offering to Rudra. If one were to offer an oblation in excess, one would be making an offering to the departed.
1.5.13.24	If there were to be an excess, one should offer it first and then take it away.
1.5.13.25	If it were to be deficient, it would be deficient.
1.5.13.26	Then one should offer.
1.5.13.27	O Vastospati, the remover of evil, entering all forms, be a good friend to us.
1.5.13.28	O Vastospati, know us well. Be our protector, free from evil. Whatever we desire, may that be accomplished. Be kind to us, be kind to us, the bipeds and the quadrupeds.
1.5.14.1	Protect my cattle, protect them for me, so that they may return to us.
1.5.14.2	O Agni, thou hast a thousand eyes, a hundred heads, thy breaths are a hundred, thy out-breaths a thousand. Thou art the lord of a thousandfold wealth. To thee we offer this oblation for the sake of strength.
1.5.14.3	O Agni, the lord of the house, may I be the good householder with you, the householder. May you be the good householder by me, the householder. O Agni, the protector of the house, protect my food and wealth. May I be the good eater with you, the good eater. May you be a good eater by me, the good eater.
1.5.14.4	May Mitra and Varuna protect these my houses, may they protect them, O young ones, from destruction, from injury. May Pusan guard them for our return.
1.5.14.5	"Protect my cattle, O Shanshya; protect them for our return." He stands by the Ahavaniya.
1.5.14.6	Having given away the cattle to the Ahavaniya, he goes.
1.5.14.7	"O Agni, with a thousand eyes, with a hundred heads," for he is indeed a thousand-eyed and a hundred-headed.
1.5.14.8	"Your breaths are a hundred, your out-breaths a thousand," for his breaths are indeed a hundred, his out-breaths are a thousand.
1.5.14.9	"You are the lord of a thousandfold wealth, to that we offer homage for the sake of strength," he thus prays for a blessing.
1.5.14.10	"O Agni, protect my progeny. Protect it for me. May I return to it." He stands by the Garhapatya.
1.5.14.11	Having given his progeny to the Garhapaty alone, he departs.
1.5.14.12	"O Agni, the householder, may I be a good householder through you, the householder. May you be a good householder by me, the householder." The two who are not householders grow old.
1.5.14.13	All life is from here.
1.5.14.14	He is not afflicted.
1.5.14.15	He stands by the southern fire, saying, "Know my food, protect it, guard it for me until I return."
1.5.14.16	He goes away after giving the food to the southern fire.
1.5.14.17	May Mitra-Varuna, the two, protect these my houses, unharmed, uninjured, may Pusan guard them, for our return. For Mitra-Varuna are the day and night.
1.5.14.18	Pusan is the cattle.
1.5.14.19	He goes around the houses, giving them to Mitra-Varuna and to Pusan.
1.5.14.20	He says, "Set up the fire."
1.5.14.21	The ashes attend thee.
1.5.14.22	Having returned to the Ahavaniya fire, he stands up, saying, "Do thou protect my cattle; do thou again give them to me."
1.5.14.23	He places the protected cattle in himself by means of the Ahavaniya alone.
1.5.14.24	O Agni, thou with a thousand eyes, with a hundred heads, thy breaths are a hundred, thy out-breaths a thousand, thou art the lord of a thousand, to that wealth we offer thee, for the attainment of strength.
1.5.14.25	"Protect my progeny, O Narya! Give it back to me." Having returned to the Garhapatya, he stands up.
1.5.14.26	By means of the Garhapaty, he places the protected progeny within himself.
1.5.14.27	O Agni, the lord of the house, may I be the good lord of the house with you as the lord of the House. May you be the good lord with me as the lord of House. May you protect my food with your intelligence. Give it back to me." Having returned to the southern fire, he stands up.
1.5.14.28	He places the food hidden in himself by means of the southern fire.
1.5.14.29	May Mitra-Varuna, the two, protect these my houses, the two of you, the undestroyed, the unharmed, Pusan has guarded them for our return.
1.5.14.30	Thus, indeed, Mitra-Varuna are the day and night.
1.5.14.31	Pusan is the cattle.
1.5.14.32	He places the houses protected by the day and night and Mitra-Varuna in himself.
1.6.1.1-3	May your gifts, O Agni, the most excellent, the most desirable, the most bountiful, the most delightful, the most brilliant, the most glorious, the most excellent of all, the most excellent in the world, the most excellent among the gods, the most excellent for us, the most excellent to be worshipped, the most excellent as a friend, the most excellent at the sacrifice, the most excellent when invoked, the most excellent giver of wealth, the most excellent protector, the most excellent lord, the most excellent Agni, the most Agni, the most brilliant Agni, the most glorious Agni, the most bounteous Agni, the most desirable Agni, the most delightful Agni, the most pleasant Agni, the most agreeable Agni, the most amiable Agni, the most friendly Agni, the most helpful Agni, the most useful Agni, the most beneficial Agni, the most auspicious Agni, the most propitious Agni, the most kind Agni, the most gracious Agni, the most generous Agni, the most liberal Agni, the most beneficent Agni, the most benevolent Agni, the most compassionate Agni, the most merciful Agni, the most forgiving Agni, the most forbearing Agni, the most patient Agni, the most tolerant Agni, the most gentle Agni, the most mild Agni, the most pleasing Agni, the most charming Agni, the most beautiful Agni, the most handsome Agni, the most attractive Agni, the most lovely Agni, the most radiant Agni, the most shining Agni, the most luminous Agni, the most bright
1.6.1.4	O Agni, may the subjects, the hopes, and the cattle be united with him. Place the countries in him which belong to Savitar.
1.6.1.5	This is your womb, the seasonal one, from which you were born shining. Knowing that, O Agni, ascend it. From there increase our wealth.
1.6.1.6	This bull, the dappled one, has moved forward, sitting before his mother and father, going to heaven.
1.6.1.7	The speech shines with thirty rays, offered to the flying one, the buffalo has ascended heaven.
1.6.1.8	It moves within the ocean, from his breath, from out-breath, for you the sun moves with the days.
1.6.1.9	From here was born the first one, from his own womb, the All-knowing One. May he carry oblations to the gods through the Gāyatrī, the Tristubh, the Jagatī and the Anushtubh, knowing.
1.6.1.10	The Agni who is our father, immortal, has entered into our hearts, we take him to ourselves. Let him not go away from us, abandoning us.
1.6.1.11	You are the milker, you are the milked, you are the cow. I give you your share. May Agni, the agreeable, be with the cattle. You are the excrement. Your bright, bright light is that by which you shine. May you shine with that light.
1.6.1.12	I take Agni first, with offspring, with radiance, with wealth. I place the nobility in me, I place the wealth in me. May we enjoy a hundred winters, with good heroes.
1.6.1.13	I have placed thee in the rite of Agni, the god, in the rite of Indra, the lord of the Maruts, in the rite belonging to the mind, the lord of men.
1.6.1.14	I have covered thee with the metre, the sky with greatness, the earth with the earth. On her lap, O divine Aditi, thou hast placed Agni, the eater of food, the son of food.
1.6.1.15	O Agni, thou purifiest the life-breaths; Agni is the sage; O Agni, do thou purify.
1.6.2.1	O Vājini, bring the dear body of Agni Pavamāna. O Vājini bring the dear body Agni Pāvaka. O Vājīni, bring the dear form of Agni Śuci.
1.6.2.2	The first cry of the one being born, whether from the rising sea or from the excrement, your wings are hawks, your arms are deer. That is your birth, O swift one, that is praised.
1.6.2.3	For strength, for power, for your rising, for the Vrishni, for the strong, you are the destroyer of enemies, the destroyer of Vritra.
1.6.2.4	Go forward, O wise one, in the eastern direction, O Agni, be Agni in front of Agni. Illuminate all directions, give us food for the bipeds and the quadrupeds.
1.6.2.5	Agni said it, Soma said it, Brihaspati said it, Savitar, Indra said it, Pusan said it, he has not placed it in the world of the righteous.
1.6.2.6	I have placed you in the rite of Agni, the god, in the rite of Indra, the lord of the Maruts, in the rite belonging to the mind, the lord of villages.
1.6.2.7	I have placed thee in thy place, the place of Ida, on the navel of the earth. O Agni, born of food, I have placed thee on the lap of Aditi, the goddess, for the eater of food.
1.6.2.8	With thy bright, bright light, with thy bright, bright, ever-flowing radiance, I have placed (thee).
1.6.2.9	O Agni, born of Ida, we have placed thee on her place, on the navel (of the earth). O Jātavedas, we have placed (thee) for the carrying of oblations.
1.6.2.10	O Agni, the king and the self-king, may they bestow on me strength. O Agni, the lord and the ruler, may they bestow strength on me. O Agni, those who are the lord and the controller, may they bestow energy on me.
1.6.2.11	From the ocean the sweet-tasting wave rose up, with the Upaṃśu (chant) it attained immortality. The secret name of ghee is the tongue of the gods, the navel of nectar.
1.6.2.12	We proclaim the name of ghee at this sacrifice, we uphold it with salutations. May Brahma listen to what is being praised. The four-horned bull has come forth.
1.6.2.13	Four horns, three feet, two heads, seven hands, he is bound in three ways, the bull roars, the great god has stretched out the mortal.
1.6.2.14	Those fires that have entered the plants and trees with a united mind, may they all unite with Viraj. Give us strength to the two-legged and the four-legged.
1.6.2.15	Seven are thy fires, O Agni, seven thy tongues, seven thy sages, seven thy dear abodes, seven thy priests, sevenfold they worship thee. Seven are thy Hotras, knowing well the seasons, seven thy wombs, fill them with ghee, Svāhā!
1.6.2.16	Those fires who are in heaven and on earth, coming together, seeking nourishment, having come together, having given wealth to Agni, having become recipients of oblations, having gone to their own place, have gone to rest. Svāhā.
1.6.2.17	Varuṇa, the one who upholds his vow, sat down on the banks for the sake of kingship, the one with good wisdom.
1.6.2.18	May the serpent, the wise one, hear us, the goat with one foot, the earth, the ocean, the praised mantras, the well-arranged ones, may they protect us. O king, delight in our oblation.
1.6.2.19	Now indeed the Brahman-lord speaks the praiseworthy hymn, in which Indra, Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman, the gods have performed their duties.
1.6.2.20	Heat is the head. This Agni is dear to the cattle. Be thou the excrement. Be thou for the offspring and the son. The light is the eye. This Agni is the dear one to the cattle. Be thou the excrement, be thou for the offspring, and the son. Wind is the breath. This Agni is a dear one to the animals. Be thou the dung. Be thou for offspring and son.
1.6.2.21	May the fire be our food.
1.6.2.22	May the heaven and earth be auspicious, may the waters and plants be auspicious, may all the fires be auspicious, separately, for my supremacy, with their own vows.
1.6.2.23	Those fires that have entered the plants and trees with a united mind, may they all unite with Viraj. May they give us strength to the two-footed and the four-footed.
1.6.3.1	Prajapati was here at first.
1.6.3.2	The plants ascended him.
1.6.3.3	The plants are indeed the sun.
1.6.3.4	They were about to stand still and could not stand still.
1.6.3.5	He lamented.
1.6.3.6	He was distressed.
1.6.3.7	Then Agni was created.
1.6.3.8	The plants went to the brilliance of that Agni created.
1.6.3.9	They did not dry up.
1.6.3.10	They did not dry up before that.
1.6.3.11	That Prajapati placed the fire, saying, "These are indeed together."
1.6.3.12	They endured.
1.6.3.13	It is indeed for endurance that this is placed.
1.6.3.14	Just as in spring and winter the fire endures the plants, so he who, knowing this, places the fire, endures his enemy, his foe, and his adversary.
1.6.3.15	This much of it is not burnt, as much as the altar is enclosed.
1.6.3.16	Having taken it up, he places the fire after having approached the water.
1.6.3.17	Having made it fit for sacrifice and worthy of oblations, he places it.
1.6.3.18	This (earth) was afraid of Agni when he was created, (thinking) 'He will burn me.'
1.6.3.19	When he places the fire having approached the water, it is for not burning it.
1.6.3.20	This is the whole body of Prajapati, namely, the waters.
1.6.3.21	All beings and all cattle approach him from all sides, he who, knowing this, having approached the waters, lays down the fire.
1.6.3.22	As much as the vessel of the boar was, so much was this (earth) at first.
1.6.3.23	Having approached the fire that is struck by the boar, he lays down the fire; thus he does not go beyond this.
1.6.3.24	He places it in her measure.
1.6.3.25	Therefore it is called Varaha.
1.6.3.26	For it supports her measure.
1.6.3.27	The Asuras were called Devapāṇis.
1.6.3.28	They stole the cows of the gods.
1.6.3.29	They followed them.
1.6.3.30	They caught up with them.
1.6.3.31	The milk of those cows diminished.
1.6.3.32	They said, "Whatever boon they had, that has been lost."
1.6.3.33	Having become a boar, he went to the gods from the demons.
1.6.3.34	Therefore cows chase the boar, knowing their own milk.
1.6.3.35	As much as is dear to the animals, bipeds and quadrupeds, so much is he dear to the animals bipeds and quadripeds, who, knowing this, installs the fire after having worshipped the boar.
1.6.3.36	This is its unloved, namely the anthill.
1.6.3.37	When one lays down the fire after having dug out a termite-hill, one lays it down in her (earth's) own body without touching it.
1.6.3.38	This is her sap which has risen up in the form of a termite-hill.
1.6.3.39	When one lays down the Agni after having dug out the termite-hill, he lays it down in the sap of her own body.
1.6.3.40	This is the energy which has risen up as a termite-hill.
1.6.3.41	When one lays down the fire after having dug out a termite-hill, one lays it down in its own (natural) place.
1.6.3.42	The termite-hill is indeed the breast of Prajapati.
1.6.3.43	When one lays down the Agni after having dug out the termite-hill, he makes Prajapati give him the breast.
1.6.3.44	He obtains food for him.
1.6.3.45	He who knows this becomes the leader of his own people.
1.6.3.46	This much is the sacrificial here of the other world, namely, the dawn.
1.6.3.47	When one places the dawn and then lays down the fire, he lays it down in the sacrificial here of that other world.
1.6.3.48	Here the animals do not deposit semen in the dawn.
1.6.3.49	When he lays down the fire after having strewn the ashes, he places the semen, for the nourishment and propagation of cattle.
1.6.3.50	This indeed is the all-pervading Agni, the sun.
1.6.3.51	When he was here, his ashes were these sand-grains.
1.6.3.52	When he lays down the Agni after having strewn the sand-grains, he places him in his own womb, in his own ashes.
1.6.3.53	This earth was loose at first.
1.6.3.54	Prajapati strengthened it with sand.
1.6.3.55	When one lays down the fire with sand, one strengthens this earth for stability.
1.6.3.56	Just as Prajapati strengthened this earth with sand, in the same way, animals strengthen him who, knowing this, lays down the fire in sand.
1.6.3.57	Indra struck Vritra with the thunderbolt.
1.6.3.58	The drops that fell from it became sand.
1.6.3.59	When one places sand around the fire, one strikes the thunderbolt at one's enemy, one's foe.
1.6.3.60	One should then mentally think of the one whom one hates.
1.6.3.61	One strikes the thunderbolt at him.
1.6.3.62	One indeed strikes the thunderbolt at the one whom one mentally thinks of.
1.6.3.63	The householder is called 'one who has excrement'.
1.6.3.64	The excrement of the householder is indeed the excrement of the dog.
1.6.3.65	When one lays down the fire after having placed the dog's excrement, one becomes a householder with excrement.
1.6.4.1	The gods were unable to divide Agni.
1.6.4.2	When they brought him forward, he became all in front.
1.6.4.3-7	He who took the horse, all became afterwards. He brought it with the horse as the leading vehicle. That is why the horse is called the leading vehicle. The horse is given in the Agni-adhyaya rite because of the division of Agni. One whose Agni is not divided, who does not give a horse in the Agni-adhaya rite, is not united with Agni.
1.6.4.8	Now he who gives a horse at the Agni-installation, for the sake of division.
1.6.4.9	He installs it after having divided it.
1.6.4.10	The gods, with the Stoma in front, conquered the Asuras.
1.6.4.11	This indeed is the Stoma, namely, the horse.
1.6.4.12	When they lead the horse in front, for victory.
1.6.4.13	He installs him for victory.
1.6.4.14	The eye of Prajapati was lost.
1.6.4.15	His horse became a horse.
1.6.4.16	When they lead the horse in front, they give sight to the sacrificer.
1.6.4.17	One should not let it go away.
1.6.4.18	If one lets it go away, one would deprive the sacrificer of sight and he would become blind.
1.6.4.19	One should take it back.
1.6.4.20	He took sight back to the sacrificer.
1.6.4.21	The foot should not be placed.
1.6.4.22	One should do the actual (ritual).
1.6.4.23	Rudra would be the lord of his animals.
1.6.4.24	It should be placed either on the side or from here or there.
1.6.4.25	One does not do the actual (rite).
1.6.4.26	Pasupati would be the lord without harming the animals.
1.6.4.27	The gods sent the sacrifice to Gayatri.
1.6.4.28	She went empty.
1.6.4.29	Agni gave her brilliance.
1.6.4.30	He becomes a goat.
1.6.4.31	Whatever goat is given in the Agni-installation, one obtains brilliance.
1.6.4.32	It should be given to the Agni-priest.
1.6.4.33	The Agni-priest is the mouth of the sacrifice.
1.6.4.34	One prospers the mouth of the sacrificer with the mouth of the sacrifi
1.6.4.35	He gives a cow and a bull.
1.6.4.36	One obtains all the stages of life.
1.6.4.37	All the stages of life are represented by the cow and the bull.
1.6.4.38	These two are the mother and father of the sacrifice, namely the cow and the bull.
1.6.4.39	The cow's milk and ghee.
1.6.4.40	The bull's cake and gruel.
1.6.4.41	They say, "He who gives a cow and a bull at the Agni-installation obtains the cow that yields what is desired."
1.6.4.42	Now those animals whose prosperity one wishes to be the greatest, to them one should give a cow and a bull, and a bullock and a cart.
1.6.4.43	That is the pair for the prosperity and propagation of animals.
1.6.4.44	The Soma-purchasing cow is indeed speech.
1.6.4.45	The cow and the bull are the Soma-purchasing cows.
1.6.4.46	When one gives a cow and a calf, one indeed obtains speech.
1.6.4.47	He who knows this speaks well.
1.6.4.48	The entire sacrificial thread should be given as an accessory.
1.6.4.49	The entire thread is the boundary of the metres.
1.6.4.50	When one gives the entire thread as an accessory, one obtains the metres.
1.6.4.51	The metres are cattle.
1.6.4.52	One obtains cattle.
1.6.4.53	One who is not fit for sacrifice, who is impure, is born from a non-sacrificial animal.
1.6.4.54	He drinks the milk of a man.
1.6.4.55	He gives gold.
1.6.4.56	He purifies himself with that.
1.6.4.57	It becomes a hundred.
1.6.4.58	A man has a life span of a hundred years and a hundred powers.
1.6.4.59	He obtains life and power.
1.6.4.60	Two thirty-man measures should be given in the two earlier oblations, and a forty-man measure in the last one.
1.6.4.61	He took it up.
1.6.4.62	By that he becomes superior, better, and more prosperous.
1.6.4.63	A man is not born until he has established the fire.
1.6.4.64	He is born only when he establishes the fire.
1.6.4.65	They should establish the fire wearing woolen garments.
1.6.4.66	They should be given to the Adhvaryu.
1.6.4.67	Woolen garments are the covering of the embryo.
1.6.4.68	They are indeed removing the embryo.
1.6.4.69-76	The fire-altar is to be built with gold and silver. Gold is the brilliance of Agni. He thus makes him brilliant. One should not remove it. If one were to remove it as it was placed, one would become a person who thinks too much and is greedy. One should therefore not remove it. One becomes a person who does not think too much and is not greedy.
1.6.5.1	Or this man, Agni, is the one who, sitting near him, eats food.
1.6.5.2	One who sits near him obtains offspring.
1.6.5.3	Animals stand near one who sits near him.
1.6.5.4	If one were to abandon this one, who is not entitled to a share, then one would be deprived of rain.
1.6.5.5	One would become a brooding, hungry person.
1.6.5.6	Those wild trees which bear the first and most abundant fruit, of them two cakes are to be made, one of barley and the other of rice, and placed on the leaves.
1.6.5.7	Then we offer to him the two portions, the domestic and the wild.
1.6.5.8	By that he does not injure him.
1.6.5.9	He becomes free from grief and sorrow.
1.6.5.10	Barley is cooked at the beginning of the season.
1.6.5.11	From here they take it out facing east.
1.6.5.12	Therefore, the barley-made one should be placed at the back and the rice-made one at the front.
1.6.5.13	If one desires for someone, one should place the barley-made (cake) at the back and rice-made (cake at the front).
1.6.5.14	These are the two breasts of Prajapati.
1.6.5.15	The gods live on his sacrifice, and men on the rain.
1.6.5.16	He wins food for himself.
1.6.5.17	He who knows this becomes the leader of his kinsmen, not suffering from hunger.
1.6.5.18	This is what Keshi Satyakami said to Keshi Darbhya, who was the food-giver to the people.
1.6.5.19	Thus we have obtained food from this Agni-installation, as he eats food.
1.6.5.20	They say, "This is all his food."
1.6.5.21	But he places the sacrificer near him.
1.6.5.22	One should know it thus, but not act thus.
1.6.5.23	Three times Prajapati spoke the truth.
1.6.5.24	This is indeed Bhuḥ, this is indeed Bhuvaḥ, this is Svar.
1.6.5.25	He should place it on the head of a Brāhmaṇa who is an Angiras.
1.6.5.26	"He should place it with the formula, "I place thee in the vow of the Angiras and the gods."
1.6.5.27	"Bhuvaḥ, Svar." In front."
1.6.5.28	Twice behind, twice in front.
1.6.5.29	The sacrifice was divided into two, and the lord of sacrifice was divided into tw
1.6.5.30	Then he should place the fire of the Brahman who is Vaiśvānara.
1.6.5.31	"He should place it with the formula, "I place thee in the vow of Agni, the god, who is earth, heaven."
1.6.5.32	"Heaven, earth." In front.
1.6.5.33	Twice in the rear, twice in front.
1.6.5.34-39	The sacrifice was divided into two parts, and the lord of sacrifice was divided into twoparts. Then he should place the Rajanya (king). "He places it behind with the formula, "Bhūr Bhuvah, I place thee in the vow of Indra, the lord of Maruts." In front with the formula, "Bhuvah Svar." Twice behind, twice in front." The sacrifice was divided in two parts, and lord of sacrifice was also divided into two parts.
1.6.5.40	The Rajanya is Indra, the Vratya is Maruts.
1.6.5.41	The Rajanya is indeed the Vishas.
1.6.5.42	The Rajanyas are indeed the Vishas, he becomes prosperous.
1.6.5.43	He obtains the Vishas. Then he should place the Vaishya.
1.6.5.44	"He places him with the formula, "O earth, O heaven, I place thee in the vow of the Gramanis." At the rear.
1.6.5.45	"O heaven, O earth." At the front.
1.6.5.46	Twice at the rear, twice at the front.
1.6.5.47	The sacrifice was divided into two parts, and the lord of sacrifice into two parts.
1.6.5.48	By the method of the leader, a Vaishya becomes prosperous.
1.6.5.49	He obtains the method of the chief.
1.6.5.50	When Agni was created, he was unable to break the shell.
1.6.5.51	Prajapati broke the shell for him with the Agniya Pavamani verses.
1.6.5.52	When he lays down the kindling-sticks of the Agniya Pavamana verses, he seizes its embryo.
1.6.5.53	He purifies it.
1.6.5.54	Just as a mother would nourish her child or a cow her calf, so does he nourish it.
1.6.5.55	When Agni was created, his brilliance blazed forth.
1.6.5.56	It entered the ashvattha tree.
1.6.5.57	When he lays down the fire-wood of the ashvattha tree, he obtains brilliance.
1.6.5.58	Agni, when created, became afraid and stood still without being kindled.
1.6.5.59	Prajapati was afraid, thinking, "He will harm me."
1.6.5.60	He kindled him with a Samya.
1.6.5.61	He pacified him.
1.6.5.62	That is why the Samya is called Samya. When he lays down fire-wood of Samya, he kindles him.
1.6.6.4	Heat is the head.
1.6.6.5	"This Agni is dear to cattle, you are excrement."
1.6.6.6	He made him dear to cattle and excrement.
1.6.6.7	"Whatever is bright, bright light, with that light you have shone." He has indeed attained light.
1.6.6.8	This is indeed the all-pervading Agni, the sun.
1.6.6.9	If he were to take it from the north, this would be so. He would burn the living one.
1.6.6.10	It should be taken from the south.
1.6.6.11	When he goes to the place of sacrifice, then the sacrificer should give a gift.
1.6.6.12	That is Viraj in the middle.
1.6.6.13	They establish the fires of Viraj.
1.6.6.14	Viraj is indeed cattle.
1.6.6.15	The animals are indeed in the middle.
1.6.6.16	Agni was not created.
1.6.6.17	Then Prajapati created beings.
1.6.6.18	They perished in the darkness of the worlds.
1.6.6.19	He lamented.
1.6.6.20	He was distressed.
1.6.6.21	Then Agni was created.
1.6.6.22	Having created Agni, he placed him below.
1.6.6.23	Those who were in this world, they all returned.
1.6.6.24	He took it up to the ankles.
1.6.6.25	Those who were in the northern world, they all came back.
1.6.6.26	He took up to the knees, to the navel, to the shoulders, to the ears.
1.6.6.27	Those who are in the northern world they all come back.
1.6.6.28	It should not be raised above the ear.
1.6.6.29	If one raises it above the ear, the sacrificer would be above the animals and Agni would burn the sacrificer from above.
1.6.6.30	They say, how can they today throw away this Brahman-offering?
1.6.6.31	He has indeed made it loose.
1.6.6.32	One should offer it to him."
1.6.6.33	Having placed it at the height of the knee, he should take it at the height above the navel, and then at the height of shoulder.
1.6.6.34	Just as the creatures returned to Prajapati from these worlds, in the same way the animals return to the sacrificer from these worlds, he who knowing thus, lays down the fire.
1.6.6.35	The gods, with Agni as their deity and Vishnu as their sacrifice, conquered the Asuras and struck them down with the thunderbolt.
1.6.6.36	If one has an enemy or a rival, they should thrice circumambulate the chariot wheel.
1.6.6.37	Just as the gods, having conquered the Asuras with Agni as their deity and Vishnu as their sacrifice, released them with the thunderbolt, so the sacrificer, having conquered his enemy, his foe, with Agni as his deity and Vishnu as his sacrifice, releases him with the thunderbolt. He who, knowing this, kindles the fire.
1.6.7.1	This indeed is Prajapati in the form of the full ladle.
1.6.7.2	When one offers with the full ladle, one attains Prajapati.
1.6.7.3	"Seven are thy, O Agni, kindling-sticks, seven thy tongues."
1.6.7.4	Thus it is that Agni has so many forms: six times seven.
1.6.7.5	He who, when kindling Agni, does not satisfy these, he indeed becomes thirsty.
1.6.7.6	He satisfies them.
1.6.7.7	He places three kindling-sticks of the Sami-wood, with ghee, with the Stoma of ghee.
1.6.7.8	He kindles him.
1.6.7.9	He pacifies him.
1.6.7.10	He becomes auspicious to the sacrificer and to the cattle.
1.6.7.11	The fires which are in these three worlds, they come together.
1.6.7.12	We take his wealth.
1.6.7.13	He has passed beyond us.
1.6.7.14	"He becomes a bearer of oblations."
1.6.7.15	One should offer it.
1.6.7.16	Those fires that come from heaven and earth, having approached, clothed in strength and fat, having given wealth to this Agni, having become pleased and satisfied, having become sharers of oblations, they return to their abode according to their light.
1.6.7.17	Having thus made it prosperous, the deities, being pleased and sharing in the oblations, go to rest according to their light.
1.6.7.18	One should recite this:
1.6.7.19	Heat is the head.
1.6.7.20	May this Agni be dear to the animals.
1.6.7.21	You are the excrement.
1.6.7.22	He made him dear to the animals, with excrement.
1.6.7.23-27	Whatever light, bright, shining, bright, eternal, is yours, by that I have established you. Thus he establishes him as having great brilliance. On the seat of Ida, on the navel of the earth, we have placed you, O Jātavedas Agni, for the carrying of oblations. Thus he makes him a carrier of oblations. When Agni was created, animals fell from his eyes to the ground.
1.6.7.28	Prajapati created the Vāravantīya (animals).
1.6.7.29	He restrained them.
1.6.7.30	Now indeed, when he is created, he is placed.
1.6.7.31	Just as from this created (animal) the animals fell down, so from this placed (animal) the cattle fall down.
1.6.7.32	For this is Rudra, namely Agni.
1.6.7.33	He who, knowing this, sings the Vāravantīya, indeed, restrains the cattle.
1.6.7.34	Prajapati, having created the Vāravantyā, obtained whatever desire he desired.
1.6.7.35	The sacrificer obtains that very desire for which he, knowing this, who desires it, lights the fire and sings the Vāravantiya.
1.6.7.36	Agni, the devourer, the all-devourer, burned these worlds.
1.6.7.37	Prajapati, singing the Varavantiya, carrying the Varana, followed him.
1.6.7.38	He appeased him.
1.6.7.39	He appeases whatever of him is the devourer, whatever is the all-devouring, he who, knowing this, sings the Varavantiyas.
1.6.7.40	Therefore the Varana should be the performer of sacrifices.
1.6.7.41	But one should not offer with this.
1.6.7.42	Whatever is, whatever has been, whatever will be, whatever is between heaven and earth, that is Vamadevya.
1.6.7.43	He who knows this and sings Vamadevya, he indeed attains it.
1.6.7.44	This is indeed the essence of Brahman, namely, the Yajnayajniya.
1.6.7.45	When one recites the Yajñāyajñiya hymn, one places the essence in the Brahman.
1.6.8.1	Prajapati, having created Agni, struck him with the Pavamāna (hymn).
1.6.8.2	When one offers to Pavamāna, one strikes him with it.
1.6.8.3	When one purifies with Pavaka, one purifies him.
1.6.8.4	When one offers with Succhi, one purifides what is impure in him.
1.6.8.5	When he offers to Pavamāna, Pavamāna is cattle; he wins cattle.
1.6.8.6	When he offers to Pāvaka, Pāvaka is food; he wins food.
1.6.8.7	When he makes an offering to Śuci, he places lustre in him.
1.6.8.8	If one wishes, 'May he be more sinful than I am,' one should offer a single oblation to him.
1.6.8.9	He has taken him away.
1.6.8.10	He becomes worse.
1.6.8.11	If one wishes, "May he not be better or worse," one should offer all the oblations together.
1.6.8.12	It binds him.
1.6.8.13	He becomes neither better nor worse.
1.6.8.14	Now, if one desires of him, 'May he be superior, more powerful, better', then one should offer to Agni Pavamāna and to Pāvaka and to Sucī, the two oblations on a single sacrificial grass.
1.6.8.15	He took it up.
1.6.8.16	By that he becomes superior, more powerful and better.
1.6.8.17-21	Now if the Sāṁyājyas of one (sacrificer) were in Tristubh or Anustubh or Jagatī, he would go beyond the Gāyatrī. He would fall short of the metres. If one desires that, one should perform the Sāṁyājya for him in Gāyatrī alone. For Agni is Gāyatrī, and the metres are Gāyatrī.
1.6.8.22	One should offer a cake on eleven potsherds to Agni-Vishnu.
1.6.8.23	Agni is all the deities, Vishnu is the sacrifice.
1.6.8.24	He has obtained both the deities and the sacrifice.
1.6.8.25	One should offer a rice-gruel cooked in ghee to Vishnu Sipivishta in three potsherds.
1.6.8.26	What is offered to Vishnu, Vishnu is the sacrfice, he has obtained the sacrifice.
1.6.8.27	Whatever is cooked in a pot, cattle are cooked in a pot; he indeed wins cattle.
1.6.8.28	Whatever is cooked in three pots, these are the three worlds; he indeed wins these worlds.
1.6.8.29	Whatever is done in ghee, ghee is indeed splendour; he indeed wins splendour.
1.6.8.30	One desiring cattle should offer a rice-cake in ghee to Aditya.
1.6.8.31	The milk of a cow is ghee, the grains are from a bull.
1.6.8.32	That pair is for the growth and propagation of cattle.
1.6.8.33	One should offer a second cake to Agni-Soma.
1.6.8.34	That is the greater offering that has come.
1.6.8.35	No one else has power over it.
1.6.8.36	When the Brahmanas formerly offered this, then no one had power over them.
1.6.8.37	Now they do not offer this.
1.6.8.38	Now these are all of the Lord.
1.6.8.39	What is Agniya, that is Agni, and Agni is the fire; he wins the fire.
1.6.8.40	What is Saumya, that is Soma, and Soma is the bright; he wins the bright.
1.6.8.41	That is the sun, the oblation of ghee, which they should offer to Brahma.
1.6.8.42	Four should eat it.
1.6.8.43	To them a common boon should be given.
1.6.8.44	In the beginning there were four pairs: one and one, two and two, three and three, four and four.
1.6.8.45	That pair is for the prosperity and propagation of cattle.
1.6.9.1	In the month of Phalguna, one should perform the rite of a Brahmin.
1.6.9.2-8	The full-moon of Phalguni is the beginning of the seasons, Agni is the deity of the seasons, the Brāhmaṇa is the beginning of men. In summer one should perform the rite for the Kṣatriya. In summer Indra killed Vṛtra. The Kṣatriya who aspires to be prosperous seeks to kill Vṛtra. In autumn one should perform the rites for the Vaiśya. Autumn is food. The Vaiśya prospers by food.
1.6.9.9	He obtains food for him.
1.6.9.10	If one were to place it in another season, or if it were for him, that one season would be auspicious, but the others would be inauspicious and difficult to bear.
1.6.9.11	If one desires it for someone, one should place it in the Phalgunī Full Moon.
1.6.9.12	Then all seasons become auspicious for him.
1.6.9.13	All the seasons make him prosper.
1.6.9.14	The full moon of Phalguni is indeed the mouth of the year.
1.6.9.15	If one were to perform the full moon of Phālguni, one would place it near the year.
1.6.9.16	It should be performed on the second day or the next day.
1.6.9.17	He takes it for the second season.
1.6.9.18	He does not place it in the absence of the year.
1.6.9.19	When he takes it in the second season, he goes to conquer the power, cattle and field of his enemy, the second.
1.6.9.20	One should place it in the Krittikā constellation for a Brāhmaṇa.
1.6.9.21	The Krittikā is Agni's.
1.6.9.22	The Brāhmaṇa is Agni's.
1.6.9.23	He places him in his own womb, in his own day.
1.6.9.24	The head of Prajapati is the Krittikas.
1.6.9.25	Agni is the mouth.
1.6.9.26	Food is eaten from the head.
1.6.9.27	He obtains food for himself.
1.6.9.28	There are seven Krittikas,
1.6.9.29	seven vital airs in the head.
1.6.9.30	Vital airs he places in him.
1.6.9.31	One should place (the fire) on Rohini for one who desires cattle.
1.6.9.32	Soma's indeed is this constellation, namely Rohini.
1.6.9.33	Soma is the bestower of seed.
1.6.9.34	He bestows seed in it.
1.6.9.35	This was the constellation of the Rishis.
1.6.9.36	In it the gods placed the plants in Rohini.
1.6.9.37	Just as these plants are placed in it, so do the animals grow in him who, knowing this, places the fire in Rohini.
1.6.9.38-45	One who desires heaven should place (bricks) on Rohini. The gods went to heaven on Rohini. One goes to heaven. The Asuras built bricks on the Kalakanja (bricks). They said, "We shall ascend heaven." Indra, speaking as a Brahman, approached them. He placed that brick on it. They seemed to have ascended heaven first. Then he removed it.
1.6.9.46	Those Asuras who were the worst fell down.
1.6.9.47	Those who were the best became Yama and his horses, and those who were inferior became the two Urnavas.
1.6.9.48	That brick which he laid down became variegated.
1.6.9.49	He who has an enemy or a rival should kindle the fire on the variegated (brick).
1.6.9.50	Just as the Asuras, the evil ones, were pushed away from this firm (earth), so his enemy, the evil one, is pushed away. He who, knowing this, installs the fire in Citra (constellation) becomes the owner of wealth.
1.6.9.51	He who desires to be the owner of wealth and food should install the fire in the eastern Phalguni constellation.
1.6.9.52-57	This is the day of Bhaga, when the Phalguni stars are in the east. One becomes a giver of food. If one desires, "May my offspring be generous," one should kindle the fire when the Phalguna stars are in the west. This is the day of Aryaman, when the Phalgunis are in the west.
1.6.9.58	Among them he should place the gift for the king, for he is the protector of the people.
1.6.9.59	The gift is Aryaman.
1.6.9.60	The people are desirous of giving to him.
1.6.9.61	The full moon and the new moon are indeed the two breasts of Prajapati.
1.6.9.62	If one establishes the fire on the full moon or the new moon, one milks Prajapati as if he were a cow.
1.6.9.63	The full moon and the new moon are the two seats of the gods.
1.6.9.64	If one installs the fire on the full moon or the new moon, both are auspicious days, both are fit for sacrifice.
1.6.10.1	One should not churn before the sun rises.
1.6.10.2	The fire installed by the Asuras is not known.
1.6.10.3	One should churn when the rays have risen.
1.6.10.4	The gods and Indra, the two, are placed in the form of the two days.
1.6.10.5	It is to be placed in twenty-four steps.
1.6.10.6	The Gāyatrī has twenty-four syllables.
1.6.10.7	The Gâyatrî is the metre of Agni.
1.6.10.8	He places it in its own womb, in its own metre.
1.6.10.9	If one desires it, one should place it in an unlimited (space).
1.6.10.10	The limited is indeed the Ksheshnu.
1.6.10.11	He obtains for him an unlimited life.
1.6.10.12	Agni, created by Prajapati, went out.
1.6.10.13	Prajapati was afraid, thinking, "He is not here, this is me."
1.6.10.14	Having gone out after him, he offered.
1.6.10.15	Now indeed, when he is deposited, he is created.
1.6.10.16	They say that one should offer the Agnihotra after having followed the Amna.
1.6.10.17	One should not do it like that.
1.6.10.18	That is the right way.
1.6.10.19	If one were to do the opposite of that, one would be unable to procreate.
1.6.10.20	One should offer the evening Agnihotra after having placed the oblations first.
1.6.10.21	Agni is light, light is Agni, svāhā.
1.6.10.22	Thus in the evening he places the semen in the middle with light.
1.6.10.23	The sun is light, light the sun, svāhā,
1.6.10.24	Thus in the morning.
1.6.10.25	Thus in evening and morning he places the semen with light in the middle, and in the morning it is for procreation.
1.6.10.27	The gods and the Asuras were engaged in a contest.
1.6.10.28	Then Indra placed Agni.
1.6.10.29	The gods were afraid.
1.6.10.30	"He will be the protector of the fire, the protector of the Agnihotra."
1.6.10.31	He will not come near us.
1.6.10.32	He will not conquer us."
1.6.10.33	They said, "Whatever you do, whatever you win, whatever you obtain, we will make that your Agnihotra. Come."
1.6.10.34	He came.
1.6.10.35-36	Therefore, the Agnihotra of the king should not be offered. Whatever he does, whatever he kills, whatever he conquers, whatever he obtains, whatever his subjects attend upon, that should be the Agnihotra of a king. They debate whether the Agnihotra of kings should be offered or not.
1.6.10.37	If one does not offer after having offered, one would cut off the sacrifice, one would be defeated or one would be lost.
1.6.10.38	One should offer on the full moon or new moon.
1.6.10.39	One should also recite the Agnihotra.
1.6.10.40	By that his Darsha-Pūrnamāsa sacrifices become continuous and uninterrupted.
1.6.11.1	If one desires, "May he be rich in cattle," then they should bring the fire from the house of one who is rich in cattle.
1.6.11.2	Just as when he was created, the cattle followed him, so when he is brought, the cattle follow him.
1.6.11.3	For this is Rudra, namely, Agni.
1.6.11.4	Now, if one desires that he should be the eater of food, they should bring the fire from the right side of the shed.
1.6.11.5	This is indeed the eater of food among the fires.
1.6.11.6	The shed is the maker of food.
1.6.11.7	He obtains food for himself.
1.6.11.8	They say, "Just as a low-caste person or a leper would treat, so is he."
1.6.11.9	He is indeed the one who is churned.
1.6.11.10	He becomes auspicious for the sacrificer and auspicious for the cattle.
1.6.11.11	If one who is going to perform a Soma sacrifice were to kindle the fire, he should not offer oblations of barley before a year.
1.6.11.12	Rudra would be hostile to his cattle.
1.6.11.13	These are indeed cattle, namely, barley and rice.
1.6.11.14	And having cooked rice in four pots, he should offer it to the Brahmanas, like grains for the living.
1.6.11.15	If he does not offer to those deities, he would be deprived of them.
1.6.11.16	One who is brooding would become hungry.
1.6.11.17	One should offer clarified butter to them.
1.6.11.18	By that he is not deprived of them.
1.6.11.19-24	He becomes free from anger and free from hatred. He offers oblations for a year. Rudra, who has entered the year, does not harm his cattle. He offered Agnihotra for a year. He knew that it was austerity. He ascended to heaven together with all.
1.6.11.25	Viraj, indeed, thrice stepped forth, the Garhapatya, the Ahavaniya and the Sabhya.
1.6.11.26	That is Viraj, indeed.
1.6.11.27	Viraj is food.
1.6.11.28	Food, indeed, is Viraj.
1.6.11.29	One should offer in the middle of the altar with the Varuna verse of the king.
1.6.11.30	Varuna is the king of the gods.
1.6.11.31	He obtains the kingdom.
1.6.11.32	Having placed gold, one offers.
1.6.11.33	He offers in the Agni-abundant (fire) and in the abode-abundant (place).
1.6.11.34	If he were to offer in a place without an abode, the Adhvaryu would be blind.
1.6.11.35	He should give him a hundred dice.
1.6.11.36	He should divide them.
1.6.11.37	Man has a hundred years of life, a hundred powers.
1.6.11.38	He obtains life and power.
1.6.11.39	On that day they should gamble with his cow in the assembly.
1.6.11.40	They should not injure her limbs.
1.6.11.41	One should offer her to the two assemblies.
1.6.11.42	Whatever she takes, that should be given to the Brahmins.
1.6.11.43	One obtains the food of the assembly.
1.6.12.1	If one is going to kindle the fire the next morning, then he should cook rice in four pots and offer it to Brahmins as food for the living.
1.6.12.2	Aditi cooked rice for the sake of offspring.
1.6.12.3	She ate the remaining rice.
1.6.12.4	From her were born Dhatri and Aryaman.
1.6.12.5	She cooked rice again.
1.6.12.6	She ate what remained.
1.6.12.7	From her were born Mitra and Varuna.
1.6.12.8	She cooked the other.
1.6.12.9	He ate the remainder.
1.6.12.10	From her were born Anśa and Bhaga.
1.6.12.11	She cooked another.
1.6.12.12	She thought:
1.6.12.13	"When I eat the remainder, two are born.
1.6.12.14	Now it would be better for me to eat before them."
1.6.12.15	She ate before them and brought it.
1.6.12.16	They, being in the womb, spoke thus:
1.6.12.17	"We shall be like the Adityas."
1.6.12.18	They desired a destroyer among them.
1.6.12.19	They were destroyed by Ansha and Bhaga.
1.6.12.20	Therefore they are not worshipped in the sacrifice.
1.6.12.21	Amsa-prasha is the share of Amsa.
1.6.12.22	Bhaga went to the people.
1.6.12.23	Therefore they say:
1.6.12.24	People should go.
1.6.12.25	There, he meets with Bhaga.
1.6.12.26	He, indeed, Indra, having gone upwards, followed the breath.
1.6.12.27	The other egg, which was dead, fell down.
1.6.12.28	That indeed is the Sun, whose progeny are these men.
1.6.12.29	Aditi ran to the Adityas.
1.6.12.30	"Let it be mine."
1.6.12.31	"Let it not fall in vain on me."
1.6.12.32	They said, "Let him speak to us, but do not insult us."
1.6.12.33	Indeed, that very one is Vivasvat, the sun, for whom Manu is Vaivasvata and Yama. Manu is in this world, Yama in the other world.
1.6.12.34	Indeed, these (gods) protect the path leading to the gods, namely, the Adityas. They drive away one who is about to die.
1.6.12.35	Or, if one were to kindle the fire without informing them, they would drive him away from the heavenly world.
1.6.12.36	The Adityas are the remaining portions.
1.6.12.37	When he has turned back after the remaining portion, he offers the kindling-sticks. This is the kindling of the fire for the Adityas.
1.6.12.38	They do not drive him away from this world.
1.6.12.39	One who is about to kindle the fire should abandon it for a year.
1.6.12.40	They should not take the fire from his house.
1.6.12.41	They should not take it from another.
1.6.12.42	After a year, the foetus is born.
1.6.12.43	He places it on the grown-up one.
1.6.12.44	One should abstain for twelve nights.
1.6.12.45	Twelve nights are the image of the year.
1.6.12.46	After a full year, the foetal is born.
1.6.12.47	It places it on the one who has grown.
1.6.12.48	One should offer three.
1.6.12.49	There are three worlds.
1.6.12.50	One attains these worlds.
1.6.12.51	One should offer one.
1.6.12.52	Prajapati is one.
1.6.12.53	One attains Prajapati.
1.6.12.54	Pururava of the Idas found the goddess Urvashi.
1.6.12.55	Her life was born.
1.6.12.56	He went to heaven and sang to the gods.
1.6.12.57	They said, "Where will this man go?"
1.6.12.58	He said, "There are many of my equals. They will say, 'Did this son of the goddess bring anything from the gods, his mother's brothers?' Let there be something for me."
1.6.12.59	Therefore Agni gave him the sacrificial body.
1.6.12.60	He placed her on his lap and brought her.
1.6.12.61	He placed her in the pot.
1.6.12.62	That ashvattha became the altar.
1.6.12.63	That pot became the shami tree.
1.6.12.64	Therefore, these two are the places of sacrifice.
1.6.12.65	Because they are born of merit.
1.6.12.66	Agni approached Varuna for study, when he was about to leave.
1.6.12.67	His wife became pregnant.
1.6.12.68	He ran away from him as he was coming forward.
1.6.12.69	He knew that all the power, the semen, was being taken away by the one who was stealing.
1.6.12.70	He stole it back to prevent its loss.
1.6.12.71	What was semen became the Aśvattha tree.
1.6.12.72	What was the membrane became the Śamī tree.
1.6.12.73	Therefore, these two are the sacrificial trees.
1.6.12.74	Because they are born of merit.
1.6.12.75	Prajapati, having created the creatures, thought of copulating.
1.6.12.76	He became a horse and stood on the ground, placing his head on the ground for a year.
1.6.12.77	From his head, the ashvattha tree sprang up.
1.6.12.78	That is the reason for the ashvattha being called ashvattha.
1.6.12.79	Therefore, it is fit for sacrifice.
1.6.12.80	Because it belongs to Prajapati.
1.6.13.1	Manu, desiring to beget offspring, was about to kindle the fire, and offered to one deity and another.
1.6.13.2	Then from the offering to Mitra-Varuna a sprout sprang up.
1.6.13.3	From its foot ghee oozed out.
1.6.13.4	It belonged to Mitra-Varuṇa.
1.6.13.5	They said to it, "You were born from our offering. You belong to Manu. Go to him."
1.6.13.6	She went to Manu.
1.6.13.7	He said, "These Asuras are performing the Agnihotra rite. Go away from them."
1.6.13.8	She went away.
1.6.13.9	They performed the Agnihotra rite on this one, then on that one, then on this one.
1.6.13.10	She came back.
1.6.13.11	He asked her, "Where did you go?"
1.6.13.12	She said, "They performed the Agnihotras on this one, on that one, on this one.
1.6.13.13	He said, "The Asuras have reached the end of the wealth only once, but the others will be superior."
1.6.13.14	He said, "The gods here are offering Agni with merit, go to them."
1.6.13.15	She went to them.
1.6.13.16	They offered this one first, then that one, then this one.
1.6.13.17	She returned again.
1.6.13.18	He asked her, "What did you go for?"
1.6.13.19	She said, "This one is the foremost, then that one, then this one."
1.6.13.20	He said, "Indeed, the gods all together ascended to heaven from here, and those who give will live by the sacrifice."
1.6.13.21	He who would give everything should take this one first, then that one and then this one.
1.6.13.22	Just as all the gods ascended to heaven together with Agni, so does the sacrificer ascend to heaven together with all (his kinsmen) who knows this and lays Agni.
1.6.13.23	He said, "These sages are laying Agni with merit. Go to them."
1.6.13.24	She went to them.
1.6.13.25	They laid him first, then this one, then that one.
1.6.13.26	She again said:
1.6.13.27	She asked her: "What did you know?"
1.6.13.28	She said: "This one first, then this one, then this one."
1.6.13.29	He said: "I indeed knew the Agnihotra. The sages have settled in all these worlds."
1.6.13.30-35	He who, knowing this, lays down the fire, stands firm with offspring and cattle. If one were to lay down the fire of the east after having laid down the fire of this world, one would lay down the fire in the wrong place. If one would lay down this fire after having laid down that fire, one would lay it down in the wrong place.
1.6.13.36	Thus is the prosperity of the house established.
1.6.13.37	The house is to be built in the east of the middle house.
1.6.13.38	Thus is the prosperity of that house established.
1.6.13.39	That which was the Praharvi became the cow.
1.6.13.40	The Seda, the human, the one with feet of ghee, the one belonging to Mitra and Varuna.
1.7.1.1	Whatever you, angry, have poured out with anger, O Agni, with good intention, good thought, we again offer that to you.
1.7.1.2	Whatever you have done, O Indra, when your mind was inflamed, and you have wandered over the earth, the Adityas, all the gods, the Vasus have restored it.
1.7.1.3	Whatever you have done, when you were angry, the Vasus, Indra and Agni have restored it.
1.7.1.4	May the Adityas, Rudras, Vasus, and Brahmans again kindle thee. O Agni, with ghee, mayst thou increase thy body. May the prosperity of wealth be with the sacrificer.
1.7.1.5	The thirty-three threads which are spread out, and which give this sacrifice with nectar, with them we cover up the hole, if there is any. May the sacrifice go to the gods.
1.7.1.6	May the mind, the light, enjoy the ghee. May it join this broken sacrifice. May the gods come to this sacrifice, spread out with seven threads, with good intentions.
1.7.1.7	May Brihaspati with the oblation of ghee, may he join this interrupted sacrifice. Those that are to be worshipped and those that are to be sacrificed, I join them with the mind and ghee.
1.7.1.8	O Agni, turning back, turn back to me with life, with radiance, with offspring, with wealth, with knowledge, with prosperity, with nourishment.
1.7.1.9	O Agni, Angiras, may there be a hundred of your coverings, a thousand of your coverings. Now, with the nourishment of nourishment, make us whole again, make us whole with wealth again.
1.7.1.10	Return with energy, O Agni, return with life, return, protect us from harm.
1.7.1.11	Return with wealth, O Agni, swell with the stream of all-nourishing, all-pervading.
1.7.1.12	Salila, Saliga, Sagara, may these Adityas, enjoying the oblation, be satisfied. Svāhā. Ketu, Suketu, Saketa, may these Aditvas, enjoying the obla- tion, be satisfied. Svaha. Devajuta, Vivasvan, Aditya, may these gods, enjoying the oblations, be satisfied. May the gods grant us the true invocation of the gods among the gods. To the Adityas, svāhā.
1.7.2.1	The share of Agni is the Punarādheya.
1.7.2.2	He who seeks this share, he injures.
1.7.2.3	If one who is setting up thinks, "May it be successful," he should set it up again after having destroyed it.
1.7.2.4	He injures the very share he seeks. Having obtained it, he injures it.
1.7.2.5	Everything is done for Agni.
1.7.2.6	Having given a share to Agni of everything that is done, one obtains all prosperity.
1.7.2.7	They say, "The materials should not be collected, the Yajus should not be performed."
1.7.2.8	For this is the collection of materials, the performance of the Yajus.
1.7.2.9	They say, "The Yajus should be performed after the materials have been collected."
1.7.2.10	The garment should be given again, the chariot should be new again, the bull should be released again.
1.7.2.11	These are the forms of the re-establishment.
1.7.2.12	He obtains and wins the forms of Agni.
1.7.2.13	Agni, when sinking, sinks with the plants.
1.7.2.14	Darbha grass is the plants of the waters.
1.7.2.15	When the darbha grass is the upolpa, he obtains and wins him from the waters and plants.
1.7.2.16	The gods, while winning the Asuras, deposited their dear forms in Agni.
1.7.2.17	If they should conquer us, we shall advance against them; if we should conquer them, we shall turn back."
1.7.2.18	Those gods, having conquered, desired:
1.7.2.19	"All of us together."
1.7.2.20	Agni said, "He who will install me with my deity, he will be born with these bodies."
1.7.2.21	The gods installed him.
1.7.2.22-28	They became united with these forms. Cattle are the dear forms of the gods. They became united with cattle. He who, knowing this, performs the re-erection, becomes united with these forms of Agni. Cattle are indeed the dear forms of gods. He becomes united with cattle. Manu, desiring prosperity, performed the re-erecti
1.7.2.29	He nourished these animals.
1.7.2.30	By that he prospered.
1.7.2.31	Tvashtra, desiring cattle, created.
1.7.2.32	These animals were born as Tvashtras.
1.7.2.33	By that they prospered.
1.7.2.34	Prajapati, desiring offspring, created.
1.7.2.35	This offspring was born as Prajapatyas.
1.7.2.36	By that it prospered.
1.7.2.37	He who created it first became prosperous by it.
1.7.2.38	That is the reason for the name of Punarvasu.
1.7.2.39	Therefore, the offering should be made in Punarvasu constellation.
1.7.2.40	For he was again united with that wealth.
1.7.2.41	He who offered it prospered.
1.7.2.42	Therefore, it should be offered in Anuradha constellation for prosperity.
1.7.2.43	One prospers and also for the sake of a pair.
1.7.3.1	Agni, when he is sinking, sinks for a year.
1.7.3.2	The seventeen Sāmidhenī verses should be employed.
1.7.3.3	There are five seasons.
1.7.3.4	There are twelve months.
1.7.3.5	This is the year.
1.7.3.6	Having obtained it from the year, he secures it.
1.7.3.7	They say: The fifteen Sāmidhenīs should be employed, not the seventeen.
1.7.3.8	This is indeed the most difficult to cross in the year.
1.7.3.9	By this one obtains what is left.
1.7.3.10	The fifteen Sāmidhenī verses.
1.7.3.11	The fifteen nights of the half-month.
1.7.3.12	They are obtained by them.
1.7.3.13	As many syllables as there are in the Sāmidhenīs, so many days are there in the year.
1.7.3.14	They are attained by them.
1.7.3.15	Agni, when he is sinking, sinks into the year.
1.7.3.16	The six seasons are the year.
1.7.3.17	Therefore, there are six divisions.
1.7.3.18	The year is indeed Agni Vaisvānara.
1.7.3.19	Since there are six divisions, he obtains him from the year itself and binds him.
1.7.3.20	And because Agni is distributed in many ways, he nourishes these nourishments.
1.7.3.21	Therefore Agni took these many forms, no other deity. And when they are made to be of two syllables and four syllables,
1.7.3.22	because animals are in pairs, in twos.
1.7.3.23	The Prajās are the seasons.
1.7.3.24	Food is the seasons.
1.7.3.25	If one were to interrupt the Prajās, one would interrupt food.
1.7.3.26	The Prājas are the mouth of the sacrifice.
1.7.3.27-33	If one were to obstruct the Prayājas, one would obstruct the mouth of the sacrifice. If one were to desire that, one should perform the Vibaktis after the Prayājas. The Prayājas are indeed virility. The Vibaktis are virility. One utters the Vasat-call over virility. He advances towards prosperity. The Agniya is performed separately.
1.7.3.34	Now why are the saha-vibhaktis (i.e. the saha-vibhāgas) with the Prayājas?
1.7.3.35	The Prayājas are performed for a year.
1.7.3.36	Why is the Agniya rite performed?
1.7.3.37	Therefore the Agniya is different.
1.7.4.1	Return again with energy, return, O Agni, with life, return, protect us from evil.
1.7.4.2	One should offer this before the Prayājas.
1.7.4.3	With wealth do thou return, O Agni, with thy stream, with all thy wealth, from every side.
1.7.4.4	Thus one should offer the Uparyājas.
1.7.4.5	He falls down with his cattle and energy.
1.7.4.6	"Return with energy again." Thus he again obtains energy and cattle.
1.7.4.7	And he makes them sharers.
1.7.4.8-13	Then indeed he prospers on both sides of the sacrifice. The Agniya is performed separately. Now why are the oblations of clarified butter offered? The oblations of clarified butters are the eyes of the sacrifice. If the oblations of clari- fied butter were to be offered in between, one would obstruct the eyes of the sacri- fice. One should do it in the world of Soma: "O Agni, do thou purify the life-breaths." By that it is Agniya.
1.7.4.14	Whatever is Pavamānī, that is Soma.
1.7.4.15	It is not done in various ways.
1.7.4.16	They do not enter Soma.
1.7.4.17	One who desires offspring or cattle should perform in the world of Soma, saying, "Agni is the head of heaven, the crest."
1.7.4.18	Whatever is in pairs, that is generative.
1.7.4.19	Whatever is full of semen, that is Soma-like.
1.7.4.20	One who extinguishes the fire is obstructed by the sacrifice.
1.7.4.21	The sacrifice is fivefold.
1.7.4.22	When one again offers the sacrifice with five potsherds, one again offers the same sacrifice.
1.7.4.23	One should offer in eight potsherds.
1.7.4.24	For Agni is the Gāyatrī, and the Gāyatrīs are the metres.
1.7.4.25	This is done for Agni, namely the re-installation.
1.7.4.26	Therefore it is offered in eight potsherards.
1.7.4.27	One should not be afraid of that.
1.7.4.28	One should only offer in five potsherds.
1.7.4.29	Or from the fifth season, the sixth season came into being.
1.7.4.30	This is the same as the fifth and sixth seasons.
1.7.4.31	When he takes him from the five-spooned (puroḍāśa) and the year, he takes him from himself.
1.7.4.32	The seasons are procreation.
1.7.4.33	Agni is the procreator.
1.7.4.34	When he is five-spooned, the procreator procreates him from procreation.
1.7.5.1	The one who puts out the fire is indeed the hero of the gods.
1.7.5.2	The hero is the giver of a hundred.
1.7.5.3	Since these are verses of a hundred syllables, he indeed makes the hero of the deities.
1.7.5.4	One should place it for someone else, and then again for someone else.
1.7.5.5	One does not attain what is placed for someone else, for whom it is again placed.
1.7.5.6	By the re-installation (of the fire) he again obtains it.
1.7.5.7	The life of the gods is old age.
1.7.5.8	For so many months does one live, as many syllables are in these verses, as much life and strength one obtains.
1.7.5.9	He obtains it.
1.7.5.10	He obtains (it).
1.7.5.11	One who puts out the fire is deprived of life and strength.
1.7.5.12-19	Life, strength, gold. He who gives gold, he prospers him in life and strength. It is of a hundred (coins). Man has a life of a hundred years, a strength of a hundred. He obtains life and strength. The Adityas went to heaven from here. They became anxious. The gods live on the sacrifice from here.
1.7.5.20-24	They again established it. They prospered. The Adityas prospered in this world, the Adityas in the other world. Cattle in this world, seasons in the other world.
1.7.5.25-27	Salila, Saliga, Sagara, may they, the Adityas, enjoy our oblation. Svāhā. Ketu, Suketu, Saketa, may they, the Adityas, enjoy our oblation. O Devjūta, O Vivasvan, O Aditya, may the gods, the Adityan, grant us the true invocation of the gods. To the Adityas svāhā. With these they again established him.
1.7.5.28	They succeeded.
1.7.5.29	When he again lays them down with these (verses), then he succeeds.
1.7.5.30	The re-laying is indeed of the Adityas.
1.8.1.1	Prajapati created the creatures.
1.8.1.2	He created Agni first, from the head.
1.8.1.3	From where he created Agni, that became the limit.
1.8.1.4	From there he brought down the blood.
1.8.1.5	That became the limit. 
1.8.1.6	Then the Udumbara (tree) came into existence.
1.8.1.7	From that, the Udumbara became Prajapati's.
1.8.1.8	From that the red fruit ripens.
1.8.1.9	He, created from that, went away, desiring his share.
1.8.1.10	He did not find that which Prajapati had intended.
1.8.1.11	He took his own eye and offered it.
1.8.1.12	Agni is light, light is Agni, svāhā.
1.8.1.13	Thus they think that the eye is the sun.
1.8.1.14	They think that this is the sacrifice in him who offers.
1.8.1.15	The eye is truth.
1.8.1.16	He who knows this and offers Agnihotra with truth,
1.8.1.17	he becomes true. He who knows this becomes true.
1.8.1.18	"The Brahmins say, "To whom should Agnihotra be offered?"
1.8.1.19	This is offered to Agni for protection and concealment.
1.8.1.20	When one offers in the evening, one supports it by the night.
1.8.1.21	When one makes the offering in the morning, one supports it with the day.
1.8.1.22	All the sacrifices are established in the fire.
1.8.1.23	Now why is this alone called Agnihotra? The Brahmavādins say:
1.8.1.24	Hotrā (the priest) had gone away from the gods, desiring a share in the Agnihotra.
1.8.1.25	When he says "Agnihotra", he shares it with Hotrā.
1.8.1.26	He makes them sharers with that.
1.8.1.27	This was the first offering to Agni.
1.8.1.28	That is why it is called Agnihotra.
1.8.1.29	He was created from this, desiring his own share.
1.8.1.30	He did not find that which Prajapati had intended.
1.8.1.31	His own speech addressed him, saying, "Offer!"
1.8.1.32	He offered it here, wiping it away, with "Svāhā."
1.8.1.33	For his own speech addressed him.
1.8.1.34	That is the origin of the word "Svāhā".
1.8.1.35	Therefore at the Agnihotra, the word "Svāhākāra" is used.
1.8.1.36	Therefore there is no hair on the forehead and on the hand.
1.8.1.37	For this reason he took it and offered it.
1.8.1.38	Therefore they say of him whose hair is combed on the right side that he is the eldest, the one with good fortune.
1.8.1.39	For Prajapati himself first combed his hair on the right side.
1.8.1.40	The ladle should be made according to this measure.
1.8.1.41	By this (verse) Agni was first offered oblation.
1.8.1.42	From that oblation, a man was created.
1.8.1.43	He offered a second oblation.
1.8.1.44	Then a horse was created.
1.8.1.45	Therefore a horse eats both (kinds of food).
1.8.1.46	Because it was created after the man, without any intervening (oblation).
1.8.1.47-54	Therefore they think of him as standing facing them, saying, "The horse is the man." He offered the third. Then the cow was created. He offered the fourth. Then the sheep was created. Then the goat was created. The fifth. Then the camel was created. Sixth. Then the barley was created.
1.8.1.55	He offered the seventh oblation.
1.8.1.56	Then barley was created.
1.8.1.57	These seven domestic animals were created.
1.8.1.58	He who, knowing this, offers the Agnihotra, obtains them.
1.8.2.1	He offered the eighth oblation.
1.8.2.2	Spring was created then.
1.8.2.3	He offered ninth oblation.
1.8.2.4	Summer was created then.
1.8.2.5-13	He offered the tenth oblation. Then the rainy season was created. He offered the eleventh oblation. Thereafter the autumn was created. The twelfth oblation was offered. Then the winter was created. An oblation was ready for the thirteenth (day). Then the cold season was created. Therefore this is the most fierce and unstable of the seasons.
1.8.2.14	From the unoffered (oblation) it came into being.
1.8.2.15	From the unoffered ( oblation) it was created.
1.8.2.16	They say, the Brahmavādins, that the seasons were created first, and then the animals.
1.8.2.17	One should say, 'The seasons and the animals.'
1.8.2.18	For both of them were created together.
1.8.2.19	It entered him again from here.
1.8.2.20	This is the Agni-place of the hand, namely the palm.
1.8.2.21	Therefore, from this, the fire burns the hand that is bent down.
1.8.2.22	When one is being burnt, if one stretches out the hands, one desires to bend down to the fire.
1.8.2.23	The animals enter the fire, the fire enters the animals.
1.8.2.24	The animals indeed enter him who knows this, and he enters the animals.
1.8.2.25	Now indeed Narada said this: "Where one sees a cow lying down, dead, he thinks, 'She is dead,' not knowing."
1.8.2.26	For they enter Agni, Agni enters them.
1.8.2.27	Therefore all the animals approach Agni in all seasons.
1.8.2.28	For there is no season apart from Agni.
1.8.2.29	Whatever he found when he was born, that is the knowledge of the one who was born.
1.8.2.30	He poured it into the waters.
1.8.2.31	It followed the waters and burned.
1.8.2.32	They became Agni's thunderbolt.
1.8.2.33	Therefore one should sprinkle the oblations, but not Agni.
1.8.2.34	If one were to sprinkle him, one would worship with a harmful sacrifice.
1.8.2.35-42	Prajapati desired her. He found her in the waters. He placed her in the plants. Therefore plants grow without being sprinkled. From plants, animals; From animals, men. He who knows this grows without being sprinkled. The one who is in the spring and winter should be taken up.
1.8.2.43	This indeed is the dear abode of Agni.
1.8.2.44	This indeed is the offering that shines forth.
1.8.2.45	By means of this one indeed approaches the dear abode of the Agni.
1.8.2.46	And one becomes possessed of cattle.
1.8.2.47	And by means of this one purifies oneself.
1.8.2.48	Agni and Surya were together in the same womb, in the red iron.
1.8.2.49	He, the sun, flowed upwards.
1.8.2.50	His semen fell down.
1.8.2.51	That Agni, the male, grasped from the womb.
1.8.2.52	That burned him.
1.8.2.53	Therefore iron, a chisel, and milk burn.
1.8.2.54	Therefore they offer this.
1.8.2.55	The semen of animals is indeed barley and rice.
1.8.2.56	Therefore they offer this.
1.8.2.57	It should not be overcooked.
1.8.2.58	It should dry up the semen.
1.8.2.59	If it were to drip, his offspring would be mad.
1.8.2.60	This is the semen of the sun that is offered here.
1.8.2.61	It is impure if not cooked.
1.8.2.62	It should be cooked until it is thick.
1.8.2.63	That is cooked, pure, and generative.
1.8.3.1	It is milked in a pot.
1.8.3.2-9	By this (water) they approach (the gods). For this (water) does not flow away from here or there, for the sake of non-flowing away. It becomes a noble vessel, with the upper part of the skull, for the sake (of attaining) the divine world. For that is the divine world. The pot made by a potter, having the form of a wheel, is indeed the divine vessel. If it were to flow away, one should pour it into water. Water is indeed peace. Water is the remedy.
1.8.3.10	The waters are the medicines.
1.8.3.11	Wherever they are used, the herbs grow there more abundantly and more bountiful.
1.8.3.12	If the milk is spilled while being milked, it should be milked into another vessel.
1.8.3.13	For the sacrifice is the atonement for the sacrifice.
1.8.3.14	If the Soma is spilled while being deposited, or while being taken down, or after being taken down, while being carried forward, or after being carried forward, while being brought forward for the Homa, it should be brought again and milked from another plant.
1.8.3.15	For the sacrifice is the atonement for the sacrifice.
1.8.3.16	Having recited the Varuni verse, one should offer the Varuni oblation.
1.8.3.17	Varuna indeed takes possession of the sacrifice when he takes possession of it.
1.8.3.18	This is indeed the atonement, the expiation.
1.8.3.19	If one is to be excluded, it should be for one who desires brilliance, who desires brahmic glory.
1.8.3.20	Or for one who desires to be praised.
1.8.3.21	Or for him who desires, 'May a hero be born to me.'
1.8.3.22	The Gharma is indeed excluded; brilliance, brahmic glory,
1.8.3.23	He becomes brilliant and endowed with brahmic glory.
1.8.3.24	One should sprinkle him whom one desires to sprinkle.
1.8.3.25	One is born as a hero.
1.8.3.26	One should offer with ghee if there is no pouring out.
1.8.3.27	This is the pouring out.
1.8.3.28	There is no expiation for what has been spilled.
1.8.3.29	And one does not become like one who has no cattle.
1.8.3.30	This is indeed the milk of cattle that is being poured out.
1.8.3.31	He bestows purity on the animals.
1.8.3.32	The fierce fire burns the animals.
1.8.3.33	Therefore, it should be sprinkled with water.
1.8.3.34	If one sprinkles with water, it would be extinguished.
1.8.3.35	One should sprinkle with the Gāndohasa rite.
1.8.3.36	That is neither water nor milk.
1.8.3.37	They say, "It may leak out."
1.8.3.38	When it is taken away from the milking, then it is spilled.
1.8.3.39	For the trees have disappeared from it. Therefore, it should be sprinkled with water.
1.8.3.40	One who gives a little bit does not win.
1.8.3.41	It pacifies the impurity of cattle.
1.8.3.42	Cattle are indeed brilliance and brahminical splendour.
1.8.3.43	Water and milk are a pair.
1.8.3.44	From the pair, indeed, offspring and cattle are born.
1.8.3.45	That is the pair.
1.8.3.46	From that very pair, the sacrificer is born with offspring and cattle.
1.8.3.47	One should offer rice-gruel to one who is to be anointed.
1.8.3.48	This is the anointed, the peaceful, the worthy of sacrifice, the pair, the procreator.
1.8.4.1	Prajapati created offspring.
1.8.4.2	They created them by means of austerity.
1.8.4.3	He restrained speech alone.
1.8.4.4	He who restrains speech approaches austerity.
1.8.4.5	The Agnihotra is the creation of offspring.
1.8.4.6	He creates offspring from both sides, from here and from there.
1.8.4.7	Speech should be restrained when the sun has set, or when it is being milked, or when it has been deposited.
1.8.4.8-13	They should be offered as soon as they are brought. That is the most secret. He should look at the rising (sun) with the verse, "May I be born with offspring and cattle." For the creation of offspring and cattle. And he anoints him for the sake of being fit. At the Agnihotra, the husband and wife commit adultery.
1.8.4.14	The former world is of the sacrificer, the latter of the wife.
1.8.4.15	If one were to remove the fire towards the east, the sacrificer would perish.
1.8.4.16	If towards the west, the wife.
1.8.4.17	The Brahmavadins say, "Which fire did he enter?"
1.8.4.18	One should remove it towards the north.
1.8.4.19	They are not grasped, they become old.
1.8.4.20	All life is from here.
1.8.4.21	He is not led to distress.
1.8.4.22	He offers four times.
1.8.4.23	He wins cattle by means of the four-footed (animals).
1.8.4.24	He offers twice.
1.8.4.25	He wins by means of the two-footed (animals)
1.8.4.26	If one desires, 'May he be the eldest and prosper by progeny', then he should offer the full (portion) first, then the smaller, then the smallest.
1.8.4.27	He prospers by progeny as the eldest.
1.8.4.28	They say, "He approaches a lesser sacrifice, a lesser progeny, lesser cattle, and lesser food."
1.8.4.29	One becomes worse.
1.8.4.30	One should gradually increase the size of the oblations, then more, then more, until the last one is full.
1.8.4.31	For the completion of the sacrifice.
1.8.4.32	They say, "He approaches a greater sacrifice, he obtains greater progeny, greater cattle, greater food, he becomes more prosperous, his youngest son becomes a rich man."
1.8.4.33	If one desires, "May all be equal," one should bring them all together at the end.
1.8.4.34	All become equal.
1.8.4.35	He should not put it in later.
1.8.4.36	That is the transgression of the sacrifice.
1.8.4.37	He should put it in wherever he has taken it.
1.8.4.38	Or the sacrifice is taken across for the sake of crossing.
1.8.4.39	He makes the one who is thinking later, when they offer in the former (fire) while they are burning in the latter.
1.8.4.40	They carry the fire of the same time.
1.8.4.41	He pleases him with that alone.
1.8.4.42	Now this is the filter of the Agnihotra.
1.8.4.43	He indeed nourishes it.
1.8.4.44	For the Agnihotra was created before the other (offerings), and he made it so much.
1.8.4.45	Therefore one offers after having run forward.
1.8.4.46	He places (the oblation) with the verse, "Grant me life."
1.8.4.47	He indeed grants life to it.
1.8.4.48	He places it with the verse, "Grant me radiance."
1.8.4.49	He indeed bestows radiance on it.
1.8.4.50	The plants, indeed, were born from the poison of Rudra.
1.8.4.51	They were not liked by the cattle.
1.8.4.52	The gods then approached Prajapati.
1.8.4.53	Prajapati said, "I choose the oblation. Let my share be."
1.8.4.54	They said, "Choose."
1.8.4.55	He said, "Let the fire-wood be dedicated to me."
1.8.4.56	Therefore, the fire-wood is dedicated to Prajapati.
1.8.4.57-66	For this is the only way for him in the world of the gods. Two kindling-sticks should be used. For there are two oblations. One should be used. For one is Prajapati. For one kindles the fire in one way. But many oblations are offered. He united them with Agni. He made them taste. They were born again as new.
1.8.4.67	Now, indeed, all the plants are agreeable to those who offer the Agnihotra and the Darsha-Pūrnamāsa.
1.8.4.68	When he puts on the kindling wood, all the plants become agreeable to him.
1.8.5.1	"He should say, "Bhūr Bhuvah Svar," before the Hotṛ.
1.8.5.2	This is indeed Brahman, this is truth.
1.8.5.3	This is the truth.
1.8.5.4	There is no sacrifice apart from this.
1.8.5.5	Therefore, one should speak thus:
1.8.5.6	"Agni is light, light is Agni, svāhā." He places the embryo with the pregnant speech.
1.8.5.7	With the speech of the pair, he generates the pair.
1.8.5.8	What is offered with speech and with the Yajus, that is the pair.
1.8.5.9	And what is offered silently and with the mind, that is the couple.
1.8.5.10	The morning offering is the standing one.
1.8.5.11	The subsequent offering should be made without omitting the previous one.
1.8.5.12	One makes a stump of wood.
1.8.5.13	The subsequent offering should be done again for the progress of the sacrifice.
1.8.5.14	One wins cattle with the previous offering and brahmic glory with the subsequent one. The offering to Agni in the evening is the one to the south.
1.8.5.15	One sprinkles semen with it.
1.8.5.16	The sprinkled semen is deposited as embryo in the night.
1.8.5.17	That is the Sūrya (rite) for the morning, for the begetting of offspring.
1.8.5.18	It should be offered either here or there, or again from the west in the morning.
1.8.5.19	For from the west there is the begetting of progeny.
1.8.5.20	For the Sūrya rite is for begetting.
1.8.5.21	That should not be neglected.
1.8.5.22	It should always be offered, for the advance of the sacrifice.
1.8.5.23	He offers facing north.
1.8.5.24	Anābha, Mṛḍ, Dhūrte, Namas te astu Rudra, Mṛḍe. These are the fierce forms of Rudra, these are his names.
1.8.5.25	He pacifies the cattle with these.
1.8.5.26	He pacifiess them with his own share.
1.8.5.27	He wipes it downwards in the evening.
1.8.5.28	Therefore in the evening one goes down with a low sound.
1.8.5.29	He wipes upwards from heaven.
1.8.5.30	Therefore, one goes beyond it.
1.8.5.31	The Agnihotra is indeed the later part.
1.8.5.32	When one recites the Yajus formula in front, it is for stability and non-deviation.
1.8.5.33	He who knows the Vaishvadev of the Agnihotra, Pashupati does not harm him, and Pashupati does not cause harm to his cattle.
1.8.5.34	One offers while sitting facing east.
1.8.5.35	He pleases the gods with that.
1.8.5.36	Having offered, he sprinkles.
1.8.5.37	He sprinkles the animals for the sacrificer.
1.8.5.38	He sprinkles towards the north.
1.8.5.39	He appeases Rudra with that.
1.8.5.40	He sprinkles to the south.
1.8.5.41	He pleases the plants and the ancestors with that.
1.8.5.42	One eats.
1.8.5.43	He pleases men with that.
1.8.5.44	He eats with his finger, not giving (to others).
1.8.5.45	One should not go with one's teeth.
1.8.5.46	If one goes with one's tooth, serpents would kill him.
1.8.5.47	He pacifies the serpents for non-violence.
1.8.5.48	One should recite the Yajus, "Pusha is."
1.8.5.49	Pusha is indeed cattle.
1.8.5.50	He indeed wins cattle.
1.8.5.51	He is indeed not peaceful, not pleased.
1.8.5.52-57	The sacrificer is indeed the oblation which he (the sacrificer) expects. When one burns the Agnihotra-vessel, it is not extinguished. One should burn the Agnihotra- vessel and place the hand on it. The hand should be placed on the Agnihotra-vessels when they are burning. He pacifies it with that. He pleases it with that. It is pacified and pleased, it does not harm him.
1.8.5.58	Thus the sacrifice proceeds.
1.8.5.59	Thus indeed the sacrifice proceeds. Now this is the secret of the sacrifice.
1.8.5.60	Now this is the secret.
1.8.5.61	They debate whether one should offer to the Gārhapatya or not.
1.8.5.62	He is the one who meditates, the rough one.
1.8.5.63	One should offer.
1.8.5.64	One should make an offering with the formula, "O Agni, lord of the house, accept the oblation, svāhā."
1.8.5.65-70	He appeases him with that. He pleases him with that. And with that he makes him not to be brooding, not to be rough. And when, having offered the first oblation, he waits to offer the second, he appeases him with it. He pleases it with it. And with that he makes it not to be brooding and not to be rough.
1.8.5.71	Then, when he is about to offer the second oblation after having offered the first, and waits for it, he appeases him by that very (act).
1.8.5.72	He pleases him by that.
1.8.5.73	And by that very (oblation) he makes him free from brooding and free from roughness.
1.8.5.74	And whatever is offered to him in his house, and when they approach him while seated near the fire and beg, he appeases them by that very (offering).
1.8.5.75	He pleases them by that.
1.8.5.76	Then indeed he makes him who does not meditate on it, free from roughness.
1.8.6.1	Two milk for the Agnihotra.
1.8.6.2	The world of the Agnihotra-offerer is greater than the milk of one.
1.8.6.3	When two milk, the sacrificer conquers the greater world.
1.8.6.4	Manu and Manasi generated this (world) by means of a pair.
1.8.6.5	What is milked from the pot and from the cow, it is born from the union of the two.
1.8.6.6	One should offer with the verse, "O Jātavedas, accepting this oblation, do thou be pleased with us in the day time."
1.8.6.7	This is his fierce form of Jātavedā.
1.8.6.8	By this he pacifies the animals.
1.8.6.9	He pacifies it by means of his share.
1.8.6.10	If it should be too much, one should offer with the verse, "O Agni, do thou accept this offering of mine, O thou of gentle form."
1.8.6.11	This is his gentle form.
1.8.6.12	It is by means of this that he pacifies the animals.
1.8.6.13	He pacifies it by means of its share.
1.8.6.14	If it should be too little, one should offer twelve times in the evening.
1.8.6.15	Twelve nights are the image of the year.
1.8.6.16	The year is indeed the fire, the all-consuming.
1.8.6.17	Those who have established the fire kindle it at the new and full moon.
1.8.6.18	Their kindling wood is indeed the seasons.
1.8.6.19	The largest embers are the months.
1.8.6.20	The smallest are the half-months.
1.8.6.21	The days and nights are the crackling sounds.
1.8.6.22	The light with smoke is the all-gods.
1.8.6.23	What is red, that is Varuna's.
1.8.6.24	What is golden, that is Brhaspati's.
1.8.6.25	That which is neither red nor golden, that is Mitra's.
1.8.6.26	When the embers have become quiet, and shine like a lamp, that is the mouth of the gods.
1.8.6.27	And indeed they think that this is the light of the sun and Agni.
1.8.6.28	Therefore one should offer then.
1.8.6.29	Whatever he puts down, that he obtains.
1.8.6.30	This indeed is the name of the offering.
1.8.6.31	One who knows this goes to the gods and men.
1.8.6.32	The offering-wood does not burn, it is not established. The offering does not flow away as it should. It is not straight.
1.8.6.33	It should be offered in such a way that the fire flows away.
1.8.6.34	For it is straight.
1.8.6.35	It is established.
1.8.6.36	Therefore, the sacrificial wood for the Agnihotra should be big.
1.8.6.37	He who gives much and performs many sacrifices, and then abandons the fire, that is his (sacrificial) ground.
1.8.6.38	Those who perform sacrifices reach this world of the good.
1.8.6.39	These are the stars.
1.8.6.40	When they say, "He has brought down the light, he has brought down the stars," they indeed fall down.
1.8.6.41	Having obtained it, they abide here according to their light, and when they fall from here, they go to that.
1.8.6.42	Now he who gives much, who offers much, who offers Agnihotra, who performs the New and Full Moon sacrifices, who performs the seasonal sacrifices, who attends many sacrifices, for him this is inexhaustible, unlimited.
1.8.6.43	The sacrifice is hidden from the one who offers.
1.8.6.44	He should be burnt by these two fires.
1.8.6.45	One ascends one's own desired (fire).
1.8.6.46	They debate whether he should be burnt by the one on the other side or by the one on this side.
1.8.6.47	Having brought both together, he should be burnt in between.
1.8.6.48	That is the most concealed.
1.8.6.49	One should take the fire at night.
1.8.6.50	The night is indeed Asuric.
1.8.6.51	One overcomes darkness by means of light.
1.8.6.52-57	He shines in this world by day. He shines in the other world by night. He who knows thus shines in both worlds. The Hotr should recite the verses "Bhūr Bhuvah Svah" before the offering. He places the bricks from these two worlds for the attainment of the heavenly world. When he offers in the evening, he attains the wish-yielding cow by that. When he makes the offering in the morning, he attains the cow by that.
1.8.6.58	When this fire is installed, one gets a thousand (cows).
1.8.6.59	One conquers the kingdom of Yama by Agniṣṭoma, the kingdom of Soma by Ukthya, the kingdom of Surya by Ṣoḍaśī, and the kingdom of Svarga by Atiratra.
1.8.6.60	All these Indra became.
1.8.6.61	One becomes all these who performs these sacrifices.
1.8.6.62	All this becomes for one who knows this.
1.8.6.63	One is endowed with oblations.
1.8.6.64-70	One who offers Agnihotra is the one who offers oblations. One who offers the Darsha-Paurnamasa sacrifices is the one who worships the gods. One who performs the Catu-r-masya sacrifices is the one with a thousand oblations. All the sacrificial rites are in the Agnihotra. One who, knowing this, offers Agnihotra, obtains all the sacrificial rites.
1.8.7.1	All the Praiyamedhas, together with Brahma, knew this.
1.8.7.2	They did not agree on the Agnihotra.
1.8.7.3	One of them offered three times, one twice, and one once.
1.8.7.4	They asked the one who offered three times, "To whom did you offer?"
1.8.7.5	He said, "This is divided into three: Agni, Prajapati, and Surya."
1.8.7.6	Then they asked him to whom he had offered twice.
1.8.7.7	He said, "This is divided into two: to Agni and Prajapati in the evening, to Surya and Prajapati at dawn."
1.8.7.8	Then they asked him to whome he had offered once.
1.8.7.9-14	He said, "This is indeed for Prajapati alone." Of them, he who offered twice prospered. The others followed him in the same caste. He who, knowing this, offers the Agnihotra prospers. Those who follow him after serving him attain the same caste. The Agnihotra should be offered at dusk.
1.8.7.15	When the sun has set, she gives birth to the aged embryos.
1.8.7.16	They say, "The Agnihotra of one who does not offer at dusk falls away."
1.8.7.17	If one thinks, "I have missed the season," one should say "Bhūr Bhuvah Svaḥ" before the Hotr.
1.8.7.18	One should offer everything with that alone, not in between.
1.8.7.19	One should make an offering with "Om, salutations to the fault of the season, svāhā."
1.8.7.20	He did not go beyond the season.
1.8.7.21	They debate whether it should be offered or not.
1.8.7.22	If the Agnihotra is not offered when the sun rises, it should be offered.
1.8.7.23	It is offered to Agni for protection and concealment.
1.8.7.24	But he makes it a means of procreation.
1.8.7.25	If he thinks that he has gone beyond the season, he should say "Bhūr Bhuvah Svah" before the Hotri.
1.8.7.26	By that alone, one does not go beyond.
1.8.7.27	One should offer with "Salutations to the morning offering! Svāhā!"
1.8.7.28	One does not go beyond the season.
1.8.7.29	Just as those who hate the Kārtikeya offer, so his offering becomes.
1.8.7.30	If the sun rises before the fire has been taken out, then a learned brahmin should take it out.
1.8.7.31	He takes it out with all the (required) rites.
1.8.7.32	One should follow it with the Agnihotra.
1.8.7.33	He propitiates him with the sacrificial fee.
1.8.7.34	And he prospers him with the sacrificial fees.
1.8.7.35	The fee is a bull.
1.8.7.36	He thus wards him off from all directions with the boon.
1.8.7.37	If one's two (cows) have gone to another or if they have been stolen, then the atonement is to re-establish them.
1.8.7.38	Just as the path is the way, so are the Darsha-Pūrnamāsa sacrifices.
1.8.7.39	Just as it is the way in between, so is the Agnihotra.
1.8.7.40	Thus indeed, the heaven shines for one who performs the Agnihotra and the Darsha-Purnamāsa sacrifices.
1.8.7.41	The oblations are placed in the Upavasatha.
1.8.7.42	Why does not the Agnihotra-offering observe the Upavasa? The Brahmavādins say:
1.8.7.43	It is continuous, unlimited, and unstable.
1.8.7.44	One eats meat.
1.8.7.45	One approaches a woman.
1.8.7.46	Therefore it does not observe the Upavaṭa.
1.8.7.47	One should observe the vow of an animal.
1.8.7.48	The animals are born as if silently.
1.8.7.49	They are pure.
1.8.7.50	When one approaches a woman silently, one becomes purer.
1.8.7.51	One should approach her with the sound "hi".
1.8.7.52	For animals approach with such a sound for the sake of purity.
1.8.7.53	They debate whether the Agnihotra should be offered after the animals have been settled or not.
1.8.7.54	If he were to establish it, he should strike it with a straw.
1.8.7.55	That is the establishment of the Agnihotra.
1.8.7.56	They say, "When one is defeated, when one is destroyed, when one suffers misfortune, then the Agnihotra is established."
1.8.7.57	That should not be established.
1.8.7.58	Prajapati grasped this with his mind.
1.8.7.59	This is the altar of the Agnihotra.
1.8.7.60	This is the Upayāma (offering) of the plants.
1.8.7.61	The sacrificial grass is the sprinkling water.
1.8.7.62	The directions are the enclosing sticks.
1.8.7.63	Whatever is placed on it is the kindling wood.
1.8.7.64	The sacrificer is the sacrificial post.
1.8.7.65	One should stand while being led up.
1.8.7.66	For the sacrificial post is indeed established in this way for prosperity.
1.8.7.67	Indeed, the Agnihotra is the middlemost part of the sacrifice.
1.8.7.68	Therefore, one who offers the Agnihotra and the Darsha-Paurnamasa sacrifices gives everything that is to be given at the sacrifice.
1.8.7.69	For this is given in the middle of the sacrifice, namely, at the Agnihotra.
1.8.7.70	They debate whether the Agnihotra should be offered by a king or not.
1.8.7.71	For a king is like raw meat.
1.8.7.72	He performs many sacrifices that are not fit for sacrifice and impure.
1.8.7.73	He eats what is not fit to be eaten.
1.8.7.74	The Brahman conquers.
1.8.7.75	Therefore, the Agnihotra should not be offered by a Kshatriya.
1.8.7.76	The Agnihotra is truth and reality.
1.8.7.77	The Brahman is truth and reality,
1.8.7.78	Therefore, the Agnıhotra should be offered by a Brahman.
1.8.7.79	Moreover, the house should be brought in front of the Brahman.
1.8.7.80	Then his Agnihotra becomes offered.
1.8.7.81	Then, if one were to act as if it were true, one should offer for him, for continuity.
1.8.8.1	If one who has been invited to Agnihotra sits down without eating, one should give it to him.
1.8.8.2	She sits down without the fire, not being able to bear it.
1.8.8.3	She makes him sit down with her.
1.8.8.4	But one should not eat after that in his house.
1.8.8.5	If he eats, he would be afflicted.
1.8.8.6	If the fire of the Agnihotra offering goes out before the offering is made, one should run with the fire and the Agnihotra offering together.
1.8.8.7	One propels him with the share.
1.8.8.8	And one prospers him with the share itself.
1.8.8.9	Then one should recite the mantra: 
1.8.8.10	From here first was born Agni, the knower of beings, from these sources. May he carry the offerings to the gods through the Gayatri, Trishtup, Jagati and Anushtup metres, knowing. These are his sources.
1.8.8.11	He generates him from his own wombs. "He says, "Be pleased with food, with wealth, with strength, with lustre, with offspring," he thus obtains these (things).
1.8.8.12	And he indeed pleases him.
1.8.8.13	" "He says, "Thou art the sovereign, thou art the self-sovereign, thou art seated on the good." He thus settles him on the good.
1.8.8.14	The two Sārasvata Utsa verses are indeed the Rk and Sāman verses.
1.8.8.15	He indeed makes him prosper by means of these two.
1.8.8.16	He makes him prosper by these two.
1.8.8.17	One should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Jyotishmati and a gruel of barley to Varuna for one whose Agnihotra has not been offered, the Agni goes before.
1.8.8.18	The darkness steals his sacrifice, if the fire before the offering of the Agnihotra goes out.
1.8.8.19	By offering to Agni Jyotishmat, he makes his sacrifice complete with light.
1.8.8.20	The night is Varuni.
1.8.8.21	By offering Varuni, he makes his Varuna-related sacrifice complete.
1.8.8.22	If another fire follows the one in which the Agnihotra has been offered, then one should take it up from that very fire, facing east, and offer the Agnihotra.
1.8.8.23	Then one should recite the mantra:
1.8.8.24	"May they be of the same mind, of the same intention, of the same consciousness, without enmity." One makes them of the same mind for the sake of non-injury to the sacrificer.
1.8.8.25	These two are said by those who speak about Brahman.
1.8.8.26	One does not say, "One hunchback and two tigers."
1.8.8.27	One should offer an oblation of eight potfuls to Agni Agnimān for one whose fires are taken away by others.
1.8.8.28	When others take away one's fires, one makes a common sacrifice to the deities.
1.8.8.29	By offering to Agni Agnimāt, one generates more deities for oneself.
1.8.8.30	He becomes more powerful.
1.8.9.1	One should recite the verse, "Agni has followed the dawn, the first, the knower of beings, following the days, the first, following the rays of the sun in many ways, following the heaven and earth, he has stretched out." If the Agnihotra offering is not made when the sun rises.
1.8.9.2	He re-establishes it as per the rule.
1.8.9.3	They say, "He makes the sacrificer ascend this world together with offspring and cattle."
1.8.9.4	Therefore, one who has established the sacred fires becomes one who has many cattle.
1.8.9.5	One should do this.
1.8.9.6	"Be at ease here only. Do not abandon me. Do not abandon this one, the son of so-and-so." He establishes him in this world together with progeny and cattle.
1.8.9.7	The sacrificer becomes more powerful.
1.8.9.8	One should offer a cake to Mitra and a one-pot oblation to Surya for one whose Agnihotra offering has not been made when the sun rises.
1.8.9.9	Mitra helps the sacrifice of one for whom the Agnihotra offering has been made when the Sun rises.
1.8.9.10	The day is Mitra.
1.8.9.11	When it is Mitra, he obtains the sacrifice from Mitra.
1.8.9.12	Now, when he makes the sacrifice prosper with this very Sun, it is in front.
1.8.9.13	If the Agnihotra has not been offered, the Sun rises, having kindled the fire, and having restrained speech, the couple should remain silent throughout the day.
1.8.9.14	One should offer the evening Agnihotra on two cows.
1.8.9.15	He gives him both shares, the evening and the morning.
1.8.9.16	When a man is sick, they say, "He eats or does not eat."
1.8.9.17	If they say, "Does not eat," then indeed he is immortal.
1.8.9.18	If he does not eat and does not speak, then indeed he is not dead.
1.8.9.19	They again obtain him through austerity.
1.8.9.20	One should offer an oblation to Agni, the lord of vows, on eight potsherds.
1.8.9.21	Agni is the lord of vows among the gods.
1.8.9.22	He approaches him with his own share.
1.8.9.23	He makes him accept the vow.
1.8.9.24	If Agni were to go out, one should rekindle it at the place where it had gone out, and then offer the Agnihotra.
1.8.9.25	Agni indeed goes out.
1.8.9.26	When it goes away, it returns to the same place.
1.8.9.27	One should offer an eight-vessel oblation to Agni Pathikrita for one whose fire has gone away.
1.8.9.28	One whose fire has gone astray goes astray from the path.
1.8.9.29	Agni is the path-maker of the gods.
1.8.9.30	He approaches him with his own share.
1.8.9.31-36	He leads him along the right path. A bull is the sacrificial fee. For he leads along the right path.
1.8.9.37	If the fire of a man who has not set up the sacred fires burns his house, he should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Kshamavata.
1.8.9.38	Agni Kshamavata burns down his house.
1.8.9.39	He burns down another house.
1.8.9.40	What is dear and agreeable to him, that he appeases with the oblation.
1.8.9.41	The fire that does not burn his house is called Adāhuka.
1.8.9.42	If the fire follows him, he should churn it out from the ashes.
1.8.9.43	It generates him from his own womb.
1.8.9.44	If there are no such ashes, he should churn the fire after touching the ashes.
1.8.9.45	He generates him from his womb.
1.8.9.46	For Agni the ascetic, the people-loving, the fire-loving, one should offer an eight-vessel oblation for one whose fire follows him.
1.8.9.47	For he is not obstructed by this (fire), but it follows him.
1.8.9.48	Plants are indeed fire-loving.
1.8.9.49	He places the share of plants, the fire-lovers, for him, for reproduction.
1.8.9.50	The thirty-three threads which are stretched out by him, and which give this sacrifice with nectar, with them we cover up the hole, if there is any. Let the sacrifice go to the gods.
1.8.9.51	One should offer thus if a chariot or a cart breaks down on the way.
1.8.9.52	These are the threads of the sacrifice.
1.8.9.53	These are indeed the deities.
1.8.9.54	He unites them.
1.8.9.55	He binds them together.
1.8.9.56	They say, the Dakshina-s wove the threads and then turned back towards the cow.
1.8.9.57	For the cow is the sacrificial animal, the worthy one.
1.8.9.58	He makes the cow step on the place with the verse, "This is where Vishnu stepped."
1.8.9.59	He has indeed made the sacrifice of Vishnu to be extensive.
1.8.9.60	He sprinkles water over it for peace.
1.8.10.1	The cow is the seat of Rudra.
1.8.10.2	The Vāyavya is being poured out.
1.8.10.3	The Āśvina is being milked.
1.8.10.4	The Saumya is being milked
1.8.10.5	The Vāruṇa is being deposited.
1.8.10.6	The Maitra is being taken with a horn.
1.8.10.7	The Māruta is having a drop.
1.8.10.8	The Pauṣṇa is being brought down.
1.8.10.9	The Sarasvata is being spread.
1.8.10.10	The Vaiṣṇava is being brought back.
1.8.10.11	The Svarga is being removed.
1.8.10.12	The Tvaṣṭra is being brought up.
1.9.1.6	Agni has been known.
1.9.1.7	Vacaspati is the Hotri.
1.9.1.8	Manas is the Upavasya.
1.9.1.9	Breath is the Havish.
1.9.1.10	Sama is the Adhvaryu.
1.9.1.11	Go to Indra, Svāhā.
1.9.1.12	Earth is the Hotri,
1.9.1.13	Heaven is the Adhvaryu.
1.9.1.14	Tvashtri is the Agnid.
1.9.1.15	Mitra is the Upavsya.
1.9.1.16	O Vacaspati, you are worshipped with the most excellent power of speech.
1.9.1.17	To the lord of sacrifice, O Varuna, what is right?
1.9.1.18	Speech-lord drank Soma.
1.9.1.19	He generated Indra for the sake of Indra.
1.9.1.20	Soma may drink Soma.
1.9.1.21	Bright one may drink Bright one.
1.9.1.22	O Indra, those Soma-pressings have been heard by you, O Soma-drinker, O Soma-presser, O Soma-knower.
1.9.1.23	Agni is the Hotar.
1.9.1.24	The Asvins are the Adhvaryus.
1.9.1.25	Rudra is the Agnid.
1.9.1.26	Brihaspati is the Upavasya.
1.9.1.27	O Speech-lord, we invoke your name, we shall proclaim your name.
1.9.1.28	You are the name of our creator.
1.9.1.29	Vācaspati drank Soma.
1.9.1.30	May you bestow strength on us.
1.9.1.31	Soma may drink Soma.
1.9.1.32	Śukra may drink Śukra.
1.9.1.33	O Indra, those Soma drinks have been heard by Vāta and Apāya, who are attentive to the offering.
1.9.1.34	The Hotṛ is the great oblation.
1.9.1.35	The Adhvaryu is the true oblation.
1.9.1.36	Agni is the one without deceit.
1.9.1.37	The Upavasya is the one without deception.
1.9.1.38	He is not to be resisted, he is not to be opposed, he is the most powerful.
1.9.1.39	The Udgātṛ is the one who opens up.
1.9.1.40	We praise your name, O Vidhi.
1.9.1.41	You are our name, O Vidhe.
1.9.1.42	Do not cut the thread of the gods, do not cut the thread for humans.
1.9.1.43	Salutations to the mother Earth.
1.9.2.1	Agni with the Yajus verses.
1.9.2.2	Savitar with the Stoma hymns.
1.9.2.3	Indra with the Ukthāmadā hymns.
1.9.2.4	Brihaspati with the Vedas.
1.9.2.5	Aditi with the waters and the sacrificial grass, the Adityas with the clarified butter.
1.9.2.6	The Maruts with the sacrificial hall and the sacrificial post.
1.9.2.7	Vishnu with the consecration and austerities.
1.9.2.8	Mitra and Varuna with the sacrificial posts.
1.9.2.9	The Asvins with the oblations.
1.9.2.10	Tvashtra with the kindling wood.
1.9.2.11	Pusha with the invocations.
1.9.2.12	Speech is the wife of Vayu.
1.9.2.13	Pathya is the wife of Pusan.
1.9.2.14	Earth is of Agni.
1.9.2.15	The army is of Indra.
1.9.2.16	The Dhenu is of Brihaspati.
1.9.2.17	The Gāyatrī is of the Vasus.
1.9.2.18	The Tristubh is of the Rudras.
1.9.2.19	The Jagati is of the Ādityas.
1.9.2.20	The Anushtubh is of Mitra.
1.9.2.21	The Virāj is of Varuna.
1.9.2.22	The Paṅkti is of Vishnu.
1.9.2.23	The consecration is of Soma.
1.9.3.1	Prajapati was alone at first.
1.9.3.2	He desired, 'May I be Yajna and create beings.'
1.9.3.3	He made himself the Yajna with ten Hotr-priests.
1.9.3.4	He made the mind the ladle, the mind the ghee, speech the altar, the Veda the sacrificial grass.
1.9.3.5	Having divided himself into ten parts, he desired a place for the union.
1.9.3.6	He indeed found the place for the vital airs in the Trivrit (Stoma).
1.9.3.7	They created the beings.
1.9.3.8	He went upward, the fifteen days of the bright fortnight.
1.9.3.9	With that he created the gods.
1.9.3.10	Those gods increased upward.
1.9.3.11	He who knows this increases upward.
1.9.3.12	He went downward, the fifteen days in the dark fortnight.
1.9.3.13	With it he created the Asuras.
1.9.3.14	Those Asuras decreased downward.
1.9.3.15	The enemy of him who knows this perishes.
1.9.3.16	In the day he created the gods, in the night the Asuras.
1.9.3.17	The gods became white, the Asuras black.
1.9.3.18	He created the gods by truth, the Asuras by falsehood.
1.9.3.19	The gods were true, the Asuras false.
1.9.3.20	He created gods with his right hand, the Asuras with his left.
1.9.3.21	Those gods became powerful, the Asuras were defeated.
1.9.3.22	Then the gods became victorious, the Asuras defeated.
1.9.3.23	He who knows this becomes himself.
1.9.3.24	His enemy becomes defeated.
1.9.3.25	He thought, "Where shall I sacrifice?"
1.9.3.26	He did not find that very place where Prajapati would have sacrificed.
1.9.3.27	There was nothing else for him to sacrifice except his own life.
1.9.3.28	He thought that Indra was indeed his own inner abode.
1.9.3.29	He said, "Go to Indra, svāhā!" and expelled it.
1.9.3.30	Breath is indeed energy.
1.9.3.31	Indra is energy.
1.9.3.32	He offered energy to energy.
1.9.4.1	They, the four Hotṛs, sat down, saying, "We shall generate Indra, the lord of Soma."
1.9.4.2	Earth was the Hotar, Heaven the Adhvaryu, Tvashtri the Agnis, Mitra the Upasthater.
1.9.4.3	They took up these two Grahas.
1.9.4.4	O lord of speech, thou art taken with the most excellent power of speech.
1.9.4.5	To the lord of sacrifice, the oblation is brought to its own place.
1.9.4.6	They found the one-and-twenty-fold abode.
1.9.4.7	By that they generated Indra.
1.9.4.8	Having generated Indra, they said, "We shall go to heaven."
1.9.4.9	They settled down as the five Hotṛ priests, with Varuna as their chief.
1.9.4.10	Agni was the Hotṛ priest, the Asvins were the Adhvaryus, Rudra was the Agnīdhra, and Brihaspati was the Upavasya priest.
1.9.4.11	The fact that they are called "Asvins" makes them the fifth Hotṛ priest.
1.9.4.12	They took up these two Grahas.
1.9.4.13	O Vācaspati, we praise your name. We praise your name.
1.9.4.14	You are the name of our name.
1.9.4.15	They found the abode of thirty-nine.
1.9.4.16	Having made that a bridge, they sang.
1.9.4.17	With that they created animals.
1.9.4.18	They took them to the deities.
1.9.4.19	They took a horse to Yama.
1.9.4.20	Half of his power departed.
1.9.4.21	He saw this acceptance.
1.9.4.22	With the impulse of the divine Savitr, with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of Pusan, I receive thee.
1.9.4.23	Varuna gives thee to Yama for me.
1.9.4.24	May he attain immortality.
1.9.4.25	May the giver be greater than the receiver. Thus he bestowed half of his strength.
1.9.4.26	He who, knowing this, accepts a horse, takes half of its power.
1.9.4.27	But he who accepts it without knowing this, loses half of his power.
1.9.4.28	They brought a cow to Rudra.
1.9.4.29	One-third of its power was lost.
1.9.4.30	He saw this acceptance.
1.9.4.31	"To Rudra you, Varuna gives to me."
1.9.4.32	He attained immortality.
1.9.4.33	May the gift be greater for the giver, may the gift be greater also for the receiver.
1.9.4.34	Thus he placed the third part of the senses.
1.9.4.35	He who, knowing this, accepts a cow, places the third part of his senses.
1.9.4.36	But he who accepts it without knowing this, loses the third part of senses.
1.9.4.37	They brought gold to Agni.
1.9.4.38	And the fourth sense-organ departed from him.
1.9.4.39	And he saw this acceptance.
1.9.4.40	"To Agni, to thee, Varuna gives."
1.9.4.41	"May he attain immortality."
1.9.4.42	"May the giver be greater than I, may the receiver be greater than I."
1.9.4.43	Thus he placed the fourth sense-organism.
1.9.4.44	He who, knowing this, accepts gold, takes the fourth part of his senses.
1.9.4.45	But he who accepts it without knowing this, loses the fourth part of the senses.
1.9.4.46	They gave a garment to Brihaspati.
1.9.4.47	From him the fifth part of the senses departed.
1.9.4.48	He saw this acceptance.
1.9.4.49	The Gnas cut you.
1.9.4.50	He (the Adhvaryu) stretches out the Apas.
1.9.4.51	He joins the minds.
1.9.4.52	"Varuna gives thee to me, O Brihaspati."
1.9.4.53	May he attain immortality.
1.9.4.54	May the giver be more than I, may the receiver be more than I.
1.9.4.55	Thus he places the fifth (part) of the strength.
1.9.4.56	He places the fifth (portion) of the strength, he who knowing thus receives the garment.
1.9.4.57	Now he who, being ignorant, accepts the fifth, his sense-organ departs.
1.9.4.58	He did not breathe for Uttana Angirasa.
1.9.4.59	His sixth sense-organ departed.
1.9.4.60	He saw this acceptance.
1.9.4.61	"To you, Uttana Angiras, Varuna gives me."
1.9.4.62	He attained immortality.
1.9.4.63	May the giver be greater than me, may I be greater than the receiver.
1.9.4.64	Thus he places the sixth on the sense organ.
1.9.4.65	He places the sixth on his sense organ, one who knows this and breathes while receiving.
1.9.4.66	But one who receives without knowing this, his sixth sense organ departs.
1.9.4.67	Who gave this to whom?
1.9.4.68	Desire gave it to desire.
1.9.4.69-77	Kama is the giver. Kama is the receiver. I receive you for Kama. This is yours, O Kama. Thus the ocean is indeed Kama. Kama is Dakshina. One receives Dakshina with Dakshina itself. He who knows that deity who brought Dakshina first, becomes worthy of receiving Dakshina. He leads Dakshina.
1.9.5.1	They, while singing, said:
1.9.5.2	"Give us from this."
1.9.5.3	"By what place?"
1.9.5.4	"Here you will know."
1.9.5.5	They said.
1.9.5.6	They, the seven Hotras, sat down, Aryaman as the householder.
1.9.5.7	Mahahavi was the Hotri.
1.9.5.8	Satyahavir was the Adhvaryu.
1.9.5.9	Acittapati was the Agnid.
1.9.5.10	Acittamati was the Upavasati.
1.9.5.11	He is not to be resisted, he is not to be opposed, he is the most powerful.
1.9.5.12	The Udgātṛ is the one who has no mouth.
1.9.5.13	They took this Graha.
1.9.5.14	"O Vidhi, we praise your name."
1.9.5.15	"You are Vidhi, our name."
1.9.5.16	They found the abode of the thirty-three.
1.9.5.17	By that they created this.
1.9.5.18-24	And this is the seven-fold sacrifice, and the thirty-three-fold sacrifice, which the gods and men give to one another. The breath is the ten-fold sacrifice. The eye is the four-fold sacrifice. The ear is the five-fold sacrifice. Speech and the self are the seven-fold sacrifices. The Agnihotra is the ten- fold sacrifice. The New and Full Moon sacrifices are the four-fold sacrifices.
1.9.5.25	The Catu-r-māsyas are offered by the five Hotṛs.
1.9.5.26	The Soma sacrifice is offered by the seven Hotṛs. (The sacrifice)
1.9.5.27	Agnihotra is offered for longevity.
1.9.5.28	He who knows this attains all longevity.
1.9.5.29	The Darsha-Pūrṇamāsa sacrifices are offered for sight.
1.9.5.30	He who thus knows does not have sight in his house.
1.9.5.31	The Catu-r māsyas are offered for hearing.
1.9.5.32	He who does not have hearing in his house knows this.
1.9.5.33-39	The sacrifice is performed for speech and for the Self. He who knows this, does not have a house for speech or for the Self. The Prajapati is the ten-hotr. Being one, he has the largest share in the Vyahrtis. He who thus knows becomes one and the largest. The sacrifice is performed for the full moon for brilliance. The Brahman is the deity of the Gayatri metre.
1.9.5.40	Agni is Gayatra.
1.9.5.41	This is his own deity, the one with the firm foundation.
1.9.5.42	No one else has control over his welfare and prosperity.
1.9.5.43	For what life does one perform the new moon sacrifice?
1.9.5.44	One is indeed united with the new moon.
1.9.5.45	One attains the entire life span, he who knows this.
1.9.5.46	For what heaven does one perform the Soma sacrifice?
1.9.5.47	One attains the heavenly world, he who knows thus.
1.9.5.48	He should touch the Agnihotra that has been raised with the Dasahotr mantra.
1.9.5.49	The gods created the Agnihotra with the Dasahotra.
1.9.5.50	It was created and obtained with offspring.
1.9.5.51	He should touch the Darsha-Paurnamasa with the Catuhotra mantra.
1.9.5.52	The Catuhotra gods created the Darsha-Purnamasa.
1.9.5.53	They were created and obtained with progeny.
1.9.5.54	He should touch the five-fold Hotrā and the four seasonal sacrifices.
1.9.5.55	The gods created the five-fold Hōtrā and the seasonal sacrifices.
1.9.5.56	They created them and obtained them.
1.9.5.57	He should touch the seven-fold Hotră and the Soma sacrifice.
1.9.5.58	The gods have created the seven-fold Hōtra and the Soma sacrifice
1.9.5.59	They created it and obtained it.
1.9.5.60	One should recite the Dashahotar (hymn) before the Sami-dhenu verses.
1.9.5.61	Prajapati is the Dashahotri.
1.9.5.62	The Sami-dhenus are the mouth of the sacrifice.
1.9.5.63	He places the pair at the mouth of the sacrificial rite.
1.9.5.64	One should recite the Catuhotar (hymns) before the Prayaja offerings.
1.9.5.65	The gods generated Indra with the Catuhotri.
1.9.5.66	He generates Indra in the sacrifice.
1.9.5.67-75	He performs the sacrifice with Indra. One should recite the five-hotr (mantra) before the oblations. The gods created the animals with the five-hotrs. They made them prosper. One creates animals. One makes one's enemy prosper. One should say the seven-hotr (verse) before the subsequent offerings. The gods went to heaven with the seven-hotrs. One goes to heaven.
1.9.5.76	One should recite the Dashahotar (hymn) before the Bahispavamana.
1.9.5.77	Prajapati is the Dashahotri.
1.9.5.78	The Bahispavamāna is the mouth of the sacrifice.
1.9.5.79	He places it at the mouth of the sacrificie in a pair.
1.9.5.80	One should recite the Catuhotar (hymns) before the Ajyas.
1.9.5.81	One should recites the Pancahotar (hyms) before the Madhyandina Pavamana.
1.9.5.82	He should recite the seven-hotar (hymn) before the Pavamāna of the Arbhava (Sutra).
1.9.5.83	The gods went to heaven through the seven-hotra.
1.9.5.84	One who knows the four-hotar (sutra) to be those to be gratified after the Soma-drinking,
1.9.5.85	he is gratified with offspring and cattle.
1.9.5.86	These are the four-hotars to be gratified after drinking Soma.
1.9.5.87	The Brahmanas who are well-versed in the Vedas, he alone satisfies them.
1.9.5.88	They, being satisfied, satisfy him with progeny and cattle.
1.9.6.1	He who does not beget progeny and cattle, should wear a garment of Bārāsi for twelve days, drink hot water, and lie down below.
1.9.6.2-6	Having performed austerities, Prajapati created himself, made himself into a couple, and generated offspring and cattle. For he is indeed uncreated, without a mate. But if he does not generate, then having performed austerities, he creates himself, makes himself into a couple and generates offspring and cattle. Prajapati is the ten-sacrificer.
1.9.6.7	Prajapati is greater than the Homa.
1.9.6.8	Therefore, they do not offer it.
1.9.6.9	One should offer the Prāṇāpāna.
1.9.6.10	One offers the Apāna in the Prāṇa.
1.9.6.11	One should sacrifice a warrior with four Hotrās.
1.9.6.12	Having taken four spoonfuls of ghee, one should recite the four Hotrās:
1.9.6.13	One should offer half with the eastern ladle and half with the northern ladle.
1.9.6.14	The gods generated Indra through the four-fold Hotr.
1.9.6.15	In whatever battle Indra is present, that battle is won.
1.9.6.16	He generates Indra in this battle.
1.9.6.17	He wins the battle.
1.9.6.18	One who desires offspring should be offered through the four-hotr.
1.9.6.19	Having taken four spoonfuls of ghee, one should recite the four-hotrs.
1.9.6.20	With the first Graha he should offer half, with the second half.
1.9.6.21	The gods generated Indra with four Hotr priests.
1.9.6.22	He generates offspring for him.
1.9.6.23	But no one is born after him.
1.9.6.24	But he becomes radiant.
1.9.6.25	For he generates him with all his power.
1.9.6.26	One who desires cattle should be sacrificed to with five Hotr priests.
1.9.6.27	Having taken up four spoonfuls of clarified butter, he should recite the Pañcahotra.
1.9.6.28	He should offer half with the eastern ladle and half with the northern ladle.
1.9.6.29	The gods created animals through the Pañcahotra.
1.9.6.30	One creates animals.
1.9.6.31	One should perform the Pañcahotrā sacrifice for one who has an enemy.
1.9.6.32	Having taken up four spoonfulls of clarified butter, one should recite the Pa pañcahotra.
1.9.6.33	With the first cup he should offer half, with the second half.
1.9.6.34	The gods defeated the Asuras with the five-fold Hotr.
1.9.6.35	One who desires to overcome his enemies should perform the five-fold sacrifice.
1.9.6.36	One who wishes for heaven should be sacrificed with the five-hotr.
1.9.6.37	Having taken four spoonfuls of ghee, one should recite the five-hotrs.
1.9.6.38	With the first cup he offers half, with the next half.
1.9.6.39	The gods went to heaven by means of the fivefold sacrifice.
1.9.6.40	One goes to heaven.
1.9.6.41	One who thinks that the sacrifice has come to an end should be sacrificed with the sevenfold sacrifice.
1.9.6.42	The gods created this world with the sevenfold (sacrifice).
1.9.6.43	It is created well.
1.9.6.44	One becomes as one sacrifices.
1.9.7.1	The Brahmavādins say that there is only one sacrifice with four Hotṛs. Why then are all the sacrifices called four Hotṛs?
1.9.7.2	There are four sacrifices.
1.9.7.3	They have four Hotṛs
1.9.7.4	That is why the four Hotṛs are called four Hotṛ.
1.9.7.5	One of the four should not eat for a year.
1.9.7.6	That is the vow.
1.9.7.7	Food is the four Hotṛs.
1.9.7.8	He who knows this becomes endowed with food.
1.9.7.9	Now if one who is a student does not approach (his teacher), he should go to the forest, make a Brāhmaṇa his observer, and recite the four Hotṛ verses.
1.9.7.10	This is indeed the means of crossing over for Brahman, namely, the four Hotṛ-s.
1.9.7.11	The Brāhmaṇa is the observer.
1.9.7.12	At the end of the vision, Brahma appeared.
1.9.7.13	He leads him to the knowledge of what has appeared.
1.9.7.14	And he who knows the four Hotr priests knows more than he who knows more.
1.9.7.15	The four Hotr priests are the source of the sacrifice.
1.9.7.16	The sacrifice was created from the four Hotr-priests.
1.9.7.17	He does not injure him who is not cursed.
1.9.7.18	One should recite the four-hotr on the tenth day for the sake of food.
1.9.7.19	The four-hotr is food.
1.9.7.20	The tenth day is the end.
1.9.7.21	Having gone to the end, one obtains food.
1.9.7.22	This is his unused now.
1.9.7.23	This is not obtained.
1.9.7.24	He employs it.
1.9.7.25	He thus obtains it.
1.9.7.26	This is the queen of serpents.
1.9.7.27	Her praise is this, namely, the four Hotṛs.
1.9.7.28	The Hotṛ speaks.
1.9.7.29	He praises what has been praised.
1.9.7.30	For what has been praised is not without praise.
1.9.8.1	The gods and the Asuras were contending.
1.9.8.2	They came to the sacrifice performing it together.
1.9.8.3	Whatever the gods did, the Asuras did.
1.9.8.4	They went away separated.
1.9.8.5	The gods said, "Let us perform this sacrifice above the Asuras."
1.9.8.6	Taking it in this way, they went away.
1.9.8.7	Agni with the Yajus verses, Savitar with the Stotras, Indra with the Uktha hymns, Brihaspati with the Chandas.
1.9.8.8	They stretched it out above the Asuras.
1.9.8.9	The Asuras did not follow their sacrifice.
1.9.8.10	By that they drove them away.
1.9.8.11	Then the gods became victorious, the Asuras were defeated.
1.9.8.12	He who knows this stretches out his sacrifice above his enemies.
1.9.8.13	He becomes victorious by himself.
1.9.8.14	His enemy is defeated.
1.9.8.15	One should offer with these (verses) at the Samṛta-sacrifice.
1.9.8.16	Four by four, in succession, before the morning recitation.
1.9.8.17	The sacrifice is of this extent.
1.9.8.18	One obtains as much as the sacrifice is.
1.9.8.19	One becomes a sacrificer.
1.9.8.20	Others are not sacrificers.
1.9.8.21	One should offer with these verses before consecration.
1.9.8.22	This is the actual consecration.
1.9.8.23	One obtains that alone.
1.9.8.24	One should offer with these (oblations) before the Dvādaśāha.
1.9.8.25	This indeed is the Dvādašāha in the direct sense.
1.9.8.26	One obtains it.
1.9.8.27	One should touch the Atithi with these (oblatioṇs).
1.9.8.28	One obtains the sacrifice with the sacrifice.
1.9.8.29	The Asuras conquered the sacrifice from the gods.
1.9.8.30	They entered the Agnidhra with their wives, going towards the north.
1.9.8.31	The Asuras, who were ashamed, turned back with their wives.
1.9.8.32	They then came back and worshipped them.
1.9.8.33	Then the gods became victorious over the Asuras.
1.9.8.34	He who knows this becomes victorious over himself.
1.9.8.35	His enemy becomes defeated.
1.9.8.36	His enemy does not ascend his house or his cattle.
1.9.8.37	He who knows this conquers the house and cattle of his enemy.
1.9.8.38	He should recite these to the Agnidhra.
1.9.8.39	Agnidhra indeed offers the Patnīvata.
1.9.8.40	The wife is satisfied and conceives semen.
1.9.8.41	He prospers with offspring and cattle.
1.9.8.42	One who desires offspring should offer these oblations between Tvashtri and his wives for a year.
1.9.8.43	Tvashtri and the wives are a pair.
1.9.8.44	This is Tvashtri, the lord of the pair, for procreation.
1.9.8.45	That is the pair.
1.9.8.46	From that very pair, the sacrificer is born with offspring and cattle.
1.9.8.47	He obtains offspring.
1.10.1.9-19	The Vājinam is for the Vājinam. The Agnēya is on eight potsherds. The Saumya is a cake on one potsherd. The Sāvitra is on eight potsherd.s The Sārasvata is a cake on three potsherds. The Pāushna is a cake on four potsherds. Translation: The Vājināṃ Vājinam (is offered). The Agnēyaka is on eight pot-sherds. Sāumya is a rice-cake on one potshers. Sāvitra is a cake on eight potsherbs. Sārasvata is on three potsherbs. The Pāuṣṇaka is on four potsherbs. 
1.10.1.20	To Agni, the leader of the army, in the morning, a cake on eight potsherds.
1.10.1.21	To the Maruts, the tormentors, at midday, a rice-pap.
1.10.1.22	To the domestic Maruts, at evening, a cooked rice, milked from all (cows).
1.10.1.23	To Indra, the remover of the distress.
1.10.1.24	To the sportive Maruts, together with the rays, a cake on seven potsherds. The Maruts are the gods.
1.10.1.25	To Agni, a cake oneight potsherds.
1.10.1.26-36	The Soma-offering is gentle. The Savitra-offering is made on eight potsherds. The Sarasvata-offering is made of rice. The Pusna-offering is made in rice. The Indra-Agni-offering is made with twelve potsherds. For Indra, the slayer of Vritra, there is an offering. For Visvakarman, there is an oblation on one potsherd. The Agniya-offering is made to Agni on eight potsherads. The Soma-offering is made gently. The Savitri-offering is made for Savitri on eight potsherards. The Sarasvati-offering is made.
1.10.1.37	The oblation to Pusan.
1.10.1.38	The oblation to Vayu is barley-gruel or milk-rice.
1.10.1.39	The oblations to Indra and Sunasira are of twelve potfuls.
1.10.1.40	The oblution to Surya is of one potful.
1.10.1.41	The oblutions to the six deities are of six potfuls, cooked rice, barley-meal, curds, and milk.
1.10.1.42	For each person there is one oblation and one cake.
1.10.1.43	The obltion to Aditya.
1.10.2.1	O Agni, the Hotr-priest, the messenger-priest, the sacrifice has stood up. May heaven and earth protect us. May the one who performs the offering be pleased. For Indra and the gods, may it be so. Accept this ghee-offering, O Agni, who is pleased. Svāhā!
1.10.2.2	We invoke the Maruts, the bearers of sacrifice, the drinkers of mead, the companions of Karambha.
1.10.2.3	O Indra, among the gods, we are your most powerful friends. The great praise of the one who is generous, the one who is rich in gifts, is sung by the Maruts.
1.10.2.4	Whatever we have done in the village, in the forest, in the assembly, in the presence of the senses, whatever we have done in water, that is in the mind of one, that is in one's own dharma, that is the release of all that sin.
1.10.2.5	Having done the deed, the doer of the deed, together with speech, having done the deed for the gods, may the giver of good gifts go to that place.
1.10.2.6	O Parā, O Pūrṇā, fall down, fall down again, O Pūrņā, like a seller, selling food and strength, O hundred-thrice-powerful one.
1.10.2.7	Give me, I give you, give to me, I give to you. Like water, you gather together. Who gives to the giver?
1.10.3.1	Here, O fathers, you may rejoice.
1.10.3.2	O Vasu, we have praised you, O magnanimous one, O well-seeing one.
1.10.3.3	Now, indeed, praised, thou goest to the will of him whose yoke is full. Do thou, O Indra, yoke thy steeds.
1.10.3.4	If we have injured the sky, the earth, or the heaven, or our mother or father, may Agni, the domestic fire, lead us from that sin, from that evil, O Jātavedas.
1.10.3.5	The Fathers have been pleased. Obeisance to you, O Fathers, to the food, obeisance to you, Fathers, to the energy, obeisance to the heat, obeisance to your life-giving power, obeisance to what is terrible among you, O Fathers. Obeisance to the life, obeisance to that which is terrible among you. Obeisance to your life, obeisance, O Fathers, be to you.
1.10.3.6	This is your father, these are our living ones. May we be here among the living.
1.10.3.7	The distant fathers, the gentle ones, with the deep paths of the ancestors, may they give us wealth and whatever is good. May they grant us prosperity and all-heroic wealth.
1.10.3.8	He, the creator, produced the firm ones. He, the giver of wealth, is the great singer. He has gone to the east, the red one, the first of the sweet ones. He has brought his own body.
1.10.3.9	They have seen, they have rejoiced, they have sung, they have praised, the sages, the good ones, with the newest thought. O Indra, your horses are yoked.
1.10.3.10	We invoke the mind with the Nārāśaṃsa hymn and the thoughts of the Pitrs.
1.10.3.11	May the mind return again for the sacrifice, for power, for life, to see the sun in abundance.
1.10.3.12	May the Pitrs again give us the mind, the divine people, to live and enjoy the community.
1.10.3.13	O Agni, today we invoke that horse, the sacrifice, the good, touching the heart, with our praises. May we prosper with your gifts.
1.10.4.1	O Rudra, we make this animal your prey. This is your share, O Rudra, accept it with your sister Ambika, svāhā.
1.10.4.2	O Amba, we have approached Rudra, the three-eyed god.
1.10.4.3	May he do what is good for us, may he do what is beneficial for us.
1.10.4.4	May it make us more prosperous, may it be our protector, may it be for our success.
1.10.4.5	Medicine for the cow, for the horse, for the man, medicine.
1.10.4.6	And for us, medicine, good medicine, as for the sheep and the ewe.
1.10.4.7	We worship Tryambaka, the fragrant one, the enhancer of prosperity,
1.10.4.8	Like a plant from its bondage, be freed from death, from the immortal.
1.10.4.9	This is your share, O Rudra, by this boon may you pass beyond the most vigorous.
1.10.4.10	With the Pināka in his hand, clad in a hide, with a stretched bow,
1.10.5.1	The gods and the Asuras were in this world.
1.10.5.2	Prajapati desired, "May I drive away the Asuras and create the progeny."
1.10.5.3	He saw the Caturmāsyas.
1.10.5.4	By the Caturmāsys he drove away the Asuras.
1.10.5.5	By the Catumasya he created offspring.
1.10.5.6	He who, knowing this, performs the Caturmāyas, drives away his enemies.
1.10.5.7	He is born with offspring and cattle.
1.10.5.8	Having created the sacrifice of Visvedevas from the Agniṣṭoma, Prajapati created the creatures.
1.10.5.9	Having created the sacrifice of Varuna-prasthas from the Ukthya, he bound these creatures with Varuna.
1.10.5.10	Having created a sacrifice of Sākamedhas from the Atiratra, Indra killed Vritra.
1.10.5.11	Some creatures were created, others were not.
1.10.5.12	Then Prajapati desired, "Let me create beings."
1.10.5.13	The year is indeed the sacrifice.
1.10.5.14	The sacrifice is Prajapati.
1.10.5.15	He placed these two kinds of milk in himself, the one to be given and the one to be taken.
1.10.5.16	Then he offered these oblations to these deities as their share.
1.10.5.17	With them he created beings.
1.10.5.18	Beings were born from the seasons.
1.10.5.19	The five oblations are the seasons.
1.10.5.20	For there are five seasons.
1.10.5.21	From that one is born.
1.10.5.22	Agni alone caused it to flow.
1.10.5.23	Soma alone placed the semen.
1.10.5.24	Agni and Soma are a pair.
1.10.5.25	Savitar caused it to be born for procreation.
1.10.5.26	Savitar is indeed the year.
1.10.5.27	The year has twelve months.
1.10.5.28	Therefore, the offering is made in twelve potsherds.
1.10.5.29	And also because of being for the sake of the Visvedevas, the offering is in twelve potsherads.
1.10.5.30	He offers silently.
1.10.5.31	For the year is not defined.
1.10.5.32	When Sarasvati had created speech, she placed it in the waters.
1.10.5.33	They established Pusan in the waters. The waters are the earth.
1.10.5.34	Sarasvati is speech.
1.10.5.35	Pusan is cattle.
1.10.5.36	Speech and cattle are a pair.
1.10.5.37-41	In the middle they are created by Prajapati. At the end, from the pair, the Visuchis are born. Here they are created by the middle Prajapati. Then at the end, from a pair, the Visuchi are born. These oblations are indeed the destroyers of Vritra.
1.10.5.42	Indra killed Vritra with Agni's army, with Soma, the king, impelled by Savitr, and with Sarasvati as the leader.
1.10.5.43	Pusan followed him with strength.
1.10.5.44	These are the oblations for victory.
1.10.5.45	Indra indeed killed Vritra.
1.10.5.46	He excelled all with his strength.
1.10.5.47	It entered everything here, water, plants, and trees.
1.10.5.48	The gods then became weary.
1.10.5.49	They made it a rule.
1.10.5.50	That is why it is called "Sannāyya".
1.10.5.51	He who knows this and performs the Sannāyya sacrifice prospers.
1.10.6.1	Curd and cooked rice are a pair.
1.10.6.2	But when it is mixed, it appears like an egg, like a womb, like a fetus.
1.10.6.3	From Tapas (penance) beings were born.
1.10.6.4	It is indeed a penance when it becomes cooked.
1.10.6.5	From that it is born.
1.10.6.6	Now this is the offering of cooked milk to all the gods.
1.10.6.7	Prajapati created beings.
1.10.6.8	He created them with the offering to all the gods alone.
1.10.6.9	Therefore these beings are dedicated to all the gods,
1.10.6.10	He sacrifices to all the gods
1.10.6.11	The Visve Devas are the young ones.
1.10.6.12	He sacrifices to them.
1.10.6.13	Then, indeed, men live by the sacrifice from that (gift).
1.10.6.14	This is the womb of creatures.
1.10.6.15	The Maruts desired it.
1.10.6.16	Then they were born with the grasp of sin.
1.10.6.17	Because they were born with sin, (the sacrifice) was performed for the sake of their own nature.
1.10.6.18	This is the begetter of cattle.
1.10.6.19	When it is the Maruts, it is with seven potsherds.
1.10.6.20	For there are seven Maruts.
1.10.6.21	The Maruts are the wind.
1.10.6.22	And indeed the Maruts are the non-moving.
1.10.6.23	And indeed by this one obtains the food of the village.
1.10.7.1	They were created by the Vaishvadeva (rite) and went astray.
1.10.7.2	Prajapati took them in by the Dyava-pithiviya (rite).
1.10.7.3	Because the Dyava-Pithiviya (rites) are for the protection of the created beings.
1.10.7.4-10	By the one-pot offering, he becomes a Prajapati. He is established among the deities as Prajapati. The one-pot offering is the sacrificer. The Ahavaniya fire is the heavenly world. When he makes the entire offering, he sends him to the heavenly world as if he were the oblation. When the sacrificer is destroyed, his offspring are destroyed. When the sacrifice is established, his offspring are established.
1.10.7.11	The Homa should be performed in a straight line for stability.
1.10.7.12	One should perform the entire Homa for stability.
1.10.7.13	The sacrificer is the one-pot offering.
1.10.7.14	The animals are the ghee.
1.10.7.15	One should fill it up.
1.10.7.16	He prospers with animals.
1.10.7.17	If one were to fill it up, one would make him inferior to the animals.
1.10.7.18	The animals would stand near him without eating.
1.10.7.19	The back should be turned towards the east.
1.10.7.20	He has made it superior to the animals.
1.10.7.21	The animals approach him and eat.
1.10.7.22	One should not be afraid of that.
1.10.7.23	One should fill it up.
1.10.7.24	Because the animals do not eat.
1.10.7.25	If the sacrificer steps forward, he would perish.
1.10.7.26	If he steps to the right, his progeny would be burnt.
1.10.7.27	If he goes backwards, his wife would perish.
1.10.7.28	If one were to burn the animals facing north,
1.10.7.29	if one were to fall facing east, there would be no rain.
1.10.7.30	One should take it back and offer it again.
1.10.7.31	For the establishment of the sacrificer.
1.10.7.32	The gift is the Dakṣiṇā.
1.10.7.33	One wins the gift with the gift.
1.10.7.34	The gift indeed is the self.
1.10.7.35	The sacrificial grass is tied in three places.
1.10.7.36	The kindling wood is tied in three ways.
1.10.7.37	The Cāturmāsya sacrifices are divided into three parts.
1.10.7.38	The Cāturmāsyas are a year long.
1.10.7.39	They churn Agni for a year.
1.10.7.40	Beings are born after Agni.
1.10.7.41	This is a begetting (sacrifice).
1.10.7.42	They also beget a bull for the sacrificer.
1.10.7.43	One should offer in spring for begetting.
1.10.7.44	One should make an offering on a slope for begetting.
1.10.7.45	They do not pour out the northern half of the altar, for reproduction.
1.10.7.46	They become (the sacrificer's) own.
1.10.7.47	"May I be born again."
1.10.7.48	Pṛṣadājya is cattle.
1.10.7.49	Cattle are of various forms.
1.10.7.50	Therefore, the Agniya ghee is of one form, the Indra-Soma curd is of another form, the Pṛṣadājyas is of another form.
1.10.7.51	The Pṛṣadājy is Indra-Agni by deity.
1.10.7.52	Indra-Agni are the Prāṇa and Apāna.
1.10.7.53	Prāṇa and Apānā are the pair.
1.10.7.54	The offspring are born from the union of the male and female.
1.10.7.55	From the union of the two, indeed, offspring and cattle are born.
1.10.7.56	That is the union.
1.10.7.57	From that very union, the sacrificer is born with offspring and cattle.
1.10.7.58	If one were to sacrifice in spring, one should spread twice.
1.10.7.59	One should pour over once.
1.10.7.60	Plants are cattle.
1.10.7.61	He establishes the animals in the plants.
1.10.7.62	If one were to offer in the rainy season, one should spread it once.
1.10.7.63	One should pour over it twice.
1.10.7.64	He attracts the animals with rain.
1.10.8.1	From the vital airs, indeed, those beings were born.
1.10.8.2	These nine oblations are the vital airs.
1.10.8.3	For there are nine vital airs.
1.10.8.4	The self is the deity.
1.10.8.5	From that one is born.
1.10.8.6	There are nine Prayājas.
1.10.8.7	There are nine Anuyājas.
1.10.8.8	Two Ajyabhāgas.
1.10.8.9	Eight Havis.
1.10.8.10	He offers to Agni.
1.10.8.11	He offers the Vājinī.
1.10.8.12	That makes thirty.
1.10.8.13	The Viraj has thirty letters.
1.10.8.14	One stands firm in Viraj.
1.10.8.15	Prajapati created beings from the womb of Viraj.
1.10.8.16-21	The sacrificer is born from the womb of Viraj. Thirty-three nights are a month. What is a month is a year. Prajapati is a year. Therefore, the sacrificer is born through the womb of Prajapati and Viraj. By offering each oblation, he has attained twelve nights.
1.10.8.22	The number of days in the year is equal to the number of days in a month.
1.10.8.23	One wins the year from one's brother.
1.10.8.24	One wins four months with the Vaisvadev, four with the Varunapraghasa, and four with the Sāka-medha.
1.10.8.25	One wins them from one's own brother.
1.10.8.26	One who performs the Rtu-yajna wins from one who performs the Catu-māsyas.
1.10.8.27	He who performs the sacrifice in the spring, the rainy season and the autumn, he is the Sacrificer of the Seasons.
1.10.8.28	He who completes the thirteenth month and sacrifices in the thirteenth month, he is the sacrificer of the four months.
1.10.8.29	Having performed three straight sacrifices, one should abandon the fourth.
1.10.8.30	Having performed two straight sacrifices, one abandons the third.
1.10.8.31	Those three years have thirty-six full moons.
1.10.8.32	Of those two, twenty-four.
1.10.8.33	Those six thirty-year periods are completed in this twenty-four-year period.
1.10.8.34	This is indeed the thirteenth month.
1.10.8.35	He completes it.
1.10.8.36	He performs a sacrifice for it.
1.10.8.37-42	One desiring cattle should offer the Vaishvadeva sacrifice, not the Varunapraghasa or the Saakamedha sacrifices. The entire man is born as a thousand. He goes as far as he can. The Vaishvadeva offering is for procreation. When one offers the Vaishvadevas, one offers for procreation. One goes to one's own measure.
1.10.8.43	When he has reached a thousand cattle, then he should offer the Varunapraghasa sacrifices.
1.10.8.44	This is the atonement for the sin of having reached a thousand cattle.
1.10.9.1	When he offers on the sacrificial grass at the Prayaja offerings, he offers the plants.
1.10.9.2	When he makes the Anuyaja offerings on the sacrificial grass, he offers the fruit.
1.10.9.3	Whatever is the grass of the Varitinas, whatever is produced from the fruit of the Adas, that he offers.
1.10.9.4	Whatever is the Durva grass, that is.
1.10.9.5	Whatever is dawn and night, that is the rising and setting of the sun.
1.10.9.6	Whatever is Joṣṭrī, that is what is born and what is to be born.
1.10.9.7	Whatever is Urja-hutis, that is what one eats and drinks.
1.10.9.8	Whatever is Daivya Hotare, that is here.
1.10.9.9	The three goddesses are speech. He offers speech.
1.10.9.10	Speech is the metres.
1.10.9.11	He offers the metres.
1.10.9.12	Tanunapat is the sacrifice when it is not yet spread out.
1.10.9.13	Narashansa is when it is spread out.
1.10.9.14	Therefore he offers to Tanunapat at the Prayajas.
1.10.9.15	For then the sacrifice is not yet spread.
1.10.9.16	Therefore he offers to Narāśamsa in the Anuyājas.
1.10.9.17	For then the sacrifice is proceeding.
1.10.9.18	He offers to Vanaspati.
1.10.9.19	Soma is Vanaspati. 
1.10.9.20	These creatures are connected with Soma.
1.10.9.21	He places the sap in the creatures.
1.10.9.22	He offers (to) Tvashtar.
1.10.9.23	For Tvashtar fashions the forms.
1.10.9.24	He offers the Vājinis.
1.10.9.25	Vājinis are cattle. 
1.10.9.26	He sacrifices to them.
1.10.9.27	The Vājinis are the metres.
1.10.9.28	He sacrifices to the metres.
1.10.9.29	The Vājins are cattle.
1.10.9.30	It should not be established.
1.10.9.31	If he were to establish it, he would establish them.
1.10.9.32	They are born in the morning without being established.
1.10.9.33	This is not like a good sacrifice.
1.10.9.34	He offers when the Paridhis have been established and struck.
1.10.9.35	By means of that which is not a sacrifice, the sacrifice is performed.
1.10.9.36	He offers in succession, for the sake of stability.
1.10.9.37	He takes it while sprinkling the sacrificial grass.
1.10.9.38	He places the semen in the bulls.
1.10.9.39	He offers while sitting with knees raised.
1.10.9.40	For animals have their knees raised, and they place the semen in the animals.
1.10.9.41	Then, with knees raised, Prajapati created the creatures.
1.10.9.42	He offers to the directions.
1.10.9.43	He spreads these directions with sap.
1.10.9.44	He offers the eastern direction last.
1.10.9.45	They return to the eastern direction.
1.10.9.46	They call out together.
1.10.9.47	For this is like drinking Soma.
1.10.9.48	The priests eat, saying, "May the strong ones carry my sacrifice." They eat in groups.
1.10.9.49	They distribute the strength in groups.
1.10.9.50	He eats himself.
1.10.9.51	He places the strength in himself.
1.10.10.1	They were created by the All-gods. Varuna seized them in the young one.
1.10.10.2	They say:
1.10.10.3	They indeed went beyond Prajapati.
1.10.10.4	Those who went beyond were seized by Varuna.
1.10.10.5	Therefore, a father should not go beyond.
1.10.10.6	By the Vaishvadev (rite) indeed Prajapati created beings.
1.10.10.7	His oblation was crushed by the Maruts.
1.10.10.8	Then they were created as afflicted by poison.
1.10.10.9	He desired a remedy for them.
1.10.10.10	He desired it for himself.
1.10.10.11	He placed this milk in himself.
1.10.10.12	With it he removed the evil from himself.
1.10.10.13	Now, the Varuna-grahas are indeed a protection against evil.
1.10.10.14	When one performs the Varuna-Grahas, it is for protection against all evil.
1.10.10.15	Varuna seized those creatures after they had eaten.
1.10.10.16	Therefore, the Varuna Grahas.
1.10.10.17	As long as the embryo is in the womb, so long is it afflicted; he who offers to Varuna is afflicted.
1.10.10.18	The Savitr is on eight potsherds.
1.10.10.19	Savitr is the Gâyatra of the gods.
1.10.10.20	The Indra-Agni is on twelve potsherds, as to deity.
1.10.10.21	When they were afflicted by Varuna, Indra and Agni gave them strength.
1.10.10.22	Varuna seized those unstable creatures.
1.10.10.23	Indra and Agni gave strength to them.
1.10.10.24	Indra-Agni are strength and vigour.
1.10.10.25	Strength and vigour are placed in the middle of creatures.
1.10.10.26	They did not breathe.
1.10.10.27	Varuna seized those that did not breathe. 
1.10.10.28	Indra and Agny are the breath of inspiration and expiration.
1.10.10.29	The Prāṇāpāna (breath) is indeed placed in the mouth of creatures.
1.10.10.30	Then these five oblations are offered for continuity.
1.10.10.31	For uninterruptedness, the offering to Maruts.
1.10.10.32	For freedom from Varuna, the offering to Varuna.
1.10.10.33	For beauty, the offering to Ka.
1.10.10.34	What became the beauty of those who were seized by Varuna, therefore it is Ka.
1.10.10.35	Ka is indeed Prajapati.
1.10.10.36	Prajapati, indeed, bound those creatures with Varuna.
1.10.10.37	When one releases them from Varuna, it is for the body and for the self.
1.10.11.1	Truth is indeed the sacrifice.
1.10.11.2	Untruth is a woman.
1.10.11.3	She who is bought by her husband commits untruth, and then she behaves with others.
1.10.11.4	He approaches the truth and the real by speaking the truth alone. If one were to speak in a quarrel, one should make the beloved one offer.
1.10.11.5	And when he recites, he makes her worthy.
1.10.11.6	They become ground with water, for the exclusion of all sin.
1.10.11.7	If they were to be burnt, there would be sin without exclusion.
1.10.11.8	Varuna took them from the vessels.
1.10.11.9	He releases them from Varuna by means of the vessels.
1.10.11.10	They are for each person.
1.10.11.11	He releases each person from sin.
1.10.11.12	One is placed on top.
1.10.11.13	He releases it from the embryos.
1.10.11.14	From food, indeed, those beings were seized by Varuna. They carry food in a winnowing basket.
1.10.11.15	Therefore, they offer with a winnowing-basket.
1.10.11.16	They offer with a woman and a man.
1.10.11.17	They release the beings from Varuna as a pair.
1.10.11.18	They offer standing facing each other.
1.10.11.19	They release from the front.
1.10.11.20	The vessels, the animals with two feet, the pairs of them, they have removed the sin from in front of them.
1.10.11.21	And the ram and the ewe, the animals with four feet, the pairs, they have removed sin from above them.
1.10.11.22	They have removed sin from both sides, from in front and from above.
1.10.12.1	Whatever Varuna seizes, he does not seize the barley and the peace.
1.10.12.2	Varuna is indeed the winter.
1.10.12.3	Those very ones who are seized by Varuna, he releases them from Varuna.
1.10.12.4	Varuna indeed is barley, belonging to Varuna.
1.10.12.5	He releases them from Varunya with their own share.
1.10.12.6	From untruth, indeed, those creatures were seized by Varuna.
1.10.12.7	Since these are animals of untruth, they are released from untruth. They become a pair.
1.10.12.8	They are released from Varuna as a pair.
1.10.12.9	(They are) hairy (animals), for the sake of being fit for sacrifice.
1.10.12.10	Those animals who took hair, attained the sacrifice.
1.10.12.11	The leaves of the śamī tree are used for the purpose of pacification.
1.10.12.12	This is the name of a tree.
1.10.12.13	The ladles should be made of this tree.
1.10.12.14	Prajapati was unable to obtain food.
1.10.12.15	He obtained it by means of the hundred-fold fire.
1.10.12.16	One should make one hundred and one ladles for obtaining food.
1.10.12.17	The thousand-fold fire indeed is the fire of the sun.
1.10.12.18	The offerings are to be made in a thousand and one.
1.10.12.19	When the vessels are offered, then one should rub the fire.
1.10.12.20	In which fire the oblation is offered, in that one should offer to the deities. Indra gave the Yati to Sala and Avrikeras.
1.10.12.21	Those are the heads of them, namely, the Kharjuras.
1.10.12.22	Soma is the drink of the gods, and the Karira-trees are the Soma-drink of the gods.
1.10.12.23	The Karira-trees belong to Soma.
1.10.12.24	The offering to Soma indeed causes rain to fall from heaven.
1.10.12.25	When there are Karira-trees, it is for the securing of rain and food.
1.10.13.1	The mountains are the eldest offspring of Prajapati.
1.10.13.2	They were birds.
1.10.13.3	They settled down wherever they wanted to.
1.10.13.4	Or, this (earth) was then loose.
1.10.13.5	Indra cut off their wings.
1.10.13.6	With them he made it firm.
1.10.13.7	Those who were the wings became the locusts.
1.10.13.8	Therefore, they come up to the mountain every year.
1.10.13.9	This is their birthplace.
1.10.13.10	Then the first juice that flowed out became the karīra fruits.
1.10.13.11	In the rainy season, the locusts move out and perform the Varuna-prastha sacrifices.
1.10.13.12	Karīra fruits are used.
1.10.13.13	It brings about rain.
1.10.13.14	Therefore, it rains more then.
1.10.13.15	It brings rain.
1.10.13.16	The Vaishvadev-rites do not use the northern altar.
1.10.13.17	They use the southern altar.
1.10.13.18	"He says, "May the offspring be born to me."
1.10.13.19	The northern altar is the womb of the offspring that are born.
1.10.13.20	They are born from it.
1.10.13.21	The southern altar is the womb for the offspring that are first born.
1.10.13.22	They too are born from it.
1.10.13.23	Here he generates both kinds of creatures, the ones that are born and the ones that are not.
1.10.13.24	This one was the hand, not this one.
1.10.13.25	They found him in that southern altar-site.
1.10.13.26	Therefore this one is his protector, for he is the younger.
1.10.13.27	Therefore the younger one protects the elder.
1.10.13.28	The two are equal and face east.
1.10.13.29	The two hands are equal and facing forward, not touching, for the complete covering of all sins.
1.10.13.30	If they were to touch, there would be incomplete covering of sins.
1.10.13.31	He touches them together on one side, for continuity.
1.10.13.32	He offers this oblation.
1.10.13.33	So that he does not go without it.
1.10.13.34	Indra is the nobility,
1.10.13.35	the Maruts are the people.
1.10.13.36	For the exclusion of the sinful and the wicked.
1.10.13.37	Whatever the Adhvaryu does, the Pratiprasthātṛ does.
1.10.13.38	Therefore, whatever the king does, the servant does.
1.10.13.39	There are not thirty oblations in the Vaishvadev or the Saakamedha sacrifices.
1.10.13.40	There are thirty oblations in Varuna Praghasa.
1.10.13.41	The Purusha is the Viraaj.
1.10.13.42	Ten fingers, ten toes, ten breaths.
1.10.13.43	When they enter the water of the Avabhrtha, it is for the release of the sacrificer from Varuna.
1.10.13.44	Whatever part of the sacrifice does not reach its proper form, that is taken by Varuna.
1.10.13.45	When they descend into the water of the avabhrtha with the nishka, it is the release of whatever is held by Varuna.
1.10.13.46-51	They come without any regard for Varuna's non-injury. They sweep the outer cow-pen. They appease Varuna in the outer cow-shed. "He is the fire, we are the kindlers." They approach to kindle, having become free from Varuna. "You are the kindling-wood, we are the kindslers." They kindle with the kindling-stick.
1.10.14.1	Having created the creatures, he thought, "I shall slay Vritra."
1.10.14.2	Having united with these deities, he attacked Vritra with the Maruts, with the army of Agni.
1.10.14.3	Approaching Vritra, seeing Vritra, he stood still, unable to strike, being held by the chest.
1.10.14.4	The Maruts supported him.
1.10.14.5	They went away.
1.10.14.6	When he had reached the vital parts, he became motionless.
1.10.14.7	They then heated him.
1.10.14.8	Therefore they are called Sāntapanas.
1.10.14.9	Indra killed Vritra with Agni as his army.
1.10.14.10	That is why it is called an army.
1.10.14.11	And Agni is the commander of the gods.
1.10.14.12	This is the raising of the army.
1.10.14.13	Indra was unable to hurl the thunderbolt at Vritra.
1.10.14.14	He offered this share to the Maruts.
1.10.14.15	They heated it for strength.
1.10.14.16	With that strength they hurled it.
1.10.14.17	They heated him together.
1.10.14.18	Therefore they are called Sāntapanas.
1.10.14.19	A rice-cake is to be offered at midday.
1.10.14.20	Then he heats both ends.
1.10.14.21	The oblation should be cooked.
1.10.14.22	For it shines on all sides.
1.10.14.23	The gods did not find the vital point of Vritra.
1.10.14.24	The Maruts struck him with a razor-edged weapon.
1.10.14.25	They indeed heated him.
1.10.14.26	Therefore they are called Sāntapanas (heaters).
1.10.15.1	They, about to kill Vritra the next day, observed fast.
1.10.15.2	They said, "Whose will this be tomorrow? Whose is being cooked?"
1.10.15.3	They cooked this rice.
1.10.15.4	They made the animals with it.
1.10.15.5	They knew, "Those who will be here will be these."
1.10.15.6	They stood with this for them.
1.10.15.7	They bound them with this.
1.10.15.8	This is indeed the limit of animals.
1.10.15.9	They lived on the day after the victory.
1.10.15.10	They said, "Whose will this be tomorrow? Whose will it be today?"
1.10.15.11	They cooked this rice.
1.10.15.12	They said, "We have not eaten the Mahuta."
1.10.15.13	They offered it to the Maruts and the Grihamedhas.
1.10.15.14	The Maruts and the Grhamedhas are indeed cattle.
1.10.15.15	They offered it for the sake of cattle.
1.10.15.16	They were indeed united.
1.10.15.17-22	The Asuras sent hunger to the gods. The gods, having heard it, cooked this rice. Not knowing the world of the gods, it again entered the Asuras. Then the gods became victorious over the Asuras. Therefore, he who, knowing this, cooks this rice, becomes victorious over his enemies. His enemy becomes defeated.
1.10.15.23	He should cook even for his neighbour.
1.10.15.24	He sends hunger to his brother.
1.10.15.25	The animal sacrifice of these is the same as the animal sacrifice of the Cāturmāsya.
1.10.15.26	The domestic fire is animal-yielding.
1.10.15.27	He does not offer the Prayāja, Anuyāja, or Sāmidhenī verses. He offers the Ajyabhāga oblations for the sake of the sacrifice.
1.10.15.28	He offers to Agni.
1.10.15.29	Agni is the same, Agni is the foundation.
1.10.15.30	By the same and the foundation.
1.10.15.31	They invoke Ida.
1.10.15.32	Ida is cattle.
1.10.15.33	The householder's fire is cattle-like.
1.10.15.34	Therefore they invoke Ida.
1.10.15.35	He places the pot with the ashes for continuity.
1.10.16.1	Among them all, Indra went away.
1.10.16.2	The gods placed this share for Indra, saying, "May he choose us tomorrow, having the share deposited."
1.10.16.3	They call out to the bull.
1.10.16.4	They call out Indra.
1.10.16.5	The cry is the Vasat-call.
1.10.16.6	Or they call out the bull of the Asuras, saying, "Let us beget offspring."
1.10.16.7-12	The cows with their calves graze together for the sake of the Soma-sacrifice. A woman eats (at the Soma-sacrifice) for the sake of Soma-sacrifice. If a woman does not eat, they would not be able to perform the Soma-sacrifice together. Therefore a woman eats for the sake of performing the Soma-sacrifice jointly. A woman eating at the Soma-sacrifice is a taking away of the sacrifice by Nirriti. For a woman is Nirriti.
1.10.16.13	The Darvi is seized by Nirriti.
1.10.16.14	For it moves in the heat.
1.10.16.15	This indeed is the woman's hand, namely the Darvi.
1.10.16.16	When one offers with the Darvi, one appeases Nirriti by means of that which is seized by Nirrti.
1.10.16.17	On the next day he set out to slay Vritra.
1.10.16.18	The Maruts were playing around him.
1.10.16.19	They approached him and drove him away.
1.10.16.20	They attacked them.
1.10.16.21	Therefore, the games.
1.10.16.22	They were united.
1.10.16.23	The gods did not see the supreme end of the Asuras.
1.10.16.24	They saw the Maruts playing among the games, and they thought, "These are the ones who have won."
1.10.16.25	They offered this share to them.
1.10.16.26	Then they conquered.
1.10.16.27	Having conquered,
1.10.16.28	This is the sun, Indra, the rays are the sports.
1.10.16.29	He moves together with the rays, having conquered.
1.10.16.30	The gods did not know the slain Vritra.
1.10.16.31	The Maruts played with him in the sports.
1.10.16.32	Therefore, the sports.
1.10.16.33	Then these five oblations for continuity.
1.10.16.34	Then this is the Indra-Agni.
1.10.16.35	Indra and Agni have brought him the thunderbolt.
1.10.16.36	Indra and Agni have brought the thunderbolt to him.
1.10.16.37	Now this is Indra's.
1.10.16.38	Indra brought him out after killing Vritra, and that is his share of the rescued.
1.10.16.39	Therefore a king who has won a battle goes out to the Udajya.
1.10.16.40	Now this belongs to Visvakarman.
1.10.16.41	All my works were done, thus he became Vishvakarman, having slain Vritra.
1.10.16.42	Now this is the pouring of the oblations for the continuity of the oblations and for the number thirty.
1.10.17.1	Having created offspring and having slain Vrittra, the gods desired immortality.
1.10.17.2	The heavenly world is immortality.
1.10.17.3	The year is the heavenly world.
1.10.17.4	By means of the twelve oblations, he touches immortality.
1.10.17.5	This is indeed a calamity for a year.
1.10.17.6	He indeed transgresses beyond a year.
1.10.17.7	By means of the twelve offerings, he again turns back to the year.
1.10.17.8	This is a calamity for a (whole) year.
1.10.17.9	He makes a year. 
1.10.17.10-17	He makes six of six, because there are six seasons, and he makes them up. He makes them up. He makes them up. They make them up. They make them up. He follows them as they make them up. The seasons are the fathers. He begets them. They beget. He follows them when they beget. From that he begets.
1.10.17.18	This is the only thing that he desired in the year.
1.10.17.19	The seasons are desired.
1.10.17.20	Or his fathers are not desired.
1.10.17.21	By this very father-sacrifice, his fathers become desired and pleased.
1.10.17.22	It should be offered on the right side.
1.10.17.23	Because the fathers are on the right.
1.10.17.24	Then they say, it should be offered from both sides.
1.10.17.25	For both are worshipped.
1.10.17.26	One should not be afraid of this.
1.10.17.27	It should be offered from the right side.
1.10.17.28	For the right side belongs to the ancestors.
1.10.17.29	There is a cake on six potsherds.
1.10.17.30	There are six seasons.
1.10.17.31	These are pleased by him.
1.10.17.32	The sacrifice is not performed with cooked rice or with the churning stick.
1.10.17.33	The sacrifice is performed with this cake.
1.10.17.34	Now these cooked rice.
1.10.17.35	These are indeed the offerings to the ancestors in the other world.
1.10.17.36	And the nights of the year are indeed unlimited.
1.10.17.37	They are indeed pleased with these.
1.10.17.38	The sacrifice to the ancestors is not performed with the cooked rice or with cake.
1.10.17.39	The offering of the Fathers is made with this gruel.
1.10.17.40	If the cow is milked for the Fathers, it should be done facing the south.
1.10.17.41	For that is the direction of the Fathers.
1.10.17.42	One should churn facing the south, sitting towards the south.
1.10.17.43	The south is the direction of Fathers.
1.10.17.44	One churns with one hand.
1.10.17.45	For the Fathers are one.
1.10.17.46	One churls with a sugarcane stalk.
1.10.17.47	For that belongs to the Fathers.
1.10.17.48	Not throwing it towards the east.
1.10.17.49	The Pitryajna is indeed (performed).
1.10.17.50	No Dakshina.
1.10.17.51	The sacrifice indeed cuts off both directions.
1.10.17.52	Both are worshipped.
1.10.17.53	He gives the sacrificial grass with its roots.
1.10.17.54	By that (he worships) the Pitrs.
1.10.17.55	By that which is without roots, the gods.
1.10.17.56	Both are worshiped.
1.10.17.57	They cover (the grass).
1.10.17.58	The Pitrs are hidden from the sun.
1.10.17.59	Then the Fathers are hidden from the gods and men.
1.10.17.60	Therefore they are covered.
1.10.17.61	He strews the sacrificial grass all round.
1.10.17.62	The seasons are all round.
1.10.17.63	So that the Fathers may come to me from all sides.
1.10.17.64	In the yonder world, the other deities are worshipped.
1.10.17.65	If one were to offer oblations there, one would mix them.
1.10.17.66	One should make it equal.
1.10.17.67	They perform the Garhapatya rite for the sake of the sacrifice.
1.10.17.68	They bring the fire from the rice-cooking.
1.10.17.69	They do not bring it from elsewhere.
1.10.18.1	O Shining One, we invoke you, O Shining One, we praise you. O Shining One, bring the Shining Fathers for the sake of eating the oblation.
1.10.18.2	Thus he recites.
1.10.18.3	For the Fathers are indeed Uśanas.
1.10.18.4	He recites the Anushtubh verse.
1.10.18.5	The Anushtubh is the end.
1.10.18.6	The Fathers are the end.
1.10.18.7	Therefore he recites the Anustubh verse.
1.10.18.8	He recitates one verse.
1.10.18.9	For the fathers are of one world.
1.10.18.10	He recitaes three verses.
1.10.18.11	For the F athers are in the third world.
1.10.18.12	When he recites one verse, it is for the Fathers;
1.10.18.13	Whatever is thrice, that belongs to the gods.
1.10.18.14	Both are sacrificed.
1.10.18.15	He does not choose a Hotar or an Arsheya.
1.10.18.16	He releases them from death.
1.10.18.17	He offers the Prajās at the Apbarhiṣa.
1.10.18.18	Barhis is progeny.
1.10.18.19	He releases progeny from death.
1.10.18.20	One who is about to perform a sacrifice is released from humans.
1.10.18.21	He offers to the east of the gods.
1.10.18.22	Here he turns away from the east with the Prachinavati verse.
1.10.18.23	Having taken it to the south, he goes north, stands to the south and offers.
1.10.18.24	For the south is the direction of the Pitrs.
1.10.18.25	He first offers to Soma.
1.10.18.26	Soma is the deity of the Pitrs;
1.10.18.27	Soma is the Pitr-deity.
1.10.18.28	When he offers Soma to the Pitrs, he offers to the Pitrs who are connected with Soma. When he offers to those who have the sacrificial grass, he offers to those connected with the sacrificial grass. When he offers Agni-sva-tta to those who are connected with the domestic fire, he offers to Agni-sva.
1.10.18.29	When he offers Agni-kavyavahan to Agni, Agni has two forms: the one that carries oblations to the gods and the other that carries oblations of food to the Pitrs. By means of the Samishti (oblation) he is established.
1.10.18.30	There are two kinds of offerings to the gods, the Yajya and the Anuvakya.
1.10.18.31	One gives life, the other takes it away.
1.10.18.32	Here there are three kinds of offerings.
1.10.18.33	The fathers are indeed superior to the gods.
1.10.18.34	And that is why he gives it away with the third offering.
1.10.18.35	He offers five times.
1.10.18.36	The sacrifice is fivefold.
1.10.18.37	The sacrifice, as far as it extends, he has attained.
1.10.18.38	He offers the Vasat-call with the words "Svāhā namaḥ".
1.10.18.39	The Svāhā-call is for the Pitrs.
1.10.18.40	The Namaḥ-call is for gods.
1.10.18.41	Both are offered.
1.10.18.42	He places them on the three lines.
1.10.18.43	Men drink after the gods and Pitrs.
1.10.18.44	He has approached the gods and Pitṛs.
1.10.18.45	He places (the oblations) thrice.
1.10.18.46	We know these three men here.
1.10.18.47-54	He mentions three others. For there are three others: father, son, and grandson, for the continuity of the lineage. He places them in all directions. For the fathers are in all directions. He makes him go to all directions. He does not place them in the direction of the setting sun. If he were to place them in the setting direction, he would enclose them with death. They follow that (direction).
1.10.18.55	Then, when he offers on it, he thereby pleases her.
1.10.19.1	Having said, "Here, O Fathers, do ye rejoice," they go away.
1.10.19.2	They stand by the Āhavanīya fire.
1.10.19.3	"We, O Agni, thee, the well-seeing," they stand by the setting sun.
1.10.19.4	Having made Agni the observer, they go to the end of life.
1.10.19.5	Having said, "The fathers have been gratified," they proceed.
1.10.19.6	They place a tuft of wool or a piece of cloth.
1.10.19.7	This is the offering for what they have obtained here.
1.10.19.8	"The fathers, the Soma-drinkers, are far away," he says. The fathers may be connected with them, for exclusion.
1.10.19.9	He goes around sprinkling water all around.
1.10.19.10	This is their sprinkling.
1.10.19.11	He again moves around without sprinkling it.
1.10.19.12	Those who perform the Pitryajña rites go to this world.
1.10.19.13	Indeed, Prajapati alone is worthy of lifting them up.
1.10.19.14	When he recites the Prajapatiya verse, Prajapati himself lifts them up.
1.10.19.15	Now, when they do not sprinkle again after having gone around, they return to this world again.
1.10.19.16	This sacrifice has gone to the Pitrs.
1.10.19.17	The sacrifice is in five parts.
1.10.19.18	When they return in five parts, they return with the sacrifice.
1.10.19.19	They return with the (verses) containing the word 'mind'.
1.10.19.20	They again invoke the mind.
1.10.20.1	This is his (Agni's) desire, the year is his desire, the seasons are his desire.
1.10.20.2	Or his (Agni) desire is the Rudras.
1.10.20.3	Since these are the three-eyed ones, thereby his Rudras are desired and pleased.
1.10.20.4	They are of one skull.
1.10.20.5	For man is not to be obtained by skulls.
1.10.20.6	He obtains him by one alone.
1.10.20.7	And this is one.
1.10.20.8	He is established in this very (earth).
1.10.20.9	They debate whether it should be poured over or not.
1.10.20.10	If one were to pour it over, one would consign Rudra's animals to his mouth.
1.10.20.11	One should not do that.
1.10.20.12	It should be poured over.
1.10.20.13	For there is no oblation that is not poured over.
1.10.20.14	They take it with one ladle.
1.10.20.15	For one ladle is of Rudra.
1.10.20.16	They take (it) with smoke.
1.10.20.17	For the incense is for the Rudras.
1.10.20.18	They carry this direction.
1.10.20.19	For this is the direction of the Rudras. 
1.10.20.20	They carry the one who is beyond.
1.10.20.21	They carry the Rudra who is beyond. 
1.10.20.22	"They say, "O Rudra, I make the rat a beast."
1.10.20.23	He sows a single seed for the rat-killer.
1.10.20.24	He appeases the beasts with it.
1.10.20.25	Therefore, the lord of beasts is the killer.
1.10.20.26	He should sacrifice at a cross-road.
1.10.20.27	At a cross-road are the houses of the Rudras.
1.10.20.28	In the houses he propitiated Rudra, saying, "This is your share, O Rudra, do you accept it with your sister Ambika, svāhā."
1.10.20.29	The autumn is the womb of Rudra, and Ambika is his sister.
1.10.20.30	He approaches her.
1.10.20.31	Therefore in autumn one kills most.
1.10.20.32	With that very (grass) he appeases him.
1.10.20.33	He offers with the middle leaf,
1.10.20.34	because it is struck by Rakshas.
1.10.20.35	He offers (the oblation) with a forest-grass,
1.10.20.36	because he appeases Rudra in the forest.
1.10.20.37	If he were to offer with a vessel, he would lead Rudra to his offspring.
1.10.20.38	Therefore he offers with a forest-grasses.
1.10.20.39	"Do not injure Rudra, we have not injured."
1.10.20.40	They became free from injury.
1.10.20.41	"Medicine for the cow, for the horse, for the man, medicine" - having become free from debt, they made medicine.
1.10.20.42	"We worship Tryambaka" - they go around.
1.10.20.43	There also the one who desires a husband goes around.
1.10.20.44	It is only the recognition of her husband.
1.10.20.45	Having left those above, they obtain them.
1.10.20.46	They obtain only Bhaga.
1.10.20.47	They pour them down for the sacrificer.
1.10.20.48	They pour down the blessing on him.
1.10.20.49	If a woman is desirous of a son, they should pour down on her.
1.10.20.50	They pour down the blessing upon her.
1.10.20.51	Having made them into dough, he sits near a tree.
1.10.20.52	This is your share, O Rudra.
1.10.20.53	With that food, go beyond the most vigorous ones. The one with the Pināka in his hand, wearing a hide, with a stretched bow.
1.10.20.54	The mountain is the birthplace of Rudra.
1.10.20.55	Therefore he approaches the creatures for peace.
1.10.20.56	He sends him to his own place with his own share.
1.10.20.57	They come without looking back, for Rudra's non-interference.
1.10.20.58	They sprinkle the outer cowpen.
1.10.20.59	They appease Rudra in the outer cowpen itself.
1.10.20.60	Amba is the name of a woman.
1.10.20.61	Therefore they are Tryambaka.
1.10.20.62	Whose oblation is not established, he is not established. His three-eyed ones are not established.
1.10.20.63	One should offer a rice-cake in ghee to Aditya, returning to one's house.
1.10.20.64	This is Aditi.
1.10.20.65	This is the foundation.
1.10.20.66	Because Aditya is established in this (earth),
1.11.1.1	O god Savitar, do thou stimulate the sacrifice, stimulate the lord of sacrifice for Bhaga. The divine Gandharva, the purifier of the banner, may he purify the banner. May Vacaspati today grant us speech.
1.11.1.2	We invoke by speech the mother Aditi, the mother of strength, the one who is called the earth, for all the world has entered into her. In her the god Savitar has spread out the law.
1.11.1.3	In the waters is immortality, in the waters is healing. In the waters are the praises. Be ye horses, ye strong ones.
1.11.1.4	Vayu, Manu, the twenty-seven Gandharvas, they first yoked the horse, they placed speed in him.
1.11.1.5-7	From the foot of the waters, from the swift-moving, from the wave, from the rushing, from the corner, from the strong, from the swift, from the strong one, from the strong-moving, from that which is strong, from the strong moving, from the strong flowing, from the strong rushing, from the strong rolling, from the strong running, from the strong going, from the strong coming, from the strong rising, from the strong falling, from the strong spreading, from the strong extending, from the strong stretching, from the strong pressing, from the strong squeezing, from the strong crushing, from the strong grinding, from the strong pounding, from the strong beating, from the strong striking, from the strong hitting, from the strong breaking, from the strong bursting, from the strong splitting, from the strong tearing, from the strong cutting, from the strong chopping, from the strong sawing, from the strong slicing, from the strong shaving, from the strong rubbing, from the strong polishing, from the strong washing, from the strong cleansing, from the strong purifying, from the strong cleaning, from the strong scrubbing, from the strong wiping, from the strong drying, from the strong heating, from the strong burning, from the strong cooking, from the strong baking, from the strong roasting, from the strong boiling, from the strong steaming, from the strong frying, from the strong grilling, from the strong broiling, from the strong searing, from the strong scorching, from the strong melting, from the strong softening, from the strong dissolving, from the strong liquefying, from the strong blending, from the
1.11.2.1	The horses, the steeds, have won the prize, stretching the path, measuring the distance.
1.11.2.2	Go to the wood.
1.11.2.3	May the steeds be auspicious to us in our prayers, the gods who are the rulers of heaven, crushing the serpent, the wolf, the demons. May we be free from enemies, from those who would harm us.
1.11.2.4	O Vājinis, at every invocation, the immortal seers, knowing the truth, come to us in our possessions. Drink this honey and be exhilarated. Satisfied, go by the paths of the gods.
1.11.2.5	Those swift ones, hearing the invocation, may all the Vājinis listen to our call, the ones who are generous, having a thousand, with good intentions, who have won great wealth in the assemblies.
1.11.2.6	This is his steed, which, bound by the neck, has gone beyond the goal. The wings were attached to it. It followed the rite of Dadhikra, and went along the paths, following the shoulders.
1.11.2.7	Even as it ran, it followed the course of the wind, like a leaf, of one who is greedy. Like a hawk running, it followed the shoulders of Dadhikra who is running, who is strong, who is a conqueror.
1.11.3.1	May the impulse of the horse come to me, may heaven and earth, the source of all, come to me, May the Fathers come to me in all forms, may Soma come to me with immortality.
1.11.3.2	Speak to Indra.
1.11.3.3	Speak to him.
1.11.3.4	Indra, make the horse win.
1.11.3.5	O Indra, may I win the horse.
1.11.3.6	The truth that you have established with Indra, that has become your true speech.
1.11.3.7	The trees have been worshipped.
1.11.3.8	Release your speech to Indra.
1.11.3.9	You two, having won the prize, having won the Soma-juice, have sniffed the share of Brihaspati.
1.11.3.10	You two having won the prize and having won the Soma juice, have wiped the share of Brihatpati.
1.11.3.11	Come, mount your own.
1.11.3.12	Come, let us mount our own.
1.11.3.13	Let us mount our own.
1.11.3.14-25	Life is accomplished by sacrifice. Breath is accomplished by sacrifice Eyes are accomplished by sacrifice. The ears are accomplished by sacrifice Mind is accomplished by sacrifice The speech is accomplished by sacrifice Brahma is accomplished by sacrifice Back is accomplished by sacrifice Heaven is accomplished by sacrifice Sacrifice is accomplished by sacrifice To Vāja, svāhā! To Prasava, svāhā!
1.11.3.26-37	To Apijaya, svāhā. To Kratu, svāhā To the Lord of the Day, svāhā, To the Lord (of the) Speech, svāhā; To Vasu, svāha. The head of heaven, the Vyashan, the last, the last, belonging to Bhauma. To the Lord and Master of the world, svāhā! To food, to thee! To strength, to thee! To the conqueror of strength, to thee. To food, To nourishment,
1.11.3.38	For wealth thee.
1.11.3.39	For nourishment thee.
1.11.3.40	We have gone to heaven, the gods.
1.11.3.41	We have become immortal.
1.11.3.42	We have been created by Prajapati.
1.11.4.1	O Agni, do thou, O thou who art good, speak to us. Be favourable to us. Grant us, O thou who givest wealth, thou art our giver.
1.11.4.2	May Aryaman grant us, may Bhaga grant us, may Brihaspati grant us, may the gods grant us, may truth grant us, may goddess Speech grant us.
1.11.4.3	Urge on Aryaman, Brihaspati, Indra, and Vishnu to give, Sarasvati, Savitar, and Vayu.
1.11.4.4	We approach Soma, the king, Varuna, Agni, the Adityas, Vishnu, Surya, Brahma, and Brihaspati.
1.11.4.5	Indra and Vayu, the well-seen, the well-invokers, we invoke here, so that all people may be well-disposed towards us at the meeting.
1.11.4.6	The impulse of the horse has produced this, the king Soma, first, among the plants and waters. He, knowing, has gone around Viraj, increasing offspring and prosperity for us.
1.11.4.7	The impulse of the steed has spread over this (earth), the heaven, and the plants; may he anoint them with ghee. May they be sweet to us. We, the priests, are awake in the country. The impulse of the horse has spread over this. And all these worlds on every side. May the one who knows give to the one who desires. May he bestow on us wealth with all heroes.
1.11.4.8	In the impulse of the divine Savitr, with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of Pusan, with the speech of Sarasvati, with the instrument of the controller, I consecrate Brihaspati for the kingdom.
1.11.4.9	I consecrate Indra for the kingdom. The draught for Indra.
1.11.4.10	Thou art taken with a support.
1.11.4.11	Thou art Druṣada, thou art Nṛṣada, thou are Āyusada, I take thee agreeable to Indra.
1.11.4.12-19	This is your birthplace. For Indra you. You are taken with a ladle. You who sit on earth, you who sit in the sky, you who sit on heaven, I take you for Indra, agreeable. This is your birthplace. For Indra you. Taken with a ladle, you are. You who are seated in water, you who are seated in ghee, you who are sitting in the world, I take you, agreeable to Indra.
1.11.4.20-27	This is your birthplace. To Indra you. You are taken with the offering formula. Graha, for all people, controller, for the wise, for you. The three firstborn, the heavenly vessel is well-sealed, of those who have the same sting, I have taken the strength and energy together. To Indra I take you, what is pleasing. This is your birthplace. To Indra you.
1.11.4.28	You are taken with the Upayāma formula.
1.11.4.29	The juice of the waters, the nectar of the waters, brought together, the juice of the waters. The juice of the juice, that I take for you, the best.
1.11.4.30	I take you for Indra, agreeable.
1.11.4.31	This is your birthplace.
1.11.4.32	For Indra you.
1.11.4.33	O Indra, thou, the most excellent, hast, as it were, with thy own hand, given to the Yavas, the most excellent of grains, the first place, and hast placed them in the front.
1.11.4.34	Thou art taken with the Upayâma-formula.
1.11.4.35	I take thee agreeable to Prajâpati.
1.11.4.36	This is thy birthplace.
1.11.4.37	Thee to Prajâpatî.
1.11.4.38	Thou art the pure sacrifice to Prajâpâti.
1.11.5.1	The gods saw different sacrifices.
1.11.5.2	But they all saw this one.
1.11.5.3	They exerted themselves in it.
1.11.5.4	They strove in it.
1.11.5.5	Brihaspati won it.
1.11.5.6	Brihspati was the priest of the gods.
1.11.5.7	Whatever the priest hears from the Brahmanas, he tells the king.
1.11.5.8	He performed a sacrifice for Indra.
1.11.5.9	He attained self-sovereignty.
1.11.5.10	This is the sacrifice of self-sovereignty.
1.11.5.11	He who performs this sacrifice goes to self-sovereignty
1.11.5.12	Because Brihaspati conquered, therefore a brahmin should perform this sacrifice.
1.11.5.13	Because they did not sacrifice to Indra, therefore a kshatriya (should perform this sacrifice).
1.11.5.14	The gods brought different sacrifices.
1.11.5.15	"This one is mine, this one is yours."
1.11.5.16	But Prajapati brought this one.
1.11.5.17-23	They desired to be like him. He gave them the Ujjiti hymns. Then indeed this (sacrifice) was performed by Prajapati. He attained self-sovereignty. This sacrifice is self-sovereignty; He who performs this sacrifice attains self-sovereignty.
1.11.5.24-30	He who knows this, and eats food, makes the food yield strength to him. Soma is the Vājapeya. He who knows this, drinks Soma, goes to strength. As many gods as drank Soma, they went to strength. Therefore, everyone thirsts for Soma. He goes to strength. The origin of strength is speech.
1.11.5.31	That speech, when created, became fourfold.
1.11.5.32	In these worlds, three quarters are in animals, and one quarter is in animals.
1.11.5.33	That which is on earth, that is in Agni, that is in Rathantara.
1.11.5.34	That which in the sky, that is in Vata, that is in Vaamadevi.
1.11.5.35	That which above, that is in Brihat, that is in thunder.
1.11.5.36	Then in animals:
1.11.5.37	From that, they placed that speech which exceeded in the Brahmana.
1.11.5.38	Therefore, the Brahman speaks both kinds of words, those that are known and those that are not.
1.11.5.39	The one that goes from the sacrifice of Brihat and Rathantara, with that one goes.
1.11.5.40	The one among the animals, with that one without the sacrifice.
1.11.5.41	He who knows this, indeed, goes to him without being obstructed.
1.11.5.42	He knows as much as speech, for he knows it.
1.11.5.43	For it is given by speech, it is given by the Veda.
1.11.5.44	He who makes a gift with the two verses, "May the gods grant me wealth" and "May the gods give me wealth," does not receive anything in return.
1.11.5.45	For he makes a gift with untruth.
1.11.5.46	Not when he is drunk.
1.11.5.47	For when his intoxication has passed, then he is burned by it.
1.11.6.1	These are the seventeen pairs of Prajapati's grahas.
1.11.6.2	The seventeenth person is Prajapati. The four limbs are the head, neck, and the self. Speech is the seventh. The ten are the breaths.
1.11.6.3	Sin is attached to each limb of a person.
1.11.6.4	When he seizes the Grahas in succession, he frees him from sin from each limb.
1.11.6.5	Soma is indeed prosperity.
1.11.6.6	Papman is the Soma-draught.
1.11.6.7	When the time comes, the Prañcas (priests) go out with the Somas, and the Pratyñcas (priesthood) with the Soma-draughts.
1.11.6.8	They purify him with Papman.
1.11.6.9	Therefore they say, "He who offers the Vajapeya sacrifice is purified."
1.11.6.10	For they purify him with Papma.
1.11.6.11	"O divine Savitar, do thou cause the sacrifice to prosper, do thou cause Yajapati to prosper for Bhaga."
1.11.6.12	He offers on the hard (fire).
1.11.6.13	This is a sacrifice that has been interrupted.
1.11.6.14	Who knows what is done or not done to it?
1.11.6.15	For the sake of all-pervasiveness and prosperity.
1.11.6.16	At the impulse of Vaja, the mother Earth.
1.11.6.17	Thus he brings the chariot. This is Aditi.
1.11.6.18	He brings it with her, impelled by Savitr, for the winning of Vaja.
1.11.6.19-25	The nectar is in the waters, the remedy is in the waters. Thus they bathe the horses. Horses are born in the waters. They are born from their own womb. The wind or Manu yokes them. Men are not fit to yoke them. He yokes them with the deities.
1.11.6.26	"From the foot of the waters, O swift-moving one," he wipes the Rāṭānas.
1.11.6.27	He recites the Yajus as it is recited before.
1.11.6.28	They make the Dundubhi drums resound.
1.11.6.29	This is the speech that entered the forest.
1.11.6.30	He wins that very (speech).
1.11.6.31	And he also wins the speech that is in the trees.
1.11.6.32	It is entirely seventeenfold.
1.11.6.33	Prajapati is indeed the seventeenfold.
1.11.6.34	He indeed attains Prajapati.
1.11.6.35	This is a sacrifice that has been discontinued.
1.11.6.36	A sacrifice that has been discontinud is obstructed from the year.
1.11.6.37	Having attained it from the year, he obstructs it.
1.11.7.1	"The Brahman moves around the wheel of the chariot, saying, 'May I ascend the highest heaven in the impulse of the divine Savitr, in the truth of Savitr."
1.11.7.2	The thunderbolt moves forward, impelled by Savitr, for the winning of strength.
1.11.7.3	Brahma is indeed Prajapati, the lord of the sacrifice.
1.11.7.4	Prajapati himself releases him from the thunderbolt for the winning of the strength.
1.11.7.5	He sings the Sama.
1.11.7.6	The Sama is indeed truth.
1.11.7.7	He wins by truth.
1.11.7.8	He makes the Ujjitii win.
1.11.7.9	Food is strength, for the winning of food.
1.11.7.10	"He stands on the chariot with the formula, "We are proceeding in the impulse of the divine Savitr, in the pressing of truth, of Brihaspati, the winner of strength, the winner of the strong, we are winning the strong."
1.11.7.11	He stands on the car impelled by Savitr, for the winning the strength.
1.11.7.12	He recites the verses addressed to the strong, for the winning strength.
1.11.7.13	They run the race for the winning of the prize.
1.11.7.14	They run with chariots yoked in the prescribed manner.
1.11.7.15	He goes to heaven by means of the Dakṣiṇā.
1.11.7.16	When they run with chariots yokes in the prescribed manner, then the sacrificer goes to heaven by the Dakṣiṇa.
1.11.7.17	Now this is the Nīvāra (cake) of seventeen potfuls.
1.11.7.18	The gods ran the race when the plants were ripe.
1.11.7.19	Brihaspati won them.
1.11.7.20	He chose these Nivara (cows) for himself.
1.11.7.21	That is why the Nivara (cows are called so).
1.11.7.22	Brihaspati won them,
1.11.7.23	He makes him a sharer for non-injury.
1.11.7.24	They take him below the sacrificial post.
1.11.7.25	Here indeed was the sun.
1.11.7.26	From here they took him to the other world.
1.11.7.27	Since they take him to the other world, and since they place him in the Catvāla, they take the sacrificer to the heavenly world.
1.11.7.28	He offers when the chariots have returned, with the verse, "May the impulse of the Vāja come to me."
1.11.7.29	He places the Vāja which he has won in himself.
1.11.7.30	"O Indra, let us release our speech, having recited the hymn to the lord of the forest." He offers the release of the chariot.
1.11.7.31	They are yoked with the Yajus.
1.11.7.32	They are released with the Yajush.
1.11.7.33	"Having conquered the strength, the winners of strength, they sniffed the share of Brihaspati." He made them sharers.
1.11.7.34	The two horses, the winners of the race, having won the race, should be rubbed at the share of Brihaspati. Thus he pleases them all.
1.11.7.35	Those who run the race take away half of the prize and the Sura-offering.
1.11.7.36	He buys back the prize which they have won.
1.11.7.37	The Madhu-sthala belongs to the Brahman.
1.11.7.38	He buys it from Brahma himself.
1.11.7.39	The prince Kakubha eats.
1.11.7.40	Kakubha means virility.
1.11.7.41	He places virility in himself.
1.11.8.1	"Come, let us ascend the heaven, come, let us ascend heaven, come, we shall ascend heaven." He agrees with his wife to ascend heaven.
1.11.8.2	This is also a continuation of the sacrifice.
1.11.8.3	Together with his wife, he attains the heavenly world.
1.11.8.4-12	Life is accomplished by sacrifice. Breath is accomplished by sacrifice.
1.11.8.13	He goes to this world with food.
1.11.8.14	"Om, to Vayu, svāhā! Om, to Prasu, svāhā!" These are thirteen oblations.
1.11.8.15	There are thirteen months in a year.
1.11.8.16	He places it in the heavenly world.
1.11.8.17	He stands firm in that.
1.11.8.18	For food, for strength, for victory in the contest, they offer with the potsherds of the Uṣa.
1.11.8.19	The Uṣa is Prajapati's.
1.11.8.20	They become more and more numerous.
1.11.8.21	They offer him with food.
1.11.8.22	He who goes to the other world goes away from this world.
1.11.8.23	By that they do not go to this world.
1.11.8.24	By that he is held in this world.
1.11.8.25	He descends with gold.
1.11.8.26	Gold is indeed brilliance.
1.11.8.27	He stands firm in brilliance.
1.11.8.28	He descends wearing a woolen garment.
1.11.8.29	A woolen garment is indeed cattle.
1.11.8.30	He stands firmly in cattle.
1.11.8.31	He offers with the Vājas prasuti verses at each offering.
1.11.8.32	Food is strength; for the securing of food.
1.11.8.33	He offers both the food of the village and the food of the forest; for the securing both kinds of food.
1.11.8.34	With a fig-wood ladle he offers.
1.11.8.35	The fig-tree is strength; for securing strength.
1.11.8.36	He offers with seven (verses);
1.11.8.37	There are seven metres.
1.11.8.38	By means of the metres he wins food for him.
1.11.8.39	For the metres are speech.
1.11.8.40	By means of speech he bestows food on him.
1.11.9.1	Now these are the Atigrahya (grahas).
1.11.9.2	They are taken for the purpose of winning that food which is not yet won.
1.11.9.3	Then these animals are offered, for the securing of the sacrificial rites.
1.11.9.4	By the Agniṣṭoma dedicated to Agni, he secures (the rites).
1.11.9.5	By the Ukthya dedicated to Indra and Agni, he secures them.
1.11.9.6	By the Vṛṣṇi dedicated to Indra, he secures the Ṣoḍaśin.
1.11.9.7	Whatever is the essence of Sarasvati, whatever is the seventeenfold hymn that has not been attained, that he attains by this.
1.11.9.8	He attains it.
1.11.9.9	Now this is the Vasha.
1.11.9.10	The gods and the Asuras were competing.
1.11.9.11	"The gods were not these, the Asuras were not these."
1.11.9.12	The gods saw this Vasha.
1.11.9.13	By that he wins the second world, the world of the Asuras.
1.11.9.14	The world of the gods is where there is no sin.
1.11.9.15	The world where there is sin is the world of the asuras.
1.11.9.16	By that the sacrificer wins the second world; he wins the world of his enemies.
1.11.9.17	The Sarasvati is the highest among others.
1.11.9.18	The Sarasvatī is the first among others.
1.11.9.19	Sarasvatī is speech.
1.11.9.20-26	The sacrifice is continuous through speech. One makes the sacrifice continuous through speech. Whatever one knows about the sacrifice and whatever one does not know, that is the gap. One makes it up through speech and Sarasvati. The morning pressing is unformulated. One attains Prajapati through that. The Vajapeya is of a different kind, being Prajapatya, with the Sama in the formulated form.
1.11.9.27	The morning pressing is that which is not defined. By that he becomes of the same origin.
1.11.9.28	The Rathantara is the Sama Veda, for the purpose of obtaining blessings.
1.11.9.29	And this (earth) indeed is the Rathantara.
1.11.9.30	He prospers in this (earth) alone.
1.11.9.31	The Pavamana at midday has the Vaja (verse).
1.11.9.32	Food indeed is Vaja. For the securing of food.
1.11.9.33	The verses of the Pavamāna are variegated, for the attainment of the heavenly world.
1.11.9.34	One should praise in the Śipiviṣṭa verses.
1.11.9.35	This is the most animal-like form of Prajāpati, namely, the Śipiviṭa.
1.11.9.36	Therefore one should praise in the Sipiviṣṭa.
1.11.9.37	The last Uktha has eighteen verses.
1.11.9.38	One continues the praise in the northern Uktha.
1.11.9.39	Whatever is in excess of the sacrifice, that goes beyond this world.
1.11.9.40	The Brihat indeed deserves to reach this world.
1.11.9.41	Brihat is indeed the strength of the senses.
1.11.9.42	When one praises with the Brihat, then the sacrificer stands firm in the strength of the sense organs and the sacrifice.
1.11.10.1	Agni won the one-syllabled (hymn). The Asvins won the two-syllabled. Vishnu won the three-syllabled, Soma won the four-syllabled; Savitar won the five-syllabled hymn; Pusan won the six-syllabled one; the Maruts won the seven-syllabled ones; Brihaspati won the eight-syllabled hymns; Mitra won the nine-syllabled verses; Varuna won the ten-syllabled verse; Indra won the eleven-syllabledverse; the All-gods won the twelve-syllabledverses; the Vasus won the thirteen-syllabledones; the Rudras won the fourteen-syllabledhymns; the Adityas won the fifteen-syllabledversesthe Goddess Aditi won the sixteen-syllabled
1.11.10.2	Prajapati is the seventeenth.
1.11.10.3	Agni conquered speech with one syllable.
1.11.10.4	The Asvins conquered the prāṇāpānas with two syllables.
1.11.10.5	Viṣṇu conquered these three worlds with three syllables.
1.11.10.6	Soma conquered the four-footed animals with four syllables.
1.11.10.7	Savitar conquered the five directions with five syllables.
1.11.10.8	Pūṣan with the six-syllabled (hymn) conquered the six seasons.
1.11.10.9	The Maruts with the seven-syllabled one conquered the seven-footed Śakvari.
1.11.10.10	Brihaspati with the eight-syllabled conquered the eight directions, the four directions and the four directions of the good.
1.11.10.11	Mitra with the nine-syllabled hymn conquered the nine breaths.
1.11.10.12	Varuṇa with the ten-syllabled Hymn conquered Viraj.
1.11.10.13	Indra conquered the Tristubh with eleven syllables.
1.11.10.14	The Viśve Devas conquered the Jagatī with twelve syllables.
1.11.10.15	The Vasus conquered the thirteenth month with thirteen syllables.
1.11.10.16	The Rudras conquered the fourteenth month with fourteen syllables.
1.11.10.17	The Ādityas conquered the fifteenth month with fifteen syllables.
1.11.10.18	Aditi conquered the sixteen-month period with sixteen syllables.
1.11.10.19	Prajapati with seventeen.
1.11.10.20	Agni conquered me, this earth, with one syllable, the Ashvins conquered space with two syllables, Vishnu conquered heaven with three syllables, Soma conquered the stars with four syllables, and Srivijna conquered the constellations.
1.11.10.21	Savitar (the sun) won the row of five syllables.
1.11.10.22	For the row of syllables is a row.
1.11.10.23	For this has four parts, and five syllables each.
1.11.10.24	Pusan (the planet Mars) won the Gayatri with six syllables.
1.11.10.25	For this also has four parts, with six syllables each.
1.11.10.26	The Maruts (the wind gods) won the Ushnih with seven syllables.
1.11.10.27	For this has four parts, and seven syllables.
1.11.10.28	Brihaspati won the Anushtubh with eight syllables.
1.11.10.29	For this has four parts and eight syllables.
1.11.10.30	Mitra won the Brihatī with nine syllables.
1.11.10.31	For it has four parts and nine syllables.
1.11.10.32	Varuna won the Viraj with ten syllables.
1.11.10.33	For this has four parts, and each part has ten syllables.
1.11.10.34	Indra conquered the Tristubh metre with eleven syllables.
1.11.10.35	For this has four parts and each part has eleven syllables.
1.11.10.36	The Visve Devas conquered the Jagati metre with twelve syllables.
1.11.10.37	For it has four parts and every part has twelve syllables.
1.11.10.38	The Vasus conquered the thirteen months with thirteen syllables.
1.11.10.39	The Rudras, with the fourteen-syllabled (hymn), conquered the fourteen months.
1.11.10.40	The Adityas, with the fifteen-syllabled, conquered the fifteen months.
1.11.10.41	Aditi, with the sixteen-syllabled hymn, conquered the sixteen months.
1.11.10.42	Prajapati is the seventeenth.
1.11.10.43	To Agni, with the one-syllabled chant, svāhā!
1.11.10.44	To the Ashvins, with the two-syllabled Agni, svāhā!
1.11.10.45	To Vishnu, the three-syllabled one, to the Chhandas, Svāhā.
1.11.10.46	To Soma, the four-syllabled, to the Chhanda, Svāhā
1.11.10.47	To Savitar, the five-syllabled Chhanda, Svāh
1.11.10.48	To Pūshan, the six-syllabled chhanda, Svāha
1.11.10.49	To the Maruts, the seven-syllabled Chandas, Svāha.
1.11.10.50	To Brihaspati, the eight-syllabled chan
1.11.10.51	To Mitra, the nine-syllabled Chan
1.11.10.52	To Varuna, the ten-syllabled one, to the Chhandas, Svāhā.
1.11.10.53	To Indra, the eleven-syllabled, to the Chhanda, Svāhā
1.11.10.54	To the twelve-syllabled Chhanda of all the gods, Svāhā!
1.11.10.55	To the thirteen-syllabled Vāsu, to the Chanda, Svāhā !
1.11.10.56	To the fourteen-syllabled Rudras, to the Chandas, Svāhā！
1.11.10.57	To the fifteen-syllabled Ādityas, to the Chāndas, Svāha !
2.1.1.5-10	Indra and Agni are strength and vigour. He overcomes them by means of strength and vigour. One who desires offspring should offer an Indra-Agni oblation on eleven potsherds, if he is capable of offspring but does not obtain offspring. Indra and Agni concealed the offspring of Prajapati. He pursued them with this oblation. They again gave him offspring.
2.1.1.11	Indra and Agni, indeed, are the ones who conceal the offspring of him who, being capable of begetting offspring, does not beget offspring.
2.1.1.12	He approaches them with the same oblation.
2.1.1.13	They again give him offspring.
2.1.1.14	The Yajya and Anuvakya verses are related to the one who has obtained.
2.1.1.15	It is for obtaining.
2.1.1.16	One should offer an Indra-Agni oblation on eleven potsherds while going to battle.
2.1.1.17	Indra and Agni are strength and vigour.
2.1.1.18	He goes forth with strength and vigour. He offers to Indra and Agni.
2.1.1.19	One should offer a cake on eleven potsherds to Indra and Agni when going to battle.
2.1.1.20	Indra and Agni are strength, vigour.
2.1.1.21	He conquers with strength and vigour itself.
2.1.1.22	When he has won the battle, then one should offer a cake to Indra and Agni on eleven potsherads.
2.1.1.23-28	He who wins a battle is deprived of his strength and energy. Indra and Agni are strength and energy. He who is going to attack a group of people should offer a cake on eleven potshards to Indra and Agni and a rice-pap to Pusan. Indra-Agni are strength and energy, he goes forth with strength and energy.
2.1.1.29	Pūṣan is the bestower of strength.
2.1.1.30	He bestows strength on him.
2.1.1.31	One should offer a cake on eleven potsherds to Indra-Agni, a cooked rice to Pūṣan, and a cake to the lord of the field, for one who is about to enter a field.
2.1.1.32	Indra-Agni are strength and power.
2.1.1.33	By strength and power, he wins the world.
2.1.1.34	Pūṣan is bestower of strength.
2.1.1.35	He bestows on him strength.
2.1.1.36	This is the wife of the field.
2.1.1.37	He indeed stands firm in her.
2.1.2.1	One should offer a cake on twelve potsherds to Agni Vaiśvānara for the sake of desire.
2.1.2.2	Agni Vaiśvānaro is indeed a year.
2.1.2.3	Desire is attained in a year.
2.1.2.4	He indeed attains a year.
2.1.2.5	One attains the desire one has, for which one has a desire.
2.1.2.6	One who is about to cross the boundary should offer oblations to Agni-Vaisvānara with twelve potfuls of cooked rice.
2.1.2.7	Agni-Vaisvânara is the year.
2.1.2.8	One becomes equal to the year.
2.1.2.9	Having crossed the boundary, one attains one's desire.
2.1.2.10	One who is about to go on a journey should offer oblations of cooked rice to Agni-Vâsudeva with twelve potfuls.
2.1.2.11-17	The year is Agni Vaiśvānara. One is accepted for the year. Having obtained the year, one prospers. When one prospers, one should offer a cake on twelve potsherds to Agni Vaiśvārara. The year is Agni Vaišvānara. He uses the year. The year prospers for him.
2.1.2.18	He makes him the sole inheritor.
2.1.2.19	He releases him.
2.1.2.20	He should give the sacrificial fee to the one whom he hates.
2.1.2.21	He moves around with a noose.
2.1.2.22	He releases it on him.
2.1.2.23	A one-year-old cow is the sacrificial fee.
2.1.2.24	For it is the image of the year.
2.1.2.25	One who is about to eat food should offer oblations to Agni Vaiśvānara in twelve potsherds.
2.1.2.26	The year is indeed Agni Vaiśvānara.
2.1.2.27	He indeed places him in the year itself.
2.1.2.28	When he eats food, then one should offer a cake on twelve potsherds to Agni Vaiśvânara.
2.1.2.29	Whatever food he eats, the year makes it tasty for him.
2.1.2.30	He eats what is tasty.
2.1.2.31	Lead is the fee, or a black garment.
2.1.2.32	The food is the head, the food is the black (colour).
2.1.2.33	By means of the food he removes the non-food and puts food in himself.
2.1.2.34	One who is going to fight should offer oblation to Agni Vaiśvānara in twelve potsherds.
2.1.2.35	Agni Vaiśvānāra is the year.
2.1.2.36	He goes to him by means of the year.
2.1.2.37-43	One who is about to engage in battle should offer a cake on twelve potsherds to Agni Vaiśvānara. He who has a firm base wins in battle. This Agni Vaiśvânara is this earth. He made this his firm base. He who is firm on this earth wins in battle. He wins in battle. When he wins in battle, he should offer a cake to Agni Vaiśvānarā on twelve potsherads.
2.1.2.44	The year is Agni Vaiśvānara.
2.1.2.45	He employs it for a year.
2.1.2.46	He conquers the year for him.
2.1.2.47	He made him a sharer.
2.1.2.48	He made it known.
2.1.2.49	One should offer a cake on twelve potsherds to Agni Vaiśvānaras for one who desires,
2.1.2.50	"He should sow these grains for the king - barley or rice."
2.1.2.51	The year is Agni Vaiśvānara.
2.1.2.52	The year is the bestower of food.
2.1.2.53	He approaches him with his share.
2.1.2.54	He bestows food on him.
2.1.2.55	One should offer a cake on twelve potsherds to Agni Vaiśvănara and a gruel of barley to Varuna.
2.1.2.56	One should perform a sacrifice for one suffering from a disease.
2.1.2.57	One who is suffering from a disease is indeed seized by Varuna.
2.1.2.58	It is from Varuna that he thus releases him.
2.1.2.59	The sun indeed is the fire of Vaiśvānara.
2.1.2.60	Varuna seizes him with this (fire) when he is seized.
2.1.2.61	Having released him, he releases him from Varuna as much as his own self is.
2.1.2.62	He should offer a Varuna oblation of barley, of this size, and a cake on twelve potsherds to Agni Vaiśvānara.
2.1.2.63	One who desires prosperity should be initiated.
2.1.2.64	One who seeks prosperity is indeed seized by Varuna.
2.1.2.65	He releases him from Varuna by that (oblation).
2.1.2.66	The oblation is of this size.
2.1.2.67	This much is the size of the body.
2.1.2.68	Having released him from Varuna, he makes him of this size.
2.1.2.69	This very sun is Agni Vaiśvānara.
2.1.2.70	He makes him follow this one.
2.1.2.71	He makes this one reach the measure of the sun.
2.1.3.1	One should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Jātavedas, a cake on eleven potsherds to Dadhikrāvan, and a cake on twelve potsherds to Vaiśvānaran Agni, for one who has performed the first Iṣṭi of all the Vedas.
2.1.3.2	Agni alone knows where his sacrifice is, where his good deeds are.
2.1.3.3	Agni alone finds it for him.
2.1.3.4	He who gives everything is impure.
2.1.3.5	The Dādhīkra-rite makes him pure.
2.1.3.6	The year is Agni Vaiśvānara.
2.1.3.7	The year alone knows where his sacrifices are, where his good works are.
2.1.3.8	He obtains it for a year.
2.1.3.9	One should offer an oblation of eight potfuls to Agni Surbhimat.
2.1.3.10	One should perform the sacrifice for one who is being cursed.
2.1.3.11	The Dārbha was being cursed by Rāthaprot.
2.1.3.12	He was told by Kaulavatī,
2.1.3.13	"We shall perform your sacrifice in such a way that your food will be eaten."
2.1.3.14	Where we did not hear the cry of a domestic animal, go there.
2.1.3.15	Whoever may have harmed you, remain silent.
2.1.3.16	Thus it is said.
2.1.3.17	And indeed, the tigers, having sniffed him, silently withdrew.
2.1.3.18	They both followed him the next day with sacrificial implements, and having churned out fire, offered to Agni Surābhīmata eight oblations.
2.1.3.19	Then they did not surround him.
2.1.3.20	One whom they would curse, one should sacrifice to him with this (verse).
2.1.3.21	One whom they curse, he is indeed afflicted.
2.1.3.22	This is the healing body of Agni, that is Surabhi.
2.1.3.23	He has made him a healer.
2.1.3.24	He has indeed made him fragrant.
2.1.3.25	He indeed pacifies.
2.1.3.26	One should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Pavamāna, a cake on eleven potsherds to Dadhikra, a cake on twelve potsherds to Vaisvānara Agni, and return to one's own house.
2.1.3.27	Pavamana purifies him, Agni burns him.
2.1.3.28	He who is accused is not purified.
2.1.3.29	They say that the Dhatikravas do not purify him.
2.1.3.30	The Dhatikra vas purify him.
2.1.3.31	Vaisvânara Agni is the year.
2.1.3.32	In the year he is satisfied.
2.1.3.33	One who desires to conquer in battle or to conquer a man should offer an oblation of eight potfuls to Agni, an oblation of eleven potfuls to Agni-Soma, and an oblation of two potfuls to Dyāvāpṛthivi.
2.1.3.34	The oblation to Agni is for prosperity.
2.1.3.35	Indra conquered Vritra by the strength of Agni-Soma.
2.1.3.36-42	He who wins a battle, indeed, kills Vritra. He who wins a man, wins the battle. This is indeed the slaying of Vritra. Indra took up the thunderbolt against Vritra. The heaven and earth did not approve of it. They approved of it with this oblation. Because it is for heaven and earth. For the approval of the thunderbolt.
2.1.3.43	Then indeed, the Vajra of Anu-mat is not-existent.
2.1.3.44	When he wins a battle or conquers a human foe, then he should offer an Agniya cake on eight potsherds, an Indra-Agniya cake on eleven potsherds, and a Dyava-Prithiviya cake on two potsherds.
2.1.3.45	The Agniya (cake) is for prosperity.
2.1.3.46	Indra killed Vritra with the strength of Agni and Soma.
2.1.3.47	He was overcome by strength and vigour.
2.1.3.48	He saw this Indra-Agni (rite).
2.1.3.49	By that he placed strength and vigour in himself.
2.1.3.50	He who wins a battle or conquers a human foe is overcome by strength and valour.
2.1.3.51	Indra and Agni are strength and valour. They are the two deities.
2.1.3.52	They make him prosper by strength and valour.
2.1.3.53	Now, the one for Dyāvāpṛthivi.
2.1.3.54	Those who have thought of him as the thunderbolt, for them this portion is made.
2.1.4.1	A brahmin should offer a cake on eleven potsherds to Agni-Soma for a desire.
2.1.4.2	The brahmin is Agni-Soma as the deity.
2.1.4.3	He approaches his own deity for a desire with a portion.
2.1.4.4	They fulfill his desire, whatever his desire may be.
2.1.4.5	One should offer a cake on eleven potsherds to Agni-Soma.
2.1.4.6	One should perform the sacrifice for a Brahmin who desires prosperity.
2.1.4.7	The gods were performing a sacrifice at Kurukshetra - Agni, Soma and Indra.
2.1.4.8	They said:
2.1.4.9	"Whoever among us will attain fame first, let him share it with us."
2.1.4.10	Among them, Soma obtained fame.
2.1.4.11	They approached him.
2.1.4.12	Therefore, they approach Soma.
2.1.4.13	He is the most famous one.
2.1.4.14	Soma then desired it.
2.1.4.15	He went to the mountain.
2.1.4.16	Agni followed him.
2.1.4.17	Those two, Agni and Soma, became united on the mountain.
2.1.4.18	Therefore, Agni burns on the mountain and Soma on the mountain. 
2.1.4.19	He, indeed, Indra, became weak as if.
2.1.4.20	He followed Agni and Soma.
2.1.4.21	They said to him:
2.1.4.22	"Sacrifice for us."
2.1.4.23	They sacrificed to him with this (rite) Agni and Soma. 
2.1.4.24	In him Agni placed brilliance and Soma placed strength.
2.1.4.25	Then he became Indra.
2.1.4.26	One who desires prosperity should sacrifice to him with this rite.
2.1.4.27	Agni, indeed, bestows brilliance upon him; Soma bestows power.
2.1.4.28	One becomes (so).
2.1.4.29	One who desires Brahmic glory should offer a cake on eleven potshards to Agni-Soma, made of Shyamaka grain, in the spring.
2.1.4.30	Agni-Soma are indeed the bestowers of Brahmic glory.
2.1.4.31	They approach him through their own share.
2.1.4.32	They bestow Brahmic glory upon him.
2.1.4.33	One should offer in the spring.
2.1.4.34-40	Spring is the season for the Brahman. They give him the radiance of Brahman in his own season. The cake is Agni's, the barley-meal Soma's. All oblations are given to Agni and Soma. They give to him all the radiance of Brahman. The Soma and Agni should be offered together.
2.1.4.41	Agni is indeed brilliance.
2.1.4.42	Soma is indeed the sense-organ.
2.1.4.43	He thus encloses the brilliance and the sense-organ on both sides.
2.1.4.44	One desiring cattle should offer a cake to Soma-Pūṣan, not ground.
2.1.4.45	Soma indeed is the bestower of semen.
2.1.4.46	Pūṣan is the progenitor of cattle.
2.1.4.47	Soma indeed bestows semen on him.
2.1.4.48	Pūṣan generates cattle.
2.1.4.49	One desiring to be a Purohita should offer a cake to Soma-Indra.
2.1.4.50	A Brahmin is of the nature of Soma.
2.1.4.51	A Kshatriya is of the nature Indra.
2.1.4.52	Soma indeed bestows freedom from blame.
2.1.4.53	He approaches him with his own share.
2.1.4.54	He bestows on him a kingdom free from blame.
2.1.4.55	One who is afflicted by a disease should offer a cake to Agni and Varuna.
2.1.4.56	One who attacks a neighbour commits an untruth.
2.1.4.57	One who commits an untruth is indeed attacking the gods.
2.1.4.58	Agni is indeed all the gods.
2.1.4.59	Here indeed is that god whom one attacks.
2.1.4.60	From there he is released.
2.1.4.61	Whatever is Varuna's, he releases him by that.
2.1.4.62	This is indeed a rite of atonement for all, a rite of atonement of all.
2.1.5.1	One desiring brahmic lustre should offer a cake on ghee to Soma and Rudra, made of white rice.
2.1.5.2	The Asura Svarbhanu covered the sun with darkness.
2.1.5.3	Soma and Rudra healed him.
2.1.5.4	He removes the blemish with this very (rite).
2.1.5.5	He bestows brilliance on him with this.
2.1.5.6	One who desires brahmic glory should be sacrificed with this.
2.1.5.7	He removes the blemish of him.
2.1.5.8	He bestows radiance on him.
2.1.5.9	This is the size of the oblation.
2.1.5.10	This is how big the Self is.
2.1.5.11	As much as his self is, so much he puts in him.
2.1.5.12	White rice is used, and white cows are milked for the ghee.
2.1.5.13	It is indeed the light that is collected here.
2.1.5.14	Ghee is used for sprinkling.
2.1.5.15	They cleanse with ghee.
2.1.5.16	It becomes ghee.
2.1.5.17	He puts more light in him.
2.1.5.18	If one is going to perform a sacrifice the next day, the houses of those who are not to be present should not be swept that night.
2.1.5.19	Water is indeed peace.
2.1.5.20	They should indeed pacify.
2.1.5.21	They perform the sacrifice in the vicinity.
2.1.5.22	For the sake of encompassing brilliance.
2.1.5.23	They proceed together with the rays.
2.1.5.24	They remove the blemish together with the rays.
2.1.5.25	One should sacrifice on the full moon day of Tisya.
2.1.5.26	Soma is the moon.
2.1.5.27	Rudra is Tisya.
2.1.5.28	He approached them only now.
2.1.5.29	The plants of Soma are in the east.
2.1.5.30	The plants belonging to Rudra are in the west.
2.1.5.31	Because those in the east do not wither, those in the west wither.
2.1.5.32	The verses belong to Manu.
2.1.5.33	Whatever Manu said, he said for the sake of healing.
2.1.5.34	It is for the sake of that healing.
2.1.5.35	These are the Sakvari verses.
2.1.5.36	For the sake of power.
2.1.5.37	The Narashansi verses.
2.1.5.38	For peace.
2.1.5.39	Because of its fear from being afflicted,
2.1.5.40	it destroys too much.
2.1.5.41	One desiring cattle should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Soma and Pusan, not ground.
2.1.5.42	The Brahman is indeed gentle by nature.
2.1.5.43	Cattle are Pusha.
2.1.5.44	He thus makes his own deity prosper with cattle.
2.1.5.45	He has made the skin.
2.1.6.1	One should offer a cake to Soma and Rudra, made of black grains, for the purpose of harming.
2.1.6.2	Plants belong to Soma.
2.1.6.3	Having begged him, he causes his cattle to be given to Rudra.
2.1.6.4	The sacrificial grass is black.
2.1.6.5	Darkness is black.
2.1.6.6	Death is darkness.
2.1.6.7	He binds him with death.
2.1.6.8	The sacrificial grass is made of reeds, the kindling wood is of Vibhit.
2.1.6.9	The sacrificial wood is made of reeds because of hearing. The kindling wood is Vibhit for separation.
2.1.6.10	One should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Soma-Rudra for those who have not sown barley. If one desires, "May he be born in the second world of men,"
2.1.6.11	Soma is the lord of these creatures.
2.1.6.12	He is born in the second heaven of men.
2.1.6.13	The grass should not be sharp, nor should it be blunt.
2.1.6.14	The wood should not be from a tree that has fallen down, nor should it not be from a fallen tree.
2.1.6.15	He generates him in this world only.
2.1.6.16	One should offer a cooked rice-gruel dedicated to Soma and Rudra.
2.1.6.17	One should perform the sacrifice for one suffering from a disease.
2.1.6.18	One who dies is dedicated to Agni.
2.1.6.19	One who is alive is dedicated to Soma.
2.1.6.20	He redeems him from both sides.
2.1.6.21	Man is milk.
2.1.6.22	Milk is what causes disease in him.
2.1.6.23	He redeeems his milk with milk.
2.1.6.24	The Hotṛ should be one whose eyes are closed.
2.1.6.25	Having brought that forest, he should scatter it.
2.1.6.26	Therefore, one should give a bull.
2.1.6.27	One should kill it.
2.1.6.28	One should eat it.
2.1.6.29	If one does not eat it, one will perish.
2.1.7.1	One should offer an eleven-pot offering to Agni-Vishnu for one who is practicing sorcery or one who is being practiced against.
2.1.7.2	One should also offer oblations to Sarasvati.
2.1.7.3	Agni is all the deities.
2.1.7.4	He indeed acts for the deities with the deities.
2.1.7.5	Vishnu is the sacrifice.
2.1.7.6	With the sacrifice, the sacrifice.
2.1.7.7	Speech is Sarasvati.
2.1.7.8	With speech, speech.
2.1.7.9	This is intended for the purpose of practicing witchcraft.
2.1.7.10	And it is intended for the practice of counter-witchcraft.
2.1.7.11	One who desires sight should offer a rice cake in ghee to Agni and Vishnu.
2.1.7.12	Agni is the bestower of sight among men, Vishnu among the gods.
2.1.7.13	These two are the bestowers of sight.
2.1.7.14	They approach him with the same offering.
2.1.7.15	They bestow sight on him.
2.1.7.16	The milk of a cow is ghee, the rice of a bull.
2.1.7.17	That is a pair.
2.1.7.18	Sight is a pair.
2.1.7.19	They generate the eye for him with the pair.
2.1.7.20	Milk is ghee.
2.1.7.21	Milk is the eye.
2.1.7.22	They generate the eye for the milk.
2.1.7.23	Ghee is radiance.
2.1.7.24	The eye is radiance.
2.1.7.25	They generate radiance for him with radiance.
2.1.7.26	He gives gold.
2.1.7.27	Gold is life.
2.1.7.28	Life is the eye.
2.1.7.29	He bestows life and sight on him.
2.1.7.30	It is of a hundred measures.
2.1.7.31	Man has a life of a hundred years, a hundred powers.
2.1.7.32	He obtains life and power.
2.1.7.33	One who is being bewitched should offer an oblation of eleven potfuls to Agni-Vishnu.
2.1.7.34	Agni is all the deities.
2.1.7.35	Vishnu is the sacrifice.
2.1.7.36	He enters in the middle, having covered the deities and the sacrifice.
2.1.7.37	One should offer a cake on eleven potsherds to Agni-Vishnu in a battle.
2.1.7.38	One should also offer oblations to Sarasvati from clarified butter.
2.1.7.39	Agni is all the deities.
2.1.7.40	By means of the deities, he drives away the deities of the enemy.
2.1.7.41	Vishnu is the sacrifice.
2.1.7.42	By means means of the sacrifice, one conquers the sacrifice.
2.1.7.43	Sarasvati is speech.
2.1.7.44	By means speech, one conquers speech.
2.1.7.45	If one thinks that the two Puronuvākyās are recited before the Yajya, then one should recite two Puronuvākya and one Yajya.
2.1.7.46	One does the same with two (verses), but one uses one (verse).
2.1.7.47	One should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni-Vishnu in the morning, a rice-pap to Sarasvati, and a rice-pap for Brhaspati. One should offer a rice-pap on eleven potsherds to Sarasvati, a rice-papp for Brhaspati, and a cake on twelve potsherds to Savitr in the afternoon. One should offer rice-pap to Savitr, a rice-ppap for Brhaspat, and a cake to Savitr in evening. One should offer the same oblations in the morning, at midday, and in the evening. One should perform the rite of the "three times" for one who has an enemy who is performing a Soma sacrifice.
2.1.7.48	Agni is all the deities.
2.1.7.49	By means of the deities, he attains the deities.
2.1.7.50	Vishnu is the sacrifice.
2.1.7.51	By means means of the sacrifice, he attains the sacrifice.
2.1.7.52	Speech is Sarasvati.
2.1.7.53	By means speech, he attains speech.
2.1.7.54	Brahma is Brihaspati.
2.1.7.55	By means Brahma, he attains Brahma.
2.1.7.56	By means the skull, he attains the metres.
2.1.7.57	By means oblations, he attains the pressing.
2.1.7.58	One should offer a cake on one potsherd to Mitra-Varuna, or a Payasyi oblation.
2.1.7.59	One attains the Anubandhya (oblation) by this (oblation).
2.1.7.60	This is the Isti of the Adhvara rite.
2.1.7.61	One attains sacrifice by this.
2.1.8.1	One should offer a rice-pap to Agni-Maruts for obtaining rain.
2.1.8.2	Both should make a rice-pap and a pot from the same clay.
2.1.8.3	In the same fire in which they cook the oblation, they should fumigate the pot.
2.1.8.4	Smoke goes to this world, not flames.
2.1.8.5	Therefore they fumigate it, not cook it.
2.1.8.6	When they have placed the oblations, they should place the pot on the right thigh and fill it with water.
2.1.8.7	If it were to rain before the time of the season, he should say, "It will rain today."
2.1.8.8	If it were to rain after the time of the ritual, he should say "It will rain tomorrow."
2.1.8.9	If it rains for a long time, he should say "It will not rain."
2.1.8.10	Agni brings rain from here and the Maruts from there.
2.1.8.11	They are the givers of rain.
2.1.8.12	He approaches them with the offering.
2.1.8.13	They bestow rain on him.
2.1.8.14	One desiring a village or cattle should offer a cake on milk to Marut, churned from the milk of tawny cows.
2.1.8.15	The ghee should be from tawny cows.
2.1.8.16	There also they should pour in cow's urine.
2.1.8.17	When the tawny cow milked, it became Priyangu.
2.1.8.18	This is the spotted (cow). Speech is the spotted (animal).
2.1.8.19	Her milk is the Priyangu grass.
2.1.8.20	He wins them with their own milk.
2.1.8.21	The Yajya and Anuvakya verses are connected with the word 'priya'.
2.1.8.22	He makes him dear to his kinsmen.
2.1.8.23	There are two-footed and four-footed verses.
2.1.8.24	He wins for him two-footed and also four-footed animals.
2.1.8.25	Just as a calf pulls at its mother, so do his kinsmen pull at him.
2.1.8.26	One should offer a cake on thirteen potsherds to Maruts if one's sons or cows are born as twins.
2.1.8.27	A man becomes helpless when Yama is born, and a cow becomes without cattle when Yama is born.
2.1.8.28	Because it is on thirteen potsherals.
2.1.8.29	Prajapati is on thirteen potshers.
2.1.8.30-35	He indeed attains Prajapati. By the twelfth year. By the Gāyatrī verse as the introductory verse. By the Jagatī verse as the concluding verse. By offering to the animals. By the Marutīṣṭi offering to the animals, One should offer a Marutīṣți with seven potsherds where a king is to be conquered.
2.1.8.36-43	The Agastya-sutra should be the Sāmidhenī verses and the Yājyā and Anuvākyā verses. Agastya threw the Ukshas at the Maruts. He offered them to Indra. They attacked him with the thunderbolt. He pacified them with this (rite). It is performed with seven potsherds; for the Maruts are seven.
2.1.8.44	The Maruts.
2.1.8.45	He appeases them with their own share.
2.1.9.1	One should offer a cake on eleven potsherds to Indra and a cake on seven potsherds to the Maruts.
2.1.9.2	One should perform the sacrifice for a royal person desiring prosperity.
2.1.9.3	The royal person is Indra by his deity.
2.1.9.4	The Maruts are the cattle.
2.1.9.5	He makes the cattle join him by means of Indra.
2.1.9.6	He makes his cattle non-contentious.
2.1.9.7	One who desires should offer a cake on eleven potshards to Indra and a cake on seven potshards to Maruts, saying, "I should make the Kshatriya and the Visha equal."
2.1.9.8	One should offer to Maruts after reciting the Marut hymn and then to Indra.
2.1.9.9	One should offer Indra after reciting the Maruta hymn.
2.1.9.10	One makes them equal to their own share.
2.1.9.11	If one desires that there be no separation, one should place a cow in the eastern half of the village, and another cow in the western half.
2.1.9.12	They meet together.
2.1.9.13	There is no separation for as long as that.
2.1.9.14	If one desires that they may be united, one should offer these two oblations and worship them as appropriate.
2.1.9.15	They are united.
2.1.9.16	One desiring to injure should offer a cake on eleven potsherds to Indra and a cake on seven potsherds to Maruts.
2.1.9.17	One should place the oblation of Indra above and that of Maruts below.
2.1.9.18	He burns them from both sides, from the superior and inferior.
2.1.9.19	One desiring to injure should make an offering of a cake on eleven potsheds to Indra and a pot of curds to Maruts
2.1.9.20	One should perform the consecration of a king who desires a village.
2.1.9.21	Having placed the cake for Indra in the middle of the oblations of milk, one should offer oblations from both sides.
2.1.9.22	Indra is the king.
2.1.9.23	The Maruts are the people.
2.1.9.24	One enters the people from the middle.
2.1.9.25	One offers oblations around.
2.1.9.26	The people surround him.
2.1.9.27	One should offer a cake on twenty-one potsherds to the Maruts for the purpose of subjugation.
2.1.9.28	The Marut is the people.
2.1.9.29	The people do not kill what is given.
2.1.9.30	The divine priest alone should strew it.
2.1.9.31	Having made it a seat of sacrificial grass, one should strike it with a wooden sword.
2.1.9.32	"One should say, 'I am cutting off the head of so-and-so, the son of so-andso, with Indra's thunderbolt."
2.1.9.33	He cuts off his head with Indra's vajra.
2.1.9.34	Then as for the wooden sword:
2.1.9.35	The wooden sword is indeed the vajra.
2.1.9.36	He strews it with the vajra.
2.1.9.37	They anoint the tiger, they anoint the lion for great wealth.
2.1.9.38	They anoint the buffalo, the bull, the standing one, the leopard in the water.
2.1.9.39	The waters are the thunderbolt.
2.1.9.40	In that there is a water-related hymn, he strikes him with the thunderbolt.
2.1.10.1	If a person's Prājāpatya sacrifice is performed in excess, one should offer an eight-pot oblation to Agni, the path-maker.
2.1.10.2	One who performs the Prājāpatyā sacrifice in excess goes beyond the path.
2.1.10.3	Agni is the path-maker of the gods.
2.1.10.4	He approaches him with his own share.
2.1.10.5	He leads him back onto the path.
2.1.10.6	A bull is the dakṣiṇā.
2.1.10.7	He indeed carries the path.
2.1.10.8	One who has set up the sacred fire should offer an oblation of eight potfuls to Agni, the lord of vows, if he goes away.
2.1.10.9	One who is a householder with the sacred fire goes away, he transgresses the vow many times.
2.1.10.10	On the vow day, he approaches a woman or eats meat.
2.1.10.11	Agni is the lord of vows among the gods.
2.1.10.12	He approaches him with the same oblation.
2.1.10.13	He makes him undertake the vow.
2.1.10.14	One who has set up the sacred fire should offer an oblation of eight potfuls to Agni, the upholder of vows, if he were to shed tears.
2.1.10.15	One who sets up the sacred fire is brought to the gods.
2.1.10.16	Therefore, one should not shed tears.
2.1.10.17	For the gods do not shed tears.
2.1.10.18	Agni is the bearer of the vows of the gods.
2.1.10.19	He went to Agni for his vow.
2.1.10.20	Therefore, he takes the vow from him alone.
2.1.10.21	One who is being cursed should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Yavishtha.
2.1.10.22	The curse that the other one uses to curse him, that curse becomes the most severe for him.
2.1.10.23	One should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni, the giver of speed, in a battle.
2.1.10.24	He who wishes to conquer in a battle, seeks speed.
2.1.10.25	Agni is the giver of speed among the gods.
2.1.10.26	He approaches him with his share.
2.1.10.27	He runs for speed for him.
2.1.10.28	One should offer a cake to Agni, the leader of the army, on eight potsherls in a battle.
2.1.10.29	Whatever army of Agni he approaches, that he does not resist.
2.1.10.30	Agni alone conquers his armies.
2.1.10.31	One should offer to Vishnu with ghee.
2.1.10.32	From this Vishnu conquered these worlds.
2.1.10.33	He conquers these worlds following Vishnu's conquest.
2.1.10.34	He drives away his enemies from these worlds.
2.1.10.35	One who desires to dedicate his cattle to Rudra should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Rudravat.
2.1.10.36	Agni is Rudra.
2.1.10.37	He dedicates his cattle to Ruddra.
2.1.10.38	If one desires that it may be appeased, one should offer a cake to Agni Surbhimat.
2.1.10.39	This is the healing form of Agni, namely Surbhi.
2.1.10.40	He has made it a medicine.
2.1.10.41	He has made it fragrant.
2.1.10.42	It pacifies.
2.1.10.43	One should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni, the giver of food, the eater of food, the lord of food, if one desires:
2.1.10.44	"May I be the one who has food, who eats food, who is the lord of food."
2.1.10.45	Agni is the one who has the food, who eats the food, who is lord of food among the gods.
2.1.10.46	He approaches him with the same oblation.
2.1.10.47	He makes him the possessor of food, the eater of food, the lord of food.
2.1.11.1	One who is afraid of demons should offer an oblation to Agni, the destroyer of demons, on eight potsherds.
2.1.11.2	The demons approached Indra.
2.1.11.3	He entered Agni.
2.1.11.4	They attacked him.
2.1.11.5	He created these drops, which are scattered when he is being sprinkled.
2.1.11.6	He drove them away with Agni alone.
2.1.11.7	Agni is the destroyer of demons among the gods.
2.1.11.8	He drives away demons with him alone.
2.1.11.9	One should sacrifice at night.
2.1.11.10	At night the demons move.
2.1.11.11	When they move, then he drives them away.
2.1.11.12	The fifteen Sāman-verses of Vāmadevya and the Yajya and Anuvākyā verses should be used.
2.1.11.13	Vāmadevya, and Kusitāyī, went to the cow belonging to them.
2.1.11.14	Kusitāyī cut off the pole of Vāma devya's chariot.
2.1.11.15	She went to another place.
2.1.11.16	"I will cut the yoke of these."
2.1.11.17	He saw Agni in the fire-pit.
2.1.11.18	He saw this mantra.
2.1.11.19	He went up with the light.
2.1.11.20	Burning with light, he entered the lake.
2.1.11.21	That indeed is the lake of Kousīta.
2.1.11.22	He indeed repelled the demons by that.
2.1.11.23	He indeed repels the demons by that (mantra).
2.1.11.24	One who desires to compete in the country or one who desires should offer an oblation of eight potsherls to Agni.
2.1.11.25	He would be the giver of food.
2.1.11.26	The gods and the Asuras were in conflict.
2.1.11.27	She, the Gāyatrī, having taken all the food, stood in between.
2.1.11.28	They knew:
2.1.11.29	"Whichever side she will go to, they will be this."
2.1.11.30	Both of them desired her.
2.1.11.31	They called her by her name.
2.1.11.32	The Asuras called her "Dābhī."
2.1.11.33	The gods call him Vishvakarman.
2.1.11.34	She did not turn to any other.
2.1.11.35	The gods invoked her with this verse:
2.1.11.36	"You are strength,
2.1.11.37	you are power,
2.1.11.38	you are might,
2.1.11.39	you are radiance,
2.1.11.40	you are the abode of the gods,
2.1.11.41	you are all, you are all-pervading,
2.1.11.42	you are everything, you are all, you conquer."
2.1.11.43	The Gayatri is indeed the year.
2.1.11.44	The year indeed stood there.
2.1.11.45	They obtained the food of the year.
2.1.11.46	The sacrificer thus obtains the food of the entire year from his enemy.
2.1.11.47	This is the Gayatri-sti.
2.1.11.48	Some say:
2.1.11.49	It is the union of the kingdom.
2.1.12.1	One should offer a sacrifice to Indra and Brhaspati for one who is a member of the community but does not come forward.
2.1.12.2	Aditi cooked rice for the sake of offspring.
2.1.12.3	She ate the leftover.
2.1.12.4	He, Indra, while still in the womb, was bound with an iron chain.
2.1.12.5	He was born with the chain.
2.1.12.6-11	Brihaspati performed the sacrifice with the Indra-Brhaspati formula. He himself destroyed that noose. He turned around these directions with the thunderbolt. One who is a national enemy should be sacrificed with the Indra-Bṛhaspati formula. He is surrounded by sin. Then he does not become a national enemy.
2.1.12.12	"To Brihaspati is offered, to Indra is made."
2.1.12.13	He releases him from all sides.
2.1.12.14	He turns around these directions with the thunderbolt.
2.2.1.1	"He says, 'I shall perform your share, the Aditya, for him, the son of so-and-so.'
2.2.1.2	One who is about to offer oblations should say this.
2.2.1.3	He should offer this oblation of ghee to Aditya.
2.2.1.4	The Adityas are these creatures.
2.2.1.5	They approach him.
2.2.1.6	They make him understand.
2.2.1.7	Seven horse-shaped pieces of wood should be placed within the altar.
2.2.1.8	When they are settled, one should strike them in the middle of the chariot-yoke.
2.2.1.9	"One should say, "I am binding the Adityas for the sake of approaching them."
2.2.1.10	One binds the Adityas here.
2.2.1.11	Those who are seeking liberation instruct him.
2.2.1.12	The strength of the Visas departed.
2.2.1.13	It entered the ashvattha tree.
2.2.1.14	With that strength, he became Bharbhara.
2.2.1.15	One obtains that strength through this very Vis.
2.2.1.16	If one does not find it in the seven, one should make them into kindling and offer this very oblation.
2.2.1.17	The Adityas are these creatures.
2.2.1.18	They approach him.
2.2.1.19	They instruct him.
2.2.1.20	If he knows them in the seven (verses),
2.2.1.21	the seven are indeed the seven Adityas.
2.2.1.22	He approaches them.
2.2.1.23	They instruct them.
2.2.1.24	If he understands them in the one or two (verses), they would be his enemies.
2.2.1.25	But when he understands them in all (verses), then he understands without being an enemy.
2.2.1.26	If he should know, then he should offer a cake on eight potsherds to the Adityas who are the upholders, and ghee.
2.2.1.27	The Adityas are the upholders.
2.2.1.28	The Aditvas are the knowers.
2.2.1.29	They support him.
2.2.1.30	"He says, "O Aditi, consent, the blessing is true, the mind is here."
2.2.1.31	One should take the place of a king who is obstructed.
2.2.1.32	If there is a person who speaks like a villager in front of him, then they should go to the assembly and shout at him.
2.2.1.33	O departed Maruts, with your own strength, you have defeated this king.
2.2.1.34	From his house, they should bring rice.
2.2.1.35	They should divide it into three parts.
2.2.1.36	The black ones should be placed under a black antelope skin.
2.2.1.37	Those who are white, one should offer a cake on ghee to that Aditya.
2.2.1.38	Aditya indeed is these beings.
2.2.1.39	They approach him.
2.2.1.40	They make him understand.
2.2.1.41	Now if one were to quarrel with those (beings), having gone away to the north, one should offer (oblations) after digging up a mound of anthill.
2.2.1.42	"What terrible thing you did today, I offer (this oblation) for the release of these bonds."
2.2.1.43	Whom people call the Earth.
2.2.1.44	She is pleased.
2.2.1.45	I announce you to Nirriti, the All-pervading.
2.2.1.46	He who is bound is seized by Nirriti.
2.2.1.47	He releases him by means of Nirriti.
2.2.1.48	This is the Vishas.
2.2.1.49	Or his kingdom is not attained.
2.2.1.50	If these are black barley, he should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni, a cake on eleven potsherds to Indra, and a rice-gruel in ghee to Varuna.
2.2.1.51	Varuna is the king of the gods.
2.2.1.52	He is the one who bestows sovereignty.
2.2.1.53	He approaches him with a share.
2.2.1.54	He bestows sovereignty on him.
2.2.1.55	This indeed is the attainment of both worlds.
2.2.1.56	One attains both worlds, the divine and the human, by this.
2.2.2.1	One should offer a cake on clarified butter to Surya, made of white rice, desiring brahminical splendor.
2.2.2.2	The gold coin below is of the value of a hundred, and the gold coin above is of the value a hundred.
2.2.2.3	Here indeed was this sun.
2.2.2.4	They placed him above, having surrounded him with these two, for the sake of these creatures.
2.2.2.5	The sun is above, and these creatures are below.
2.2.2.6	This one is silver, and that one is golden.
2.2.2.7	With these (verses) he places him above the progeny of these (verses).
2.2.2.8	He sits above the progeny of this (verse).
2.2.2.9	One should offer five black beans at the Prayāja offerings.
2.2.2.10	This (verse) is the sun, he follows these five seasons with splendour.
2.2.2.11	These five directions make him resplendent.
2.2.2.12	One desiring life should offer a cake on ghee to Prajapati, along with a hundred black-beans.
2.2.2.13	The gods, having killed the Asuras, were afraid of death.
2.2.2.14	They approached Prajapati himself.
2.2.2.15	Prajapati performed the sacrifice for them with this (rite).
2.2.2.16	Then the gods attained immortality.
2.2.2.17	Gold is indeed immortality.
2.2.2.18	Immortality is life.
2.2.2.19	He has placed immortality in them with immortality.
2.2.2.20	One who desires life should offer sacrifice with this.
2.2.2.21	This is the immortality of man, that he goes to the end of his life.
2.2.2.22	Gold is indeed immortality.
2.2.2.23	Life is immortality.
2.2.2.24	He places immortality in him with immortality.
2.2.2.25	By that he attains the whole life and does not die before his time.
2.2.2.26	It becomes a hundred black grams.
2.2.2.27	Man has a life of a hundred years and a hundred powers.
2.2.2.28	He attains life and power.
2.2.2.29	He gives away four times four black grams.
2.2.2.30	For prosperity.
2.2.2.31	He says to the Brahman to take everything.
2.2.2.32	He establishes the sacrifice in the Brahman.
2.2.2.33	All the power of Brahman is placed in him.
2.2.2.34	And indeed, Brahman is Brahman.
2.2.2.35	Brahman places the life of Brahman in him.
2.2.3.1	One desiring to be a Purohita should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Brhaspati.
2.2.3.2	His offering-prayers and responses should be on the theme of light, and dedicated to Brhaspati,
2.2.3.3	Brhaspati is Brahman.
2.2.3.4-9	The Brāhmaṇa of Brhaspati is the deity. He approached his own deity, the Purodha. His own deity makes him go to the Purodha. The light that shines forth from the sun, that is the light. Therefore, it is called Jyotishmati. If one does not go to the Puroda, one should offer a sacrifice to Indra and Brhaspati.
2.2.3.10	And Brahma and Kshatra, he made united.
2.2.3.11	They have placed him in front.
2.2.3.12	One desiring a village or desiring cattle should offer a cake to Brhaspati on milk.
2.2.3.13	The Yajya and Anuvakya verses should be from the Brhaspati group.
2.2.3.14	Milk should be brought from the house of one who has many cattle.
2.2.3.15	It should be the milk of one's own cows.
2.2.3.16	It should also be water.
2.2.3.17	This is indeed the prosperity that is collected.
2.2.3.18	Brahma is Brihaspati.
2.2.3.19	Brihaspati is the Chanda (verses).
2.2.3.20	Brihaspati, the reciter, is with the Chanda (verse).
2.2.3.21	He offers his own deity with the most abundant (oblation).
2.2.3.22	He makes him a reciter with his own kinsmen.
2.2.3.23	One should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Brahma-pati in a battle.
2.2.3.24	The Brāhmaṇaspati's wife should be Vīravatī and Vayavatī.
2.2.3.25	One should perform the Darsa sacrifice with a canopy.
2.2.3.26	The sacrificial grass should be without blades.
2.2.3.27	The enclosing sticks should be with arrows.
2.2.3.28	The birds enter the farthest village.
2.2.3.29	It should be known thus: 'We shall conquer.'
2.2.3.30	Brahma is the lord of Brahma.
2.2.3.31	Brahma alone approached.
2.2.3.32	He should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Brhaspati, if he desires:
2.2.3.33	"May there be the strength of Brahman."
2.2.3.34	The Brhaspati-cake should have the Marutvatī verses as the Yajya and Anuvakya.
2.2.3.35	Brhaspati is Brahman.
2.2.3.36	The Maruts are the people.
2.2.3.37	He destroys the people in Brahman.
2.2.3.38	For firmness, for non-decay;
2.2.4.1-8	One desiring cattle should offer a cake to Brhaspati on the Garmut (grass). Prajapati created cattle. They, being created by him, went away from him. Brhaspati followed them. When they settled down, from that place Sakno Garmut was born. He said to him, "Sacrifice to me with this." He sacrificed to him with that.
2.2.4.9-14	The cattle turned towards him. One who desires cattle should offer to him. The cattle turn towards him. When he offered to him, then the cattle turned towards him.
2.2.4.15	They, having been created from him, went away.
2.2.4.16	He made Pūṣan their overlord.
2.2.4.17	Where they settled, from there Śakna Garmu was born.
2.2.4.18	He brought him.
2.2.4.19	"With this, may I be established."
2.2.4.20	Soma said,
2.2.4.21	"My own is the unploughed and cooked."
2.2.4.22	He offered the Soma-Pūṣan oblation.
2.2.4.23	The cattle returned to him.
2.2.4.24	One who desires cattle should sacrifice with this.
2.2.4.25	Cattle indeed turn towards him.
2.2.4.26	When he sacrificed with this, then cattle turned towards him.
2.2.4.27	Soma indeed is the bestower of semen.
2.2.4.28	Pūṣan is the progenitor of cattle.
2.2.4.29	Soma indeed bestows semen on him.
2.2.4.30	Pūşan generates cattle.
2.2.4.31-36	One desiring cattle should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Prajapati, cooked in the milk of a spotted cow, and churned with the milk of spotted cows. The ghee should be of spotted cows. Here also they should churn out cow's urine. When the spotted cow milked, it became the Garamuta. This is the spotted cow. The spotted cow is speech. This is its head, namely the Garamuta.
2.2.4.37	Therefore, this is like an egg, like nectar.
2.2.4.38	One desiring cattle should offer a cake to Prajapati.
2.2.4.39	Cattle belong to Prajapati
2.2.4.40	Prajapati is the progenitor of cattle.
2.2.4.41	He approaches him with his own share.
2.2.4.42	He generates cattle for him.
2.2.4.43	One should offer a cake on twelve potsherds to Agni, one should offer a cake in the form of a house to Rudra, where Rudra would pacify the creatures.
2.2.4.44	The Vastu is born from Vastu.
2.2.4.45	This indeed is the Vastu of Rudra.
2.2.4.46	He appeases him with his own share.
2.2.4.47	One should sacrifice to the Niṣāda-carpenter with that.
2.2.4.48	That is his sacrifice.
2.2.4.49	A horn or a donkey is the fee.
2.2.5.1	One should offer a cake on twelve potsherds to Parameshthin, if one desires, "May I be Parameshthin."
2.2.5.2	Parameshthi is the supreme among the gods.
2.2.5.3	Parameshthi is the king among men.
2.2.5.4	He approaches him with a share.
2.2.5.5	He makes him supreme.
2.2.5.6	He should give him a bow and three (cows).
2.2.5.7	May Agni give you brilliance, Indra give you strength, the bond of kinship.
2.2.5.8	Agni himself bestows upon him brilliance.
2.2.5.9	Indra bestows upon him the power of Indra, the kinship of the father.
2.2.5.10	One who has an enemy should offer a cake on twelve potshards to Visvedevas.
2.2.5.11	Having made it sit on the sacrificial grass, one should arrange it with a wooden sword, saying, "I am arranging this one and that one."
2.2.5.12	One should say, "I am separating this one and that."
2.2.5.13	One should do so to the one whom one hates.
2.2.5.14	Whatever is cut off below and whatever is held by the wooden wedge, that he offers to Vishnu, the one of great strides.
2.2.5.15	Vishnu himself moves between them.
2.2.5.16	He should again arrange them.
2.2.5.17	"He says, "I am arranging myself and this one together."
2.2.5.18	The one he likes.
2.2.5.19	These creatures are dedicated to all gods.
2.2.5.20	With them alone he arranges the other.
2.2.5.21	He unites himself with them.
2.2.5.22	One should offer a cake to Indraṇī when the army is about to march.
2.2.5.23	The army is Indraṇī.
2.2.5.24	He conquers her with Brahma in front, with the face.
2.2.5.25	There should be lotus flowers on the altar.
2.2.5.26	They are indeed the army that has risen up.
2.2.5.27	He conquours her with the right way.
2.2.5.28	Whatever is found in that army, that is the Dakṣiṇā.
2.2.5.29	One who desires prosperity should offer a cake to Vācaspati.
2.2.5.30	He who is the overlord of speech is Vācaspati,
2.2.5.31	This indeed is the means of attaining prosperity.
2.2.6.1	One should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni, the lord of the Vasus, for the Satinas, a cooked meal of Shyamaka rice to Soma, the lord of Rudras, a cake on eleven potsherds of Nivaraka to Indra, the lord of Maruts, a cooked meal made of barley to Varuna, the lord of Adityas. The gods, standing for supremacy over one another, divided themselves into four parts: Agni with the Vasus, Soma with the Rudras, Indra with the Maruts, Varuna with the Adityas. Brihaspati performed the sacrifice for them. They came together and recognized Indra. One who performs this sacrifice comes together and recognizes him. They say: "The cake on eleven potshers should be offered to Indra, for they came together and recognized him."
2.2.6.2	May there be union between us by day and the beast, may there be union between the horse and the night. May there be union for us with our own, may there be (union) with the strangers. May there be (union), O Asvins, you two, for us here.
2.2.6.3	O Indra, may we unite with wealth, may we unite in food, may we unite together with many bright and shining boons, may we unite (with you) through the divine Pramathi, with the strength of heroes, with cattle, with horses, with wealth.
2.2.6.4	O Indra and Vayu, we invoke you, the well-seeing, the well-loving, so that all the people may be of good mind at our meeting.
2.2.6.5	May your minds, your vows, and your intentions be united. Those who are separated, we unite you.
2.2.6.6	Your intentions are the same, your hearts are the same, may your minds be the same, so that you may be well-disposed towards each other.
2.2.6.7	The same is the mantra, the same is the agreement, the same is their vow, the same is your mind. You all desire the same sacrifice. I offer you with the same oblation.
2.2.6.8	Come together, understand each other, may your minds know each other. The gods, as in the past, know their share and come together.
2.2.7.1	One should offer an oblation to Agni on eight potsherds, a rice-pap to Savitr, barley-gruel to Vayu, or a milk-rice to Yama, or an oblation to Bhumi on one potsherd, for one whose gold is lost, or for one who obtains gold.
2.2.7.2	Agni first obtained gold.
2.2.7.3	He invoked Savitr.
2.2.7.4	There is nothing that has not been reached by Vayu.
2.2.7.5	In this (earth) he found that (treasure).
2.2.7.6	The Agniya (rite) is for obtaining wealth.
2.2.7.7	The Savaniya (rite) is to promote (prosperity).
2.2.7.8	The Vayuya (rite) for success.
2.2.7.9	And why the Bhauma (rite)?
2.2.7.10	For in this (earth) it was found.
2.2.7.11	These are the givers.
2.2.7.12	He approaches them with the sacrificial gifts.
2.2.7.13	They give it to him.
2.2.7.14	When he finds it, then he should offer to them.
2.2.7.15	Those who did not win, he makes their shares.
2.2.7.16	For non-injury.
2.2.7.17	Prajapati gave his daughters to Soma, the king, as the stars.
2.2.7.18	He dwelt only with Rohini, not with the others.
2.2.7.19	Those (stars) being neglected, went back.
2.2.7.20	He was seized by the king's consumption.
2.2.7.21	He oozed out.
2.2.7.22	Therefore one seized by the king’s consumption oozes out.
2.2.7.23	He then approached Prajapati.
2.2.7.24	Prajapati said to him,
2.2.7.25	"Speak the truth."
2.2.7.26	He spoke the truth,
2.2.7.27	"As in all the seasons, so in the winter also."
2.2.7.28	Therefore he dwells in all the seasons.
2.2.7.29	Prajapatī desired expiation for him.
2.2.7.30	Therefore, on the new moon day, he offered a cake to Visvedevas.
2.2.7.31	Through that, he found atonement for him.
2.2.7.32	He became nourished along with it.
2.2.7.33	He became more prosperous.
2.2.7.34	If one is afflicted by royal consumption, one should offer a cake to Visve Devas on the new moon.
2.2.7.35	Through this, he found atonement.
2.2.7.36	He obtains expiation by means of that very (oblation).
2.2.7.37	He becomes nourished in accordance with him who is nourished.
2.2.7.38	He becomes more powerful.
2.2.8.1	Prajapati indeed allotted the shares to the gods.
2.2.8.2	Indra said,
2.2.8.3	"What is left over, that is mine."
2.2.8.4	Indeed, his power was left over.
2.2.8.5	He then ascended these worlds from above.
2.2.8.6	He did not obtain them by one (purorasa), nor by two.
2.2.8.7	Having obtained them by the third, he established them.
2.2.8.8	When there are three purorasa oblations, he obtains the strength and power from these worlds and establishes them.
2.2.8.9	The northern purorasa is larger than the southern.
2.2.8.10	The northern world is larger than the south.
2.2.8.11-17	To Indra the King, the first (is offered). To Indra the Self-King, the middle (is offered). To Indra the Over-King, the last (is offered). These are all Indra. He became the kingdom, the self-kingdom, the over-kingdom. He who performs these sacrifices becomes all this. He who knows this becomes all this. One should offer with the middle (verse) after reciting the first.
2.2.8.18	Having recited the middle one, he should offer with the highest one.
2.2.8.19	Having recited the highest one, he should make an offering with the first one.
2.2.8.20	Thus all his Anuvākyās become (recited) and all his Yājyās.
2.2.8.21	For the recognition of these worlds.
2.2.8.22	And also for continuity.
2.2.8.23	One who desires brilliance should offer a cake on eleven potshards to Indra, the possessor of heat and the sun.
2.2.8.24	Heat is brilliance.
2.2.8.25	The sun is brilliance.
2.2.8.26	He indeed obtains splendour.
2.2.8.27	One desiring cattle should offer oblations to Indra, the possessor of power, on eleven potshards.
2.2.8.28	Cattle are indeed the power.
2.2.8.29	Indra is the bestower of power.
2.2.8.30	He approaches him with his own share.
2.2.8.31	He bestows power and cattle on him.
2.2.9.1	One should offer oblations on eleven potshers to Indra, the bestower of the sun and the horse sacrifice.
2.2.9.2	One should consecrate one who is restrained.
2.2.9.3	He who is stopped has gone to the end.
2.2.9.4	The end is the sun.
2.2.9.5	The end (is reached) by the horse sacrifice.
2.2.9.6	He makes him attain the end by the end.
2.2.9.7	Vasha is the fee.
2.2.9.8	(He offers) saying, "May he not lead me astray."
2.2.9.9	One who desires, "May my people prosper," should offer oblations to Indra, the lord of the sun, the lord of horse sacrifice, on eleven potsherds.
2.2.9.10	This is the end of the rites of prosperity.
2.2.9.11	This is the end of (the rite of) the Sun.
2.2.9.12	This is (the rite of ) the horse sacrifice.
2.2.9.13	He makes him attain the end by means of the end.
2.2.9.14	The fee is a she-goat.
2.2.9.15	(The fee) is to prevent him from taking me away.
2.2.9.16	One who has lost his prosperity should offer oblations to Indra, the lord of the Sun and the horse sacrifice, on eleven potsherds.
2.2.9.17	When the prosperity of a man comes to an end, then he becomes worse.
2.2.9.18	The end is the sun.
2.2.9.19	The end (is reached) at the horse sacrifice.
2.2.9.20	One attains only the end.
2.2.9.21	One does not become worse.
2.2.9.22	One who desires that the great sacrifice may not decline should offer oblations to Indra, the lord of the sun and the horse sacrifice, on eleven potsherds.
2.2.9.23	These two are the sacrificial forms of Indra, namely, the Arka and the Asvamedha.
2.2.9.24	They are the same.
2.2.9.25	He offers the great sacrifice with them.
2.2.9.26	One should offer a cake on eleven potshards to Indra, the one who is worthy of heat and the sun.
2.2.9.27	One should make an offering to Indra, the angry one, the one who has the mind, on eleven potshers.
2.2.9.28	One should perform an offering to Indra who has power on eleven potshhers.
2.2.9.29	One should prepare a cake on eleven potshells to Indra, the worthy of Arka and the Aswamedha.
2.2.9.30	One who desires prosperity should perform this sacrifice.
2.2.9.31	This is the heat of Indra and the sun.
2.2.9.32	This is his anger and mind.
2.2.9.33	This is Indra and his power.
2.2.9.34	This is Arka and the horse sacrifice.
2.2.9.35	Indra became all these.
2.2.9.36	One who performs these sacrifices becomes all these.
2.2.9.37	All this becomes for one who knows this.
2.2.10.1	One should offer a cake on eleven potshards to Indra, the remover of distress.
2.2.10.2	One should perform the sacrifice for one suffering from a disease.
2.2.10.3	This is the healing body of Indra, the remover from distress.
2.2.10.4	He approaches him with his share.
2.2.10.5	He is released from distress.
2.2.10.6	One who is afraid of death or destruction should offer a cake to Indra, the protector, on eleven potshers.
2.2.10.7	Indra is the protector.
2.2.10.8	Indra is the remover of obstacles.
2.2.10.9	He approaches him with a share in the sacrifice.
2.2.10.10	He protects him.
2.2.10.11	One who has a senior brother should offer oblations to Indra, the upright, on eleven potshards.
2.2.10.12	The senior brother is the power.
2.2.10.13	He makes them upright by means of power.
2.2.10.14	One should offer oblations on eleven potshers to Indra, the shining, in a battle.
2.2.10.15	Indra, indeed, struck Vritra with the thunderbolt.
2.2.10.16	He strikes the thunderbolt at them.
2.2.10.17	One should offer oblation of eleven potsherds to Indra-Vajrin in a battle.
2.2.10.18	One who wins a battle indeed conquers the enemies.
2.2.10.19	One conquers the enemies indeed.
2.2.10.20	One should make an oblation of eleven potshells to Indra-Abhimātigha in a battle.
2.2.10.21-28	He who wins a battle conquers the Abhimānī. He conquers the Abhīmānī. One who desires to be able to withstand should offer a cake on eleven potshards to Indra, the conqueror of the Abhimānīs. He should say, "May I be safe." Indra hurled the thunderbolt at Vṛtra. The Dānavas did not accept it. They accepted it with this oblation.
2.2.11.4-10	He who is bound has gone to the other world. He brings him back from the other world. One should offer a cake on thirteen potshards to Indra. One should perform the sacrifice for one who is bound. Thirteen is an excess. One who is bound is an excess. One who is bound is excess. He brings back one who is bound from the excess.
2.2.11.11	One should offer oblations to Indra with eleven potfuls of cooked rice.
2.2.11.12	One should offer oblations with eleven potfuls to Indra, the slayer of Vritra.
2.2.11.13	One should make an offering to Indra, the destroyer of Vritra, with eleven potfuls, if one's enemy performs a Soma sacrifice.
2.2.11.14	One who performs a Soma sacrifice is indeed laying down a thunderbolt against his enemy.
2.2.11.15	If one offers to Indra with the thunderbolt,
2.2.11.16	one strikes down his thunderbolt with the thunderbolt.
2.2.11.17	To the slayer of Vritra.
2.2.11.18	Vritra is the enemy.
2.2.11.19	He indeed slays him.
2.2.11.20	To the slayer of Vrtrotur.
2.2.11.21	Vritrotur is the enemy. He indeed slays him
2.2.11.22	He indeed crosses him.
2.2.11.23	One who is disputing with another over a field or cattle should offer oblations to Indra, the conqueror of fields, on eleven potsherds.
2.2.11.24	Indra is the conqueror of fields among the gods.
2.2.11.25	He approaches him with his own share.
2.2.11.26	He wins him land and cattle.
2.2.11.27	One should offer oblations to Indra, the overlord, on eleven potsherds, where kings are equal.
2.2.11.28	Indra is the overlord of the gods.
2.2.11.29	He approaches him with his own share.
2.2.11.30	He makes him attain overlordship.
2.2.12.1	One should make an offering to Indra, the angry one, on eleven potshers, in a battle.
2.2.12.2-7	By anger one creates energy, by the sense of power one wins. He places energy and the sense of power among them for victory. One should offer a cake to anger in a battle. By anger one creates energy. He places only energy among them for victory.
2.2.12.8	He has made the truth of the mind his own.
2.2.12.9	One should offer oblations to Indra with the mind, one who desires to be meritorious and unassailable.
2.2.12.10	Mind is indeed prosperity and radiance.
2.2.12.11	He places prosperity and radiance in him.
2.2.12.12	One should not praise the mind for a year.
2.2.12.13	What is not obtained is obtained by the year.
2.2.12.14	By the year he attains prosperity and radiance.
2.2.13.1	If the Soma-drink were to be offered to one whose Soma-drink has been consumed by the moon, or if there are cakes, one should make them into three parts.
2.2.13.2	Those in the middle should be offered to Agni Datra in eight potsherds.
2.2.13.3	Those who are the oldest should be offered to Indra Pradatta in curds.
2.2.13.4	Those who are the most inferior, he offers a cooked oblation to Vishnu Sipivista and to the Soma.
2.2.13.5	Agni is the giver of the middle one.
2.2.13.6	Indra is the giver of what is the best.
2.2.13.7	And what is the most inferior, that is Sipivista.
2.2.13.8	He obtains that.
2.2.13.9	Indeed, cattle.
2.2.13.10	The moon exceeds him whose Soma offering is consumed when the moon rises.
2.2.13.11	He indeed surpasses the animals.
2.2.13.12	One who desires animals should offer a sacrifice on the new moon day and then release the calves.
2.2.13.13	If there are cakes, one should make them into three parts.
2.2.13.14	The smallest ones should be offered to Agni Sanimanta in an eight-pot offering.
2.2.13.15	The middle ones should be offered as a cooked oblation to Vishnu Sipivista.
2.2.13.16	Those who are the most venerable, they offer a cooked oblation to Indra, the giver.
2.2.13.17	Agni himself obtains for him whatever is here.
2.2.13.18	Vishnu obtains whatever is in the atmosphere.
2.2.13.19	Indra obtains whatever is in heaven.
2.2.13.20	The Satvas desire cattle.
2.2.13.21	When these grains are divided,
2.2.13.22	The Satvas are indeed the desirers.
2.2.13.23	The Satavas are indeed the protectors.
2.2.13.24	One who has lost his prosperity should offer an oblation to Agni on eight potsherds.
2.2.13.25	A cow should be given as Dakṣiṇā.
2.2.13.26	Having gone eastwards, one should offer a Trikūpa oblation to Viṣṇu.
2.2.13.27	A cow with a calf should be given as dakṣiṇā
2.2.13.28	Having gone east, one should go to a mountain or water and offer a oblation to Prajāpati in ghee.
2.2.13.29	A cow that has given birth to a calf should be offered as Dakṣiṇa.
2.2.13.30	If it is to Agni, one transgresses this.
2.2.13.31	The one who is Vaishnavya, by that (he goes to) the sky.
2.2.13.32	The one who is Prajapati, by that (one goes to) this world.
2.2.13.33	When one goes east, one indeed moves towards oneself.
2.2.13.34	When one approaches a mountain, one indeed returns to the waters.
2.2.13.35	When three cows are given as Dakshina,
2.2.13.36	These three worlds are indeed three.
2.2.13.37	The cow gives these worlds to him.
2.2.13.38	He bestows on him these worlds.
2.2.13.39	He who knows thus, he milks these worlds which have been bestowed on him.
2.2.13.40	One should offer a cake to Soma and Indra, made of shyamaka grains, to Soma-drinking Indra.
2.2.13.41	Indra drank Soma of Tvashtri without being invoked.
2.2.13.42	His Soma-drinking fell down above.
2.2.13.43	They became shyamaka grains.
2.2.13.44-50	He who vomits Soma is deprived of the Soma-drink. Because it is dedicated to Soma. He thus makes him whole again with Soma-drink. He who vomits soma is deprived of the power and strength of Indra. Because it belongs to Indra. He thus restores him with the power and strength belonging to Indra. For his Soma-drink is as if loose.
2.2.13.51	Then this (verse) is recited, "Soma vomits."
2.2.13.52	He grinds with black-gram grains for the sake of retaining the Soma drink.
2.3.1.1	One should offer an eight-pot Agniya oblation and a Payasyā oblation to Mitra-Varuna.
2.3.1.2	One should perform the sacrifice for one suffering from a disease.
2.3.1.3	The Agniya oblation is for prosperity.
2.3.1.4	Then, having made him without bones, he establishes him.
2.3.1.5	The lords of the sacrifice are the Payasyas, the unpacified, the unremoved.
2.3.1.6	The animal should be offered.
2.3.1.7	For peace, for non-removal.
2.3.1.8	These are indeed animals, namely, barley and wheat.
2.3.1.9	When there is a cake made of barley, then the animal is offered with that.
2.3.1.10	For peace and non-removal. The animal should be offered to Mitra-Varuna.
2.3.1.11	The animal of the Brahman should be offered to Maitravaruna.
2.3.1.12	The Brāhmaṇa should have Maitrāvaruṇa as his deity.
2.3.1.13	The Kṣatriya should have Indra-Varuṇa as his deity
2.3.1.14	The Kṣatra has Indra-Varuṇas as its deity.
2.3.1.15	The Vaiśya should have Agni-Varuṇa.
2.3.1.16	Agni is all the deities.
2.3.1.17	Here the Vaiśya also has a deity.
2.3.1.18	One should perform a sacrifice for one suffering from a disease.
2.3.1.19	He approaches his own deity through expiation.
2.3.1.20-27	He who is afflicted with disease is as if seized by Varuna. He releases him from Varuna. Man is milk, and he is afflicted with disease. He redeems his milk with milk. When he arranges (the bones). For when a wound is cut open, the arrow is removed from the middle. They remove the disease from the middle. And when he again arranges (the bones) and offers to Agni,
2.3.1.28	Just as one removes a thorn and wraps it up in a turban, so one should sacrifice for one who desires prosperity.
2.3.1.29	He approaches his own deity through expiation.
2.3.1.30	One who desires prosperity is indeed seized by Varuna.
2.3.1.31	He indeed releases him from Varuna through that.
2.3.1.32	Milk is indeed a man.
2.3.1.33	He who desires prosperity desires milk.
2.3.1.34	He wins for him milk with milk.
2.3.1.35	When he spreads it out,
2.3.1.36	for the protection of the sacrifice.
2.3.1.37	And when he again gathers it in,
2.3.1.38	he gathers him in for prosperity.
2.3.1.39	One who desires a village should be sacrificed to.
2.3.1.40	He approaches his own deity by atonement.
2.3.1.41	One who wishes for a village is seized by Varuna.
2.3.1.42	By that he releases him from Varuna.
2.3.1.43	Milk is the man.
2.3.1.44	He who desires a village desires milk.
2.3.1.45	He obtains milk for him by means of milk.
2.3.1.46	When he scatters (the oblations),
2.3.1.47	for the protection of the sacrifice.
2.3.1.48	And when he again collects (the oblations)
2.3.1.49	he collects him with the village.
2.3.1.50	He offers on one potsherd.
2.3.1.51	Here indeed are the bonds of Varuna.
2.3.1.52	From there he releases him.
2.3.1.53	Whatever one would offer in various ways, that is the stretching of the sacrifice.
2.3.1.54	All should be offered in the fire.
2.3.1.55	For prosperity.
2.3.1.56	O Mitra and Varuna, with that body of yours which is strength, we worship you.
2.3.1.57	With that, release this one from affliction.
2.3.1.58	O Mitra, Varuna, with your body which is togetherness, we worship you both.
2.3.1.59	With that release this one from afflictions.
2.3.1.60	The body of yours, O Mitra and Varuna, which is to be released, by that do we approach you.
2.3.1.61	By that release this one from affliction.
2.3.1.62	The body of yours, Mitra and Varuna which is to be protected, by that do you approach you.
2.3.1.63	 By that release this one (from affliction).
2.3.1.64	The body of you, O Mitra and Varuṇa, which is to release, to be protected, which is to approach, by that do I approach you.
2.3.1.65	He has spoken this, that, and that, for the sake of removing sin.
2.3.1.66	O king Varuna, whatever noose of yours there is among the gods, I have removed it with this.
2.3.1.67	To him be svāhā.
2.3.1.68	O king, whatever noose there is among men, I have removed that with this.
2.3.1.69	Svāhā to him.
2.3.1.70	O king Varuṇa, whatever noose is among bipeds, quadrupeds, and cattle, I have removed with this.
2.3.1.71	To him be svāhā.
2.3.1.72	"O king, the noose that is in the plants, in the trees, in the waters, in the earth, in the directions, that I remove with this (verse).
2.3.1.73	To him be svāha."
2.3.1.74	These are indeed Varuna's nooses.
2.3.1.75	Then he releases him.
2.3.2.1	One who has an enemy should offer a cake to Visvamedha.
2.3.2.2	The gods and the Asuras were competing.
2.3.2.3	Those gods worshipped them with the act of seizing.
2.3.2.4	Whatever was the property of the Asuras, they seized.
2.3.2.5	They seized their minds.
2.3.2.6	They became without minds.
2.3.2.7	One who has an enemy should offer.
2.3.2.8	This is the act of seizing the mind.
2.3.2.9	One seizes the minds of one's enemies.
2.3.2.10	They are overcome by the mind.
2.3.2.11	One should perform the sacrifice for the desire of a village.
2.3.2.12	This is indeed the grasping of the mind.
2.3.2.13	This indeed grasps the minds of one's own people.
2.3.2.14	They do not drive us away, being grasped by the mind. Here is the corrected and aligned text:
2.3.2.15	From the house of all the people, ghee should be brought.
2.3.2.16	As many as there are, and as much as there is, of ghee that is brought from the house, he attracts the minds of all of them.
2.3.2.17	They do not take away from us those whose minds are attracted.
2.3.2.18	He offers with the formula, "I offer with the mind."
2.3.2.19	He makes them mentally satisfied.
2.3.2.20	"O gods, those who are of the same mind, those who are mentally satisfied, I desire them with my heart.
2.3.2.21	May they desire me with their hearts."
2.3.2.22-28	Make them of one mind with me, svāhā. O god, those sons who are of one mind, I desire them with my heart. May they desire me with their hearts. Make them of one mind with me, svāha. O god! Those women who are of one mind, I desire them with my heart. Let them desire me with their hearts. Make them of one mind with me,
2.3.2.29	O god, I desire with my heart those cattle who are of one mind.
2.3.2.30	May they desire me with their hearts.
2.3.2.31	May they make me of one mind with them. Svāhā.
2.3.2.32	These are indeed the kinsmen, like kinsmen, like sons, like women, like cattle.
2.3.2.33	He unites himself with them.
2.3.2.34	He becomes one with them.
2.3.2.35	A milch cow is the fee.
2.3.2.36	For she is the goddess of all.
2.3.2.37	And as for the Vaishvadevisthi,
2.3.2.38	Vaishvadevis are these creatures.
2.3.2.39	They indeed won them.
2.3.2.40	They were the first to be performed.
2.3.2.41	The Prayajas and Anu-yajas are outside the Self.
2.3.2.42	The Self is the deity.
2.3.2.43	If one were to offer the Prayajas and Anu yajas before or after (the main offering), one would consign one's kinsmen outside the Self. Therefore one should offer them in the middle.
2.3.2.44	And when one offers in the middle,
2.3.2.45	He makes the beings of the same kind as himself.
2.3.2.46	If he desires, they may come quickly.
2.3.2.47	If he wishes, 'May they come quickly', he should offer on a wooden (fire-pan).
2.3.2.48	For trees are moving and unmoving.
2.3.2.49	If he wants them to be firm,
2.3.2.50	'May they come with difficulty', he should offer with a clay (fire-pan),
2.3.2.51	For this is firm.
2.3.2.52	You are firm.
2.3.2.53	You are the firm one among the gods.
2.3.2.54	May I be the firm one among my kinsmen, dear to my kinsmen, the enforcer, the bestower of wealth.
2.3.2.55	You are the fierce one.
2.3.2.56	You are fierce among the gods. May I be fierce among my kinsmen.
2.3.2.57	May I become dear to my kinsman, the enforcer of wealth.
2.3.2.58	May I conquer among my kinsmen.
2.3.2.59	You are the overlord among the gods.
2.3.2.60	May I be the overlord among my equals, dear to my equals, the enforcer, the bestower of wealth.
2.3.2.61	You are the overlord.
2.3.2.62	You are overlord among the Gods.
2.3.2.63	May I become the overlord among equals, dear to equals, the enforcers, the bestower.
2.3.2.64	You are a sun.
2.3.2.65	May you be a wise one among the gods.
2.3.2.66	May I be a wise one, dear to my kinsmen, among my kinsmen, the protector, the bestower of wealth.
2.3.2.67	These are the kinsmen.
2.3.2.68	He places them in him.
2.3.2.69	He makes them not to depart from him.
2.3.3.1	Then this horse is received.
2.3.3.2	It is received on both sides.
2.3.3.3	He (the sacrificer) releases his senses and cattle.
2.3.3.4	Varuna is the horse, Varuna is the deity.
2.3.3.5	He who accepts a horse, he becomes appeased to Varuna.
2.3.3.6	Therefore one should perform a sacrifice with a horse as the oblation.
2.3.3.7	For the sake of being free from Varuna.
2.3.3.8	There are four-headed (sacrificial posts).
2.3.3.9	The horse has four feet.
2.3.3.10	By means of the heads one obtains him.
2.3.3.11	As many horses as there are, so many oblations are offered.
2.3.3.12	He releases him from all sides.
2.3.3.13	One becomes superior.
2.3.3.14	From the one he does not remember, he is released.
2.3.3.15	If one who is going to receive a gift again were to offer, he would not offer.
2.3.3.16	If one were to receive a gift repeatedly, one would again be released by Varuna.
2.3.3.17	Now, if one is going to receive a gift, then his oblations should be to Varuna. They should be to Surya and Varuna.
2.3.3.18	If they are to Varuna, then he is released from Varuna.
2.3.3.19	And if they are to Surya,
2.3.3.20	he receives his own deity.
2.3.3.21	For the non-injury of himself.
2.3.3.22	There are twenty-one kindling verses.
2.3.3.23	This is the twenty-one-fold Aditya.
2.3.3.24	Prajapati is the Aditya.
2.3.3.25	The horse is of Prajapati.
2.3.3.26	He obtains as much as the horse is.
2.3.3.27	All other animals have a womb, they are born from the womb of a man.
2.3.3.28	The horse has no womb, it is born in the water.
2.3.3.29	That this is a cake for the grandson.
2.3.3.30	He makes it one with a womb.
2.3.3.31	He establishes him in his own womb.
2.3.3.32	"O king Varuna, the noose of the Gayatri metre which is established in the Brahmana, I remove it with this (verse).
2.3.3.33	To him be salutations!"
2.3.3.34	"O king Varuṇa, the noose which is the Triṣṭubh metre and is established in the Kshatriya, I remove it by this (verse). "
2.3.3.35	"To him be salutatioṇs!"
2.3.3.36	O king Varuna, the Anushtup metre is thy noose, established in the directions. I have released thee from that.
2.3.3.37	To him be salutations!
2.3.3.38	O king Varuna, thy noose is established in the directions, I have released thee.
2.3.3.39	To him salutations!
2.3.3.40	The metres are Varuna's nooses.
2.3.3.41	With them he binds him.
2.3.3.42	With those (verses) with which he seizes him, he releases him.
2.3.3.43	He offers with two verses addressed to Apamnaptrya.
2.3.3.44	With those (verses) addressed to Apamnaptriya, he releases him from Varuna.
2.3.4.1	O Agni, thou art the life.
2.3.4.2	With that give life to this one and to that one.
2.3.4.3	O Indra, thou art the breath.
2.3.4.4	Give breath to him for whom thy breath is svāhā.
2.3.4.5	You are the breath of the Pitrs.
2.3.4.6	Give breath to him for whom you are the breath. Svāhā.
2.3.4.7	You are the breath of all the gods.
2.3.4.8	Give breath for him for whom you breath. Svāha.
2.3.4.9	You are Bṛhaspati's breath.
2.3.4.10	Give breath, for him for whom your breath. Svāhe.
2.3.4.11	You are Prajapati's breath.
2.3.4.12	Give life to him whose life is yours. Svāhā.
2.3.4.13	What became new became ghee, what moved became butter, what was not pure became clarified butter.
2.3.4.14	The path of ghee, the navel of immortality, given by Indra, prepared by the Maruts, that you Vishnu saw, that you Ida Gavya brought.
2.3.4.15	With the Stoma of Pavamāna, with the course of Gayatra, I release thee with the strength of Upamśu.
2.3.4.16	With the Brihat, with the Rathantara, with the course in Trishtubh, I raise thee with the strength in Sukra.
2.3.4.17	May the god Savitar lead thee with the measure of Agni, with the course according to Jagati, with life for life.
2.3.4.18	This radiance has been given by Agni, the great giver of wealth, the strength and power for long life, for a hundred autumns. I accept it for the great power.
2.3.4.19	O Agni, make this (life) for long life, radiance, sharp strength. O Varuna, O Soma, O King, like a mother, grant protection to this one, as all the gods do to one who has long life.
2.3.4.20	Agni is life.
2.3.4.21	His life is created by men.
2.3.4.22	By that, may you be long-lived.
2.3.4.23	Brahma is life.
2.3.4.24	His life is created by Brahmins.
2.3.4.25	By that may you be long lived.
2.3.4.26	Sacrifice is life.
2.3.4.27	Its life is created by Dakshina.
2.3.4.28	By that May you be long- lived.
2.3.4.29	Immortality is life.
2.3.4.30	Gods create his life.
2.3.4.31	By that let you be long-living.
2.3.4.32-43	You are the breath of the Ashvins. They have given you breath. Live by it. You are the breath of Mitra and Varuna. They have bestowed breath on you. Live by that. You are Bṛhaspati's breath. May he bestow breath on you. Live by that. Prajapati Parameṣṭhin's breath is yours. May he give you breath. May you live by that.
2.3.5.1	One should offer a cake on eleven potsherds to Agni-Vishnu, a cooked rice to Sarasvati and a cooked rice to Brihaspati.
2.3.5.2	On the previous day.
2.3.5.3	One should perform the sacrifice for one suffering from a disease.
2.3.5.4	Agni is all the deities.
2.3.5.5	Vishnu is the sacrifice.
2.3.5.6	He bestows life on him with the deities and the sacrifice.
2.3.5.7	Sarasvati is speech.
2.3.5.8	Brihaspati is Brahman.
2.3.5.9	And with speech and with Brahman he bestows life on him.
2.3.5.10	And the deities are the vital airs.
2.3.5.11	He takes the vital airs on the previous day and observes fast.
2.3.5.12	He should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni, a rice-pap to Soma in milk, a rice-cake to Aditya in ghee, a rice- pap to Varuna made of barley, a cake to Agni Vaiśvānara on twelve potsherds.
2.3.5.13	One who is suffering from a disease should be sacrificed to.
2.3.5.14	When a person dies, his body goes to Agni, the juice to Soma.
2.3.5.15	The Agniya (oblation) is for the body, by that he redeems him.
2.3.5.16	The Saumya (oblation), by that for the taste.
2.3.5.17	As much as he redeems him,
2.3.5.18	This is Aditi.
2.3.5.19	On her are the creatures born.
2.3.5.20	On her he generates him.
2.3.5.21	This is the size of the oblation.
2.3.5.22	This is how big the body is.
2.3.5.23	Whatever is his own, except Varuna.
2.3.5.24	The year is Agni Vaiśvānara.
2.3.5.25	He establishes him in the year itself.
2.3.5.26	He makes him live for a year.
2.3.5.27	"You are the life of Agni, with that give life to this one, to the one named so-and-so."
2.3.5.28	Agni is the bestower of life among humans.
2.3.5.29	He bestows life upon him.
2.3.5.30	He offers with five (verses).
2.3.5.31	Man is fivefold.
2.3.5.32	He makes him (the fire) blow as much as man is.
2.3.5.33	Having made him (the fire ) blow as much as a man is,
2.3.5.34	This indeed is the one who blows, this is the vital breath.
2.3.5.35	He blows from these quarters.
2.3.5.36	These quarters are of his deity.
2.3.5.37	As for each deity, he thus directs him towards these directions and places the vital airs in him.
2.3.5.38	What was new became ghee.
2.3.5.39	What moved became clarified butter.
2.3.5.40	What was sweet became honey.
2.3.5.41	This is the greatness of ghee.
2.3.5.42	And he indeed magnifies it.
2.3.5.43	With the Stoma of Pavamāna, with the Gāyatrī metre,
2.3.5.44	with the strength of Upamśu, let me release thee.
2.3.5.45	Just as one releases, lifts up, and carries away what is to be killed, so does he do this.
2.3.5.46	This much is there, the Stomas, the Grahas, the metres.
2.3.5.47	As much as there is, with that he bestows life on him.
2.3.5.48	He bestows life on the sacrifice.
2.3.5.49	All the priests recite (the following verses).
2.3.5.50	All of them together treat him.
2.3.5.51	All of them bestow life on him.
2.3.5.52	Having touched the hand of the Brahman, they recite (the following verse).
2.3.5.53	Brahman is Brahman.
2.3.5.54	He bestows life on him through Brahman.
2.3.5.55	They pour ghee from gold.
2.3.5.56	Gold is nectar.
2.3.5.57	Ghee is life.
2.3.5.58	They pour life into him from nectar.
2.3.5.59	He sucks like a calf.
2.3.5.60	He places life in himself.
2.3.5.61	He binds it to him.
2.3.5.62	He makes him prosper with life.
2.3.5.63	He binds with the Agniya.
2.3.5.64	Agni is all the deities.
2.3.5.65	He bestows life on him with all the deities.
2.3.5.66	Agni is life.
2.3.5.67	Among them, man is the one who bestows life.
2.3.5.68	With that, may you be long-lived.
2.3.5.69	He who knows the gods who are long-lived and those who bestow life, attains all life and does not die before his time.
2.3.5.70	These indeed are the gods who are the long-lived and the ones who bestow life, namely, these vital airs.
2.3.5.71	They place life in him.
2.3.5.72	You are the breath of the Ashvins.
2.3.5.73	They have given you breath.
2.3.5.74	With that, live.
2.3.5.75	These indeed are the breaths.
2.3.5.76	He places them in him.
2.3.5.77	He makes them not to depart from him.
2.3.5.78	Ten should be given.
2.3.5.79	For there are ten breaths in the body.
2.3.5.80	He places the breaths in him.
2.3.5.81	A horse should be given.
2.3.5.82	Clothes should be given.
2.3.5.83	Gold should be given. 
2.3.5.84	A cow should be given.  
2.3.5.85	A boon should be given.   
2.3.5.86	Much should be given.    
2.3.6.1	One should offer an Agniya cake on eight potsherds and an Indra cake on five potsherds.
2.3.6.2	Curd, honey, ghee, cooked barley, and water are mixed together.
2.3.6.3	A rice-gruel is offered to Aryaman.
2.3.6.4	The Agniya cake is for prosperity.
2.3.6.5	The Indra cake on five potsheards is for prosperity.
2.3.6.6-14	The sacrifice is fivefold. The Yajus and Anuvakya are fivefold. Animals are fivefold. The man is fivefold. He attains as much as the man. Having become all that, he attains the animals. For this is mixed like animals. And whatever animals there are, he mixes them with him. They say:
2.3.6.15-24	The cake on eleven potsherds to Indra should be offered. For Indra is the lord of cattle. Some say: The cake to Prajapati should be offered. For Prajapati is the lord of animals. Prajapati is the progenitor of animals. He approaches him with his own share. He generates animals for him. Now this oblation to Aryaman. He who gives is Aryaman.
2.3.6.25	The gift is Aryama.
2.3.6.26	The creatures are desirous of giving to him.
2.3.6.27	One should offer an eight-vessel oblation to Agni Bhrājasvat and a rice-gruel to Surya, and an eight-vessel offering to Agni Bhrājāsvata.
2.3.6.28	One should perform the sacrifice for one who desires sight.
2.3.6.29	Humans see with the eye of Agni at night and with the eye of Surya during the day.
2.3.6.30	These two are the givers of sight.
2.3.6.31	They approach him with the same oblation.
2.3.6.32	They bestow sight on him.
2.3.6.33	Sight is common, but it is divided into two.
2.3.6.34	When the oblations are similar and are placed side by side, he bestows on him the two eyes separately.
2.3.6.35	One sees as much with one eye as with both. If there were no oblation in between,
2.3.6.36	Now, because there is a rice-cake in between, therefore this is in between.
2.3.6.37	For the sake of holding the eyes.
2.3.6.38	White rice is used, and white cows are milked for ghee.
2.3.6.39	For the sun is like that.
2.3.6.40	For prosperity.
2.3.6.41	It is done in milk.
2.3.6.42	Milk is ghee.
2.3.6.43	Milk is the eye.
2.3.6.44	He makes the eye of milk for him.
2.3.6.45	He places them with the Sūrya-verses.
2.3.6.46	He places sight in it.
2.3.7.1	The gods went to the abode of the Asuras.
2.3.7.2	But Indra did not go.
2.3.7.3	Their senses and powers departed from them.
2.3.7.4	Agni's Rathantara,
2.3.7.5	Indra's Brihat,
2.3.7.6	The Vaivasvatas' Vairāja,
2.3.7.7	Savitar's Vairāja, and
2.3.7.8	Tvashtar's Revati.
2.3.7.9	The Maruts are the Sakvaris.
2.3.7.10	Indra followed them.
2.3.7.11	He united himself with them.
2.3.7.12	He became (powerful) by them.
2.3.7.13	One who desires prosperity should offer this sacrifice.
2.3.7.14	He unites himself with these very senses and powers.
2.3.7.15	He becomes (powerful) by these.
2.3.7.16	It is performed on twelve potsherds.
2.3.7.17	For the sake of being all-gods.
2.3.7.18	He places the skulls with their mouths upwards.
2.3.7.19	This is the oblation.
2.3.7.20	For non-burning.
2.3.7.21	One should perform the sacrifice for one who is being cursed.
2.3.7.22	For whom the gods eat food, for him men eat food.
2.3.7.23	All these are the deities.
2.3.7.24	All these deities desire his food.
2.3.7.25	Men eat his food.
2.3.7.26	"Recite to Indra Rathantara."
2.3.7.27	Having recited the Rathantara verse, one should offer with the Brihat verse.
2.3.7.28	"Recite to Indra Barhata."
2.3.7.29	Having recited Brihat verse, one should make an offering with the Rathantara verse.
2.3.7.30	" Recite to Indra Vaimata."
2.3.7.31	Having recited Vaimata verse, one should perform with the Vaishvadevya verse.
2.3.7.32	"Recite to Indra, the lord of the Vairāja."
2.3.7.33	Having recited the Vairāja verse, one should offer with the Vairūpa verse.
2.3.7.34	"Recite to Indra the lord of the Revatī."
2.3.7.35	Having recited Revatī, one should offer the Shakvari verse.
2.3.7.36	" Recite to Indra, lord of the Shakvari."
2.3.7.37	Having recited Shakvari, one should offer Revatī.
2.3.7.38	With these very same powers and deities he joins him.
2.3.7.39	He offers the oblation in a circle.
2.3.7.40	With these very same powers, and deities he encircles him.
2.3.7.41	The Brihatī is cattle.
2.3.7.42	Agni is Rudra.
2.3.7.43	If one were to offer the Vasat-call with the Brihatī, one would consign one's cattle to Rudra.
2.3.7.44	Then indeed the animals are born in the Brihatī, which is not exhausted.
2.3.7.45	Four syllables of the Anuvākyā are exceeded in the Yājyā.
2.3.7.46	He accomplishes the Anushtubh and the Paṅkti.
2.3.7.47	The Anushtubh is speech.
2.3.7.48	The Paṅkti is Prajapati.
2.3.7.49	Herein he places Prajapati in speech.
2.3.7.50	For reproduction.
2.3.7.51	That is the pair.
2.3.7.52	From that very pair, the sacrificer is born with offspring and cattle.
2.3.8.1	I create you, the sweet one, with the sweet, the intense one, with the intense, the bright one, with the bright, the divine one, with the divine, the immortal one, with the immortal, with Soma.
2.3.8.2	You are Soma.
2.3.8.3	Cook for the Ashvins.
2.3.8.4	Cook for Sarasvati.
2.3.8.5	Cook for Indra, the holder of the thunderbolt.
2.3.8.6	May the daughter of the sun purify your Soma that has flowed away with the eternal Vāra.
2.3.8.7	Purified by Vayu with the purifying (Soma), Soma has flowed back. He is Indra's worthy friend.
2.3.8.8	O ye two, O ye two, ye who are skilled in the art of giving, ye who give the grain in due order, here, here, do ye make the food for them who have not come to the offering of homage with the sacrificial grass.
2.3.8.9	Thou art taken with the Upayāma-formula.
2.3.8.10	I take thee, the unpierced, with the unpierced (formula), dear to the Asvins.
2.3.8.11	This is thy birthplace.
2.3.8.12	Thee to the Asvins.
2.3.8.13	You are taken with the formula.
2.3.8.14	I take you, the faultless one, with the faultless one for Sarasvati.
2.3.8.15	This is your birthplace.
2.3.8.16	For Sarasvati you.
2.3.8.17	You are taken with the ritual formula.
2.3.8.18	I accept you, the fault-free one, with the formula for Indra, the holder of the reins, who is faultless.
2.3.8.19	This is the birthplace for you.
2.3.8.20	For Indra, the holder, you.
2.3.8.21	Whatever of his Soma juice Indra drank with Śacī, that I now consume with my mind and ghee, the king Soma, here.
2.3.8.22	Your seats are different, O gods, and your gifts. Do not mix together in the highest heaven. You are Sura, the shining one; this is Soma. Do not harm each other as you enter your own abode.
2.3.8.23	I heard two Vedas, of the Fathers and of the Gods, by which this world moves together, what is between the Father and the Mother.
2.3.8.24	Those who, eating, did not bring the gifts, whom the Agni-sticks tormented, whose bad sacrifice was among them, may that be made good by Visvakarman.
2.3.8.25	Thinking the non-sacrificial to be sacrificial, the wise one in battle, knowing the vital breath, has committed a great sin. Bound by that, O Viśvakarman, release him for welfare.
2.3.8.26	The sacrificer, afflicted by the Rși, having abandoned his subjects and repenting, the two Madhavyas have found them. May Viśvakar-man release us from them.
2.3.9.1	He gratifies the Asvins with cakes on lotus leaves.
2.3.9.2	With Badara-grains, the Indra-offering.
2.3.9.3	With Karkandhu-grains, the Sarasvati-offering.
2.3.9.4	Sarasvati is speech.
2.3.9.5	He makes this (offering) sweet with speech.
2.3.9.6	If any one speaks to him in an improper manner,
2.3.9.7	saying, 'You have gone too far, you have been injured,'
2.3.9.8	he again speaks to him in a proper manner.
2.3.9.9	The Adhvaryu meditates on the lion.
2.3.9.10	The Vyāghra is the Pratiprasthātṛ.
2.3.9.11	The Vṛka is the Yajamāna.
2.3.9.12	This is the Sura.
2.3.9.13	He takes those very organs and powers with which he is deprived of, and puts them in him.
2.3.9.14	The head of the Brāhmaṇa is the Sādya.
2.3.9.15	For the purpose of being purified.
2.3.9.16	Sura is food.
2.3.9.17	Food is purified.
2.3.9.18	By that one is purified.
2.3.9.19	One Puroruk
2.3.9.20	One is the offering.
2.3.9.21	One places the power in one place.
2.3.9.22	A brahmin should be given to drink.
2.3.9.23	With that, the oblation is made.
2.3.9.24	One should drink oneself.
2.3.9.25	One places power in oneself.
2.3.9.26	All the offerings should be made in the fire.
2.3.9.27	For prosperity.
2.3.9.28	He is indeed seized by sin in the middle.
2.3.9.29	When one goes beyond the middle, one releases him from sin in the middle.
2.3.9.30	If one were to offer on the Ahavaniya, one would not turn away from sin, and the remedy would be done.
2.3.9.31	If one were to offer in the southern one, one would turn away from sin and the remedy would not be done.
2.3.9.32	And if one were to sprinkle, for this is how it sprinkles.
2.3.9.33	It becomes a hundred-sprinkler.
2.3.9.34	A man has a hundred years of life, a hundred years of strength.
2.3.9.35	One obtains life and strength.
2.3.9.36	Or, when he is sick, he goes to the Fathers.
2.3.9.37	When they recite the mantras for the Fathers, they thus appease him with the Fathers.
2.3.9.38	Because there are three (mantras), for the Fathers are in the third world.
2.3.9.39	And because there are four, they thus appease them from the directions.
2.4.1.1	Viśvarūpa, the son of Tvaṣṭra, was the nephew of the Asuras with three heads.
2.4.1.2	He drank Soma with one head,
2.4.1.3	Sura with another,
2.4.1.4	and ate food with the third.
2.4.1.5	Indra thought,
2.4.1.6	"This one will be the same as me."
2.4.1.7	He made peace with him.
2.4.1.8	With that, the yoke-arrow fell down.
2.4.1.9	He said to the carpenter who was standing, 
2.4.1.10	"Cut off his head!"
2.4.1.11	He cut off his head with an axe.
2.4.1.12	Therefore, the head was placed on the axe.
2.4.1.13	Therefore his food is not to be eaten.
2.4.1.14	His head that was Soma-drinking became the quail.
2.4.1.15	His head which was Sura-drinking became the partridge.
2.4.1.16	By whom he (Indra) bestowed food, that one was the Tittiri.
2.4.1.17	He, Tvashtra, having lost his son, brought Soma to Indra.
2.4.1.18	He pressed it in a hundred-doored (vessel).
2.4.1.19	Some say: 'In a thousand-doored (one).'
2.4.1.20	In that (vessel) Indra desired to be invited.
2.4.1.21	He did not invite him.
2.4.1.22	Taking it with a tube, he drank it.
2.4.1.23	He became ill by drinking Soma.
2.4.1.24	Therefore Soma should not be drunk without being offered.
2.4.1.25	One becomes deficient by drinking Soma.
2.4.1.26	The two became lions when they escaped from here.
2.4.1.27	The two tigers when they escaped from this place.
2.4.1.28	The two jackals when they escaped from there.
2.4.1.29	The first thing that was vomited became the lotus.
2.4.1.30	The second thing that was vomitated became the jujube.
2.4.1.31	The third thing that was vomitied became the citron.
2.4.1.32	What is below that is Sura.
2.4.1.33	They offered to him with the Sautrāmaṇī.
2.4.1.34	He gave back to him those very powers and energies with which he had been afflicted.
2.4.1.35	One should offer to one who has been afflicted by Soma.
2.4.1.36	One is afflicted by the power and energy of Soma when Soma afflicts one.
2.4.1.37-41	He places in him the power and strength of Indra, as much as he has. One who is being consecrated with the Rajasuya should be officiated by him. One who consecrates himself with the Rajasuye is deprived of the power and strength. He places in him the strength and power of Indra, as far as he has. He should officiate for one who desires prosperity.
2.4.1.42	He who is capable of prosperity but does not attain it, is deprived of his power and energy.
2.4.1.43	Having attained the power and energy, he bestows it on him.
2.4.1.44	One should perform the Jyogamaya sacrifice.
2.4.1.45	He who is afflicted by a disease is deprived of his strength and energy.
2.4.1.46	He places it in him as much as the sense-organ and energy.
2.4.1.47	One should perform a sacrifice for a specific purpose.
2.4.1.48	This is what they say.
2.4.1.49	For this is like a sacrifice for a purpose.
2.4.1.50	They say this.
2.4.1.51	One should indeed perform a sacrifice.
2.4.1.52	For every man is in need, and everyone desires to prosper.
2.4.1.53	If it is for Asvinī,
2.4.1.54	because the Asvins healed him.
2.4.1.55	If it be for Sarasvatī,
2.4.1.56	Sarasvati is speech.
2.4.1.57	For she was healed by speech.
2.4.1.58	Because it is Indra's.
2.4.1.59	For having obtained those powers and energies from Indra, he gave them to her.
2.4.2.1	It should be made of lead from a eunuch.
2.4.2.2	Lead is falsehood.
2.4.2.3	A eunuch is falsehood.
2.4.2.4	Surā is falsehood.
2.4.2.5	He buys falsehood from falsehood.
2.4.2.6	They say:
2.4.2.7	The Vada-ba is to be offered in the south.
2.4.2.8	For this (animal) is indeed a Sritvari (i.e. a female animal) and the Vada-ba also is a Sritvari.
2.4.2.9	They offer the first animal to Indra-Agni.
2.4.2.10	Then to Sarasvati.
2.4.2.11	Then to Indra.
2.4.2.12	In this way he proceeds with the omentum offerings.
2.4.2.13	He thus dominates them by Indra.
2.4.2.14	The first animal offered again is to Indra.
2.4.2.15	They offer to Indra again.
2.4.2.16	for the sake of having the senses.
2.4.2.17	The Indra-offering is the last of the oblations, and the Indra-cake is the first of the cakes.
2.4.2.18	Indra is power.
2.4.2.19	He binds him to power.
2.4.2.20	The Savitr is for the sake of delivery.
2.4.2.21	The Varuna is for the sake freedom from Varuna.
2.4.2.22	For he is seized by Varuna in the middle.
2.4.2.23	She was created last, with the head turned away.
2.4.2.24	The reason why the cake is placed above is that it is covered, for the sake of completeness.
2.4.2.25	The Iḍa is offered together with the Samāvartana.
2.4.2.26	For the sake of union.
2.4.2.27	And also for the sake of the Iḍa not being lost.
2.4.2.28	Whatever is defective in the Sauramaṇī is made good in this.
2.4.2.29	When the oblations are to other deities and the animals to other deities, then what is not right for her becomes right.
2.4.2.30	Half of Prajapati's own self was firmness, half was weakness.
2.4.2.31	What was firmness, that they placed in front; what was weakness, that they enclosed behind.
2.4.2.32	What was firm, that was Soma.
2.4.2.33-39	Then he created the Brahman. Therefore, all Brahmans are indeed wise in Brahman. That which is the sin of the gods is the sin. Then he created the Kshatriya. Therefore, the elder and the younger, the daughter-in-law and the father-in-law, having drunk the liquor, lament and sit down. For that is the sin. Sin is sin.
2.4.2.40	Therefore, a brahmin should not drink wine.
2.4.2.41	So that he does not mix himself with sin.
2.4.2.42	One should say this to a brahmin who is a member of the assembly.
2.4.2.43	He who knows this and drinks wine, it does not harm him.
2.4.2.44	This is indeed the vigorous form of Prajapati.
2.4.2.45	Prajapati is vigor.
2.4.2.46	He places vigor in him.
2.4.3.1	Then Agni poured forth the Soma that was in excess.
2.4.3.2	"He poured it forth, saying, 'O Indra, may thy foe increase!'
2.4.3.3	He made Indra his foe, for he desired to make Indra his foe.
2.4.3.4	Thus speech itself became divided.
2.4.3.5	The Soma which he poured out and in which he poured out the Agni, those two are the deities Agni and Soma. The Prāṇa and Apāna became united with them.
2.4.3.6	As far as he stretched his arms upwards, so far did it spread.
2.4.3.7	Whether it was as much as the slope or as much as above the fire.
2.4.3.8	He grows by the length of an arrow in a day, and by the length of a span in a year.
2.4.3.9	Some say:
2.4.3.10	He grows by the length an arrow in a single day, and by a span in a single year.
2.4.3.11	Some others say:
2.4.3.12	For half a month, for a month, for the year.
2.4.3.13	He spread over all these streams.
2.4.3.14	Therefore Indra was afraid.
2.4.3.15	Therefore Tvashtra was afraid.
2.4.3.16	Indra wanted to take it back.
2.4.3.17	He gave it back to him.
2.4.3.18	Tvashtra poured the thunderbolt on him.
2.4.3.19	It was a penance that was the thunderbolt.
2.4.3.20	He could not lift it up.
2.4.3.21	Then indeed Vishnu was another deity.
2.4.3.22	He said:
2.4.3.23	"Let us bring it, by which he may bring this."
2.4.3.24	He placed himself in three ways.
2.4.3.25	He was afraid of turning away from it.
2.4.3.26	The third in this (earth).
2.4.3.27	The third in the atmosphere.
2.4.3.28	The third on heaven.
2.4.3.29	By that third which was in this (earth), he took up the thunderbolt, following Vishnu.
2.4.3.30	Seeing the raised thunderbolt, he was afraid.
2.4.3.31	He said:
2.4.3.32	"Is there any strength in this?
2.4.3.33	I will give it to you.
2.4.3.34	Do not kill me."
2.4.3.35	He gave it to him.
2.4.3.36	He accepted it.
2.4.3.37	"It is mine."
2.4.3.38	He gave that to Vishnu.
2.4.3.39	Vishnu accepted it.
2.4.3.40	May Indra bestow power on us, may the wealthy ones be with us for wealth.
2.4.3.41	May our wishes be fulfilled."
2.4.3.42	He knew,
2.4.3.43	"There is indeed power within me."
2.4.3.44	When it was in the sky, he took up the thunderbolt, supported by Vishnu.
2.4.3.45	Seeing the raised thunderbolt, he was afraid.
2.4.3.46-54	He said: "Is there any strength in this?" "I will give it to you." "Do not kill me." He gave it to him. He accepted it. "Twice, do not kill me." He gave it to Vishnu. Vishnu accepted it.
2.4.3.55	May Indra bestow power on us, may the wealthy ones be with us for wealth.
2.4.3.56	May they be with us for blessings.
2.4.3.57	He knew:
2.4.3.58	There is indeed power within him.
2.4.3.59	When he was in heaven, he took up the thunderbolt, supported by Vishnu.
2.4.3.60	Seeing the raised thunderbolt, he was afraid.
2.4.3.61	He said:
2.4.3.62	"Is there any strength in this?"
2.4.3.63	"I will give it to you."
2.4.3.64	"Do not kill me."
2.4.3.65	"Let us make peace so that you may enter me."
2.4.3.66	He said:
2.4.3.67	"If you enter me, what will be mine?"
2.4.3.68	He said:
2.4.3.69	"May I enter thee for thy enjoyment."
2.4.3.70	He gave it to him.
2.4.3.71	He accepted it.
2.4.3.72	"Three times do thou give me."
2.4.3.73	It is indeed threefold.
2.4.3.74	He gave him a thousand, the verses, the songs, and the formulas.
2.4.3.75	Whatever there is here, that is threefold.
2.4.3.76	He obtains cattle.
2.4.4.1	Vritra is the belly, Papman is hunger, the enemy of man.
2.4.4.2	When he approaches the heat, he removes sin, he removes the enemy, he removes hunger.
2.4.4.3	In that he speaks,
2.4.4.4	this is his speech above.
2.4.4.5	Both of you strove to conquer, but neither of you was defeated.
2.4.4.6	Indra and Vishnu, when you competed, you divided the thousand into three parts."
2.4.4.7	He said, "It is true."
2.4.4.8	"Two for the giver, one for the receiver."
2.4.4.9	They stood there only.
2.4.4.10	Therefore, it is Indra-Vishnu.
2.4.4.11-16	The Trirātra is prescribed for the attainment of the three worlds. One attains as much as one can attain in three nights, and one attains the three worlds. Therefore, they say: "The fee is a thousand." One should recite the Uṣṇīsa and Kakubha verses. The Uṣṇīṣa is the Gāyatrī.
2.4.4.17	Now those four syllables in the Rk.
2.4.4.18	The animals have four feet.
2.4.4.19	Just as here the Purorasa is in the Purorasa, so also here the syllables are in the Rk
2.4.4.20	Breath indeed is the Gāyatrī.
2.4.4.21	Animals move by breath.
2.4.4.22	The Uṣṇīṣa and Kakubha verses are recited for the sake of cattle.
2.4.4.23	O Agni, your three powers, three abodes, three tongues, born of truth, are ancient.
2.4.4.24	Your three forms are divine, with them protect us, O Agni, with your unfailing speech.
2.4.4.25	He encloses (the fire).
2.4.4.26	For the sake of heroism.
2.4.4.27	And also for the sake of beauty.
2.4.4.28	If one were to place it at the end of the Jagati, one would go to the end.
2.4.4.29	But if one places it at the end with the Tristubh, one does not go to the end
2.4.4.30	The Tristubh is indeed strength and energy.
2.4.4.31	One stands firm in strength and energy. "
2.4.5.1	"Having brought the sacrifice to all the deities."
2.4.5.2	They say.
2.4.5.3	This indeed is the whole sacrifice.
2.4.5.4	For the sacrifice is brought to all the deities.
2.4.5.5	All the metres are employed in the sacrifice.
2.4.5.6	One should offer (the oblation) while reciting all the metres.
2.4.5.7	One who is practising sorcery should offer (the olation).
2.4.5.8	This entire sacrifice is employed in the sacrifice,
2.4.5.9	and one practises sorcery with the entire sacrifice.
2.4.5.10	But it should be without Dakṣiṇā.
2.4.5.11	He thought that it should be so.
2.4.5.12	For the Dakṣiṇās are indeed the sacrifice.
2.4.5.13	Now, if one says, "I will perform a sacrifice," but does not perform it, one should perform it with this (rite).
2.4.5.14	This entire sacrifice is indeed all.
2.4.5.15	One obtains atonement with the entire sacrifice.
2.4.5.16	The subsequent Puruṣa-offerings become greater.
2.4.5.17	The subsequent world is greater.
2.4.5.18	Or, as this (world) is, so is that (world).
2.4.5.19	Or, the atmosphere is not the form of this (world).
2.4.5.20	Therefore, the middle one is made of barley.
2.4.5.21	And thus it is indeed the form of the sky.
2.4.5.22	It is made with twelve potsherds.
2.4.5.23	Whatever is threefold, that is the prosperity of the three worlds.
2.4.5.24	He cuts off the excess of all.
2.4.5.25	For the one who is a Chāmbata.
2.4.5.26	One should make a Chāmbat as much as one can reach.
2.4.5.27	This is what they call the Chhambana-asa.
2.4.5.28	The sacrifice indeed proceeds like a garment.
2.4.5.29	When the Tarpya-offerings are scattered, that is the form of the Yajus.
2.4.5.30	When cows are given, that is of the Uktha-Madana.
2.4.5.31	When gold is given, it is said to be the Chandas. That is the form of Sama.
2.4.5.32	The Srindjyas indeed performed this sacrifice.
2.4.5.33	They went to the end of the Śrī.
2.4.5.34	Therefore, one should not offer too much.
2.4.5.35	For the lord is the one who goes beyond the limit.
2.4.5.36	He who offers with this (rite) severs (his connection with the world).
2.4.5.37	A son should be offered (the rite).
2.4.5.38	For the continuity (of the rite).
2.4.6.1	One should offer an Agniya cake on eight potsherds, an Indra cake on eleven potsherds, and a Barhaspatya rice-pap.
2.4.6.2	One should offer (the rite) to one who desires prosperity.
2.4.6.3	Indra, indeed, was unsteady.
2.4.6.4	He said to Agni and Brihaspati:
2.4.6.5	"Sacrifice for me."
2.4.6.6	Agni and Brihaspati sacrificed him with this (sacrifice).
2.4.6.7	In him Agni placed brilliance, Indra placed power, and Brihaspati placed Brahman.
2.4.6.8	Then Indra became (powerful).
2.4.6.9	One who desires prosperity should offer this sacrifice.
2.4.6.10	He places Agni in him, Indra the power, and Brihaspati the Brahman.
2.4.6.11	One becomes prosperous.
2.4.6.12	Because he placed three kinds of power in him, therefore it is threefold.
2.4.6.13	The other (sacrifices) are connected with Indra.
2.4.6.14	For the sake of having power.
2.4.7.1	May the wind blow before, may it blow, may it blow fiercely, may it blow with thunder, may it blow in abundance, may it blow as it pleases, may it blow for us, may it blow. The wind blows, the wind blows, the fierce wind blows, the terrible wind blows, the great wind blows, the strong wind blows, the mighty wind blows, the powerful wind blows, the violent wind blows, the fearful wind blows, the dreadful wind blows, the awful wind blows, the frightful wind blows, the terrifying wind blows, the awesome wind blows, the awe-inspiring wind blows, the frightening wind blows, the hair-raising wind blows, the shaking wind blows, the moving wind blows, the blowing wind blows, the roaring wind blows, the thundering wind blows, the raining wind blows, the lightning wind blows, the cloud wind blows, the rain wind blows, the hail wind blows, the snow wind blows, the dust wind blows, the sand wind blows, the smoke wind blows, the fire wind blows, the air wind blows, the breath wind blows, the life wind blows, the death wind blows, the Yama wind blows, the hell wind blows, the heaven wind blows, the earth wind blows, the water wind blows, the sky wind blows, the space wind blows, the time wind blows, the eternity wind blows, the beginning wind blows, the end wind blows, the creation wind blows, the destruction wind blows, the existence wind blows, the non-existence wind blows, the being wind blows, the not-being wind blows, the good wind blows, the bad wind blows, the auspicious wind blows, the inauspicious wind blows, the beneficial wind blows, the harmful wind blows, the favorable wind blows, the unfavorable wind blows, the agreeable wind blows, the disagreeable wind blows, the pleasant wind blows, the unpleasant wind blows, the gentle wind blows, the harsh wind blows, the soft wind blows, the hard wind blows, the light wind blows, the heavy wind blows, the cool wind blows, the hot wind blows, the cold wind blows, the warm wind blows, the dry wind blows, the moist wind blows, the windy wind blows, the calm wind blows, the still wind blows, the quiet wind blows, the noisy wind blows, the silent wind blows, the loud wind blows, the low wind blows, the slow wind blows, the fast wind blows, the steady wind blows, the unsteady wind blows, the straight wind blows, the crooked wind blows, the even wind blows, the uneven wind blows, the smooth wind blows, the rough wind blows, the pure wind blows, the impure wind blows, the clean wind blows, the unclean wind blows, the fragrant wind blows, the foul wind blows, the sweet wind blows, the bitter wind blows, the salty wind blows, the astringent wind blows, the sour wind blows, the pungent wind blows, the bland wind blows, the tasty wind blows, the tasteless wind blows, the wholesome wind blows, the unwholesome wind blows, the healthy wind blows, the unhealthy wind blows, the healing wind blows, the injurious wind blows, the nourishing wind blows, the weakening wind blows, the strengthening wind blows, the debilitating wind blows, the uplifting wind blows, the depressing wind blows, the inspiring wind blows, the dispirited wind blows, the joyful wind blows, the sorrowful wind blows, the happy wind blows, the unhappy wind blows, the peaceful wind blows, the agitated wind blows, the serene wind blows, the disturbed wind blows, the tranquil wind blows, the restless wind blows, the concentrated wind blows, the distracted wind blows, the focused wind blows, the scattered wind blows, the controlled wind blows, the uncontrolled wind blows, the disciplined wind blows, the undisciplined wind blows, the tamed wind blows, the untamed wind blows, the trained wind blows, the untrained wind blows, the skillful wind blows
2.4.7.2	O gods, the protectors, Mitra, Varuna, Aryaman, the waters have broken the ocean given by the sky, from the rain of heaven, from the atmosphere, from the earth. From there may the rain come to us.
2.4.7.3	O gods, the drinkers, the waters, the waters of the sky, the waters of heaven, the waters of earth, the waters of men, the waters of cattle, the waters of plants, the waters of trees, the waters of rivers, the waters of lakes, the waters of springs, the waters of wells, the waters of clouds, the waters of rain, the waters of dew, the waters of frost, the waters of snow, the waters of ice, the waters of streams, the waters of oceans, the waters of seas, the waters of ponds, the waters of puddles, the waters of fountains, the waters of waterfalls, the waters of cascades, the waters of pools, the waters of reservoirs, the waters of tanks, the waters of canals, the waters of channels, the waters of ditches, the waters of drains, the waters of gutters, the waters of troughs, the waters of basins, the waters of cups, the waters of vessels, the waters of pots, the waters of jars, the waters of pitchers, the waters of buckets, the waters of pails, the waters of ladles, the waters of syringes, the waters of sprinklers, the waters of sprays, the waters of showers, the waters of jets, the waters of spouts, the waters of pipes, the waters of tubes, the waters of funnels, the waters of filters, the waters of strainers, the waters of sie
2.4.7.4	They make day night, with the rain-bearing cloud, when they flood the earth.
2.4.7.5	The men of good gifts have come to the giver, the heaven's treasure has been found. Let the cloud pour down, let the rains follow the bow, in accordance with the wealth.
2.4.7.6	The Maruts, when they are raised up, send down rain from the ocean, the rain-bearing clouds. The cows of the two Asvins do not approach the wicked. Which good one have the chariots followed?
2.4.7.7	Send down rain from the sky with water, fill the ocean. Those gods who have a share in heaven, those who have a share of the atmosphere, those who have shares in the earth, they enter this field, they follow this field.
2.4.8.1	The rain, the food of the gods, had departed.
2.4.8.2	Then all this dried up.
2.4.8.3	Then the gods approached Prajapati himself.
2.4.8.4	Prajapati performed the sacrifice for them with the Kariri.
2.4.8.5	He brought back the rain, the food, to them.
2.4.8.6	Where Parjanya does not rain, one should perform this sacrifice for the chief priest or the Purohita.
2.4.8.7	The rain and food depart from where Parjanya does not rain.
2.4.8.8	When they perform the Kariri sacrifice, it is for the purpose of securing rain and food.
2.4.8.9	There are eight Vatahoma offerings.
2.4.8.10	There are the eight directions.
2.4.8.11	They thus turn the rain from the directions.
2.4.8.12	"Manda, Vasha, Jyotishmati, Asvari."
2.4.8.13	These are the names of the waters.
2.4.8.14	Just as one calls out to someone by name, saying "So-and-so, so-and-so," in the same way one invokes the waters by their names.
2.4.8.15	"You are the offering of the bull, the horse."
2.4.8.16	Because the bull is the horse.
2.4.8.17	Because the bull (is) Parjanya.
2.4.8.18	For prosperity.
2.4.8.19	"I am binding you for rain."
2.4.8.20	Because one binds for rain.
2.4.8.21	The gods, Vasu, Agni, Soma, Surya.
2.4.8.22	He indeed seeks rain with the deities.
2.4.8.23	If it does not rain, they should stay there itself.
2.4.8.24	They indeed cause rain to cease with the day and night.
2.4.8.25	They are Karīra fruits.
2.4.8.26	For the securing of rain and food.
2.4.8.27	They are Madhu-dyuta.
2.4.8.28	This is the juice of water and plants.
2.4.8.29	He thus makes them (the plants) grow with the juice of water and plants.
2.4.8.30	He makes them grow with the juice.
2.4.8.31	One should offer to Agni Dhāmacchāda an oblation on eight potsherds, to Maruts on seven potsherds, and to Surya on one potsherd.
2.4.8.32	One should perform this sacrifice for one who desires rain.
2.4.8.33	Agni brings rain from here, the Maruts make it grow from there.
2.4.8.34	The sun showers down with rays.
2.4.8.35	These are the givers of rain.
2.4.8.36	He approaches them with the same share.
2.4.8.37	They give him rain.
2.4.8.38	"He says, "Produce rain from heaven, fill the ocean with water."
2.4.8.39	These and those are the same.
2.4.8.40	With these, one goes to those.
2.4.8.41	Those gods who have a share in heaven, those who have a share on earth, they enter this field, they enter this fieid in accordance with it.
2.4.8.42	He touches these worlds for rain.
2.5.1.1	One desiring cattle should offer a black, tawny, or yellow animal to Soma.
2.5.1.2	Plants belong to Soma.
2.5.1.3	Cattle are plants.
2.5.1.4	The Somasya animal is offered to Soma, the god of the moon.
2.5.1.5	It has hair.
2.5.1.6	This is the form of prosperity.
2.5.1.7	He indeed obtains prosperity.
2.5.1.8	It is tawny-coloured, the form of Soma, for prosperity.
2.5.1.9	One who desires cattle should offer the Somasya-Pausna animal to the one who is the best among the three.
2.5.1.10	Soma indeed is the bestower of semen.
2.5.1.11	Pūṣan is the begetter of cattle.
2.5.1.12	Soma indeed places semen in him.
2.5.1.13	Pūṣan begets cattle.
2.5.1.14	Two teats are born to them.
2.5.1.15	The third is strength.
2.5.1.16	Cattle are strength.
2.5.1.17	He obtains strength and cattle through strength.
2.5.1.18-23	She gives birth to other animals three times in a year. This is the form of prosperity. One indeed attains prosperity. Some creatures are sharers, others are not. If the sacrificial post is made of Udumbara wood, one makes both sharers and non-sharers.
2.5.1.24	Every month he is cooked in advance of other trees.
2.5.1.25	This is the form of prosperity.
2.5.1.26	He indeed attains prosperity.
2.5.1.27	One desiring cattle should offer a sheep as the last animal.
2.5.1.28	Cattle are indeed related to Prajapati.
2.5.1.29	Prajapati is the progenitor of cattle.
2.5.1.30	He approaches him with his own share.
2.5.1.31	He begets cattle on him.
2.5.1.32	Prajapati is the womb.
2.5.1.33	One is born from the womb itself.
2.5.1.34	This is the form of all cattle.
2.5.1.35	The beard is like that of a man.
2.5.1.36	The head is like that of an ass.
2.5.1.37	The ears are like those of a donkey.
2.5.1.38	The hair is like that of dogs.
2.5.1.39	The front feet are like those of cows.
2.5.1.40	The hind feet are like those
2.5.1.41-46	Indeed, the unborn one, having assumed all the forms of animals, has obtained them. All the forms of animals stand before him. The offering of the Hiranyagarbha-verse is the Sāmidhenī verses of Prajapati. The Aprayi verses are the Aprayi verses of Prajapāti. Gold should be given for the sake of brilliance.
2.5.1.47	The Tarpaṇa is to be given for the sake of progeny.
2.5.1.48	The Adhivasa is to be given, by means of which one obtains the forms of the sacrifice.
2.5.1.49	By this (rite) Upareru Rādha obtained prosperity.
2.5.1.50	One who performs this sacrifice prospers.
2.5.1.51	He indeed distributed the Prasitra in twelve parts.
2.5.1.52	There he gave twelve boons.
2.5.1.53	What is given in twelve parts, this is its form.
2.5.1.54	One should offer a white animal to Vayu.
2.5.1.55	One should perform the sacrifice for one who desires prosperity.
2.5.1.56	Vayu is the most powerful and most energetic among the gods.
2.5.1.57	He leads one to prosperity.
2.5.1.58	They say, "The gods are not controlled, they lead one to misfortune."
2.5.1.59	But he leads one to prosperity himself.
2.5.1.60	One should offer a white goat to Vayu.
2.5.1.61	One should perform the sacrifice for the sake of a village.
2.5.1.62	Vayu is the protector of these creatures. He leads them in this way and that way.
2.5.1.63	If one offers to Vayu, Vayu himself leads him to the protector.
2.5.1.64	The Yajya and Anuvakya verses are about the protector.
2.5.1.65	It establishes the village in him.
2.5.1.66	It becomes white.
2.5.1.67	It is the form of Brahman for prosperity.
2.5.1.68	One should offer a white (animal) to Vayu.
2.5.1.69	One should perform the sacrifice for one suffering from a disease.
2.5.1.70	Vayu is indeed the life-breath.
2.5.1.71	For him, the life-breath has indeed departed.
2.5.1.72	Then he becomes afflicted with a disease.
2.5.1.73	If one offers to Vayu, Vayu indeed bestows life-breath upon him.
2.5.1.74	The Yajya and Anuvakya verses are recited.
2.5.1.75	He bestows life-breaths upon him.
2.5.1.76	It becomes white.
2.5.1.77	The form of Brahman is for prosperity.
2.5.1.78	One should offer a white horse to Vayu.
2.5.1.79	One should perform a sacrifice for one who desires cattle.
2.5.1.80	Vayu is the life-force.
2.5.1.81	Cattle run towards the life-force, which is Vayu. When one smells the wind in the rainy season,
2.5.1.82	Vayu indeed gives cattle to him.
2.5.1.83	The Yajya and Anuvakya verses are about the horse.
2.5.1.84	He placed the animals in it.
2.5.1.85	It becomes white.
2.5.1.86	The form of Brahman for prosperity.
2.5.2.1	Svabhanu, the demon, covered the sun with darkness.
2.5.2.2	The gods removed the darkness from him.
2.5.2.3	What they removed first became the black (cow).
2.5.2.4	What they removed second became the red (cow).
2.5.2.5	what they removed third became the tawny (cow).
2.5.2.6	What was covered, that became the cow.
2.5.2.7	They said, "We shall offer this animal to the gods for our own desires."
2.5.2.8	Then indeed this was the constellation, without hair.
2.5.2.9	They said: "We shall offer it to that desire, so that plants and trees may be born on it."
2.5.2.10	They offered it to that desire.
2.5.2.11	Then from her were born the plants and trees.
2.5.2.12	One who desires offspring or cattle should offer this black-and-white goat.
2.5.2.13	One is born with offspring and cattle.
2.5.2.14	Some say: The first one who struck the darkness, the sun's ray was fastened to the post's socket, and the black-and- white goat became visible.
2.5.2.15	The animal is offered to both.
2.5.2.16	If it is born of this, or if it is born of that, it is offered to the will, to the will.
2.5.2.17	One should offer an Agniya goat and a Varuna sheep.
2.5.2.18	One should consecrate one who desires prosperity.
2.5.2.19	The bones of a man are Agniya.
2.5.2.20	The flesh is Varuna.
2.5.2.21	By means of the Agniya (rite) he redeems his Agniya (rite). By means of the Varuna (rite) he makes it Varuna (rite).
2.5.2.22	One should offer a sheep to Sarasvati for the one who has been seized by speech.
2.5.2.23	Sarasvati is speech.
2.5.2.24	By means of speech, he heals his speech.
2.5.2.25	It becomes free from disease for all-pervasiveness.
2.5.2.26	It is not damaged for prosperity.
2.5.2.27	One desiring Brahmic glory should offer a white goat to Agni, to Brihaspati and to Surya. In spring, to Agni; in the rainy season, to Brihaspatī; in winter, to Surya.
2.5.2.28	The one to Agni brings forth brilliance.
2.5.2.29	The one for Brihaspati brings forth Brahmic glory.
2.5.2.30	The one dedicated to Surya brings forth radiance.
2.5.2.31	This makes him attain the three-fold prosperity and radiance.
2.5.2.32	They are completed in a year.
2.5.2.33	One attains what is not attained by a year.
2.5.2.34	By a year he attains and then bestows radiance and prosperity.
2.5.2.35	It is white, the form of Brahman, for prosperity.
2.5.2.36	One should offer a goat to Vayu, a sheep to Sarasvati, and a goat to Aditi. One should perform the sacrifice for one who is being slandered.
2.5.2.37	The wind blows the foul smell of one who is being slanderred.
2.5.2.38	This (wind) indeed goes over everything here.
2.5.2.39	Since it is offered to Vayu, Vayu makes his smell fragrant.
2.5.2.40	His fragrant smell is followed by the people.
2.5.2.41	Those whom they curse, they curse with speech.
2.5.2.42	Speech is Sarasvati.
2.5.2.43	If she is Sarasvati, she pacifies their speech.
2.5.2.44	He who is cursed is not established.
2.5.2.45	This is Aditi.
2.5.2.46	This is the establishment.
2.5.2.47	If he is established in her, he is established in the Adityas.
2.5.2.48	He who curses is deprived of his power and strength.
2.5.2.49	The organ, the virility, the embryo.
2.5.2.50	When women become pregnant, they strengthen him with the organ and virility.
2.5.3.1	The gods and the Asuras were competing.
2.5.3.2	They came to the sacrifice together.
2.5.3.3	Whatever the gods did, the Asuras did.
2.5.3.4	They did not go apart.
2.5.3.5	The gods saw this Vāmana animal.
2.5.3.6	They offered it to Vishnu.
2.5.3.7	Then Vishnu conquered these worlds.
2.5.3.8	Then the gods drove away the Asuras from these worlds.
2.5.3.9	Thereupon the gods became victorious, the Asuras were defeated.
2.5.3.10	One who has an enemy or a rival should offer this Vāmana to Vishnu.
2.5.3.11	Therefore Vishnu conquered these worlds.
2.5.3.12	He conquers these worlds following Vishnu's conquest.
2.5.3.13	He drives away his enemies from these worlds.
2.5.3.14	One should conquer them as if they were uneven.
2.5.3.15	For the gods conquered these worlds as if they were unequal.
2.5.3.16	He conqures these worlds as if equal.
2.5.3.17	Indra indeed killed Vritra.
2.5.3.18	He went forward.
2.5.3.19	While going, he embraced Indra with seven coils.
2.5.3.20	From that the animals went astray.
2.5.3.21	The Vaidehas went astray from the head.
2.5.3.22	Therefore, their birth is in front, their abode is in front.
2.5.3.23	From their hips, the bull Vaideha went astray.
2.5.3.24	He thought, "This one alone will free me from this sin."
2.5.3.25	He should offer the bull to Indra.
2.5.3.26	But he should first offer the goat to Agni.
2.5.3.27	He first burned Vritra's body with Agni and then with Indra's power he attained his own strength.
2.5.3.28	One who feels afflicted by sin and darkness should offer this bull to Indra.
2.5.3.29	One should offer the Agniya animal first.
2.5.3.30	Having burnt off the sins by Agni, one then takes up the power of Indra by the Indra animal.
2.5.3.31	Indra indeed covered the strength.
2.5.3.32	Then it rose to a thousand.
2.5.3.33	In front of that thousand, Kubhra rose.
2.5.3.34	Therefore they call this thousand-fold Lakshmi, and he who knows it and he who does not.
2.5.3.35	And they say, "He saw this world and ascended, he attained it, it is that attained, the Kuha."
2.5.3.36	One desiring cattle should offer the Indra animal.
2.5.3.37	Cattle belong to Indra.
2.5.3.38	Indra is the begetter of cattle.
2.5.3.39	He approaches him with the same oblation.
2.5.3.40	He causes him to beget cattle.
2.5.3.41	When he has reached a thousand cattle, then he should offer this Vamana to Vishnu.
2.5.3.42	For in this (animal) the thousand was established.
2.5.3.43	It went sideways.
2.5.3.44	Therefore it is seen to be sideways.
2.5.3.45	By this he took possession of that thousand.
2.5.3.46	This is the taking possession of the thousand, for non-disturbance.
2.5.3.47	The gods and the fathers were in this world.
2.5.3.48	Whatever was the property of the gods, that Yama took.
2.5.3.49	The gods then approached Prajapati.
2.5.3.50	He, Prajapati, saw these two animals as a pair, the bull and the cow.
2.5.3.51	He offered them.
2.5.3.52	He first offered the cow to Vishnu and Varuna.
2.5.3.53	Having bound them with Varuna himself, he released them with the sacrifice of Vishnu.
2.5.3.54	Then he offered the bull to Indra among the gods.
2.5.3.55	Having thus obtained the senses and powers of the senses, he placed them in them.
2.5.3.56	One who has an enemy or a rival should offer these two animals in union, a bull and a cow.
2.5.3.57	One should offer the cow first, which is dedicated to Vishnu and Varuna.
2.5.3.58	Having bound them with Varuna, one drives them away with the sacrifice of Vishnu.
2.5.3.59	Then with the Indra-offering, he attains Indra's power and strength in himself.
2.5.4.1	One who has been released again should offer a Savitr-offering. One who has been meritorious in the past and later becomes sinful.
2.5.4.2	Savitar is the progenitor of prosperity.
2.5.4.3	He approaches him with his own share.
2.5.4.4	He makes him prosper for prosperity.
2.5.4.5	He who, having been a man in the front, goes to the rear, attains prosperity only later.
2.5.4.6	Just as he attains prosperity, so he makes him attain prosperity.
2.5.4.7	One desiring offspring should offer the Vehatam to the plants.
2.5.4.8	This is the beloved of the plants.
2.5.4.9	These indeed surround the sun.
2.5.4.10	Indeed, the plants conceal his offspring, he who is capable of begetting offspring but does not beget offspring.
2.5.4.11	He approaches them with the same oblation.
2.5.4.12	They again give him offspring.
2.5.4.13	The plants are indeed water.
2.5.4.14	Water indeed digs for him.
2.5.4.15	They dig for him offspring.
2.5.4.16	One desiring food should offer the two cows, heaven and earth, as the common mothers.
2.5.4.17	For what he pours down, that stands in her.
2.5.4.18	Heaven and earth are the lords of food.
2.5.4.19	They approach him with their share.
2.5.4.20	They give him food.
2.5.4.21	One should offer the calf to Vayu.
2.5.4.22	Vayu is the calf of these two.
2.5.4.23	Vayu makes these two give.
2.5.4.24	Those who know this, indeed, are the ones who milk the cows.
2.5.4.25	One should offer a black cow to Indra.
2.5.4.26	One should perform a sacrifice for a royal person desiring prosperity.
2.5.4.27	Indra was born from this (cow).
2.5.4.28	When he was being born, he turned away from this womb.
2.5.4.29	She became the black cow.
2.5.4.30	Then they say, having generated that very power of Indra, strength and energy, they did not expect any more sons.
2.5.4.31	She became the daughter of Sūta.
2.5.4.32	He who is capable of prosperity but does not become so, is deprived of power and strength.
2.5.4.33	It is Indra-like.
2.5.4.34	He places power in him.
2.5.4.35	Now he who knows him, and having given birth to him, becomes the master of his offspring, should offer him to Indra, if he desires brilliance.
2.5.4.36	He obtains that very power, energy, and brilliance.
2.5.4.37	One should offer a tawny cow to Sarasvati, if one is disputing with someone over land or cattle.
2.5.4.38	Sarasvati is speech.
2.5.4.39	By speech he overcomes their speech.
2.5.4.40	This cow, though she is a cow, does not give milk.
2.5.4.41	He makes their speech true.
2.5.4.42	One who is a king should offer a cow belonging to the heaven and earth, which has been driven around, if he moves among the people.
2.5.4.43	For he is indeed separated from heaven and earth.
2.5.4.44	Then he moves among the half of the people.
2.5.4.45	Heaven and earth indeed establish him in the people.
2.5.4.46	It becomes the boundary.
2.5.4.47	For this is the boundary of the country.
2.5.4.48	If one moves beyond the boundary, one is established in the heaven and earth.
2.5.4.49	The next day he should offer a calf to Vayu.
2.5.4.50	Vayu is the calf of these two.
2.5.4.51	Vayu gives the two worlds and the community.
2.5.4.52	The two kinds of wealth are indeed in the two animals, and he who knows this milks them.
2.5.5.1	One should offer a black-coloured sheep to Agni.
2.5.5.2	One should sacrifice a tawny bull to Soma for one who desires prosperity.
2.5.5.3	The Agniya is indeed for prosperity.
2.5.5.4	One who is capable of prosperity but does not attain it is indeed deprived of power and strength.
2.5.5.5	Whatever the gentle one himself obtains for himself as the deity, he obtains and bestows.
2.5.5.6	It becomes so.
2.5.5.7	One becomes a tawny-colored one.
2.5.5.8	It is the form of Soma for prosperity.
2.5.5.9	One should offer a goat to Vayu.
2.5.5.10	One should perform the sacrifice for one who is being cursed.
2.5.5.11	One who is being cursed is not purified.
2.5.5.12	Vayu is the purifier of the gods.
2.5.5.13	He purifies him with the wind.
2.5.5.14	He is neither in the village nor in the forest, whom they curse.
2.5.5.15	He is not a domestic animal nor a wild one.
2.5.5.16	Therefore, this is his deity, and he prospers among animals.
2.5.5.17	One should offer an animal to Indra-Agni for one whose father or grandfather did not drink Soma.
2.5.5.18	He who does not drink Soma, his father and grandfather, is deprived of the power of Indra.
2.5.5.19	By the Indra-offering he makes him prosperous with the power of Indra himself.
2.5.5.20	He who does not drink the Soma, his father or grandfather, is deprived by the deities.
2.5.5.21	By the Agni-offering he makes them prosperous with Agni, for Agni is all the deities.
2.5.5.22	He becomes connected with it.
2.5.5.23	For the drinking of Soma is as if connected with him whose father and grandfather did not drink Soma.
2.5.5.24	Therefore, through this deity, his cattle are prosperous.
2.5.5.25	One desiring cattle should offer a tawny-coloured animal to Tvashtra.
2.5.5.26	Cattle belong to Tvashtra;
2.5.5.27	Tvashtra is the progenitor of cattle;
2.5.5.28	He approaches him with the same oblation. He causes him to beget cattle.
2.5.5.29	One should offer a neuter animal to Soma and Pūṣan.
2.5.5.30	One should perform a sacrifice for a eunuch.
2.5.5.31	Wherever one is born on earth, one should seek it out. Here, when this one is born, his power and strength depart.
2.5.5.32	He bestows upon him that very power and strength.
2.5.5.33	Soma and Pusan, when he was born, attained his power and strength.
2.5.5.34	This is Pusan, the plants are Soma.
2.5.5.35	When he offers to Soma and Pusan he attains his own power and strength by his own deity.
2.5.5.36	He becomes (powerful).
2.5.5.37	They proceed with those (oblations) which are not to be uttered, with the former ones which are connected with the god of the south.
2.5.5.38	The woman who has the form of a man is seized by Nirriti.
2.5.5.39	The man who has the form (of a woman) is seized by Nirrti.
2.5.5.40	He releases him by means of Nirriti itself.
2.5.5.41	No oblation to Nirriti was offered to Agni.
2.5.5.42	If one offers on embers, then one offers to Agni. That is not so.
2.5.5.43	Where Indra, the bull, was seized by Nirriti, the sin.
2.5.5.44	He who was struck by sin became neuter.
2.5.5.45	He who thinks he is seized by sin and darkness should offer this neuter animal to Indra.
2.5.5.46	By the same means by which Indra struck down sin, he strikes down sin.
2.5.5.47	Then with the Indra-verse, he places in himself the power of Indra.
2.5.5.48	Prajapati created the animals.
2.5.5.49	He created first of all this neuter.
2.5.5.50	The animals followed him.
2.5.5.51	They say that he first created this one, and offered it to Tvashtra and his wives as a neuter.
2.5.5.52	With it he created offspring.
2.5.5.53	One who desires offspring or cattle should offer this animal to Tvashtri and his wives.
2.5.5.54	Tvashtri and the wives are a pair.
2.5.5.55	This is Tvashtri, the pair, in the form of a neuter, for procreation.
2.5.5.56	That is a pair.
2.5.5.57	Therefore, from that pair, the sacrificer is born with offspring and cattle.
2.5.6.1	Prajapati created the creatures.
2.5.6.2	They, being created, became angry with him.
2.5.6.3	He caught them with Varuna.
2.5.6.4	They, caught by Varuna, were covered by Krishna Petvu.
2.5.6.5	He seized the foot of him who was running away.
2.5.6.6	The hoof of him fell off.
2.5.6.7	He became one-hoofed.
2.5.6.8	He understood,
2.5.6.9	This is the one who has been seized by Varuna among these creatures.
2.5.6.10	"He offered this animal to Varuna, saying, "May these creatures be released from Varuna."
2.5.6.11	Then these creatures were released from Varuna.
2.5.6.12	Therefore, this (animal) is indeed to be released from Varunya.
2.5.6.13	One who is afflicted by a serious disease should be made to offer it.
2.5.6.14	For he is indeed seized by Varuna's sin.
2.5.6.15	Now if this one (the sacrificer) falls ill.
2.5.6.16	He releases him from Varuna by means of that which belongs to Varuna.
2.5.6.17	It has one hoof and one foot.
2.5.6.18	For such was its form, for prosperity.
2.5.6.19	One should sacrifice on an island.
2.5.6.20	These indeed are the visible ones belonging to Varuna, namely, the waters.
2.5.6.21	He releases Varuna visibly in his own womb.
2.5.6.22	The waters carry him around on all sides, for the Rakshas have no share in him.
2.5.6.23	One should offer a black animal to Varuna when practising sorcery.
2.5.6.24	Since it is Varuna, he binds him with Varuna himself and then covers him.
2.5.6.25	It becomes black.
2.5.6.26	Darkness is black.
2.5.6.27	Death is darkness.
2.5.6.28	He binds him with death itself.
2.5.6.29	This is the form of sin, namely black.
2.5.6.30	As if it were Krishna, sin.
2.5.6.31	He anoints him with sin. He should employ him.
2.5.6.32	I bind the animal to King Varuna, to Indra, the bull, the sole portion. Only the gods enter the limbs. Yama seizes, Nirriti the enemies.
2.5.6.33	Thus he makes him approach these very deities. Death is Yama. He makes him approach him through death.
2.5.6.34	One who is about to sprinkle should offer a black sheep to Agni Vaiśvānara.
2.5.6.35	Agni Vaiśvānāra is the year.
2.5.6.36	One becomes equal to the year.
2.5.6.37	Having approached the year, one approaches the desired object.
2.5.6.38-46	One should offer the horse of the Ashvins, black and with a white forelock. One should consecrate the younger brother. The Ashvins are the younger brothers of the gods. The Ashvin deities belong to one who is the younger brother. They approach him with their share. They lead him to the front. He becomes black. He removes sin. He becomes with a white fore-lock.
2.5.6.47	He places lustre in his mouth.
2.5.6.48	One should offer a black horse with a white mane.
2.5.6.49	One should perform a sacrifice for one suffering from a disease.
2.5.6.50	The Ashvins are the physicians of the gods.
2.5.6.51	The Ashvinis are the deities of one suffering from a sickness.
2.5.6.52	He approaches them with his share.
2.5.6.53	They heal him.
2.5.6.54	It becomes black.
2.5.6.55	It indeed removes sin.
2.5.7.6	They became obedient.
2.5.7.7	They became obedient.
2.5.7.8	Now they say that this is the reason why they are called Vasha.
2.5.7.9	It was fat.
2.5.7.10	Now they call it Vasa.
2.5.7.11	Then the first juice that flowed out, Brihaspati took.
2.5.7.12	That is Rohini, belonging to Brihaspati.
2.5.7.13	Then the one that flowed out afterwards, Mitra and Varuna took.
2.5.7.14	She is of two forms, belonging to Mitra and Varuna.
2.5.7.15	Then that which flowed over, the Visve Devas.
2.5.7.16	She is of many forms, belonging to the Visve Devatas.
2.5.7.17	Then that flowed over, Agni and the Maruts.
2.5.7.18	She is the speckled one, belonging to Agni and the Marut.
2.5.7.19	Then they say:
2.5.7.20	"The black-spotted one." Those which were the drops, they are these other forms.
2.5.7.21	Then the first drop that fell down, Brihaspati caught hold of.
2.5.7.22	He became a bull.
2.5.7.23	That is why he is called Uksna.
2.5.7.24	Some say:
2.5.7.25	"The deity that was caught hold of became a bull."
2.5.7.26	That is why it is called Uksnatvam.
2.5.7.27	One should offer him to Brahmanaspatya.
2.5.7.28-34	One should sacrifice to a brahmin who desires prosperity. Brahma is indeed Brhaspati. Brhaspati is the deity of the brahmin, himself. Having obtained strength and vigor for this deity, he attains it. One certainly becomes (prosperous). One desiring brahminical splendor should sacrifice to Rohini, belonging to Brhaspati. The deity of Rohini is Brhaspati. 
2.5.7.35	The Brāhmaṇas of Brhaspati are the deities themselves.
2.5.7.36	Having obtained them as deities, he bestows radiance and brahminical splendour.
2.5.7.37	It becomes Rohini.
2.5.7.38	The form of Brahman for prosperity.
2.5.7.39	One desiring cattle should offer a two-formed animal to Mitra and Varuna.
2.5.7.40	Day and night are Mitra and Varuna,
2.5.7.41	Cattle are born in accordance with day and night.
2.5.7.42	They approach him with the same oblation.
2.5.7.43	They bestow cattle on him.
2.5.7.44	This is the essence of the metres.
2.5.7.45	He bestows cattle on him with the essence of the Metres.
2.5.7.46	It becomes twofold for prosperity.
2.5.7.47	One should offer a Vaiśvadevī animal with many forms for whatever desire one may desire.
2.5.7.48	All these are the deities.
2.5.7.49	All the deities approach Kāma with a share in the sacrifice.
2.5.7.50	They fulfill his desire, whatever it may be.
2.5.7.51	This is the essence of the metres.
2.5.7.52	They give him the essence of the Metres.
2.5.7.53	It becomes many-formed for prosperity.
2.5.7.54	One desiring rain should offer a spotted animal to Agni and Maruts.
2.5.7.55	Agni sends down rain from here.
2.5.7.56	The Maruts drive away from afar.
2.5.7.57	These are the givers of rain.
2.5.7.58	He approaches them with a share.
2.5.7.59	They give him rain.
2.5.7.60	This is the essence of the metres.
2.5.7.61	Rain is the essence.
2.5.7.62	They give to him the essence of rain, the rain, with the essence of the Metres.
2.5.7.63	It is variegated.
2.5.7.64	The Maruts are the sons of Prisni.
2.5.7.65	One desiring food should offer a black-spotted (cow) belonging to the earth.
2.5.7.66	This (cow) is the bestower of food.
2.5.7.67	He approaches her with her own share.
2.5.7.68	She gives him food.
2.5.7.69	One should not take the skin.
2.5.7.70	Skin is foodless.
2.5.7.71	Black is foodless.
2.5.7.72-77	Having removed the non-food by means of the non-food, he places the food in himself. What fell from the head when it was cut off, that became the tawny cow, the Vasa. This is the Vasa. The others are food. One should offer the cow belonging to Brahmaṇaspati to one whom one wishes to attack. Brahmaṇaspati is indeed Brahma.
2.5.7.78	The Brahman-priest is the deity of the Brahman.
2.5.7.79	He attacks him with all that is Brahman.
2.5.7.80	He cuts off his brilliance.
2.5.7.81	He should give it away.
2.5.7.82	He becomes tawny.
2.5.7.83	The form of Brahman is for prosperity.
2.5.7.84	One desiring Brahmanic lustre should offer a white horse to Surya.
2.5.7.85	The sun indeed is the bestower of Brahmanic lustre.
2.5.7.86	He approaches him with the same share.
2.5.7.87	He bestows on him the lustre of Brahman.
2.5.7.88	It becomes white.
2.5.7.89	The form of Brahman for prosperity.
2.5.7.90	One desiring rain should offer a black-eared animal to Mitra-Varuna.
2.5.7.91	Day and night are Mitra-Varuna;
2.5.7.92	it rains according to day and night.
2.5.7.93	This is the form of day, that is white;
2.5.7.94	What is black, that is night.
2.5.7.95	It becomes twofold for prosperity.
2.5.8.1	One should offer the Lalāma to Indra, the angry one, the intelligent one, in a battle.
2.5.8.2	Indeed, valour is done by anger.
2.5.8.3	One conquers by power.
2.5.8.4	He establishes valour and power for victory.
2.5.8.5	It becomes Lalāma.
2.5.8.6	For this is anger in front.
2.5.8.7	Then indeed he makes them go forth in front of him, for victory.
2.5.8.8	One who has an enemy should offer a bull to Indra, the slayer of foes.
2.5.8.9	Foe is sin, enemy.
2.5.8.10	He strikes down the foe, the sin, the enemy, with power.
2.5.8.11	One who is overcome by Vritra should offer to Indra.
2.5.8.12	Abhimāti is the evil Pāpmā, the enemy.
2.5.8.13	Having destroyed Abhimāti, the evil Pāpman, the enemy, by means of his own power, he became the slayer of Vṛtra.
2.5.8.14	He goes to his own kingdom.
2.5.8.15	For he who goes to his own kingom is called Vṛtratūr.
2.5.8.16	One should offer a sheep with Indra and Maruts as its deities and with the thighs of Pṛṣni.
2.5.8.17	One should sacrifice to the king who desires a village.
2.5.8.18	The king is Indra by his deity.
2.5.8.19	The Vratya is Maruts.
2.5.8.20	He makes the village belong to him by means of his power.
2.5.8.21	The thigh is of Prsni.
2.5.8.22	He places the village behind him.
2.5.8.23	He makes his village non-contentious.
2.5.8.24	One should sacrifice a bull to Indra with thunderbolt.
2.5.8.25	One should sacrifice to a king who desires prosperity.
2.5.8.26	When a king becomes a wielder of the thunderbolt, then he attains prosperity.
2.5.8.27	When one makes a sacrifice to a wielder of thunderbolt, one bestows the thunderbolt upon him.
2.5.8.28	By that he attains victory and prosperity.
2.5.8.29	He bestows upon him prosperity and greatness.
2.5.8.30	When one says 'to a wielder of a thunderbolt', that is his means of harming.
2.5.8.31	He should mentally contemplate the one whom he hates.
2.5.8.32	He strikes him with a thunderbolt.
2.5.8.33	He indeed conquers.
2.5.8.34	One should offer a tawny bull, a red bull, or a yellow bull to the one who is fit for kingship but does not attain it.
2.5.8.35	Soma is indeed the deity of this (rite).
2.5.8.36	For Soma is the king.
2.5.8.37	He approached his own deity for kingship.
2.5.8.38	The deity itself leads him to the kingdom.
2.5.8.39	One becomes tawny-coloured.
2.5.8.40	The form of Soma is for prosperity.
2.5.9.1	If one is born on the first Ekastaka day, and if one is about to be born, one should offer an eight-vessel Agniya oblation.
2.5.9.2	Agni is the womb of animals.
2.5.9.3	He buys them back from the womb, from the place of purity.
2.5.9.4	One should offer a cake on twelve potsherds to Agni Vaisvānara every month.
2.5.9.5	Agni Vaisvānaran is the year.
2.5.9.6	He buys him back from the year itself.
2.5.9.7	When he goes to the sacrificial session, then one should offer a bull to Indra, the slayer of enemies.
2.5.9.8-12	Abhimāti is the evil, the enemy. By means of the sense organ, he strikes down the evil, the Abhimāti, the enemy. The horse with the unfurled banner is the dakṣiṇā. This indeed is the one who has turned away from evil. By means evil, he turns him away.
2.5.9.13-16	Now if one is born on the other Ekastaka, then having released him in the same way, one should offer him to Indra who has slain Vritra. Vritra is the evil-minded enemy. Having slain the evil-minded Vritra with his own power, he became the slayer of Vritra. He attained sovereignty.
2.5.9.17-24	For he who goes to self-sovereignty, they call him Vritra-tūr. One hundred untied-flowing rivers are the Dakṣiṇā. These are turned away from sin. He turns him away from sin. The hundred become. Man has a hundred years of life, a hundred years of strength. He obtains life and strength. The gods and the Asuras competed.
2.5.9.25-30	They said: "You should conquer this Brahma." Aruna, Tupara, and Chetriya were the preceptors of the gods, while Ayashringa and Shyaineya were the preceptors for the demons. The demons cried out, "Araḍa is our preceptor, these are his!" They both agreed.
2.5.9.31	The gods cut off his head with a razor.
2.5.9.32	He lay down with his head between the two horns.
2.5.9.33	The Asuric speech spoke and entered this (world).
2.5.9.34	The one who conquered entered the trees.
2.5.9.35	Therefore, a Brahmin should not drink from a clay vessel.
2.5.9.36	(He should think) 'May I not mix myself with the Asuric speech.'
2.5.9.37	He who knows this becomes a drinker of the nectar-cup, and approaches speech with a victorious (cup).
2.5.9.38	One should offer the animal dedicated to Brahmanaspati to one whom one wishes to attack.
2.5.9.39	Brahmanaspati is Brahman.
2.5.9.40	The animal dedicated to Brahman is the deity of the Brahman.
2.5.9.41	He attacks him with all that is Brahman.
2.5.9.42	He cuts off his brilliance.
2.5.9.43	He indeed cuts off.
2.5.9.44	The dawn is the upper (part).
2.5.9.45	For such was his form, for prosperity.
2.5.9.46	The gods, having slain the Asuras, drove them out from these worlds.
2.5.9.47	They entered the night.
2.5.9.48	The Asvins entered after them.
2.5.9.49	They surrounded the darkness.
2.5.9.50	They offered this Asvin oblation.
2.5.9.51	May he remove the darkness.
2.5.9.52	The sun has come back to them from the east with light.
2.5.9.53	He removed the darkness with these two.
2.5.9.54	One who thinks he is caught by sin and darkness should offer this Asvina horse-sacrifice.
2.5.9.55	By the same means by which the Asvins removed the darkness, he removes sin.
2.5.9.56	The sun comes to him from the east with light.
2.5.9.57	He removes that darkness from him.
2.5.10.1	The sun was exhausted by its rays.
2.5.10.2	Then all this became darkness.
2.5.10.3	That Prajapati saw these ten bulls.
2.5.10.4	Some say that Indra saw them.
2.5.10.5	He offered those to Indra.
2.5.10.6	With them he placed the senses and powers in him.
2.5.10.7	The Lalamas were offered to him, with them he placed lustre in him.
2.5.10.8	With the Shitikukuda above, with them the white rays behind, with them from there the sun became luminous on all sides.
2.5.10.9	One who desires brilliance should offer these bulls of Indra.
2.5.10.10	The bulls are offered from the mouth, and by them he bestows brilliance on him.
2.5.10.11	The bull with a white tail is offered from above.
2.5.10.12	By them, the white-tailed ones are offered from behind. By them he makes him brilliant in every way.
2.5.10.13	He sends him to the measure of the sun.
2.5.10.14-22	One should offer the animal sacrifice to Prajapati in the twelfth month. Twelve months make a year. Having obtained the year, one obtains it. Nine animals are offered. There are nine vital airs. Vital airs are indeed the strength in a man. He places strength in him. Ten animals are offered. The Viraj has ten syllables.
2.5.10.23	Viraj is these very senses and powers. Having placed them in the Self, Viraj stands in her own self.
2.5.10.24	Salutations to the greatness of the eye, to the father of the Maruts. I sing that for you. Having been offered, go along the paths of the gods. Stand in the plants with your bodies.
2.5.10.25	This was the resolve of the gods: Pūṣan, the lord of waters, the bull of plants, chose the drop of Soma. The great mountain became that which it is.
2.5.10.26	The drop has spread over the earth and heaven, over this womb and the one before it. I offer the drop that moves in accordance with the common womb, in accordance with the seven Hotras.
2.5.10.27	Father of the calves, lord of the cows, he is the father of the great Garga-s. The calf, the embryo, the afterbirth, the milk, the cream, the butter, that is his womb.
2.5.10.28	The cows have chosen you for kingship; the Maruts in heaven praise you. Shining with the rays of the kingdom, then you, the fierce one, distribute the riches.
2.5.11.1	One who desires prosperity should offer a goat to Vayu.
2.5.11.2	One who desires prosperity should sacrifice a bull to Indra, or a bull to Varuna.
2.5.11.3	When one offers to Vayu, Vayu himself leads him to prosperity.
2.5.11.4	One who is capable of prosperity but does not attain it is deprived of the power and strength of Indra.
2.5.11.5	When one makes an offering to Indra, one is united with the power and strength.
2.5.11.6	He who is capable of prosperity but does not attain it is seized by Varuna.
2.5.11.7	By the Varuna (rite) he releases him from Varuna.
2.5.11.8	One should offer these (animals) to one who is practising sorcery.
2.5.11.9	If (one offers) to Vayu, Vayu releases the thunderbolt for him.
2.5.11.10	The thunderbolt is Indra's.
2.5.11.11	The thunderbolt indeed is released by Indra.
2.5.11.12	If it is Indra-related, then he strikes him with the thunderbolt.
2.5.11.13	If it is Varuna-related, then having bound him with Varuna, he releases him.
2.5.11.14	One desiring brahmic glory should offer a bull to Surya.
2.5.11.15	The sun indeed is the bestower of brahmic glory.
2.5.11.16	He approaches him with his own share.
2.5.11.17	He bestows brahmic glory on him.
2.5.11.18-23	Whatever he has gained by his strength, by that. Whatever he has gained by ploughing, by that. Whatever he has gained through drinking, by that. He makes him prosperous. He makes him prosperous by the three-fold. One should offer a many-formed oblation to the sun if the sun does not rise while the crops are being harvested in the month of Ashvina. The sun sets beyond him if the sun does no rise while the crops of Ashvina are being harvested.
2.5.11.24	Whatever the sun carries to him, that he carries to him.
2.5.11.25	One becomes many-formed.
2.5.11.26	The rays have many forms.
2.5.11.27	Having obtained the forms of the rays, he carries them to him.
2.5.11.28	Agni, having been created, did not shine.
2.5.11.29	He offered a black-necked goat to Agni, the shining one.
2.5.11.30	By that he became shining.
2.5.11.31	He desired:
2.5.11.32-39	This is the one who is everywhere. He offered a black-necked goat to Agni, the one who is all-pervading. Through that, he became everywhere. He desired: "May I have a share everywhere." He offered a goat with a black neck to Agni, the sharer. Through that he became everywhere. He desired:
2.5.11.40	May my subjects be desirous of giving.
2.5.11.41	He offered to Agni Datra a black-necked goat.
2.5.11.42	By that his subjects became desirous of giving. 
2.5.11.43	One who desires, "May I be lustrous, may I be everywhere, may I be in every part, may my subjects be desirous to give," should offer these black-necked goats.
2.5.11.44	One becomes lustrous.
2.5.11.45	He is able to do everything.
2.5.11.46	He is able to do all things.
2.5.11.47	People are eager to give to him.
2.5.11.48	One desiring cattle should offer the animal of Prajapati with many forms.
2.5.11.49	Cattle are of Prajapati.
2.5.11.50	Prajapati is the progenitor of cattle.
2.5.11.51	He approaches him with a share.
2.5.11.52	He generates cattle for him.
2.5.11.53	He becomes one with many forms.
2.5.11.54	There are many forms of animals.
2.5.11.55	He obtains the forms of animals for him.
2.5.11.56	One should offer a peacock or a parrot to Yama, or a mongoose, if one desires:
2.5.11.57	"One should obtain the world of Yama." By this, Yama obtained the world beyond.
2.5.11.58	Yama obtained lordship over that world.
2.5.11.59	He approaches him with the same oblation.
2.5.11.60	He makes him attain lordship over that world.
2.5.11.61	One attains the world of Yama by means of this (rite) in one way.
2.5.11.62	One should perform this rite in old age.
2.5.11.63	One dies before the time.
2.5.11.64	One becomes a parrot or a peacock.
2.5.11.65	This is the prosperity of his animals by means of his deity.
2.6.1.1	They offer a cake on eight potsherds to Anumati for those who have gone beyond the dice-board.
2.6.1.2	It is a cake on one potsherd for Nirriti.
2.6.1.3	They cook both together.
2.6.1.4	They proceed with the one for Nirriti first.
2.6.1.5	Having gone to the south, they place a single torch in the pit dug out by themselves and offer with the stalks of the Vaisrañsaka grass.
2.6.1.6	May Nirriti be pleased. Svāhā.
2.6.1.7	The fee is a black garment with a torn end.
2.6.1.8	Having returned, they proceed with the Aṣṭākapāla offering to Anumati.
2.6.1.9	The fee is a cow.
2.6.1.10	If one crosses the boundary towards the north, one should go towards the north, dig out a mound, and offer.
2.6.1.11	"This is my share of the field of so-and-so, the son of so-andso."
2.6.1.12	He then restores it.
2.6.1.13	This I place on the ground of so-and-so, son of so-and so.
2.6.1.14	On the next day, for the Adityas, the gods of the earth, a rice-pap with ghee.
2.6.1.15	A bull is the fee.
2.6.1.16	On the following day, for Agni and Vishnu, an oblation on eleven potsherds.
2.6.1.17	A dwarf bull is the fee
2.6.1.18	On the following morning, for Agni and Soma, an oblation of eleven potsherds
2.6.1.19	Gold is the fee.
2.6.1.20	The next day, one should offer a cake on eleven potshards to Indra-Agni.
2.6.1.21	A bull is the Dakṣiṇā.
2.6.1.22	The next day, one offers a cake on eight potshers to Agni.
2.6.1.23	Curd dedicated to Indra.
2.6.1.24	A silken garment is the Dakṣinā.
2.6.2.1	One should offer a cake to Indra-Agna on eleven potshers or to Agni-Indra.
2.6.2.2	A cake to Viśve Devāḥ.
2.6.2.3	A cake of Śyāmāka grains to Soma.
2.6.2.4	The one-pot oblation is for the heaven and earth.
2.6.2.5	A calf is the firstborn, the sacrificial fee.
2.6.2.6	A plough with twelve yokes, a cart with eight wheels, a bull.
2.6.3.1	The eight-pot oblation to Agni.
2.6.3.2	The oblation of barley to Varuna.
2.6.3.3	The obltion of Gaveduka to Rudra.
2.6.3.4	Curd to Indra.
2.6.3.5	A cow and a bull are the sacrificial fee.
2.6.3.6	Because of the removal of water, they bring Apāmārga plants.
2.6.3.7	Having made those grains, having gone to the right side, having placed a single torch in a self-made pit, he offers with a leaf-spoon, saying:
2.6.3.8	"By the impulse of the divine Savitr, by the arms of the Ashvins, by the hands of Pusan, by the strength of Indra,
2.6.3.9	You are the destroyer of Rakshas, svāhā.
2.6.3.10	The Rakshas is slain.
2.6.3.11-18	We have bound the Rakshas. The gift is the Dakshina. The gods who are in front, with Agni as their eye, the destroyers of Rakshas, may they protect us. May they protect us. To them svāhā. The gods in the right, with Yama as their eye, destroyers of Rakshasa, may they protect us. May they protect us.To them svāhā.
2.6.3.19-25	The gods who are in the rear, with Maruts as their eyes, destroyers of the Rakshas, may they protect us. May they protect us. To them svāhā. The gods who are in front, with Indra as their eyes, the destroyers of the Rakṣas, may they guard us. May those gods protect us. To those gods svāhā. The gods who are on the right side, with Agni as their eyes, the destroyers of the Raksha, may they guard us. May those gods protect us To those gods svāh ā. The gods who are on the left side, with Yama as their eyes, may they guard. us. May they protect us. Translation: The gods who are at the back, with Maruts for their eyes, destroyers (of the Rakshas), may they protect us! May they protect (us). To them svāha! The gods who (are) in the front, with Mitra-Varuna as their eyes, (the) destroyers of the Raksa, may they protect (us)! May those gods (protect) us. To those (gods) svāhā! The gods (who are) on the right side (of the altar), with Agni as their eye, the destroyers of Rakshas, (may they protect us). May those gods guard us. To those svāhā. (The gods) who are on the left side (of the sacrificial ground), with Yama as their eye, may they guard (us). May they protect. To those gods, svāhā.
2.6.3.26	May they protect us.
2.6.3.27	To them, svāhā.
2.6.3.28	This I am enclosing the Rakshas.
2.6.3.29	O Agni, burn the Rakshas!
2.6.3.30	The Rakshas is burnt.
2.6.3.31	To Agni, the one who sits in front, svāhā!
2.6.3.32	To Yama, the one who is seated in the south, svāhā
2.6.3.33	To the Maruts, the ones who are seated in the west, svāhā,
2.6.3.34	To Mitra and Varuna, the ones who sit in the north, svāhā.
2.6.4.9	The Vaisnava is with three potfuls of oblations.
2.6.4.10	The Dakshina is Vamana.
2.6.4.11	The Soma-Pausna is with eleven potfuls of oblation.
2.6.4.12	The Indra-Pausna oblation is with potfuls of obla
2.6.4.13	The Paushna oblation is potfuls of obl
2.6.4.14	The Dakshna is Shyama.
2.6.4.15	To Agni Vaisvantar, the oblation is with twelve potfuls of oblatio
2.6.4.16	The Varuna oblation is made of barley.
2.6.4.17	The Dakshinā is gold and a horse.
2.6.5.1-8	The Barhaspatya oblation is to be offered in the house of the Brahman. The bull is the Dakshina. The Indra oblation is to have eleven potsherds and is to be offered at the house of the king. The bull (is the Dakshina). The Aditya oblation is to the wife of the king. The buffalo is the Dakshhina. The oblation to the Nirriti is to be offered to the house of those who have been purified by the scraping of their nails. The she-hen with a variegated tail is the Dakshnina.
2.6.5.9	The Agniya-offering on eight potsherds is to be performed in the house of the commander-in-chief.
2.6.5.10	Gold is the Dakṣiṇā.
2.6.5.11	The Asvinya-offering on two potsherds is performed in the house belonging to the storekeeper.
2.6.5.12	A cow is the Dakṣinā.
2.6.5.13	The Savitrya-offering on eight potsheds is performed in thehouse of the warrior.
2.6.5.14	A white cow is the Daksinā.
2.6.5.15	The Varuna-offering on ten potsherds made of barley is performed in the home of the charioteer.
2.6.5.16	A black bull is the Dakṣina.
2.6.5.17-23	The oblation to Maruts is to be offered in the house of a village-chieftain of the Vaishya caste. The Dakshina is a black-spotted cow. The oblation to Pusan is to be offered at the house of a milk-distributor. The Dakshiṇa is a black cow. The three-pot oblation to Vishnu is to be offered to the house of a carpenter and a chariot-maker. The Dakshinā is made of iron. The oblations to Rudra and Gavadhuka are to be offered at houses of a dice-player and a cow-butcher. The Dakṣiṇā is a cow.
2.6.5.24	The sacrificial animal is a bull, a bull with a white head, a bull with white feet, a bull with one white foot, a bull with three white feet, a white bull, a bull whose horns are like a lion's mane, a bull with long hair, a bull with short hair, a bull standing with its tail, a bull with black hair, or a bull with three calves.
2.6.6.1	One should offer a cake on eleven potshards to Indra, the remover of distress.
2.6.6.2	One should make an offering to Indra, the dispenser of wealth, on eleven potshers.
2.6.6.3	The sacrificial animal is a male buffalo.
2.6.6.4	A vessel made of the leaves of the ashvattha tree is used.
2.6.6.5	Then they milk a white cow with a white calf.
2.6.6.6-11	It itself becomes unconscious. It itself is churned. The ghee itself melts. Then they offer the oblation dedicated to Mitra and Brhaspati. They cook the rice grains that are the most crushed as the oblation dedicated Brhaspati. Here they cover the vessel, pour ghee over it, and pour in the rice grains that have been the largest.
2.6.6.12	Both are cooked together.
2.6.6.13	They proceed with Maitra first.
2.6.6.14	A horse is the Dakṣiṇā for Maitra.
2.6.6.15	A donkey is the Dakṣinā for Brhaspati.
2.6.6.16	One should offer an eight-poured oblation to Agni, the lord of the house, for those who are falling down.
2.6.6.17	A rice-gruel of Shyamaka to Soma, the lord of plants.
2.6.6.18	An eight-poured offering to Savitr, the bestower, for those who have been born.
2.6.6.19-25	To Brihaspati, the lord of speech, a cake on eleven potsherds. To Indra, the eldest of the Hayanas, a cake on twelve potsherds. To Mitra, the lord of truth, a cake on thirteen potsherds.To Varuna, the lord of dharma, a cake on fourteen potsherds. Translation: To Brihaspati the lord of speech a cake on eleven pots. To Indra the eldest of the Hāyanas a cake on twelve pots. To Mitra the lord of truth a cake on thirteen pots. To Varuna the lord of dharma a cake on fourteen pots. To Rudra the lord of cattle a cake on fifteen pots. Savitar may prosper thee among the givers. Agni among the householders.
2.6.6.26	Soma is of the trees.
2.6.6.27	Brihaspati is of speech.
2.6.6.28	Indra is of the eldest.
2.6.6.29	Mitra is of the true.
2.6.6.30	Varuna is of the righteous.
2.6.6.31	Rudra is of the cattle.
2.6.6.32	Those gods, the enemies of the enemy, have made this bridegroom, the son of so-and-so, the son of such-and-such, in the clan of such-andsuch, for the great kingdom, for the great rule.
2.6.6.33	Shukra-jyotis and Citra-jyotih.
2.6.6.34	Satya-jyotis, Jyotisman.
2.6.6.35	Satya and Ritapash, Atyamhah.
2.6.6.36	Ritajih and Satyajih.
2.6.6.37	Senajih and Susena.
2.6.6.38	Antamitra and Dureenamitra, the group.
2.6.6.39	Rta and Satya.
2.6.6.40	Dhruva and Dharuna.
2.6.6.41	The Holder, the Dispenser, and the Distributor.
2.6.7.1	The goddesses, the waters, the waters' dispenser.
2.6.7.2	You are the givers of the kingdom.
2.6.7.3	Give the kingdom, svāhā.
2.6.7.4	The goddesses the waters, the dispenser of the waters.
2.6.7.5	You are givers of the realm.
2.6.7.6	Give the realm to him.
2.6.7.7	You are a bull-wave.
2.6.7.8	You are Bull-sensed.
2.6.7.9	You are Lord of Waters.
2.6.7.10	You are not to be abandoned.
2.6.7.11	You are to be carried around.
2.6.7.12	You are the vigorous ones.
2.6.7.13	You are the gentle ones.
2.6.7.14	You belong to the pasture.
2.6.7.15	You have the brilliance of the sun.
2.6.7.16	You have skin like the sun.
2.6.7.17	The strength of the Maruts is yours.
2.6.7.18	You are obedient.
2.6.7.19	You are Shakvari.
2.6.7.20	You are bearers of the universe, bearers of people.
2.6.7.21	The essence of water and plants.
2.6.7.22	You are Savitri.
2.6.7.23	You are givers of kingdoms.
2.6.7.24	A kingdom has been given to him.
2.6.8.1	O goddesses, the waters, mix yourselves together, bestowing great power, seeking the kingdom for the warrior, unassailable, bestowing strength, bestowing great radiance for the warrior.
2.6.8.2	I have grasped the goddesses, the sweet waters, the nourishing, the royal, the shining ones, by which Mitra and Varuna anointed Indra, and led him beyond the enemies. Thou art not broken, thou art the kinsman of speech, thou art the giver of Soma, born of heat. I cleanse you with brightness, the bright ones, with brightness; I cleanse you with the moon, the bright ones with the moon. May Savitar, the divine one, cleanse you with the spotless filter, with the rays of Vasu Surya. The royal ones, the drinkers of the same draught, the shining ones of energy, the one unassailable, the eaters of grass, clothed in fat, Varuna has made his abode among the waters, the child of the waters, the youngest of the waters.
2.6.8.3	O Rudra, whatever is your supreme name on the mountain, that is offered to you. Whatever is desired is offered to you, svāhā. Soma, Indra, Varuna, Mitra, Agni, may those gods who uphold dharma uphold dharma for you.
2.6.9.1	You are the womb of the kshatriya.
2.6.9.2	You are a swelling of the kshatriyas.
2.6.9.3	You are an umbilical cord of the kshatryas.
2.6.9.4	Agni, the householder, has been offered.
2.6.9.5	Indra, the one with increased fame, has been offered.
2.6.9.6-11	The two, Mitra and Varuna, are known, the two who are firm in their vows. The two, heaven and earth, are known, those who increase truth. Pusha, the knower of all, is known. Aditi, the goddess, is known. Here is this one, the son of so-and-so, the son of the daughter of so-andso, in the clan of so-and so, for the great kingdom, for the great sovereignty. This is your king for your people.
2.6.9.12	Soma is the king of our Brahmanas.
2.6.9.13	You are Indra's thunderbolt, the slayer of Vritra.
2.6.9.14	With you he slew Vritra. Here is the thunderbolt.
2.6.9.15	You are the destroyers of enemies.
2.6.9.16	Strike him facing east.
2.6.9.17	Strike him turning back.
2.6.9.18	Strike him sideways.
2.6.9.19	Strike him obliquely.
2.6.9.20	Strike him upwards.
2.6.9.21	Strike him from the directions.
2.6.9.22	You are Mitra.
2.6.9.23	You are Varuna.
2.6.9.24	Golden-hued, at sunrise, the iron-pillar, at sunrise of the sun.
2.6.9.25	You have ascended, O Varuna and Mitra, the pit, from there you have made Aditi and Diti.
2.6.10.1	Stand with the kindling wood.
2.6.10.2	May the Gayatri metre protect you.
2.6.10.3	The Trivrit stoma.
2.6.10.4	The Rathantara Sama.
2.6.10.5	Agni is the deity.
2.6.10.6	Brahman is the wealth.
2.6.10.7	Stand in the fierce (direction).
2.6.10.8	The Tristubh metre shall protect thee.
2.6.10.9	The Stoma is fifteenfold.
2.6.10.10	The Brihat is the Sama.
2.6.10.11	Indra is the deity.
2.6.10.12	The kingdom is the wealth.
2.6.10.13	Stand in the eastern (direction).
2.6.10.14	Jagati metre shall protect thee
2.6.10.15	The Stoma has seventeen parts.
2.6.10.16	The Sama is Vairupak.
2.6.10.17	The Visve Devas are the deities.
2.6.10.18	The Vid is the wealth.
2.6.10.19-28	Stand towards the north. May the Anushtubh metre protect thee. The Ekavimsa (Stoma) is thy praise. The Vairāja is thy Sāman. Mitra-Varuna are thy deities. Pusti is thy wealth. Stand towards the upward. May the Paṅkti metre protect thee. The Trinava and Trayastrimsa Stomas are thine. The Shakvara and Raivata are thy Sāmans.
2.6.10.29	Brihaspati is the deity.
2.6.10.30	The fruit is wealth.
2.6.10.31	You are the radiance of Soma, you are radiant.
2.6.10.32	May my radiance be like yours.
2.6.10.33	The head of Namuci is turned back.
2.6.10.34	The serpents are bound.
2.6.10.35	Protect from death.
2.6.10.36	Protect from the sky.
2.6.11.1	To Agni svāhā! To Soma svāhā! To Savitr svāhā! Svāhā to Sarasvatī! To Pūṣan svāhā! svāhā to Brhaspati! To Indra svāhā! to Ghoṣa svāhā! Śloka svāhā! Anśa svāhā, svāhā to Bhaga! To the Lord of the Field svāhā! With the lustre of Soma, with the brilliance of Agni, with the power of Indra, with the resolve of all the gods, I consecrate thee. Thou art the womb of Indra, thou art the womb of the gods. Protect the heaven-born ones. Protect those who have come together. Those who are going along the low-lying path, those who are going along that which is high, they go along the back of the bull of the mountain, the boats that are well-oiled, the waters.
2.6.11.2	Thou art Indra's thunderbolt, the winner of strength. With thee may this one win strength. I yoke thee with the command of Mitra and Varuna, the rulers. Thou art Vishnu's stride, the slayer of foes. Thou art the Maruts' impulse, the conqueror. Thou art the mind won by the impulse of Indra. This is the thunderbolt, the winner-of-strength. May our son win strength with it.
2.6.12.1	This is the measure, this is life, bestow life on me. This is strength, this is radiance, bestow radiance on me. This (is) energy, bestow energy on me. This art thou, thou art Mitra, thou art Varuna, thou art the true (one). I am united with all the gods. Obeisance to the mother Earth. May the mother Earth not injure me. He has established his own name and kingdom. Varuna has recovered his own body. We have become the observances of Mitra, the pure one. We have remembered the great name of truth.
2.6.12.2	All the Vratas were of Varuna. He who is friendly with Mitra has crossed the enemies. The divine ones shone with their sacrifice. Trita brought the old one.
2.6.12.3	You are the one who is to be worshipped, the one who is worshipped. You have sat down on the one who is worthy of worship. You have sat on the one who deserves worship. Varuna, the one who has firm vows, has sat down among the people for the sake of kingship, the one of good counsel.
2.6.12.4	To Agni svāhā, to Soma svāhā, svāhā to Indra's strength, svāhā, for the strength of the Maruts.
2.6.12.5	The swan, pure, with wealth, pure in the atmosphere, the officiating priest, pure on the altar, the guest, pure in the house, pure among men, pure in the best, pure in truth, pure in space, born from water, born from cows, born from truth, born from mountains, truth.
2.6.12.6	You are Brahman, you are Brahman, you have the truth as your wealth. You are Brahman, Mitra, you are the good friend. You are Brahman; you are Indra, you have truth as your energy. You are Brahman. You are Varuna, you have all as your energy. This is the thunderbolt. By it may I prosper. The directions have been conquered. This is Prajapati. No one else than you has encompassed all these beings. To whomsoever we offer, may that be ours. He is the son of such and such. He is the grandson of such and such; may we be the lords of wealth.
2.6.13.1	To the grandson of the waters, svāhā.
2.6.13.2	To the grandson of strength, svāhā
2.6.13.3	To Agni, the householder, svāhā."
2.6.13.4	Savitr is offered on eight potsherds.
2.6.13.5	A white one is the dakṣiṇā.
2.6.13.6	Sarasvatī is offered on rice.
2.6.13.7	A cow is the dakṣinā.
2.6.13.8	Pūṣan is offered on rice
2.6.13.9	A black one is the daksinā.
2.6.13.10	Brhaspati is offered on rice,
2.6.13.11	A bull with a white back is the dakṣinā.
2.6.13.12	Indra is offered on eleven potsherds.
2.6.13.13	The bull is the Dakṣiṇā.
2.6.13.14	Varuṇa is made of barley and has ten pot-shaped cakes.
2.6.13.15	Babhru is the Dakṣinā, the great one, the one sacrificed to.
2.6.13.16	Tvāṣṭra has eight pot-shaped cakes
2.6.13.17	The one with shoulders, the one with a snout, the one with ears, or the one with a saddle, is the Dakṣinā.
2.6.13.18	Agniyeṣṭa has eight pot-cakes.
2.6.13.19	Gold with eight edges is the Dakṣina.
2.6.13.20	Soma is a rice-cake.
2.6.13.21	Babhru is the Dakshina.
2.6.13.22	Vaishnav is Trikapala.
2.6.13.23	Vaman is the Dakshna.
2.6.13.24	Agneya is Astakapala.
2.6.13.25	Gold is the Dakshana.
2.6.13.26	Barhaspatya is Caru.
2.6.13.27	Shitiprishtha is the Dakshma.
2.6.13.28	Indra is Ekadashakapala.
2.6.13.29	Rishabha is the Dakshmana.
2.6.13.30	Vaishvadeva is Caru. 
2.6.13.31	Pisang is the Dakshnana.
2.6.13.32-41	Maitravaruni is the offering of cooked milk. A cow is the Dakshina. Agneya is the offering on eight potsherds. Soumya is the offering of rice-gruel. Saumya is the offering of twelve potsherds. Sauma is the offering of barley-gruel. Savitra is the offering of eight potsherds Savitra is the offering on twelve potsherds Barhaspatya is the offering in the form of rice-gruels. Agnivesa is the offering on twenty-one potsherds. Twastri is the offering on seven potsherds. Tvashtri is the offering of seven potsherds Agnivesya is the offering for Agni-Vaisvantar on twenty-one Agniveshya is the offering for Agnivesa on twenty-one potsheards. Tvashtri is offering on seven potshers. The chariot-borne procession is the Dakshna. Sarasvata is the offering of gruel.
2.6.13.42-50	The oblation to Pusan. The oblation to Mitra. The obration to Varuna. The oblution to Aditi. The oblusion to the Lord of the Field. The left-hand side of the chariot, the leader of the army, is the Dakshina. The black-spotted cow, pregnant, is the Prsti-cow. The black cow, pregnant, belongs to Aditi. The oblation to Savitar, the giver of life, the lord of the living, the eight-vessel oblation.
2.6.13.51	To the Ashvins, a cake on eleven potsherds.
2.6.13.52	To Sarasvati, the goddess of truth, a rice-pap.
2.6.13.53	The staff, the sandals, and the dry skin are the fees.
2.7.1.1	The yoke, the first mind, the truth, Savitar yoked the thoughts, having placed the light of Agni on the earth, he brought it.
2.7.1.2	With the mind yoked to the Savitar, the God, we yoke ourselves to the Savitar for the attainment of the heavenly power. Savitar, the illuminator, yoking the Gods to the heaven, the great light, to be produced by the illuminating mind, Savitar produces them.
2.7.1.3	They yoke the mind, they yoke you with the ancient Brahman, with salutations. May the praise go forth like a guide on the path. May all the sons of immortality listen, who have stood in the divine abodes.
2.7.1.4	To whose journey others have followed, the gods, honoring the greatness of the god, who measured the earthly realms, that lord, the god Savitar, with great power.
2.7.1.5	O god Savitr, may this (sacrifice) of mine be successful. O god Savitr! May this sacrifice of mine be successful, bringing prosperity, winning wealth, winning the world, winning the heaven. May I accomplish the Stoma with the Gayatri verse, the Rathantara with the Tristubh verse, the Brihat with the Jagat verse. I take thee with the impulse of the god Savitr, with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of Pusan. Thou art a woman. Thou art a woman. With the Gayatri metre I bring Agni, the domestic, the Angiras-like, from the abode of the earth. With the Tristubh metre, thou art a woman. Thou art a spade. With thee may we be able to dig Agni from his abode. With the Jagat metre, taking the spade in his hand, Savitr, bearing the golden spade, having placed Agni, the light, on the earth, brought him down. With the Anushtubh metre.
2.7.2.1	O horse, run swiftly, the best, according to the year. Your supreme birth is in heaven, your navel in the sky, your womb on earth.
2.7.2.2	You yoke the donkey, you two, in this place, O you two who have testicles, carrying Agni, the one who belongs to us.
2.7.2.3	At every union, we invoke you, at every race, O Indra, for help, as friends.
2.7.2.4	Come, O Urva, advancing, the unrighteousness of Rudra's Gaṇapātis, may I be with you.
2.7.2.5	Come, O Urva!
2.7.2.6	Making the blessings and safety-zones free from fear, with Pūṣan, with the companion.
2.7.2.7	Agni, the domestic, like Angiras, we bring hither. Agni, the domestic like Angiras, may we approach. Agni, the Domestic, like Angiras we shall bring hither.
2.7.2.8	Agni has followed.
2.7.2.9	Coming, he shakes off all foes on the way. He seeks Agni in the great abode with his eye.
2.7.2.10	O horse, having conquered the earth, desire Agni with radiance. Having surrounded the earth, tell us from where we should dig him up.
2.7.2.11	Your back is the sky, your abode is the earth, your body is the atmosphere, your womb is the ocean. Stand with your eyes against the enemies.
2.7.2.12	Come forth, O steed, from this place of thine, for great prosperity. We may be in the favour of the earth. We dig Agni at the foot of this (earth).
2.7.2.13	The steed, the giver of wealth, has come forth from the lower world to the well-made world of the earth. From there we dig the well-formed Agni, ascending to the highest heaven.
2.7.2.14	I embrace thee with my mind, with ghee, the one who is being praised, all the worlds, the wide one, the long one, the great one, the most excellent one, the most greedy one, the one who sees, the one who eats.
2.7.2.15	I embrace thee from all sides, from the front, with my mind, without any protection. Accept that. The one who has the glory of the dead, the one who desires the colour, Agni, the one who rejoices in his own body, the one who delights.
2.7.2.16	The lord of wealth goes around.
2.7.2.17	We have surrounded thee, O Agni, the wise, the protector, the bright-coloured, the destroyer, the destroyer of the unsteady, for each day.
2.7.2.18	Thou, O Agni, with thy light, thou, O Agni, shining brightly, thou, O god, from the waters, thou, O lord of men, art born pure among men.
2.7.2.19	In the impulse of the divine Savitr, with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of Pusan, in the abode of the earth, I dig up Agni, the domestic, like Angiras, shining, with the auspicious light, shining with the uninterrupted radiance, harmless to creatures, in the abode on the earth, we dig up Agni, domestic, like Angira
2.7.3.1	Thou art the back of the waters, the womb of Agni, the ocean, swelling all around, increasing, growing great, on the lotus, spread thyself by the measure of heaven.
2.7.3.2	Be ye shelter and armour, be ye both the unpierced, the many, the expanding, the dwelling together. Be ye the Agni, the lord, the purifier.
2.7.3.3	You two, knowing the heaven, have come together with your hearts and souls, to carry Agni, the shining, constant one.
2.7.3.4	You are the one who is the most excellent, bearing all, Atharva first churned you, O Agni.
2.7.3.5	Atharva churned you from the lotus, from the head of all, O Agni, from the source of all speech.
2.7.3.6	That thee, O Indra, the sage Dadhyan, son of Atharvan, hath praised, the slayer of Vritra, the giver of wealth.
2.7.3.7	That thee, O Indra the bull, the sage Pathya hath praised, the destroyer of foes, the giver of riches in battle after battle.
2.7.3.8	O Hotar, sit in thy own place, O healer, and arrange the sacrifice in the place of good deeds. Worship the gods with oblation. O Agni, bestow great life on the sacrificer.
2.7.3.9	The Hotar, the bestower of gifts, is seated in the Hotar's seat, the bright one, the well-skilled one, the one with unerring resolve, the one with the thousand-bearing tongue, the one with pure tongue, the one who is not to be overcome.
2.7.3.10	Be thou seated, thou art great, thou art to be praised by the gods. Let Agni, the tawny one, the one to be worshipped, emit smoke, the one to praise, the one to show.
2.7.3.11	Do thou, O Agni, the most worthy, be born first of all days, the most useful among the useful, the red among the red, in the woods, in the woods. Bearing seven treasures, Agni, the most knowing, sits down as the Hotar.
2.7.3.12	Here is he.
2.7.3.13	We yoke this hymn to the worthy Jatavedas with our thoughts, as a chariot, for his friendship is good. Let us not be deprived of thy friendship, O Agni.
2.7.3.14	This is yours.
2.7.4.1	The goddesses of water, the sweet ones, for the sake of the disease-free subjects, from their abode, the plants have risen up, the very pleasant ones.
2.7.4.2	May the wind, the father, grant you the heart that is stretched out, which is expanded, you who move among the gods with the breath of life, to which god shall the Vasat be offered to you?
2.7.4.3	Sujata, Jyotisa, Sarman, Varutha, and Suva have attained heaven. O Agni, you shine in all forms, O Vibhavasa, you shine in the light of the divine Kripa.
2.7.4.4	Rise up, O Agni, for your own sacrifice, with praises, with the divine Kripa's gaze and great radiance, O Agni, come with good praises.
2.7.4.5	"Stand up, O God Savitar, for our protection. The upward-going one is the companion of strength. When we are dazzled by the rays of the sun,
2.7.4.6	Thou art the embryo of the two worlds, O Agni, the beautiful one, placed in the plants. The bright child has enveloped the darkness. He has come forth from his mothers, roaring like a bull.
2.7.4.7	Be firm, O Vīḍvaṅga, be swift, be strong, O steed, be wide, be well-seated, thou art the carrier of Agni, the most desirable.
2.7.4.8	Be auspicious to the human beings, O Angiras, do not injure the sky, the earth, the atmosphere, the trees.
2.7.4.9	Let the horse go forth neighing, let the ass braying go forth, bearing Agni, the domestic, before the end of life.
2.7.4.10	Bearing Agni, the bull, the bull, embryo of the waters, the ocean-born, come, O Agni, for protection.
2.7.4.11	Truth, truth, we bear Agni, the domestic one, like Angiras.
2.7.5.1	O plants, receive this Agni, coming here, peaceful, as he settles down, free from all evil. May he sit down, removing our evil thoughts.
2.7.5.2	O plants, rejoice in him, with flowers, with berries, this is your seasonal embryo, he has settled in the ancient abode.
2.7.5.3	Shining with your wide radiance, may I be in the protection of Agni, the well-praised, in the protection of the great, of the most auspicious, in the protection.
2.7.5.4	The waters have stood, the bountiful ones, they have placed you in strength, for great might, for sight.
2.7.5.5	Of that most auspicious juice of yours, may we partake here, like eager mothers.
2.7.5.6-7	Therefore, we go to the one who is worthy of worship, for whose sake you sing. Do you generate us with water. We unite Mitra with the earth and the light of heaven, the well-born Jātavedas. We unite you for the sake of the people.
2.7.5.8	The Rudras, having united the earth with the great light, have kindled it. Their radiance, eternal, shines among the gods.
2.7.5.9	The earth, united with the Vasus and the Rudras, the wise and capable ones, having made it soft with their hands, may Sinivāli make it soft.
2.7.5.10	May Sinivāli, Suparna, Sukarīra, and her own shadow give thee, O Aditi, the ladle in thy hands.
2.7.5.11	May Aditi make the ladle with her strength, with her arms, with her mind, as a mother her son, and may she bear Agni in her womb.
2.7.6.1	Thou art the head of the sacrifice.
2.7.6.2	May the Vasus make thee with the Gayatri metre, like Angiras, O ladle.
2.7.6.3	You are Dhruva.
2.7.6.4	You are Earth.
2.7.6.5	With the stream, may he bestow on me offspring, prosperity, cattle-keeping, good heroism, and kinsmen for this sacrificer.
2.7.6.6	May the Rudras make you with the Tristubh metre, like Angiras, in the pot.
2.7.6.7	You are Dhruva,
2.7.6.8	You are the atmosphere.
2.7.6.9-13	May the Adityas make you with the Jagati metre, like Angiras, in the ladle. You are firm. You are the sky. May the Adityas, with the Jagati meter, make you like Angiras in the ladle. You are firm.
2.7.6.14	May the All-gods, the All-pervading, make thee with the Anushtubh metre, like Angiras, in the ladle.
2.7.6.15	Thou art firm.
2.7.6.16	Thou art the quarters.
2.7.6.17	With the stream, may I obtain offspring, prosperity, cattle-keeping, good heroism, and kinsmen for this sacrificer.
2.7.6.18	Thou art a cord of Aditi.
2.7.6.19	May Aditi grasp thy root.
2.7.6.20	Having made the earth a womb of clay for Agni,
2.7.6.21	Aditi gave it to her sons, saying, "May they be nourished."
2.7.6.22	May the Vasus fumigate you like the Angiras.
2.7.6.23	May the Rudras fumigate you like Angiras.
2.7.6.24	The Adityas may fumigate you like angiras.
2.7.6.25	May Indra fumigate you like a Angiras.
2.7.6.26	May Varuna fumigate thee with Angiras.
2.7.6.27	May Vishnu fumigate thee with the Angiras.
2.7.6.28	Brihaspati may fumigate thee with (the Angiras).
2.7.6.29	May Aditi, the goddess, with the All-gods, dig the pit in the abode of the earth with Angiras.
2.7.6.30	The goddesses, the wives of the gods, the goddesses of all gods, have placed thee on the seat of earth, like Angiras, in the pot.
2.7.6.31	The goddess Dhishana, the goddess of all gods, has bound thee on the seat on earth, like Angira, in the pot
2.7.6.32	The goddesses Gnas, the goddesses of the gods of all gods, are cooking thee on the seat in earth, like Angirases, in the pot.
2.7.6.33	May Varutri, the goddess, the goddess of all gods, cook thee in the cauldron on the earth's surface, like Angiras.
2.7.6.34	May the goddesses, the mothers, the goddesses of all gods, the goddesses who have cut the leaves, cook thee in a cauldron on the earth’s surface, like the Angiras.
2.7.6.35	The fame of Mitra, the upholder of the people, of the god, is in the assembly.
2.7.6.36	The splendour of the one with the bright fame.
2.7.6.37	May the god Savitar, with good hands, with good fingers,
2.7.6.38	with good arms and with strength,
2.7.6.39	May you rise up, be great, stand upright, be firm,
2.7.6.40	Uninjured, O Earth, fill the directions and quarters.
2.7.6.41	I give this ladle to Mitra for protection.
2.7.6.42	May it not break.
2.7.6.43	May the Vasus seize thee with the Gayatri metre, in the manner of Angiras, in the ladle.
2.7.6.44	May the Rudras seize thee with the Trishtup metre, in the Angiras manner, in the ladle
2.7.6.45	May the Adityas seize thee with the Jagati metre, in the way of Angiras, with the ladle.
2.7.6.46	The All-gods, the All-pervading, may seize thee with the Anushtup metre, with the ladle, in the manner Angiras.
2.7.7.1	The mind, the Agni of intention, I employ, svāhā. The mind, the intellect, the Agni of intellect, I employ, svāhā. The heart, the Agni of consciousness, I employ, svaha. The speech, the Agni of control, I employ, sviha. To Prajapati Manu, svāhā! To Agni Vaisvānara, svāhā!
2.7.7.2	"O Agni, do not be angry, do not be harsh, be firm, be vigorous, O good one, be vigorous. Agni and you will do this.
2.7.7.3	Be firm, O goddess Earth, for welfare. You were created by the Asuric magic with your own power. May this offering be acceptable to the gods. Be unharmed in this sacrifice."
2.7.7.4	The Hotar, the most excellent, the most famous, the son of strength, the wonderful, the giver of ghee and food,
2.7.7.5	He has come from the highest heaven to the lower one, to the place where I am, to that one.
2.7.7.6	The most excellent, the highest, the most excellent of the highest, the red-horse, the most desirable, the most beloved of men, O Agni, you are the best of the enemies.
2.7.7.7	Whatever wood, O Agni, we put in thee, may all that be ghee for thee. Do thou accept it, O most excellent one.
2.7.7.8	Whatever is licked by the tongue, whatever is creeping over, may all that become ghee for thee. Accept it, O most excelent one.
2.7.7.9	Day after day, they bring him the food, as if for a horse, for his food. They rejoice in the abundance of wealth, Agni, may I not suffer from your presence.
2.7.7.10	Agni, kindled on the navel of the earth, we invoke for great prosperity, the one who delights in libations, the one who is praised greatly, the one who deserves sacrifice, the conqueror, Agni, in battles.
2.7.7.11	Those who are the armies, the thieves, the robbers, the brigands, and those who are the thieves and robbers in the forest, those I place in your mouth, O Agni.
2.7.7.12	Those who are the thieves, the brigands in the forests, and those who have evil intentions in the bushes, those I place into your jaws.
2.7.7.13	With your fangs, O Agni, you devour the Malimbas; with your jaws, the thieves; with your jaws the robbers. O Blessed One, you devour them. May they be devoured.
2.7.7.14	He who is hostile to us, and he who hates us, and he whom we hate, and he who is envious of us, may all of them be destroyed by you.
2.7.7.15	I have raised their arms, their radiance and their strength. I have destroyed the power of my enemies. I have brought my own people forward.
2.7.7.16	My Brahman is sharp, my valour is sharp, my strength is sharp, my Kshatra is sharp, my victory is sharp, I am the Purohita of whom.
2.7.7.17	The Brahman and the Kshatra, united, do not suffer. The Brahman and the kshatra, united in one, do not suffer; the Brahman and the kshtra, united in one. The Brahman and kshatra, both united, do not suffei; the Brahman and kshatna, united in one; the Brahman and Kshatra, both unitea, do not suffer, the Brahman and kshtra, united, do no suffer; the Brahman, the kshatra and the Brahman, united, do nol suffer; the Brahman the kshatra the Brahman and the Brahman, all united, do not suiTer. The Brahman and Kshatna, united, do noi suffer; the Brahman anu kshatra, all united,
2.7.8.1	do not suffer; the Kshatra and the Kshatna, all united, the Kshatra anu Kshatra, all unitea, do noi suffer. The Brahman, the Kshatna and the Brahman, unitea, do nol suffer. The Brahman the Kshatra the Brahman, all unitea. The Brahman, Kshatra and Brahman, all united. The Brahman, kshatra and Brahman. all united, do nol sufier. The Brahman, Brahman and Brahman, all uniteu, do not suffer.
2.7.8.2	Night and Dawn, with their minds, look after the one child, the same, the same. The sky and earth, the golden one shines within. The gods, holding Agni, give wealth.
2.7.8.3	The wise one assumes all forms. He has brought forth good for the two-legged and the four-legged. Savitar, the desirable one, has pierced the sky. He follows the course of the dawn, shining.
2.7.8.4	You are Suparna, the Garutman, your head is three-fold, your eye is the Gayatri, your wings are the Brihat and Rathantara, your body is the Stoma, your limbs are the Chandas, your name is the Yajus, your body is Vamadevya, your tail is the Yagyayajiya, your tufts are the Dhisnyas, you are Suparna the Garutman. Go to heaven, fall to the sky. You are Vishnu's step, the slayer of enemies. You are the Gayatri metre, ascend the earth, follow it. You are Vishnu’s step, the destroyer of excess. You are the Tristubh metre, ascend the sky, follow it. You are Vishnu's stride, the destroyer of enemies. You ascend the Jagat metre, follow the sky. You ascend the Anushtubh metre, follow the directions. Agni roared like thunder, the earth trembled, the plants were shaken. The newborn, blazing, shone forth immediately, shining with his own light between heaven and earth.
2.7.8.5	O Agni, thou who art turned towards us, O Agni, the son of Angiras, again with energy and wealth I have approached thee. Thou hast become firm, thou standest unshaken. May all the clans desire thee. May the kingdoms hold thee.
2.7.8.6	O Varuna, thou hast loosed the highest bond from us, thou art high above the bright ones, thou hast gone forth from darkness to the light, Agni with his shining, with his ruddy light, born, he hath filled all the places.
2.7.8.7	O Agni, the swan, pure, sit on the lap of this thy mother, knowing all the worlds, do not be scorched by her light or heat. Shine forth within her, the bright light.
2.7.8.8	O Agni, within thy own abode, the pot, thou shinest with thy lustre. Thou, the knower of beings, shining with thy heat, be thou auspicious.
2.7.8.9	Having become auspicious, O Agni, do thou sit down with me. Having made all directions auspicious, thou hast sat down in thy own place.
2.7.9.1	Agni was born first around heaven, then he was born around us as Jātavedas, and the third time in the waters as Nṛman, the constant one. The people kindle him, their own lord.
2.7.9.2	We know thy three-fold, Agni, three-fold, we know thy dwelling-place, which thou hast spread in many places. We know thy highest name, which is most secret. We know that height from which thou hast appeared.
2.7.9.3	In the ocean, O Agni, in the waters, the men, the men with eyes, have placed thee in the heaven, in the third region, in the womb of truth, the bulls have taken thee.
2.7.9.4	The most excellent of the shining ones, the protector of the cows, the giver of the desires of the generous ones, the son of Vasu, the king of the waters, shines forth, the first of the dawns, the illuminator.
2.7.9.5	The shining one, the purifier, the one who delights, the wise one, Agni, the immortal one, is placed among mortals. The tawny one, the bearer of the burden, sends forth smoke, shining with his bright radiance, he illuminates the sky.
2.7.9.6	Agni, the crying one, was born, the king of all the worlds, the lord of heaven and earth, when he was born. He broke the rock, the hard one, when he went away. The people worshipped Agni when he was five.
2.7.9.7	O Agni, the god, who today has made for you the cake with ghee, the one to be eaten by the good, lead him to the good path, to the highest light, to the divine bliss, O most excellent one.
2.7.9.8	O Agni, do thou honour him, the praiseworthy, among the Sūshravases, the praises are honoured. The dear one to the sun, the dear one to Agni, he shines forth with the born, he shines forth by the born.
2.7.9.9	O Agni, the sacrificers, desiring the heaven, made thee their messenger, and worshipped thee with oblations. With thee they desired wealth, the herdsmen desired the herd with cattle.
2.7.9.10	The Agni who has set, the well-loved of men, the all-encompassing, the guardian of Soma, with the Rishis, I invoke the heaven and earth, the two not to be hated. May the gods bestow on us wealth with many heroes.
2.7.10.1	May the All-Gods raise thee up, O Agni, with their thoughts. Be thou to us auspicious, the well-wisher, the illuminator.
2.7.10.2	O Agni, go with the light, with thy auspicious rays, thou art bright with thy great lights. Do not injure thy body and progeny.
2.7.10.3	Agni has cried, Agni is to be worshipped with kindling woods. With ghee, rouse the guest. Offer oblations to him.
2.7.10.4	Agni, I hear the praise of Bharata. The sun shines brightly. He who stood by Puru in battles, the divine guest, the giver, is our auspicious one.
2.7.10.5	O divine waters, receive this ash. Make it fragrant in the world. Let the mothers with their nests bow to him, as if to a son, and hold him as their own.
2.7.10.6	O Agni, in the waters you are united with the plants. You are conceived again.
2.7.10.7	Thou art the embryo of plants, the embryo of trees, the embryo of all that is, O Agni, thou art the embryo of waters.
2.7.10.8	Thou hast settled down again, shining, with thy mothers, the waters, and the earth, and the ashes.
2.7.10.9	Again approaching the house, and looking at the earth, O Agni, be in the remaining place of thy mother, as in her lap, most auspicious.
2.7.10.10	Again with energy and wealth, be thou awakened by this my speech, O most excellent, most powerful, most bountiful, most generous, most beneficent, most glorious, most auspicious, most brilliant, most radiant, most luminous, most brilliant, O Agni. I praise thee, I bow to thee. I praise thy body, O Agni.
2.7.11.2	Thou art the ashes of Agni, thou art the excrement of Agni, thou are the sign of Agni, thou bearest the desires, may thy bearing of desires be in me. This is that Agni, in whom Indra placed the pressed Soma in his belly, the thousandfold strength, the steed, the winner, the seven-timer, the winner, thou art praised, O Jātavedas.
2.7.11.3	O Agni, thou hast sought the heaven's expanse, thou hast sought to tell the gods, the Dhishnyas, those who are beyond, the bright ones, and those who are below, the waters that stand near the sun.
2.7.11.4	O Agni, whatever light of thine is in heaven, on earth, in the mountains, in the plants, in the waters, whereby thou hast stretched out the firmament, that shining, that bright, that ocean, is seen by men.
2.7.11.5	The Agni-s, the sons of Pūṣan, with the slope, in unison, may they enjoy the offered oblation, the great gifts free from disease.
2.7.11.6	O Agni, may the Ida, the most brilliant, the most desirable, the most enduring, be for the one who prays. May our son, our offspring, be victorious. O Agni, may your good will be towards us.
2.7.11.7	This is your sharp weapon. With that deity, be firm like Angiras. Thou art the enclosing weapon. With that Deity, be firm like the Angiras. Be ye the enclosed, be ye the enclosing. Be ye firmly established. Be ye united in your resolve. Be ye agreeable, shining, of good mind, united in the seeking of food and strength.
2.7.11.8	May your minds be united, may your vows be united, and may your intentions be united. O Agni, be the lord of the purifying fire. Give the sacrificer food and strength.
2.7.11.9	O Agni, you are the purifying one, the one who bestows wealth and nourishment. Having made all directions auspicious, you have come to your own abode.
2.7.11.10	May you, like a mother to her son, protect Agni, the lord of the earth, in his own womb, the cauldron, released by Prajapati, the creator of all, in accordance with the seasons and all the gods.
2.7.12.1	May you desire the one who does not offer sacrifices, the one who does evil, the thief, the robber. May that desire be on us. We offer salutations to you, O goddess Nirriti.
2.7.12.2	Obeisance to thee, O Nirriti, of sharp lustre, of iron, of crooked bonds. This thy bond, O Yama, thou hast bound with Yama, thy consort. Thou hast bound him in the highest heaven.
2.7.12.3	What today the goddess Nirriti has bound thee with a noose, which is not to be released, around thy neck, that I loosen thee in the middle of thy life. Now let the living one go to his father, released.
2.7.12.4	Whatever bright light was born on the other side of that great radiance, may that assembly of yours protect us from enemies. O Agni, the all-pervading one, svāhā! Salutations to prosperity! The one who dwells in the house, the one who brings together the Vasus, he sees all forms with the Sachis, like a god, in accordance with the true Dharma. Indra did not stand in the midst of the paths.
2.7.12.5	By whom the gods, the luminaries, have ascended above, by whom the Adityas, the Vasus, by whom the Rudras, by whom the Angiras have attained greatness, may the sacrificers go by that (path) to welfare.
2.7.12.6	May Pūṣan yoke, may Savitr yoke, may Brihaspati yoke for you. By the brilliance of Agni, by the lustre of the Sun.
2.7.12.7	The wise yoke the ploughs, they stretch out the furrows separately, the wise, with good will towards the gods.
2.7.12.8	Yoke the ploughs, stretch out the furrows, sow the seed in the prepared furrow. May the harvest be abundant, may the ripe grain be near.
2.7.12.9	The plough, the ploughshare, the good plough-line, the Soma-drinking bull, may he plough the land, the cow, the sheep, the cart, the plough, and the plough-share.
2.7.12.10	May the good fruits of the earth be plentiful, may the good ploughman come with his team. May the ploughmen be satisfied with the oblation, may the plants be well-grown for us.
2.7.12.11	May the Sun, with his plough, the Maruts with their ploughs, the Lord of the Sires with his ploughs, the Rain-god with his seed, may they all, as they sow, bless us. May the Sun and the Maruts, the Lord of Sires and the Rain-god, bless us with grain.
2.7.12.12	May the Sun and the Rain-gods, the Lord of Sires and the Maruts sow, and may this earth, which is full of seasons, be ploughed by the ploughs.
2.7.12.13	O Sita, be smeared with ghee and honey, approved by all the gods and Maruts. Increasing the share of strength, sweet and nourishing, O Sita, may you cover us with milk.
2.7.12.14	The yoke is the Udyoga, the Antaryama, the Isha, the Khrigali, the Shava, the Ashtra, the Talam, the Pratinaha, both the Mandukyas.
2.7.12.15	The sun, surrounded by the golden-hued rays, rises, having conquered the cows, horses and gold, with the single-wheeled chariot, taking the portion of energy from the earth.
2.7.12.16	O Indra, this fallen from the hand, fallen from the hips, fallen from the thighs, fallen from the womb, fallen from the buttocks, fallen from the energy, fallen from the strength, fallen from the seed, fallen from the sap, fallen from the juice, fallen from the milk, fallen from the butter, fallen from the honey, fallen from the nectar, fallen from the sweetness, fallen from the taste, fallen from the flavor, fallen from the fragrance, fallen from the smell, fallen from the touch, fallen from the contact, fallen from the sight, fallen from the vision, fallen from the hearing, fallen from the sound, fallen from the mind, fallen from the thought, fallen from the speech, fallen from the utterance, fallen from the body, fallen from the form, fallen from the life, fallen from the breath, fallen from the light, fallen from the radiance, fallen from the heat, fallen from the warmth, fallen from the fire, fallen from the flame, fallen from the smoke, fallen from the luster, fallen from the brilliance, fallen from the splendor, fallen from the glory, fallen from the power, fallen from the might, fallen from the vigor, fallen from the force, fallen from the firmness, fallen from the stability, fallen from the solidity, fallen from the hardness, fallen from the softness, fallen from the gentleness, fallen from the tenderness, fallen
2.7.12.17	Of the Uṣṭas, of the Pīlvas, and of the Ābandhanīyas, we know your names, O bearers of the Kīlālas, all of you.
2.7.12.18	Release yourselves, O blameless ones, going to the gods, you have crossed over the darkness, to the other shore of this light, of the waters.
2.7.13.1	Those plants which are the firstborn of the gods, three times a hundred, seven abodes of the tawny ones, before Manu, I know.
2.7.13.2	A hundred are your homes, a thousand your shoots, O Amba, and now, O Indra, you have made this medicine for me.
2.7.13.3	Flowering, bearing fruit, bearing fruit, and fruitless, like horses, the plants, the conquerors, are the conquerors.
2.7.13.4	The plants, the mothers, thus I call you, O goddesses, the destroyers of evil, the destroyers of the evil.
2.7.13.5	Your dwelling is in the Ashvattha tree, your abode is made in the leaves. You are indeed the sharers of cows, when you share the man.
2.7.13.6	The plants come together like kings assembled together. He is called the sage, the poet, the destroyer of demons, the remover of evil.
2.7.13.7	Your mother is named Nishkrit, and you are indeed Sankrit. The birds are flying. When you are sick, Nishkrit.
2.7.13.8	The plants that are Soma-like, that are horse-like, that give strength, that are strong, that are life-giving, all the plants, for the sake of my safety, have I gathered.
2.7.13.9	When I, the bestower of strength, take these plants in my hand, the self of consumption perishes, as does the life-stealer before the life-giver.
2.7.13.10	The plants, with their heat, come forth like cows from the pen, the wealth of those who are to be united, your own self, O man.
2.7.13.11	All the worlds have gone beyond, like a thief who has gone away from the village.
2.7.13.12	The plants have come forth, whatever evil there is in the body.
2.7.13.13	Those that have entered into you, those that have stood in each part, may they drive away your consumption, like a fierce one with a middle-head.
2.7.13.14	Together with the Yakshma, fall down with the crow, with the Kikadivi, with the wind's swiftness, together with the Nihaka.
2.7.13.15	Let one of you speak to another, let another speak to one of you. All the plants, having agreed, have spoken to me.
2.7.13.16	Those that are fruitful, those that are not fruitful, those that have sheaths, and those that have no sheaths, may they, born by Brihaspati, release us from evil.
2.7.13.17	The plants that fall from heaven, we eat the living one among them. No man shall be injured.
2.7.13.18	We call upon heaven, the stars, the mountains, the Yakshas, the oceans, the rivers, the forests. May they release us from sin.
2.7.13.19	We invoke the king Varuna, the creator, and also Pusan, the foremost Tvashtar. May they release us from affliction.
2.7.14.1	May the creator of the earth not harm us, the one who spreads the true law in heaven, and the one who first created the moon and the waters. To which god shall we offer oblation?
2.7.14.2	O Earth, return with the sacrifice and with milk. Agni, the eager one, has ascended your womb.
2.7.14.3	O Agni, that which is bright, that which is shining, that which is pure, that which is fit for sacrifice, we offer that to the gods.
2.7.14.4	I have come here for nourishment and strength, for the stream of ghee, for the source of the bull. May it enter our cows and plants. I abandon the disease, the incurable one.
2.7.14.5	O Cow, yielding what is desired, do thou yield to the progeny and plants. To Indra, Agni, Pūṣan, Mitra and Varuna.
2.7.14.6	O Agni, thy fame, thy strength, thy radiance, O thou of great light, shine forth. O thou of great lustre, thou dost bestow the praiseworthy strength on the giver, on the poet.
2.7.14.7	Shining with the lustre of fire, shining with the lustre of the sun, shining with the unerring lustre, the son of the mother, moving with the light, thou art shining, thou fillest both the worlds.
2.7.14.8	O Agni, ruling, thou spreadest with the creatures, for us, O immortal, the wealth of the immortal. Thou shinest with the form of the shining one, thou fillest the wealth of the shining one.
2.7.14.9	O Agni, the bestower of strength, the all-knowing, be pleased with our good praises and our beneficial thoughts. You, the one who unites, the one with many powers, the one with varied rays, born from the good,
2.7.14.10	The people have placed the truthful bull, the great seer, Agni, in front for their pleasure. The divine one, with ears to hear, the most praiseworthy, you are united with the human through speech.
2.7.14.11	The one who performs the sacrifice, the one who knows, the one who consumes the great wealth of gifts, you bestow the desirable, the beautiful, the nourishing, the nourishing, and the agreeable.
2.7.14.12	Grow, be united with you from all sides, O Soma, be the strength at the union of strength.
2.7.14.13	May your juices and your strength be united, may your Vrishṇi-men be united, O thou who art the conqueror of foes. Thou, O Soma, swelling, art made immortal. Set thy highest fame in heaven.
2.7.15.1	Brahman, the unborn, the first, the foremost, we invoke from the far side of the sea, the bright one, whose dwelling-places are the most distant, and who knows the origin of the existent and the non-existent.
2.7.15.2	The golden embryo was born first, the lord of beings, the only one. He supported this earth and heaven. To which god shall we offer oblation?
2.7.15.3	Born from water, from the essence of earth, from the work of all, he came forth. Tvashtra gave him form. That is the god, the self-born, the first man.
2.7.15.4	Let Drapça descend. Homage to the serpents, whatever they are, who are on the earth, in the sky, and in heaven. Homage to those serpents.
2.7.15.5	Those who are the arrows of the Yatudhanas, those who are the trees, those who lie in the holes, to those serpents homage.
2.7.15.6	Those who are in the light of heaven, or in the rays of the sun, or who have made their abode in the waters, to those serpents salutations!
2.7.15.7	Make the thunderbolt, the pressing stone, like a king on his elephant, going to the pressing stone, pressing the pressing stone, go down, strike the demons with the most burning (thunderbolts).
2.7.15.8	Your illusions fall with speed, touch them with your sharpest power, burning. With your austerities, O Agni, let the flying insects be scattered, let the sparks be scattered in all directions.
2.7.15.9	Let the destroyer be quickly scattered, be the protector of this clan, the unassailable. The one who is far away, the one who is near, the one who wishes us harm, O Agni, may no misfortune befall us from you.
2.7.15.10	O Agni, stand up, extend yourself, burn down the enemy, the sharp-shooter, who has made us hostile. Burn down the low one, the dry one, not the moist one.
2.7.15.11	Be upright, overcome our enemies. Reveal the divine ones, O Agni. Be firm. Destroy the demons, the enemies. Destroy the enemies.
2.7.15.12	This Agni, the lord of a thousand and a hundred prizes, is the head of the poets.
2.7.15.13	I settle you with Agni's radiance, with that deity, firmly as Angiras.
2.7.15.14	The leader of the sacrifice and of the earth, where thou art with thy auspicious messengers, thou hast placed the head in heaven, thy own self, and thou hast made Agni the carrier of oblations.
2.7.15.15	I settle thee with Indra's strength, with that deity, as Angiras did. Be firm, thou art firm, thou art established by the All-creator, well established. May not the ocean drown thee, may not the Suparna [1] injure thee. Firmly thou holdest the earth. Thou art firm, thou holdest firm, thou art firmly established. Do not injure the earth, protect me from the earth. Thou are light, give me light, hold the sky, hold the sky firmly, do not injure the sky, protect me from sky. Thou art heaven, give me heaven, hold heaven, hold heaven firmly, do not injury heaven, protect me from heaven. Those thy moist, those thy nestling, those thy drops, O Agni, which are in thy belly, by all of them, both of them, knowing, thou sittest down here in thy body.
2.7.15.16	Growing from stalk to stalk, the rougher and rougher, O Dūrvā, thou growest with a thousand and a hundred.
2.7.15.17	Thou who growest with a hundred, and growest with a thou- sand, to that Goddess of thine, O Dūrbā, we offer sacrifice with oblation.
2.7.16.1	O Agni, those thy rays which thou, O Sun, spreadest in the sky with thy rays, with all those rays of thine, O God- dess, make us shine for the people today.
2.7.16.2	O ye Gods, the light that is in the Sun, the light that in the kine, the light that's in the horses, Indra and Agni, with all these lights, O Brihaspati, bestow on us.
2.7.16.3	Viraj, the light, has supported (it). Svaraj, the light, supported (it). Samraj, the light, supports (it). You are the seed of the world, the brick, the heavenly world. I ascend you with the mind. Agni is light, light is Agni. With that deity, be firm like Angiras. Surya is the seed of Suvan, the brick, heaven. I ascend you by speech. Surya is light, light Surya. With that deity be firm like Angira. Brihaspati should place you on the luminous earth, for all, for the in-breath, out-breath, through-breath, upward-breath, for the established, for the conduct, for all light. Agni is your lord. With that deity you be firm like Angirases. Vishvakarman should place you on luminous space, for all, the in-breath... Vishvakarman is your lord. The Supreme One should place you on a luminous heaven, for all, in-breath... Surya is your lord. You be firm like Angirases. You are Ashada, the one who conquers, the one who rules, the one who overcomes the enemy, the one who subdues the army. You are the one with a thousand powers. You should invigorate me.
2.7.16.4	Honey are the winds, honey the rivers flow, may the plants be sweet for us.
2.7.16.5	Honey is the night, honey the day, honey the earth's expanse. May heaven, our father, be sweet for us!
2.7.16.6	May the tree be sweet for us, may the sun be sweet for us; may the cows be sweet for us.
2.7.16.7	I place thee in the water, in the shade of the rising wave of the ocean. Obeisance to the ocean, obeisance to the ocean's eye. May the heavenly rain follow thee. May not the sun burn thee. May Agni Vaiśvānara, with unbroken leaves, look upon the creatures. He has entered the three oceans, the lord of waters, the bull of the bricks. Go there where the former have gone, clothed in excrement, to the world of the righteous.
2.7.16.8	May the earth and heaven, the two, have mixed this sacrifice. May they nourish us with their burdens.
2.7.16.9	This is Vishnu. O tree, the wind blows your top. Now indeed, for Indra to drink, press the Soma in the mortar.
2.7.16.10	Night and Dawn, stitched together by the gods with immortality, came to the cauldron, and stood on their sister's altar. Agni, known by the sages of old, may he make that known here. O Earth, be seated on Earth, on the mother, on the mother. Thou art the gentle one, the pleasant one. Be seated on the gentle one, be seated on the pleasant one. Varuna, the upholder of his vow, has sat down on the pastures for the sake of kingship, the well-willed one.
2.7.16.11	We seek Agni, the great, the divine, the wonderful, the all-pervading, the all-knowing, the all-seeing, the all-powerful, the all-encompassing, the all-embracing, the all-consuming, the all-subduing, the all-ruling, the all-creating, the all-sustaining, the all-destroying, the all-purifying, the all-illuminating, the all-benefiting, the all-bestowing, the all-giving, the all-granting, the all, the all-knower, the all-seer, the all-ruler, the all-creator, the all-sustainer, the all destroyer, the all-purer, the all-illuminer, the all-beneficient, the all-giver, the all-granter, the all-possessor, the all-enjoyer, the all, and the all-knowest.
2.7.16.12	Agni, the all-shining, the all-bright, the all-luminous, the all-brilliant, the all-glorious, the all-splendid, the all-radiant, the all-blazing, the all-burning, the all-scorching, the all-glowing, the all-heating, the all-warming, the all-kindling, the all-igniting, the all, is kindled by the kindlers, the all-adorers, the all-worshippers, the all-praisers, the all-glorifiers, the all-extollers, the all, in the all-shining all-bright all-luminous all-brilliant all-g
2.7.17.1	O Agni, yoke those thy horses, O god, who are good, who carry thee, the swift ones.
2.7.17.2	Yoke thou, O god, the horses summoned by thee, as a charioteer, the ancient Hotar, the seat.
2.7.17.3	The rivers flow together, like cows, purified within by heart and mind. I see the streams of ghee, the golden birch-tree in the middle of Agni.
2.7.17.4	For Richi, for Ruci, for Bhasi, for Jyotis, for Agni, for the all-shining, for the all, for the all shining, for the all. Agni, with brilliance, is brilliant, with lustre, is lustrous, you are the giver of a thousand. For a thousand, I have united the embryo of the sun with milk. The form of a thousand, of universal form, you should protect with strength. Do not be distressed. Make it a hundred-year-old, while being worshipped.
2.7.17.5	The wind's speed, Varuna's navel, the horse born in the midst of the waters, the golden child of the rivers, the mountain-born, Agni, do not injure him in the highest heaven.
2.7.17.6	The ever-flowing, tawny, shining Agni, I praise with salutations the ancient-minded one. He, being fashioned according to the seasons and the joints, do not injure Aditi, the shining one.
2.7.17.7	The womb of Tvashtri, the navel of Varuna, the cow that is born from the highest heaven, the thousand-fold illusion of the Asura, O Agni, do not injure it in the highest heaven.
2.7.17.8	He who is Agni, born from Agni's heat, from sorrow of the earth or from the sky, who has created these beings, the universal creator, may that Agni be your protector. May it surround you.
2.7.17.9	Do not injure this two-footed animal, the sacrificial animal, being offered for the sake of wisdom by the thousand-eyed one. I direct the wild deer to you. Sit down with your body, having fashioned it with that. May the curse of yours reach the one whom we hate. May the curse reach him. Do not injure this one-hoofed animal, the sacrificial horse, the neighing one among horses. I direct the tawny wild animal to you. Sit with your body, fashioned with that. May your curse reach the one whom I hate. May your curse fall on him. Do not hurt this thousand-streamed, flowing, golden-streaming, flowing in the middle of the water, giving milk, Aditi to the people. Do not injure the wild gavaya, the animal, the sacrificial gavaya, the wild gavaya. I direct it to you. Sit, having fashioned your body with that. May thy curse reach the one I hate. May thy curse fall on him.
2.7.17.10	I assign to you the wild sheep; sitting down, may you build up your body. May the curse of him whom we hate come upon the sheep. May the curse come upon him whom we hate. The goat was born from Agni's sorrow. He saw his father first. By him the gods went to the divine highest place. By him they went to the highest place, the highest. The wild antelope I assign to you. Sitting down, may you construct your body. May his curse come upon the antelope. May his curse fall upon him whom we Hate.
2.7.18.1	I place thee in the waters.
2.7.18.2	I place thee in the water's depth.
2.7.18.3	I place you in the waters' course.
2.7.18.4	I place thou in the waters' light.
2.7.18.5	I place in the waters' ashes.
2.7.18.6	I place the in the waters' home.
2.7.18.7	I place them in the waters' abode.
2.7.18.8	I place they in the waters' dwelling.
2.7.18.9	I place thy in the waters' decay.
2.7.18.10	I place you in the waters' company.
2.7.18.11	I place you in the abode of the waters.
2.7.18.12	I place thee in the waters' dwelling.
2.7.18.13	I place thou in the waters' womb.
2.7.18.14	I place thy in the waters' excrement.
2.7.18.15	I place in the waters' path.
2.7.18.16	I place with the Gayatri metre.
2.7.18.17	I place the Tristubh metre.
2.7.18.18	I settle you with the Jagat metre.
2.7.18.19	I settle you with the Anushtubh metre.
2.7.18.20	I settie you with the Paṅkti metre.
2.7.19.1	This is the eastern quarter.
2.7.19.2	Its life-breath is Bhauvāyana.
2.7.19.3	Spring is the life-breath.
2.7.19.4	The Gāyatrī is the spring.
2.7.19.5	The Gâyatrī is the Gâyatra.
2.7.19.6	From the Gâyatra comes the Upamshu.
2.7.19.7	From the Upamshu comes the Trivrit.
2.7.19.8	Trivrit is Rathantara.
2.7.19.9	The sage is Vasishtha.
2.7.19.10	By you, taken by Prajapati, I take the breath for the sake of offspring.
2.7.19.11	This is the southern Vishvakarman.
2.7.19.12	His mind is Vishvakarman's.
2.7.19.13	Summer is mental.
2.7.19.14	The Tristubh is summer.
2.7.19.15	The Svaras is from Tristubh.
2.7.19.16	From Svaras comes Antaryama.
2.7.19.17	From Antaryama comes the fifteen.
2.7.19.18	From the fifteen comes the Brihat.
2.7.19.19	Bharadvaja is the Rishi.
2.7.19.20	By you, taken by Prajapati, I take the mind for the offspring.
2.7.19.21	This is the one with all-pervading vision.
2.7.19.22	His eye is all-pervasiveness.
2.7.19.23	The rains are all-pervasive.
2.7.19.24	The Jagati is the rainy one.
2.7.19.25	The Jagatī is equal to the Ṛk.
2.7.19.26	The Sukra is equal to the Rk.
2.7.19.27	From the Sukra comes the seventeen.
2.7.19.28	The seventeen-syllabled verse is called Vaírupa.
2.7.19.29	The sage is Jamadagni.
2.7.19.30	"You have taken the eye with the eye of Prajapati, I take it for the subjects."
2.7.19.31	This is the northern heaven.
2.7.19.32	Its hearing is golden.
2.7.19.33	The arrow is Sharadrí.
2.7.19.34	The Anushtubh is Sharadí.
2.7.19.35	The Anushhtubh is Aíd.
2.7.19.36	The Aíd is Manthí.
2.7.19.37	The Manthin is Ekavimsha.
2.7.19.38	From the twenty-one, the Vaishvaran.
2.7.19.39	The sage is Vishvamitra.
2.7.19.40	You have taken up the ear with the Prajapati-graha for the sake of offspring.
2.7.19.41	This is the highest wisdom.
2.7.19.42	Her speech is the mother.
2.7.19.43	The winter is to be spoken.
2.7.19.44	The Panchati is the winter.
2.7.19.45	The Nidhanavat is the Panchati.
2.7.19.46	The Nidhavanat is the Aggrayan.
2.7.19.47	From Āgrayana, the thirty-nine and thirty-three.
2.7.19.48	From the thirty-nine, thirty-three, and Śākvara-Raivata.
2.7.19.49	Viśvakarman is the sage.
2.7.19.50	I take speech from you, taken by Prajapati, for the sake of offspring.
2.7.20.1	The eastern direction.
2.7.20.2	The spring season.
2.7.20.3	Agni is the deity.
2.7.20.4	Brahma is the wealth.
2.7.20.5	The metre is Gāyatrī.
2.7.20.6	The Sāman is Rathantara.
2.7.20.7	The Stoma is Trivṛt.
2.7.20.8	It has fifteen verses.
2.7.20.9	The sage is Sānagā.
2.7.20.10	The age is of three kinds.
2.7.20.11	The path is made.
2.7.20.12	The wind is the wind in front.
2.7.20.13	The fathers, the grandfathers, the distant ones, the near ones.
2.7.20.14	May they protect us.
2.7.20.15	May they protect us in this Brahman, in this Purodhas, in this rite, in this blessing, in this invocation of the gods.
2.7.20.16	The southern direction.
2.7.20.17	The summer season.
2.7.20.18	Indra is the deity.
2.7.20.19	Wealth is the substance.
2.7.20.20	The Tristubh metre.
2.7.20.21	The Brihat Sama.
2.7.20.22	The Stoma is fifteen.
2.7.20.23	It has seventeen parts.
2.7.20.24	The eternal Rishi.
2.7.20.25	The Dityas are the Vayas.
2.7.20.26	The Treta-s are the names.
2.7.20.27	The southern wind is the wind.
2.7.20.28	The fathers, grandfathers, the higher and the lower.
2.7.20.29	May they protect us.
2.7.20.30	May they, the fathers, grandfathers protect us in this Brahman, in this Purodha, in this Karma, in this Ashi, in this Devahuuta.
2.7.20.31	The western direction.
2.7.20.32	The rainy season.
2.7.20.33	The Vishve Devas are the deities.
2.7.20.34	Vid is wealth.
2.7.20.35	The Jagati is the meter.
2.7.20.36	Vairupa is the Sama.
2.7.20.37	The Stoma is seventeen.
2.7.20.38	It is one with twenty-one parts.
2.7.20.39	The sage is Ahabhu.
2.7.20.40	The age is three-fold.
2.7.20.41	The age of the Dvapara is the last.
2.7.20.42	The wind is behind the wind.
2.7.20.43	The fathers, grandfathers, and great-grandfathers are above and below.
2.7.20.44	May they protect us.
2.7.20.45	May they protect us in this Brahman, in this Purodhas, in this rite, in this blessing, in this invocation of the gods.
2.7.20.46	The northern direction.
2.7.20.47	The autumn season.
2.7.20.48	The deities Mitra and Varuna.
2.7.20.49	Wealth and prosperity.
2.7.20.50	The Anushtubh metre.
2.7.20.51	The Vairaja Sama.
2.7.20.52	The Ekavimsa Stoma.
2.7.20.53	He is the one with thirty-nine wheels.
2.7.20.54	The ancient sage.
2.7.20.55	The fourth age.
2.7.20.56	The overpowering of the enemies.
2.7.20.57	The wind from the north, the wind.
2.7.20.58	The fathers, the grandfathers, the distant ones, the near ones.
2.7.20.59	May they protect us.
2.7.20.60	May they protect us in this Brahman, in this Purodhas, in this rite, in this blessing, in this invocation of the gods.
2.7.20.61	The upward direction.
2.7.20.62	The seasons of winter and spring.
2.7.20.63	Brihaspati is the deity.
2.7.20.64	The fruit is wealth.
2.7.20.65	The Pankti is the meter.
2.7.20.66	The Shakarara and Raivata are the Samans.
2.7.20.67	The Stoma is Trinava.
2.7.20.68	He is the one who moves in the heaven of the thirty-three gods.
2.7.20.69	The sage Supārna.
2.7.20.70	The age of Prsthavāḍa.
2.7.20.71	The one who ascends is the leader of the Ayas.
2.7.20.72	The wind is above the wind.
2.7.20.73	The fathers, grandfathers, the distant ones, the near ones.
2.7.20.74	May they protect us.
2.7.20.75	May they protect us in this Brahman, in this Purodhas, in this rite, in this blessing, in this invocation of the gods.
2.8.1.1	Fill the world, fill the void, be firm.
2.8.1.2	Indra and Agni, Brihaspati have settled thee in this womb. The pressing stones, the pressing stones of the Soma, press thee, the pressing stones, the Soma, the pressing stones.
2.8.1.3	The birth of the gods, the three shining heavens, the firm foundation, the firm birthplace, thou art firm, thou hast taken thy firm place, O Sadya.
2.8.1.4	Accepting the first sign of the cauldron, the Adhvaryus, the Asvins, have placed thee here.
2.8.1.5	The nest-maker, the giver of ghee, the old woman, the auspicious one, has taken her place in the abode of the earth.
2.8.1.6	May the Rudras and Vasus sing to thee; do thou increase this prayer for good fortune.
2.8.1.7	May the Asvins, the Adhvaryus, place thee here.
2.8.1.8	Sit here, O son of Daksha, with thy own powers, for the great joy of the gods, for the fight.
2.8.1.9	As a father to his son, as one who is kind, do thou enter with thy own body.
2.8.1.10	The Asvins, the Adhvaryus, have placed thee here.
2.8.1.11	The dust of the earth, the name of the waters, may all the gods praise thee.
2.8.1.12	Sit here, with thy back to the Stoma, rich in ghee, give us wealth and offspring.
2.8.1.13	The Asvins, the two Adhvaryus have placed thee here,
2.8.1.14	I place thee on the back of Aditi.
2.8.1.15	The supporter of the sky, the upholder of the directions,
2.8.1.16	The ruler of the world,
2.8.1.17	Thou art the wave, the drop of the waters.
2.8.1.18	May the Asvins, the Adhvaryus, settle thee here.
2.8.1.19	Together with the seasons.
2.8.1.20	Together with ordinances.
2.8.1.21	Together with gods.
2.8.1.22	Together with Vayu-gods.
2.8.1.23	To Agni thee, to Vaisvānara.
2.8.1.24-34	The Asvins, the Adhvaryus, have settled thee here. With the seasons, with the laws, with the Vasus, with the seasons, with the laws, with the Rudras, with the seasons, with laws, with Aditya, with the seasons,
2.8.1.35	With the Jātavedas.
2.8.1.36	With all the gods, with the Vaiśvānara gods.
2.8.1.37	With the gods, with Vayu.
2.8.1.38	To Agni, to Vaiśvānari.
2.8.1.39	May the Adhvaryus, the Asvins, settle you here.
2.8.2.1	Protect my breath.
2.8.2.2	Protect my out-breath.
2.8.2.3	Protect my through-breath.
2.8.2.4	Open wide my sight.
2.8.2.5	Make my hearing clear.
2.8.2.6	Pour forth water.
2.8.2.7	Nourish the plants.
2.8.2.8	Protect the two-footed.
2.8.2.9	Protect the four-footed.
2.8.2.10	Send down rain from heaven.
2.8.2.11	The age is the warrior.
2.8.2.12	The metre is the mayanta.
2.8.2.13	The age that supports.
2.8.2.14	The metre that rules.
2.8.2.15	The age of the head.
2.8.2.16	The metre Prajapati.
2.8.2.17	The age Vishvakarman.
2.8.2.18	The metre Parameshthi.
2.8.2.19-31	The three-year-old is the age. The Tristubh is the meter. The four-year-old bull is the age. The Virata is the meter. The five-year-old cow is the age.The Gāyatrī is the meter.The three-year-calf is the age. Anuṣṭubh is the age. Four-year-old calf is the age. Anushtubh is the meter, the five-year-calf. The Brihatī is the meter. Bull is the age.
2.8.2.32-45	Kakup is the meter. The bull is the age. Satobṛhatī is the meter.  The bull is age. Paṅkti is the meter.   The cow is the age.   Jagatī is the meter The bull is an age. Yavalam is the meter. The bull is the age Viśālam is the meter.The man is the age. The bull is an age Tandra is the meter. A lion is the age.
2.8.2.46	The Chhandas is the Chastiser.
2.8.2.47	The Vyahra is the Age.
2.8.2.48	The Chhandas is Unassailable.
2.8.3.1	O Indra and Agni, you two, firm in your strength, have placed the indestructible brick. With the back you have filled the heaven and earth, and have obstructed the atmosphere.
2.8.3.2	You are the queen, the eastern direction. You are the Viraj, the southern direction. You are Samrat, the western direction. You are Svarat, the northern direction. You are Adhipatni, the upward direction. Protect my life, protect my breath, protect my out-breath, protect my through-breath, protect sight, protect hearing, protect mind, increase my speech, protect my self, bestow light on me. The Chanda is Prama, the Chanda is Pratima, the Chanda has no decay, the Chanda consists of five, the Chanda of six, the Chanda consisting of seven, the Chanda Gāyatrī, the Chanda Triṣṭubh, the Chanda Jagatī, the Chanda Anushtubh, the Chando Viraj, the Chanda Brihatī, the Chando Earth, the Chanda Space, the Chanda Heaven, the Chanda Stars, the Chanda Samā, the Chanda Agriculture, the Chanda Speech, the Chanda Mind, the Chanda Cow, the Chanda Horse, the Chanda Goat, the Chanda Gold, Agni is the deity, Vāta is the deity, Sūrya is the deity, Candrama is the deity, Vasus are the deities, Rudras are the deities, Ādityas are the deities, Maruts are the deities, Indra is the deity, Varuna is the deity, Brihaspati is the deity, Viśve Devas are the deities. You are the head, you are the king, you are the firm one, you are the supporter, you are the earth, for life, for radiance, for agriculture, for prosperity, for the moving king, you are moving, you are the controller, you are the support, you are the sustainer, for food, for energy, for wealth, for nourishment.
2.8.4.1	The Trivrit is the swift one.
2.8.4.2	The Pancadasa is the shining one.
2.8.4.3	The Saptadasa is the sky.
2.8.4.4	The Astadasa is the rushing one.
2.8.4.5	The Navadasa is the heat.
2.8.4.6	The Savimsat is the turning back.
2.8.4.7	The Ekavimsat is the support.
2.8.4.8	The Dva-vimsat is the radiance.
2.8.4.9	The Trayovimsat is the gathering.
2.8.4.10	The Catu-vimsat, the womb.
2.8.4.11	The Panca-vimsat are the embryos.
2.8.4.12	Ojas is thirty-nine.
2.8.4.13	Virat is thirty.
2.8.4.14	Kratu is thirty-one.
2.8.4.15	Vidhriti is thirty-two.
2.8.4.16	Prathishtha is thirty-three.
2.8.4.17	Brahma's abode is thirty-four.
2.8.4.18	Naka is thirty-six.
2.8.4.19	Viveta is forty-eight.
2.8.4.20	Dhatra is fifty.
2.8.5.1-12	You are the share of Agni. The consecration is the lordship. Brahma is the praise. The Stoma is threefold. You are the share of Indra. Vishnu is the lordship. The Kshatra is the praise. The Stoma is fifteenfold. You are a share of the men with eyes. Dhatri is the lordship. Janitra is the praise.The Stoma is seventeenfold.
2.8.5.13	You are the share of Mitra.
2.8.5.14	Varuna is the lord.
2.8.5.15	The rain is from heaven.
2.8.5.16	The wind is the Sprit.
2.8.5.17	The Stoma is twenty-one.
2.8.5.18	You are the share of Aditi.
2.8.5.19	Pusha is the lord. 
2.8.5.20	The strength is the Sprit
2.8.5.21	The Stoma has twenty-nine.
2.8.5.22	You are a share of the Vasus.
2.8.5.23	The Rudras are the lords.
2.8.5.24	The Sprit has four feet.
2.8.5.25	The twenty-four-fold Stoma.
2.8.5.26	You are the share of the Adityas.
2.8.5.27	You are lordship of the Maruts.
2.8.5.28	The embryos are touched.
2.8.5.29	The twenty-five-fold Stoma
2.8.5.30	You are the portion of Savitar.
2.8.5.31	You are Lordship of Brihaspati.
2.8.5.32	The directions are touched.
2.8.5.33	Four-fold Stoma,
2.8.5.34	You are the part of the barley.
2.8.5.35	The Adhipatya of the Ayavanas.
2.8.5.36	The Prajas are touched.
2.8.5.37	The Stoma is forty-four.
2.8.5.38	You are the share of the Rbhus.
2.8.5.39	The Adhipatya is of all the gods.
2.8.5.40	The past, the end, is touched.
2.8.5.41	The stoma is thirty-three.
2.8.6.1	They praised with one.
2.8.6.2	The Praja-s were born.
2.8.6.3	The lord of the Praja-s was the Adhipati.
2.8.6.4	They praised with three (verses).
2.8.6.5	Brahma was created.
2.8.6.6	Brahmāspati was the lord.
2.8.6.7	They praised with five (verses).
2.8.6.8	The elements were created.
2.8.6.9	The lord of the elements was the lord. 
2.8.6.10	They praised with seven (verses).
2.8.6.11	Seven sages were created.
2.8.6.12	Dhatā was the lord. 
2.8.6.13	They praised with nine (verses).
2.8.6.14	The Pitrs were created.
2.8.6.15	Aditi was the ruler.
2.8.6.16	They praised with eleven (verses).
2.8.6.17	Seasons were created.
2.8.6.18	The seasons were the rulers.
2.8.6.19	They praised (the seasons) with thirteen (verses).
2.8.6.20	Months were created.
2.8.6.21	Samvatsara was the ruler. The seasons were the rulers
2.8.6.22	They praised with fifteen (verses).
2.8.6.23	The Kshatriya caste was created.
2.8.6.24	Indra was the lord.
2.8.6.25	They praised with seventeen (verses).
2.8.6.26	Domestic animals were created.
2.8.6.27	Brihaspati was the lord. 
2.8.6.28	They praised with nineteen (verses).
2.8.6.29	The Shudra and Arya castes were created.
2.8.6.30	Day and night were the lords.
2.8.6.31	They praised in twenty-one (verses).
2.8.6.32	One-hoofed animals were created.
2.8.6.33	Varuna was the lord.
2.8.6.34	They praised with twenty-three (verses).
2.8.6.35	Small animals were created. 
2.8.6.36	Pusha was the lord. 
2.8.6.37	They praised with five-twenty (verses).
2.8.6.38	Wild animals were created.  
2.8.6.39	Vayu was the lord.  
2.8.6.40	They praised with seven-twenty (verses)
2.8.6.41-50	The trees were created. Soma was the lord. They praised with twenty-nine (verses). Heaven and earth were separated. The Vasus and Rudras followed. They were the lords. They praised in thirty-one (verses). The beings were created. Yava and Ayava were the lords. The Vasus and Rudra were the lords. They praised in thirty-three (verses).
2.8.6.51	The elements did not become calm.
2.8.6.52	Prajapati was the supreme lord, the overlord.
2.8.7.1	O Agni, drive away our enemies who are born, and drive away those who are yet to be born. O Jātavedas, drive them away. Tell us what is auspicious. May we be under your protection. May we be protected by the three armies.
2.8.7.2	O Jātavedas, drive away our enemies who have arisen and those who are yet to arise. Tell us what is in your mind. May we be free from our enemies.
2.8.7.3	The Stoma of forty-four is wealth, the Stoma of sixteen is strength, the Stoma is Agni's excrement, its name is water. May all the gods praise thee, O Stoma, with the Stoma, seated here with ghee, bestow on us offspring and wealth.
2.8.7.4	The deity is Angiras. The metre is Dhruva. The metre is Varivash. The metre is Achach. The metre is Manas. The metre is Sambhu. The metre is Paribhu. The metre, is Sindhu. The metre. is Vyach. The metre is Samudra. The metre is Salila. The metre is Kakup. The metre is Trikakup. The metre,is Kavya. The metre is Angup. The metre.is Aksarapankti. The metre is Padapankti. The.metre is Vistarapankti.The metre is Kshurobhija. The metre is Paksha. The metre is Prachach. The metre. Is Samyach. The metre.Is Viyach. The.metre.is Brihat. The metre is Rathantara. The metre is Nikaya. The metre is Vivedha. The metre is Gira. The metre is Bhrish. The metre is Sastup. The metre Is Anushtup. The metre .is Evash. The metre.s Varivash.The metre is Vayas. The metre is Vayaskrit. The metre is Vishala. The metre is Vispardha. The metre. s Chadi. The metre is Durohan. The metre is Tandra. The metre is Anka-Anka.
2.8.8.1	With the ray, I invoke the destruction for destruction.
2.8.8.2	With the Dharma, I invoke the Dharma for the departed.
2.8.8.3	With the Anvita, I invoke the heaven for heaven.
2.8.8.4	With the Sandhi, I invoke the atmosphere for the atmosphere.
2.8.8.5	With the Pratidhi, I invoke the earth for the earth.
2.8.8.6	With the support, I invoke the rain for the rain.
2.8.8.7	With the Prava, I invoke the day for the day.
2.8.8.8	With the Anu, I invoke the night for the night.
2.8.8.9	Oshija, for the Vasus, win the Vasus.
2.8.8.10	With Praketa, for the Rudras, win the Rudras.
2.8.8.11	With Sudita, for the Adityas, win the Adityas.
2.8.8.12	With Tantu, for the offspring, win the offspring.
2.8.8.13	With Ojas, for the fathers, win the fathers.
2.8.8.14	With Pritanashaha, for the cattle, win the cattle.
2.8.8.15	With Revata, for the plants, win the plants.
2.8.8.16	O Indra, you have conquered, O Indra, you are victorious.
2.8.8.17	O Lord, you have conquered the breath, O Lord, you are victorious!
2.8.8.18	O Holder, you have conquered exhalation, O Holder, you are victorious
2.8.8.19	O Serpent, you have conquered sight, O Serpent, you are victorious;
2.8.8.20	O Youthful, you have conquered learning, O Youthful, you are victorious,
2.8.8.21	O Three-fold, you have conquered Three-fold, O Three-fold,
2.8.8.22	O Proceeding, you have conquered Proceeding, O Proceeding, you are victorious.
2.8.8.23	O you who are covered, O you who are uncovered, O you who cover, do you cover!
2.8.8.24	O you who are followed, O you who follow, O you who lead, do you lead!
2.8.8.25	O you with growth, O you with growth, do you grow!
2.8.8.26	O you of growth, O you of growth, do you increase!
2.8.8.27	O you increasing, O you increasing, do you increase
2.8.8.28	O you of following growth, O you following growth, do you follow growth!
2.8.8.29	O you having wealth, O you having wealth, do you have wealth!
2.8.8.30	O Vesha Shri, O Vesha Shri! May I conquer Vesha Shri!
2.8.8.31	O Vasya Ashtya, O Vasya Ashtyi! May I conquer Vasya Asht!
2.8.8.32	O Utkranti, O Utkranti! May I conquer Utkranti!
2.8.8.33	O Uktranti, O Uktranti! May I conqueror Uktranti!
2.8.9.1	You are the queen.
2.8.9.2	The eastern direction.
2.8.9.3	The Vasus are your presiding deities.
2.8.9.4	Agni is the repeller of calamities.
2.8.9.5	May the Trivṛt Stoma be established on the earth for thee.
2.8.9.6	May the Ajya Uktha be established for thee for the sake of invincibility.
2.8.9.7	May the Rathantara Sāman be established for thee in the firmament for the sake of stability.
2.8.9.8	May the sages, the first-born among the gods, extend thee by the measure of heaven.
2.8.9.9	And this is the regulator and the lord.
2.8.9.10	May all of them, knowing you, place you and the sacrificer in the world of heaven, in the highest heaven.
2.8.9.11	You are Viraj.
2.8.9.12	The southern direction.
2.8.9.13	Rudras are your presiding deities.
2.8.9.14	Indra is the repeller of calamities.
2.8.9.15	May the Stoma of fifteen verses be established for you on earth.
2.8.9.16	May the Prauga hymn be established for the sake of invincibility.
2.8.9.17	The great Sama is established in the atmosphere.
2.8.9.18	The sages, the firstborn among the gods, may extend you by the measure of heaven.
2.8.9.19	And this is the regulator and the lord.
2.8.9.20	May all of them, in agreement, establish you on the back of the sky, in the heavenly world, and the sacrificer.
2.8.9.21	You are the emperor.
2.8.9.22	The western direction.
2.8.9.23	The Adityas are your presiding deities.
2.8.9.24	Soma is the guardian of the rites.
2.8.9.25	May the Stoma of seventeen verses be established on the earth.
2.8.9.26	The Marutvatiya hymn for the sake of invincibility.
2.8.9.27	The Vairambha Sama for the sake of stability in the atmosphere.
2.8.9.28	The sages, the firstborn among the gods, may they spread you by the measure of heaven.
2.8.9.29	And this is the regulator and the lord.
2.8.9.30	May all of them, knowing you, place you and the sacrificer in the world of heaven, in the heaven of the sky.
2.8.9.31	You are the lord of heaven.
2.8.9.32	The northern direction.
2.8.9.33	The Maruts are your presiding deities.
2.8.9.34	Varuna is the repeller of calamities.
2.8.9.35	May the twenty-one-fold Stoma be established for you on the earth.
2.8.9.36	May the single-fold hymn be established for you for the sake of invincibility.
2.8.9.37	The Viraj Sama is established in the atmosphere.
2.8.9.38	The sages, the firstborn among the gods, may extend you by the measure of heaven.
2.8.9.39	And this is the regulator and the lord.
2.8.9.40	May all of them, in agreement, establish you on the back of the sky, in the heavenly world, and the sacrificer.
2.8.9.41	You are the lord.
2.8.9.42	The upward direction.
2.8.9.43	All those gods are the lords.
2.8.9.44	Brihaspati is the counter-holder of the Hatis.
2.8.9.45	May the Stomas of thirty-nine and thirty-three be established in the earth.
2.8.9.46	May the Utkhas of the Visvedevas and Agni-Maruts be established for the sake of invincibility.
2.8.9.47	May the Samanas of Shakra and Raivata be established in the firmament for the sake of stability.
2.8.9.48	May the sages, the first-born among the gods, establish you by the measure of heaven.
2.8.9.49	And this is the regulator and the lord.
2.8.9.50	May all of them, knowing you, place you in heaven, in the world of heaven, with the sacrificer.
2.8.10.1	This is the one in front, Harikesha, the sun-ray.
2.8.10.2	His Rathakritsna and Rathaujas are the commanders of the army.
2.8.10.3	Punjikasthala and Kritasthala are the celestial nymphs.
2.8.10.4	The demons are the target.
2.8.10.5	The demons of protection are the target. 
2.8.10.6	To them be salutations.
2.8.10.7	May they be gracious to us.
2.8.10.8	We place in their jaws him whom we hate and who hates us.
2.8.10.9	This is the southern quarter, the creator of all.
2.8.10.10	His commanders are Rathasvana and Rathashcitra.
2.8.10.11	The Apsarases are Menaka and Saharjana.
2.8.10.12	The cattle are the Dakshina, the curse.
2.8.10.13	The killing of a man is a sin.
2.8.10.14	To them be salutations.
2.8.10.15	May they be gracious to us.
2.8.10.16	Whomsoever we hate, and who hateth us, him we place in their jaws.
2.8.10.17	This one, the last, is the possessor of wealth.
2.8.10.18	His charioteers are Rathas and Asamarathas, and his generals are Grammaṇis.
2.8.10.19	His Apsarases are Āmlocanta and Pramlocanta.
2.8.10.20	The tigers are the Heti.
2.8.10.21	The serpents are the Praheti.
2.8.10.22	To them be salutations.
2.8.10.23	May they be gracious to us.
2.8.10.24	We place in their jaws him whom we hate and who hates us.
2.8.10.25	This is the northern country of Samyadvayu.
2.8.10.26	Its commanders-in-chief are Senajit and Susena.
2.8.10.27	The Apsarases are Visvaci and Ghritaci.
2.8.10.28	The waters are the missiles.
2.8.10.29	The wind is the counter-missile.
2.8.10.30	To them be salutations.
2.8.10.31	May they be gracious to us.
2.8.10.32	Whomsoever we hate, and who hateth us, him we place in their jaws.
2.8.10.33	This is the one above, the one below, the one of wealth.
2.8.10.34	Its commanders are Tarkshya and Charishtanemi.
2.8.10.35	Its Apsarases are Urvashi and Purshachi.
2.8.10.36	The thunderbolt roared.
2.8.10.37	The lightning was hurled.
2.8.10.38	To them be homage.
2.8.10.39	May they be gracious to us.
2.8.10.40	Whomsoever we hate, and he who hates us, we place him in their jaws.
2.8.11.1	I settle you in the eastern direction.
2.8.11.2	With Agni as the deity, with the Gayatri metre, I place the head of Agni.
2.8.11.3	I place the head of Agni on the head of the Gayatri metre.
2.8.11.4	I place you in the southern direction.
2.8.11.5	I place the wing of Agni with Indra as the deity, with the Tristubh metre.
2.8.11.6	I put the wing of Agni on the wing of the Tristubh meter.
2.8.11.7	I place thee in the western direction.
2.8.11.8	With the Viśve Devas as the deity, with the Jāgata metre, I place the tail of Agni.
2.8.11.9	With the Jāgata meter, with the tail of Agni, I place the Agni's tail.
2.8.11.10	I place you in the northern direction.
2.8.11.11	With Mitra-Varuna as the deity, the two gods, with the Anushtubh metre, I place Agni's wing.
2.8.11.12	I place Agni's flank with the flank of the Anushtubh metre.
2.8.11.13	I place you with the upward direction.
2.8.11.14	I place Agni's back with the deity Brihaspati, with the Paṅkti metre.
2.8.11.15	I put Agni's back in the back of the Paṅkti meter.
2.8.12.1	Madhu and Madhava are the seasons of spring. You are the union of Agni. May heaven and earth be united, may the waters and plants be united, may all the separate fires be united for my supremacy, with their vows.
2.8.12.2	Those fires, of one mind, between heaven and earth, the spring seasons, being conceived, may they enter Indra like the gods.
2.8.12.3	Thou art the union of Agni. May heaven and earth be united. May the waters and plants be united. May all the fires be united for my supremacy, O ye of the same vows.
2.8.12.4	Those fires who are of one mind between heaven and earth, the seasons of winter, being conceived, may they enter Indra like the gods.
2.8.13.1	You are the wind-bearer.
2.8.13.2	You are cloud-bearer.
2.8.13.3	you are lightning-bearer.
2.8.13.4	Thunder-bearer.
2.8.13.5	Rain-bearer.
2.8.13.6	What you are of Agni,
2.8.13.7-16	You are Agni's Agni-like. You are Vayu's Vayu-like. You are Vāyu's Vāyu-like.  You are the gods' gods-like.  Translation: You are Agni' Agni-like. You are Vayu' Vayu-like You are Vâyu's Vâyu-like. you are the gods's gods-like. You belong to the gods. You are the gods' s gods-like. you belong to the gods You are the common-like.  you are the one who is in the atmosphere. you are seated in the atmosphere.
2.8.13.17-26	Amba, Bulla, Nitatni, Stana-yanti, Abhra-yanti, Megha-yanti, and Chupunika. To the water, to you. To the gentle one, to you. To the true one, to you To the leader, to you.To the good leader, to you  To the good leader, To the good leader. To the shining one, to you, To the light of heaven, to you. to the Adityas, to you.
2.8.14.1	Udapura is the name of this (region). I invite thee with my self, with men, with cattle, with horses, with life, with lustre, with offspring, with wealth, with devotion, with prosperity, with nourishment. The Maruts are thy protectors. Vayu is thy lord. With that deity, be firm like Angiras. Adidyu is the name of it. It is pervaded by immortality. I invite thee with myself, with men, cattle, with horses with life, with splendour, with offspring, wealth, with devotion with prosperity, with food. The All-gods are thy protectors. Surya is thy lord. With that deity, be firmly established. May Prajapati settle thee on the back of the earth. Thou art the earth. Thou are the ground. Thou art the extensive earth. Thou art Aditi, the supporter of the universe. Thou art the supporter of the earth. Protect the earth. Protect it from all injury. Protect the earth from all injury. Thou art the support, the conduct, of the breath, the out-breath, the through-breath, the up-breath, and the settled breath. May Agni protect thee with his great, auspicious, most peaceful, all-embracing power. May Visvakarman settle thee on the surface of the atmosphere. Thou art the atmosphere. Thou are the extensive atmosphere. Thou art shining atmosphere. Thou art radiant atmosphere. Thou art atmosphere with rays. Thou art the one who shines in heaven, on earth, and in the atmosphere. Protect the atmosphere. Protect it from injury. Protect the atmosphere from injury. Thou art support, conduct, of the breathing, the out-breathing, the through-breathing, the up-breathing, and the settled breathing. May Vayu protect thee with his greatness, auspiciousness, most peaceful, and all-embracing. May Parameshthin settle thee on the sky. Thou art the sky. Thou are the shining sky. Thou art extensive sky. Thou art radiant sky. Thou art sky with rays. Thou are the one who shines the heaven, the earth, and the atmosphere. Protect heaven. Protect it from harm. Protect heaven from harm. Thou art the breathing, the breathing out, the through- breathing, the up- breathing, and the settled-breathing. May Surya protect thee with his greatest, auspicious, most peacefully, all-embraicing power. The horse, when he has not eaten his fill, when he has come out from his stall, is blown by the wind. His dark path is known.
2.8.14.2	I place you in your abode, in the shade of the rising wave of the ocean. Salutations to the ocean, salutations to the ocean's sight. You are the thousand, you are the thousand's measure, you are the thousands' reflection, you are the thousanda's union, you are the thouasnd's rise. You are a thousand. For a thousand I offer you. These bricks of mine, O Agni, may be cows, one and a hundred, a hundred and a thousand, a thousand and ten thousand, ten thousand and twenty thousand, twenty thousand and thirty thousand, thirty thousand and forty thousand, forty thousand and fifty thousand, fifty thousand and sixty thousand, sixty thousand and seventy thousand, seventy thousand and eighty thousand, eighty thousand and ninety thousand, ninety thousand and a hundred thousand, a hundred thousand and a hundred and one thousand, a hundred and one and a hundred and two thousand, a hundred two and a hundred and three thousand, a hundred three and a hundred and four thousand, a hundred four and a hundred and five thousand, a hundred five and a hundred and six thousand, a hundred six and a hundred and seven thousand, a hundred seven and a hundred and eight thousand, a hundred eight and a hundred and nine thousand, a hundred nine and a hundred and ten thousand, a hundred ten and a hundred and eleven thousand, a hundred eleven and a hundred and twelve thousand, a hundred twelve and a hundred and thirteen thousand, a hundred thirteen and a hundred and fourteen thousand, a hundred fourteen and a hundred and fifteen thousand, a hundred fifteen and a hundred and sixteen thousand, a hundred sixteen and a hundred and seventeen thousand, a hundred seventeen and a hundred and eighteen thousand, a hundred eighteen and a hundred and nineteen thousand, a hundred nineteen and a hundred and twenty thousand, a hundred twenty and a hundred and twent-one thousand, a hundred twent-one and a hundred and thirty thousand, a hundred thirty and a hundred and forty thousand, a hundred forty and a hundred and fifty thousand, a hundred fifty and a hundred and sixty thousand, a hundred sixty and a hundred and seventy thousand, a hundred seventy and a hundred and eighty thousand, a hundred eighty and a hundred and ninety thousand, a hundred ninety and a hundred and a hundred thousand. These bricks, O Agni, are cows, sixty thousand, imperishable, abiding in the seasons, growing in truth, flowing with ghee, flowing with honey, full of strength, full of milk, full of self-existence, full of family. They are called Virajas, they are the wish-yielding cows, here and in the other world.
2.9.1.1	May the tawny ones, with good intentions, bring you here, with white horses, with banners, with wind-like speed, with strength, with mind-like speed, at this sacrifice for my offering, O Śarva.
2.9.1.2	I invoke the great god, the ancestor of the gods, the sages, and the demons, the thousand-eyed, the auspicious one.
2.9.1.3	We meditate on that Purusha, we meditate on the great god, may he inspire us with knowledge.
2.9.1.4	We meditate on that Ganga-born, we meditate on him who is the daughter of the mountain, may Gauri inspire us with knowledge!
2.9.1.5	We meditate on him who has the form of a boy, we meditate on Kartikeya, may Skanda inspire us with knowledge!
2.9.1.6	We meditate on Karata, we meditate on the elephant-faced one, may that one incite our teeth.
2.9.1.7	We meditate on the four-faced one, we meditate on Padma-asani, may that one inspire us with Brahma.
2.9.1.8	We meditate upon Keshava, we meditate upon Narayana, may that one Vishnu inspire us.
2.9.1.9	We meditate on the Sun, we meditate on Prabhakara, may that Sun inspire us.
2.9.1.10	We meditate on Soma Raja, we meditate on Maharaaja, may that Moon inspire us.
2.9.1.11	 We meditate on Jvalana, we meditate on Vaishvanara, may that Fire inspire us.
2.9.1.12	We know that, we meditate on that, may that inspire us.
2.9.1.13	We know that, we know the supreme Self, we meditate on the supreme Self, may that inspire our creation.
2.9.2.1	Salutations to you, O Rudra, to your wrath, and also to your arrows. Salutations to you, to your bow, and also to both your arms.
2.9.2.2	O Rudra, with that benign form of yours, which is not terrible, which is not fearful, look upon us with that benign form.
2.9.2.3	O Girisha, the arrow which you hold in your hand, which is auspicious, which is terrible, make it auspicious. Do not injure the person, the world.
2.9.2.4	We address you with auspicious words, O Girisha, so that all people may be well-disposed towards us at the time of meeting.
2.9.2.5	The divine physician, the first, the most excellent, has spoken. He who is the red one, the tawny one, the auspicious one, the one who is the tawny one, he who is the tawny auspicious one, he who has the tawny auspicious one - all those who are the Rudras, those who are the tawny ones, those who are tawny, those who are in the directions, those who are here, those who are there, those who are on the earth, those who are above, those who are below, those who are around, those who are near, those who are far, those who are many, those who are one, those who are a thousand, those who are more than a thousand, those whose number is unknown, those who are to be known, those who are not to be known, all those who are Rudras, those tawny ones, those tawny ones - may they be propitious to us. He who moves down, the one with the blue neck and red body, he was seen by the cowherds, he was seen in the water, he was seen everywhere. May he be seen by us, may he be propitious to 
2.9.2.6	Obeisance to the blue-robed, to the thousand-eyed, to the glorious one. And to those who are his followers, I offer this obeisance to them.
2.9.2.7	Obeisance to your weapon, to the unerring, to the destroyer. Obeisance to both of them, and to your arms, O archer.
2.9.2.8	Release the bowstring from both your bows. Let those arrows that are in your hands fall down, O Blessed One.
2.9.2.9-11	O Thousand-eyed One, having stretched your bow, O Hundred-arrowed One, having opened the mouth of the arrows, be gracious to us. The bow of the matted-haired one is without arrows, the arrow-holder is without arrows. The arrows that were his are now without arrows. May the arrow of your bow encompass us from all sides. And the arrow-holder that is yours, place him in this (man). May the arrow that is yours encompass us from all directions. And the arrow that is your arrow-holder, place him in him.
2.9.2.12	The arrow that is yours, O most excellent one, has become auspicious. With that, from all sides, do thou protect us with thy benignity.
2.9.3.1	Salutations to the commander of the army, the golden-armed one.
2.9.3.2	Salutations also to the lord of the directions.
2.9.3.3	Salutations unto the trees with tawny hair.
2.9.3.4	Salutations, also, to the lord of cattle.
2.9.3.5	Salutations again to the tawny-haired one with the sacred thread.
2.9.3.6	Salutations once more to the lord of nourishment.
2.9.3.7	Obeisance to the one who is tawny-coloured, to the one who has lustre.
2.9.3.8	Obeisance to the Lord of paths.
2.9.3.9	Obeissance to the one who causes disease, to the one with a tawny beard.
2.9.3.10	Obeisence to the Lord of food.
2.9.3.11	Obeiscnece to Rudra, to the one of great speed.
2.9.3.12	Obeience to the Lord of fields.
2.9.3.13	Obeiscece to the one who goes to Bhava, to the one whose name is Bhava.
2.9.3.14	Obeince to the Lord of the world.
2.9.3.15	Obeicence to the one who destroys, to the one called Sūta.
2.9.3.16	Obeiance to the Lord of forests.
2.9.3.17	Salutations to Rohița, the architect.
2.9.3.18	Salutations to the lord of trees.
2.9.3.19	Salutations, O merchant, to the one who knows mantras.
2.9.3.20	Salutations the lord of the Kṣatriyas.
2.9.3.21	Salutations Bhuvanta, the one who makes water flow.
2.9.3.22	Salutations lord of herbs.
2.9.3.23	Salutations Sahmanā, the one who cures diseases.
2.9.3.24	Salutations Lord of the ones who cure diseases.
2.9.3.25	Salutatious to the one who cries out loudly, to the one with a loud voice.
2.9.3.26	Obeisance to the lord of beings.
2.9.3.27	Obeisance to the one who is covered with all (things).
2.9.3.28	Obeisance, to the lord of the Pattis.
2.9.3.29	Obeisence to the one who has a bow, to the one who holds the bow.
2.9.3.30	Obeissance to the lord of thieves.
2.9.3.31	Obeience to the one who deceives, to the one wbo deceives others.
2.9.3.32	Obeiscnece to the lord of those who steal.
2.9.3.33	Obeiscece to the one who moves around, to the one wh moves around.
2.9.3.34	Obeiseence to the lord of foresters.
2.9.3.35	Salutations to the bow-wielding, arrow-wielding one.
2.9.3.36	Salutations to the lord of thieves.
2.9.3.37	Salutations those who are bent on killing, the hunters.
2.9.3.38	Salutations, to the lord of those who steal.
2.9.3.39	Salutations the sword-wielding ones, who move at night.
2.9.3.40	Salutations of the lord of those whose clothes are torn.
2.9.3.41	Salutations one who wears a turban, who moves in the mountains.
2.9.3.42	Salutations again and again to the lord of the Kulunjas.
2.9.4.1	Obeisance to those who make arrows and bows.
2.9.4.2	Obeisance to those who have arrows and bows. Obeisance to you all.
2.9.4.3	Obeissance to those who string and release. Obeisance to those whose arrows are strung and released.
2.9.4.4	Obeisence to those who draw and shoot. Obeisance to the arrows that are drawn and shot.
2.9.4.5	Obeiscnece to those who hold and pierce. Obeisance to arrows that are held and pierced.
2.9.4.6	Salutations to those who are asleep and those who are awake.
2.9.4.7	Salutations to those who are lying down and those who are sitting.
2.9.4.8	Salutations those who are standing and those who are running.
2.9.4.9	Salutations the assemblies and the lords of the assemblies.
2.9.4.10	Salutations horses and the lords of horses.
2.9.4.11-15	Salutations to you, the rulers, the rulers of the world, the rulers of heaven, the rulers of earth, the rulers of hell, the rulers of all beings, the rulers of men, the rulers of cattle, the rulers of plants, the rulers of trees, the rulers of herbs, the rulers of grasses, the rulers of water, the rulers of fire, the rulers of wind, the rulers of space, the rulers of time, the rulers of light, the rulers of darkness, the rulers of day, the rulers of night, the rulers of dawn, the rulers of twilight, the rulers of birth, the rulers of death, the rulers of life, the rulers of non-life, the rulers of good, the rulers of evil, the rulers of truth, the rulers of falsehood, the rulers of dharma, the rulers of adharma, the rulers of virtue, the rulers of vice, the rulers of merit, the rulers of demerit, the rulers of happiness, the rulers of suffering, the rulers of joy, the rulers of sorrow, the rulers of pleasure, the rulers of pain, the rulers of love, the rulers of hatred, the rulers of desire, the rulers of anger, the rulers of greed, the rulers of generosity, the rulers of delusion, the rulers of wisdom, the rulers of ignorance, the rulers of knowledge, the rulers of unknowing, the rulers of learning, the rulers of unlearning, the rulers of faith, the rulers of unbelief, the rulers of devotion, the rulers of disaffection, the rulers of worship, the rulers of disrespect, the rulers of reverence,
2.9.4.16	Salutations to the diverse forms, salutations to you, the diverse forms.
2.9.4.17	Salutations to the armies, salutations to the commanders of the armies, salutlations to you.
2.9.4.18	Salutations, to the charioteers, salutations to those who are on chariots, salutations to yoou.
2.9.4.19	Salutations. to the warriors, salutations to thoe who gather, salutations to yot.
2.9.4.20	Salutations tto the elders, salutations to thee young ones, salutations to yon.
2.9.4.21	Salutations tothe young, salutations to thoseseated, salutations toyou.
2.9.5.1	Salutations to the Brahmins, salutations to the Rajanyas.
2.9.5.2	Salutations to the Sutas, salutations to those of the Vaisya caste.
2.9.5.3	Salutations, to the carpenters, salutations to you, the cartwrights.
2.9.5.4	Salutations the potters, salutations to your blacksmiths.
2.9.5.5	Salutations those of the Nisada caste, salutations to all of you, the Puñjishta.
2.9.5.6	Salutations to the dogs and to the hunters.
2.9.5.7	Salutations to the dogs and their masters.
2.9.5.8	Salutations unto Bhava and Sharva.
2.9.5.9	Salutations, O Rudra and Pashupati.
2.9.5.10	Salutations (to you) with matted hair and with dishevelled hair.
2.9.5.11	Salutations with blue throat and with white throat.
2.9.5.12	Salutations of the thousand-eyed and the hundred-armed.
2.9.5.13	Salutations to Giriśa and Śipivista.
2.9.5.14	Salutations to Mīḍhuṣṭara and Ēṣumat.
2.9.5.15	Salutations the short one and the dwarf.
2.9.5.16	Salutations, to the great one and the eldest.
2.9.5.17	Salutations. to the aged one and the well-aged one.
2.9.5.18	Salutations .to the one who is not old and the foremost.
2.9.5.19	Salutations , to the swift one and the one who is without old age.
2.9.5.20	Salutations  to the quick one and the speedy one.
2.9.5.21	Obeisance to Urmiya and Avashvanya.
2.9.5.22	Obeisance to Dvipya and Srotsyaya.
2.9.6.1	Obeissance to Ashushena and Ashuratha.
2.9.6.2	Obeisence to Bilmina and Kavachina.
2.9.6.3	Obeience to Varmina and Varuthina.
2.9.6.4	Obeiance to Shura and Avabhindata.
2.9.6.5	Obeiance to Shruta and Shruta-sena.
2.9.6.6	Obeince to Jyestha and Kanistha.
2.9.6.7	Salutations to the one who is born before and after.
2.9.6.8	Salutations to the one who stands in the middle, to the one who has no fear.
2.9.6.9	Salutations, to the one at the end, to the one with knowledge.
2.9.6.10	Salutations the one who is beautiful, to the one whose voice is heard.
2.9.6.11	Salutations yo the one who is in the south, to the one of peace.
2.9.6.12	Salutations o the one who is at the end, the one who is praised.
2.9.6.13	Salutations co the one who is on the earth, to the one in the sky.
2.9.6.14	Salutations lo the one who is of the forest, to the one within the house.
2.9.6.15	Salutations to Śrava and Pratiśrava.
2.9.6.16	Salutations to Pathya and Srutaya.
2.9.6.17	Salutations Nādyā and Vaishanta.
2.9.6.18	Salutations Nippya and Bhidya.
2.9.6.19	Salutatons Avatya and Kūpya.
2.9.6.20	Salutations Sūdyā and Sarasya.
2.9.7.1	Salutatioṇs to Dundubhi and Ahananiya.
2.9.7.2	Salutations Dhṛṣṇu and Pramṛsha.
2.9.7.3	Salutations to the one with the bow, to the one with wisdom.
2.9.7.4	Salutations to the sharp-shooter, to the one who wields weapons.
2.9.7.5	Salutations, to the one holding his own weapon, to the one having a good bow.
2.9.7.6	Salutations the one with clouds, to the one lightning.
2.9.7.7	Salutations one who rains, to the one does not rain.
2.9.7.8	Salutations  to the one with wind, to the one scorching.
2.9.7.9	Salutations , to the one with wind and frost.
2.9.7.10	Salutations . to the one with houses, to the one of houses.
2.9.7.11	Salutations to Soma and Rudra.
2.9.7.12	Salutations to Tamra and Charuna.
2.9.7.13	Salutations (to you) who are Shanga and Pashupati.
2.9.7.14	Salutations, O fierce one and terrible one.
2.9.7.15	Salutations unto the slayer of the enemy and the slayer of the distant enemy.
2.9.7.16	Salutations of the slayer and the slayer of what is to be slain.
2.9.7.17	Salutations be to the trees with tawny hair.
2.9.7.18	Salutations Tara.
2.9.7.19	Salutations Sambhu and Mayobhu.
2.9.7.20	Obeisance to Sankara and to Mayascara.
2.9.7.21	Obeisance to Siva and to Shivarata.
2.9.8.1	Obeisence to Shikhandina and to Pulashti.
2.9.8.2	Obeissance to Kamshila and to Kshena.
2.9.8.3	Obeience to Iriinya and to Prapathya.
2.9.8.4	Obeiscnece to Grihya and to Gosthya.
2.9.8.5	Obeiance to Gehya and to Talpya.
2.9.8.6	Obeicence to Kulyia and to Tirthya.
2.9.8.7-14	Obeisance to the one who is beyond and within. Obeisance to the one to be crossed and to the one to cross. Obeisence to the one to flow and to the one who flows. Obeissance to the one to foam and to the one with foam. Obeience to the one to wear and to the one wearing. Obeiscnece to the one to cut and to the one in the abyss. Obeissnce to the one to dry and to the one green. Obeisnce to the one with dust and to the one dusty. Obeinsnce to the one who wears and to the one without
2.9.8.15	Salutations to the one who is to be worshipped and to the one who worships.
2.9.8.16	Salutations to the one who has waves and to the one with waves.
2.9.8.17	Salutations the one who has leaves and to the one whose leaves are eaten.
2.9.8.18	Salutations, to the one who removes obstacles and to the one that strikes.
2.9.8.19	Salutations who scratches and to the one scratching.
2.9.8.20	Salutations both to the one who scratches and to one who scratches.
2.9.9.1	Obeisance to the mountains, to the hearts of the gods. Obeisance to the searching ones. Obeisance to those who search. Obeisance to him who is not injured. O Drap, O Andhaspati, O Daridr, O Neelalohit, do not be afraid, do not cry. Let none of our cattle or progeny be injured.
2.9.9.2	We offer these thoughts to Rudra, to the one with matted locks, to the destroyer of heroes, so that there may be peace for us, for the two-footed and the four-footed, for all prosperity in this village, without sickness.
2.9.9.3	O Rudra, that auspicious form of yours, auspicious for all healing, auspicious for the sound of your voice, with that, be gracious to us for life.
2.9.9.4	May the curse of Rudra be averted from us, may the evil intention of Tvesa be averted from us. Be firm for the generous ones, be gracious to the offspring and the sons.
2.9.9.5	O most auspicious one, most auspicious one, be auspicious to us. Be gracious, having lowered your bow. Be gracious, O unangry one, bearing the Pināka, wearing the hide, coming near, wearing the skull.
2.9.9.6-8	O Rudra, thou art the best of gods, thou art the most excellent. O Rudra, thou hast a thousand weapons, may they strike others, not us. The thousands of weapons in thy arms, O Maghavan, may they turn their faces away from us. The countless thousands of Rudras on earth, their bows are stretched to a thousand yojanas, we know that.
2.9.9.9-11	Those who are in this great ocean, in the sky, above, their bows are a thousand yojanas long. Those who are blue-necked, with white throats, the Rudras who are attached to heaven, their bows are a thousand yojanas. Those who have blue necks and white throats, the Sharvas who move below the earth, their bows are 
2.9.9.12	Those who are in the trees, with tawny tails, blue necks, and red, their bows are a thousand yojanas long, and their arrows are a thousand yojnas long.
2.9.9.13	Those who are the lords of beings, with matted hair and beards, their bows are ten thousand yojanas in length, and their arrows ten thousand yojanes in length.
2.9.9.14	Those who guard the paths and are the protectors of the path, your enemies are the Ailas, their bows are twenty thousand yojanas, and their arrows twenty thousand yojanes.
2.9.9.15	Those who wander in the sacred places, the Śṛgāvas and Niṣaṅgins, their bows are a thousand yojanas long.
2.9.9.16	Those who discriminate among foods and drinks, the people who drink from vessels, their bows are also a thousand yojanās long.
2.9.9.17	Those Rudras who are in the directions, whether they are as many as these or more, their bows are a thousand yojanas long. That is our wealth.
2.9.9.18	Obeisance to the Rudras who are in heaven, whose arrows are rain. To them ten in the east, ten in the south, ten in the west, ten in the north, ten above, to them obeisance. May they be gracious to us. Whomsoever we hate, and he who hates us, we place him in their jaws. Obeisance to the Rddras who are in the atmosphere, whose arrows are wind. To them ten... Obeisance to the Rdras who are on the earth, whose arrows are food. To them ten ...
2.9.10.1	To the non-terrible, to the terrible, to the most terrible of the terrible, to all the terrible ones, to the terrible of the terrible ones, salutations to you, O Rudra, in all your forms.
2.9.10.2	He who follows the path to heaven, like a cow to be well-guided, by that path may you, O Lord, go.
2.9.10.3	These golden-colored ones are entering their own birthplace. Go, O Blessed One, for the sake of returning and seeing again, with Sahadeva, with the bulls, with the group, with the retinue, as invited, to the one who is saluted, to the one saluted, to the dismissed, to the dismissed. Go to the path, go to the path, Go to heaven, go to heaven, Go to heaven. Go to heaven. Go to light, go to light. To you, may there be salutations. Do not harm me. Invited, invited. Saluted, saluted. Dismissed, dismissed. Go to path, go to path. Go to heaven, Go heaven. Go to Svarga. Go to Svarg. Go to light. Go to light.
2.10.1.1	The Maruts, the givers of food, have gathered it from the stone, from the mountain, from the plants, from the herbs, from the trees. They have given it to us, the food and strength, the Maruts, the protectors. The stone, thy hunger, is in me. The strength is in thee. Let the curse of him whom we hate come upon him. With the help of the ocean, O Agni, we go around thee. Be thou a purifier, be thou auspicious to us.
2.10.1.2	We encircle thee with the womb of Him, O Agni, thou art the purifier, be thou auspicious to us.
2.10.1.3	Come down to the earth, come down to the grass, O Agni, come down to rivers, thou art the son of the waters, O frog, come with them, make this our sacrifice of the colour of the purifier, auspicious.
2.10.1.4	This is the way of the waters, the abode of the ocean. May other afflictions torment us. May the fire be auspicious to us.
2.10.1.5	O Agni, with thy shining light, thou, the shining one, dost shine for us. Thou, the shining one who shines with thy shining light. Thou, the kind one, dost shine like the dawn with its sign. He who, not being old, is not thirsty, not being young, is not eager, not being a man, is not a woman, does not shine in the battle.
2.10.1.6	Obeisance to thee, O Agni, to thy flames and to thy light. May thy other shafts burn against our foes. May Agni be auspicious unto us.
2.10.1.7	O Indra, O Agni, O Soma, O Varuna, O Yama, O Aryaman, O Mitra, O Vivasvan, O Savitar, O Pusan, O Vishnu, O Sarasvati, O Daksha, O Rudra, O Bhava, O Ishana, O Mahadeva, O Mahadeva. O Indra, O Agni. O Indra and Agni. O Agni and Indra. O Indra. O Agni. O Soma. O Varuna. O Yama. O Aryaman. O Mitra. O Vivasvan. O Savitar. O Pusan. O Vishnu. O Sarasvati. O Daksha. O Rudra. O Bhava. O Ishana. O Mahadeva. Mahadeva. O Agni, O Agni. Translation: O Indra, O Varuna. Indra and Varuna. Varuna and Indra. Indra. Varuna. O Soma, O Varupa. O Varupa and Soma. Soma and Varupa. Soma. Varupa. O Yama, O Aryama. Yama and Aryama. Aryama and Yama. Yama. Aryama. O Mitra, O Vayu. Mitra and Vayu. V
2.10.1.8	Those gods who are worthy of sacrifice among the gods, who have a share in the annual sacrifice, may they drink themselves of the honey and ghee at this sacrifice without being offered.
2.10.1.9	Those gods who have come to godhood from the gods, who are the leaders of this Brahman, from whom nothing flows forth without them, they are not above heaven and earth, in the womb.
2.10.1.10	Those who give life, those who take life, those who give breath, those who give strength, those who give wealth, may they burn others against us. May Agni be auspicious to us.
2.10.2.1	Agni with his sharp radiance has made everything free from distress. May Agni bestow wealth on us.
2.10.2.2	He who offers these worlds, the Rishi, the Hotar, sat down as our father. Seeking wealth with a blessing, he entered first the lower world.
2.10.2.3	What was the forest, what the tree, from which heaven and earth were fashioned? The wise one should ask this with his mind. What was it that stood above, supporting the worlds?
2.10.2.4	What was the foundation, what the beginning? What was the story from which the Creator, the all-seeing one, produced the earth and heaven by his greatness? He who is all-seeing, all-faced, all-handed, all-supporting, he, the one God, produced heaven and earth by his arms and wings.
2.10.2.5	Those thy forms, the great, the small, the middle, O thou of universal skill, and these, O friend, thou shalt learn by the oblation of thy friends. Thou thyself shalt worship, enjoying thy own body.
2.10.2.6	O thou of universal skill! thou hast made Indra the protector, the invincible, by the oblation in the act of nourishing. To him bow the divine hosts. This fierce one is as he should be.
2.10.2.7	O Vishvakarman, having been nourished with oblations, yourself perform the sacrifice of the earth and heaven. May others be confused around us. May Maghavan be our leader here.
2.10.2.8	We invoke today Vachaspati, Vishvakarman for protection, yoked with the mind, in the race. May he accept our most desirable invocations. May he, the all-pervading one, the well-doing one, be present at our assembly.
2.10.3.1	The wise father of the eye, with his mind, has generated ghee for him who is bending down. When the former ones had not yet given, then indeed the heaven and earth were not yet separated.
2.10.3.2	Viśvakarman, the measurer, who is the supporter, the regulator, the supreme, the seer, the most excellent, the most excellent of all, the most excellent among the gods, the most excellent in the world, the most excellent one, the most excellent god, the most excellent lord, the most excellent creator, the most excellent maker, the most excellent disposer, the most excellent arranger, the most excellent ruler, the most excellent regulator, the most excellent supreme one, the most supreme one, the supreme one, the highest one, the highest god, the highest lord, the highest creator, the highest maker, the highest disposer, the highest arranger, the highest ruler, the highest regulator, the highest supreme one, the one who is the highest, the highest one. They have generated wealth in him, the ancient seers, the singers, the ones who are not asleep, the ones who have attained the path in the path, the ones who created these beings.
2.10.3.3	He who is our father, our creator, our dispenser, who has created us from the true, who is the only one to name the gods, all other worlds follow his command.
2.10.3.4	The highest of heaven, the highest of earth, the highest of the gods, whatever Asura there is, what embryo did the waters first contain? Where all the gods assembled, there that embryo, the first, the waters contained, where all the gods beheld it. One is deposited on the navel of the unborn, in which all the worlds are established.
2.10.3.5	If Viśvakarman was born as the first god, then the Gandharva became the second, and the third was the father who created the plants. They placed the embryo of water in many places.
2.10.3.6	You do not know him who created these. There is a difference between you. They wander, covered by delusion and deceit, unsatisfied and seeking praise.
2.10.4.1	Lead him up to the north, O Agni, with ghee not offered. Unite him with radiance and make him very prosperous with offspring.
2.10.4.2	Lead him to the forefront of his kinsmen, may he be the lord of his people. Unite him with the prosperity of wealth. May he be the one who shares in the portion of the gods.
2.10.4.3	To whom we offer oblations in our homes, O Agni, may you increase him. The gods have declared him as the one who shares. And this is the lord of Brahmanas.
2.10.4.4	The swift, the strong, the bull, the unvanquished, the dense, the dense, and the agitator of the tribes, the roaring, the unblinking, the single hero, Indra conquered a hundred armies at once.
2.10.4.5	With the roaring, the blinking, the conquering, the fighting, the hard-to-move, the conquering, with that Indra, conquer and unite! O men, with the warrior, the strong, with the bow in hand.
2.10.4.6	He, with his bow in hand, with his bow-string, the lord, in the battles of the united hosts, Indra, the conqueror of the united, the drinker of Soma, the strong, with his bow raised, with his arrows fixed, has gone up.
2.10.4.7	O Brihaspati, driving around with your chariot, destroying the Rakshas, the foe, shattering the armies, conquering in battle, victorious, may you be our protector, the foremost of chariots.
2.10.4.8	The hero Indra, who is swift to seize the clans, who is strong, who has a hundred enemies, who is hard to conquer, who is the conqueror of the battle-array, may he protect our army in the fight.
2.10.4.9	The strong, the aged, the foremost, the powerful, the swift, the strong, the fierce, the heroic, the heroic, and the brave, O Indra, may you mount your victorious chariot, O giver of cattle.
2.10.4.10	The one who divides the clans, the knower of cattle, the one with the thunderbolt in his hand, the conqueror, the one who destroys the enemy with force, this Indra, the one who is praised by his kinsmen, the one who has conquered, the one who conquers, the one who will conquer, the one who makes the enemy tremble, the one who brings down the enemy, the one who defeats the enemy, the Indra who is praised by the gods, the one who delights the gods, the Indra who delights the gods - may the gods praise him.
2.10.4.11	Indra is their leader, Brihaspati is their guide, the sacrifice is their right, Soma is their vanguard. May the Maruts go in the midst of the conquering and overpowering armies of the gods.
2.10.4.12	The mighty, fierce, irresistible shout of the gods, Indra, Vishnu, Varuna, the king, the Adityas, the Maruts, of the great-minded, the rulers of the world, has arisen.
2.10.4.13	May Indra be with us when the banners are raised; may our arrows be victorious. May our heroes be superior. May the gods help us in the battles.
2.10.5.1	May the five divine directions, the goddesses, driving away evil and ill-will, approach the lord of sacrifice for prosperity. The sacrifice stands in prosperity.
2.10.5.2	In the kindled Agni, the great, the bearer of praise, the invoked, having taken the heated Gharma, they worshipped. When the gods pacified the sacrifice,
2.10.5.3	The divine, the divine, the divine. The divine, the heavenly, the divine, to the divine, the heavenly. The divine, to the heavenly, the heavenly.
2.10.5.4	Harikeśa, the Sun-rayed, the Foremost, Savitar, the Light, the constant Rising, him Pūṣan, the Wise, goes forth in the impulse, the Overseer of all the worlds, the Protector.
2.10.5.5-6	The gods, the Adhvaryus, have stood among the gods, the pacified, to be pacified, for the sacrifice. The fourth part of the sacrifice goes where the offering goes. May the blessings of the prayers be accepted by us. Indra, the most excellent among the strong, the most excellent of the strong, the lord of the lords, the most excellent one among the excellent, the most excellent, the most eminent, the most excellent. Indra has been praised by all, the most excellent in the assembly, the most excellent at the sacrifice, the most excellent for the sacrifice, the excellent one, the most excellent.
2.10.5.7	This chariot is in the middle of heaven, extending over the two worlds, the sky. He sees the two worlds, Ghrtachi and Vishvachi, between the eastern and western sign.
2.10.5.8	The red hawk in the ocean entered the eastern womb of his father. The speckled stone, placed in the middle of the sky, moved to the ends of the path.
2.10.5.9	May the God Agni, invoked by the God, come to the sacrifice. May the God Agni come to the sacrifice, invoked by the Gods.
2.10.5.10	"May the God Agni, invited by the God, go to the sacrifice. " Two verses.
2.10.6.1	Go in order, bearing the sky in your hands, having gone to the back of heaven, you have come to the sacrifice with the Gods."
2.10.6.2	O Agni, go forward, the first, to the east, the eye of the gods and of mortals. May the sacrificers go with the Bhrigus, seeking (the heaven), with welfare.
2.10.6.3	I have ascended from the earth to the atmosphere, from the atmosphere to heaven, from the surface of heaven I have gone to the heavenly light.
2.10.6.4	Those who go to heaven, not looking back, ascend to the sky, the two worlds, those who have found the sacrifice which has a thousand streams, the wise ones who have spread it out.
2.10.6.5	O Agni, you are the thousand-eyed, the Suparna Garutman, you have seated yourself on the back of the earth, you have filled the atmosphere with light, you have risen up with the light of heaven, you have upheld the directions with your brilliance. The one who is invoked, the well-favoured one, has seated himself in his own place in front. The gods who are to be accomplished have seated themselves in this place, in the northern direction, along with the sacrificer.
2.10.6.6-7	I choose the variegated, most excellent, all-generative good counsel of Savitar, which Kanva milked from the earth, the cow, with a thousand streams of milk. We invoke thy highest birth, O Agni, we invoke thee with praises at the lower seat. From which womb thou hast risen, to that we offer thee oblations when thou art kindled.
2.10.6.8	O Agni, shine forth brightly before us, with thy constant light, the most excellent, the most brilliant. The steeds approach it, the most excellent.
2.10.6.9	O Agni, today I offer this oblation to thee, thy altar, as thou art in mind, as the gods have come here, the Vītihotras, the increasers of truth.
2.10.6.10	On the path of the ocean, the wind, I offer this oblatory offering to the all-worker, the all-possessor, the all-shining.
2.11.1.1	Shukra-jyotis and Citra-jyotih.
2.11.1.2	Satya-jyotis, Jyotisman.
2.11.1.3	Satya and Ritapash, Atyamhah.
2.11.1.4	Ritajih and Satyajih.
2.11.1.5	Senajih and Susena.
2.11.1.6	Antamitra and Dureenamitra, the group.
2.11.1.7	Rta and Satya.
2.11.1.8	Dhruva and Dharuna.
2.11.1.9	The Holder, the Dispenser, the Distributor.
2.11.1.10	The like and the unlike.
2.11.1.11	The like, and the counter-like.
2.11.1.12	The measured and the measured together, the strong.
2.11.1.13	The like ones, the unlike ones, the ones like us.
2.11.1.14	The like-ones, the counter-like-ones, the ones like this.
2.11.1.15	The measured ones, the measured together, for our protection, the strong Maruts at this sacrifice.
2.11.1.16	Indra, the divine hosts, the Maruts, follow him.
2.11.1.17	Just as the divine hosts, Maruts, followed Indra, so may the divine and human hosts follow this sacrificer.
2.11.2.1	My strength and my offspring,
2.11.2.2	My exertion and my expansion,
2.11.2.3	My wisdom and my resolve,
2.11.2.4	My voice and my verse.
2.11.2.5	My hearing and my hearing.
2.11.2.6	My light and my own.
2.11.2.7	My breath and my out-breath.
2.11.2.8	My circulating breath and my life-breath.
2.11.2.9	Mind and my knowledge.
2.11.2.10	My speech and my mind.
2.11.2.11	My sight and my hearing. 
2.11.2.12	My skill and my strength.
2.11.2.13	My energy and my endurance.
2.11.2.14	My life and my old age.
2.11.2.15	My self and my body.
2.11.2.16	My protection and my armor.
2.11.2.17	My limbs and my bones.
2.11.2.18	My joints and my bodies.
2.11.2.19	My seniority and my authority.
2.11.2.20	My anger and my beauty.
2.11.2.21	My water and my moisture.
2.11.2.22	My greatness and my glory.
2.11.2.23	May my greatness and my extent.
2.11.2.24	May my height and my length.
2.11.2.25	May my growth and my increase.
2.11.3.1	May my truth and my faith.
2.11.3.2	May my world and my wealth.
2.11.3.3	May my power and my radiance.
2.11.3.4	May my play and my joy.
2.11.3.5	May my praise and my good deed.
2.11.3.6	May my birth and my future birth.
2.11.3.7	May my knowledge and what is to be known.
2.11.3.8	What is mine, what will be mine.
2.11.3.9	What is mine, what is mine.
2.11.3.10	What will be mine, what will not be mine.
2.11.3.11	The good, the good path, what is mine, what I have.
2.11.3.12	What is good, what is good for me.
2.11.3.13	What is auspicious, what is auspicious for me.
2.11.3.14	The beloved, what is agreeable to me.
2.11.3.15	What I desire, what is agreeable for me.
2.11.3.16	Wealth, what is mine.
2.11.3.17	May there be good for me, may there be welfare for me.
2.11.3.18	May there be prosperity for me, may fame be for me.
2.11.3.19	Truth for me, immortality for me.
2.11.3.20	Absence of disease for me, absence of sickness for me.
2.11.3.21	Life for me, long life for me.
2.11.3.22	No enemy for me, no fear for me.
2.11.3.23	Sleep for me, rest for me.
2.11.3.24	Good day for me, good day for me.
2.11.4.1	Guide for me, support for me.
2.11.4.2	May there be peace for me, and may there be fortitude for me.
2.11.4.3	May there be the universe for me, and the greatness for me.
2.11.4.4	And may there be discernment for me, and knowledge for me.
2.11.4.5	The sun for me, and prosperity for me.
2.11.4.6	Sira for me, and repose for me.
2.11.4.7	Energy for me, and truthfulness for me.
2.11.4.8	Milk for me, and juice for me.
2.11.4.9	Ghee for me, and honey for me.
2.11.4.10	Sacrifice for me, and praise for me.
2.11.4.11	Agriculture for me, and rain for me.
2.11.4.12	May Jaitra and Audbhetra be mine.
2.11.4.13	May Rayi and Raya be mine.
2.11.4.14	And may Pushta and Pushti be mine.
2.11.4.15	Vibhu and Prabhu be mine.
2.11.4.16	Purnatara and Purnatara be mine.
2.11.4.17	Kuya and Akshiti be mine.
2.11.4.18	Akshu and Anna be mine.
2.11.4.19	Vrih and Yava be mine.
2.11.4.20	Masha and Tila be mine.
2.11.4.21	And my little grains, and my fragrant grains.
2.11.4.22	And my black grains, and my millet.
2.11.4.23	And my wheat, and my lentils.
2.11.4.24	And my mung beans, and my kidney beans.
2.11.5.1	And my mountains, and my hills.
2.11.5.2	And my gravel, and my trees.
2.11.5.3	And my stone, and my clay.
2.11.5.4	And my gold, and my iron.
2.11.5.5	And my lead, and my tin.
2.11.5.6	May the black and the red iron be mine.
2.11.5.7	May Agni and the waters be mine.
2.11.5.8	And the herbs and the plants be mine.
2.11.5.9	The cultivated and the uncultivated be mine.
2.11.5.10	Let the domestic and wild animals be established by sacrifice.
2.11.5.11	May wealth and prosperity be mine.
2.11.5.12	Existence and prosperity be mine
2.11.5.13	May the purpose and the means be mine.
2.11.5.14	This is my path, this is my goal.
2.11.5.15	This is my deed, this is my power.
2.11.5.16	This is wealth, this is my abode.
2.11.5.17	May Agni and Indra be mine.
2.11.5.18	May Soma and Indra be mine
2.11.5.19	May Savitar and Indra be mine,
2.11.5.20	May Sarasvati and Indra be mine;
2.11.5.21	May Pusan and Indra be mine:
2.11.5.22	May Aditi and Indra be mine!
2.11.5.23	May Dhatri and Indra be mine;
2.11.5.24	Tvashtra and Indra are mine.
2.11.5.25	Mitra and Indra are mine
2.11.5.26	Varuna and Indra are mine,
2.11.5.27	Vishnu and Indra are mine;
2.11.5.28	Brihaspati and Indra are mine:
2.11.5.29	The Vasus and Indra are mine!
2.11.5.30	The Rudras and Indra are mine !
2.11.5.31	The Adityas and Indra are mine ;
2.11.5.32	The Maruts and Indra are mine;
2.11.5.33-41	Earth and Indra are mine. Space and Indra are mine Heaven and Indra are mine, The stars and Indra are mine; The seasons and Indra are mine: Agriculture and Indra are mine! Rain and Indra are mine.
2.11.5.42	May Anus and Rays be mine.
2.11.5.43	May Adhipati and Adabhya be mine.
2.11.5.44	Upamshu and Antaryama be mine.
2.11.5.45	Indra-Vayu and Maitra-Varuna be mine.
2.11.5.46	Ashvin and Pratiprasthana be mine.
2.11.5.47	Sukra and Manthin be mine.
2.11.5.48	Aggrayan and Vaishvadev be mine.
2.11.5.49	Indra-Agni and the minor Visve Dev are mine.
2.11.5.50	Dhruva and Vaishvanara are mine.
2.11.5.51	Marutvatiya and Nishevalya are mine.
2.11.5.52	Savitar and Sarasvat are mine.
2.11.5.53	Patnivat and Hariyajana are mine.
2.11.5.54	Srucas and Chamasas are mine.
2.11.5.55	Vayu offerings and Dronakalaśa are mine.
2.11.5.56	My Adhiṣaṇas and my Gravas.
2.11.5.57	My Pūtabṛt and my Apūtabṛt.
2.11.5.58	My Barhi and my Vedi.
2.11.5.59	My Avabṛtha and my Svāgākāra.
2.11.6.1	My Agni and my Gharm.
2.11.6.2	My Arka and my Sūrya.
2.11.6.3	My Prāṇa and my Aśvamedha.
2.11.6.4	My Aditi and my Earth.
2.11.6.5	My Diti and my Heaven.
2.11.6.6	May the Shakaris, the fingers, and the directions be established by the sacrifice.
2.11.6.7	The season and the vow.
2.11.6.8	The year and austerity.
2.11.6.9	May the day and night, the Urvashi and Veshti, and the Brihat and Rathantara be established by the sacrificial rite.
2.11.6.10	One and three, thirty-three.
2.11.6.11	Four and eight, forty-eight.
2.11.6.12	Three-colored and three-colored (cows).
2.11.6.13	Ditya-vat and Ditya-auhi.
2.11.6.14	Five-colored and five-colored (cows)
2.11.6.15	Three-calved and three-calved (cows).
2.11.6.16	Four-vat and four-auhi. (cows).
2.11.6.17	Pashta-vat and Pashta-auhi.  (cows).
2.11.6.18	Uksha and Vasha.
2.11.6.19	Bull and Veha.
2.11.6.20	Dhenu and Andvana.
2.11.6.21	Stoma and Yajus.
2.11.6.22	The Rk and the Sama.
2.11.6.23	Initiation and austerity.
2.11.6.24	The Brihat and the Rathantara.
2.11.6.25	May the plants, the trees, and the directions be established by my sacrifice.
2.11.6.26	For food thee.
2.11.6.27	For strength thee.
2.11.6.28	For victory in strength thee.
2.11.6.29	To food thee.
2.11.6.30	To energy thee.
2.11.6.31	To wealth thee.
2.11.6.32	To nourishment thee.
2.12.1.1	May the All-gods, O Maruts, come to us today, may all the fires be kindled. May all the gods come to us here. May there be wealth and strength for us.
2.12.1.2	May the strength of the seven directions, or of the four, from afar, may the strength come to me with all the gods, with the bestowers of wealth.
2.12.1.3	May Vāja, in front and in the middle, may Vāja, with the seasons, arrange the gods. For in the impulse of Vāja, one bows down. May I be the lord of all directions.
2.12.1.4	Vāja makes my gift prosper today. Vāja nourishes the gods with oblations. Vāja made me the most heroic of all. May I conquer all directions as the lord of Vāja.
2.12.1.5	May I be generated with the milk of the earth, may I be generated with water and plants. May I be able to generate strength, O Agni.
2.12.1.6	Milk in the earth, milk in the plants, milk in the sky, milk in the directions, may the directions be rich in milk for me.
2.12.2.1	Agni, the Gandharva, the possessor of truth, the distributor of truth,
2.12.2.2	His herbs are the Apsarases named Muda.
2.12.2.3	May that Brahman-king protect this.
2.12.2.4	May those Brahman-kings protect this.
2.12.2.5	To him, svāhā!
2.12.2.6	To them, svāhā !
2.12.2.7	The Gandharva Sun is united with all.
2.12.2.8	His rays are the Apsarasa Gandharvas named Āyuva.
2.12.2.9	The Gandharvas Susumna and Suryarasmi are the Moon.
2.12.2.10	His stars are the Apsarases named Bekuraya.
2.12.2.11	The wind, the Gandharva, is the one with all-pervading knowledge.
2.12.2.12	His waters are the Apsarasa named Urja.
2.12.2.13	The hawk, the Gandharava, is the sacrifice.
2.12.2.14	His Dakshina is the Apsarasa known as Ishta.
2.12.2.15	The Gandharva is Brihaspati, the creator of the universe, Indra.
2.12.2.16	His Maruts are the Apsarase named Oja.
2.12.2.17	Prajapati is Parameṣṭhin, the Gandharva is the mind.
2.12.2.18	His Rk and Sāman are the Apsarases named Stāva.
2.12.2.19	Amṛḍa is Dūrehetir, the Gandharvas are Death.
2.12.2.20	His offspring are the Apsarasa named Bhīrava.
2.12.2.21	O Lord of the World, to whom your houses are above, O Lord of the Virāṭ, to that Brahman, to that Kshatra, grant great protection.
2.12.2.22	Whose are all the directions, the Apsarases, whose name is Plee, may he protect this Brahman and nobility.
2.12.2.23	May they protect this Brahman and Nobility.
2.12.2.24	To him, svāhā!
2.12.2.25	To them, svāhā!
2.12.3.1	You are the ocean, the shining one, the moist follower, the auspicious one, the one who has become Mayobhu, carry me with (your) blessings. Svāhā. You are Avasyu, the generous one, the auspicious one who has become the one who has Mayobhu, carries me with (your blessings). Svāhā. You are Marut, the group of Maruts, the auspicious one that has become Mayobhus, carries me with your blessings. Svāha. The waters are united with the Ayus, the dawn is united with the reddish ones, the Ashvins are united with the Dambas, the Suras are united with the Etashas, the Vaishvanara is united with the Idda and ghee. Svāhā! I yoke Agni with strength and ghee, the divine Suparna, the great one, with that we may attain the expanse of the growing Brahman, dwelling in the highest heaven.
2.12.3.2	These two are thy wings, immortal, feathered, by which thou, O Agni, drivest away the Rākṣasas. By them may we attain the world of the righteous, where the sages of old, the first, have gone.
2.12.3.3	You are the head of heaven, the navel of earth, the strength of waters and plants, the universal life, the shelter, the protector. Obeisance to you on the path of the universe, you stand established at the head.
2.12.3.4	Your heart is in the ocean, your life is in the waters. Break the ocean and give us rain from heaven, from the clouds, from the sky, from the earth.
2.12.3.5	I release your reins, I release your rays, I release your yokes and your coverings. Let the deity who gives us wealth grant us good fortune. Tell me, she who gives shares among the deities.
2.12.3.6	May Agni, the desired, the giver of wealth, the bestower of blessings, the desired by the Bhrigus, the bestower by the ascetics, the desired by Vasus, the offered Agni, may he protect our desired oblation. Obeisance to the gods.
2.12.4.1	By whom the Rishis, with their austerities, perform the sacrifice, kindling the fire, bringing it to heaven, whom the Manus call "the one with the spread-out sacrificial grass," in him I have placed Agni in the sky.
2.12.4.2	May we follow him with our wives, with our sons, with our brothers, or with gold. Seizing the heaven, in the world of the righteous, on the third back, in the shining heaven.
2.12.4.3	He has ascended the middle of speech, this Agni, the lord of truth, the knower, the bull, placed on the back of the earth, he shines. Let those who are hostile make themselves inferior.
2.12.4.4	This Agni, the most heroic, the protector of life, the thousand-year-old, shining, not declining, shining brightly in the midst of water, may he approach the divine abode.
2.12.4.5	O Agni, do thou go forth, do thou go along the path of the gods. Do thou make it manifest. Do thou undertake this good deed. Where the sages of old, the first ones, have gone.
2.12.4.6	Do ye both go forth, do ye both go along the path to the gods. Do ye both make it manifest. By these good deeds may we follow the gods, where our fathers of old have gone.
2.12.4.7	Awaken, O Agni, and be watchful of him. May he be united with the performed and the unperformed. And again, making him, the Fathers, the young ones, and the wind, may they weave your thread.
2.12.4.8	With which you carry a thousand, with which, O Agni, all-knowing, you carry the entire universe, with that carry this sacrifice for us, so that we may go to heaven among the gods.
2.12.4.9	This is yours.
2.12.5.1	May the seasons, the Agni-s, the Rishis, the years, the true ones, increase you. Shine with the divine light, illumine the four quarters.
2.12.5.2	Be united, O Agni, and awaken him. Rise up for great prosperity. May those who attend on you not be deprived. O Agni, may the Brahmanas be honoured by you, may they be glorious.
2.12.5.3	These Brahmanas choose thee, O Agni, O Agni, be auspicious in our protection, be our vanquisher of foes, O Agni, vanquisher of foes. Be thou watchful in thy own house, not sleeping.
2.12.5.4	Here, O Agni, do thou establish wealth. Let not the envious, the evil-minded, injure thee. May thy kingdom, O Agni, prosper. May thy attendants increase, not injuring thee.
2.12.5.5	O Agni, with your own power, be victorious. O Agni, be successful in the friendship of your friends. For the middlemost of your kinsmen, for the kings, O Agni, be the most honoured.
2.12.5.6	O Agni, today, cross over the obstacles, the calamities, the ill-will, the ill-luck. Cross over all the evils, O Agni. Then give us wealth with heroes.
2.12.5.7	O Agni, the all-knowing, the invincible, the unassailable, the universal, the upholder of the kingdom, do thou shine forth here, releasing the evil spirits, and with thy auspicious rays do thou protect us today.
2.12.5.8	O Brihaspati, O Savitar, do thou awaken him, do thou make him who is firm and strong, do thou increase him for great prosperity, and may all the gods rejoice with him.
2.12.5.9	May I be there where Yama is, O Brihaspati, thou hast released me from the curse. The Asvins have repelled death from me. O Agni, with the goddesses, thou art the physician.
2.12.5.10	We have risen from the darkness, seeing the light, we have gone to the highest God, to the Sun, to the highest light.
2.12.6.1	His kindling-sticks are upright, his bright and shining flames are upright. The most brilliant of the bright, the son of Supratīka.
2.12.6.2	Tanunapāt, the Asura, the knower of all, the god, may he anoint the path leading to the gods with honey and ghee, the one who delights in honey, the one who nourishes the sacrifice.
2.12.6.3	Agni, the god of good deeds, the god Savitar, the all-embracing, comes with his power and ghee.
2.12.6.4	The praising Agni, with devotion, at the rites, the striving priests, praises the greatness of Agni.
2.12.6.5	He is the gentle one, the good-going one, the one with good paths, the one with the great Mitra, the Vasu, the one who stands, and the most radiant of the Vasus.
2.12.6.6	The goddesses, the doors, give him all his vows. The goddesses, the gates, give him all the vows. The goddesses who are the gates give him all the rites.
2.12.6.7	Those two are his divine wives, in the womb, Dawn and Night, may they protect this sacrifice, this our offering.
2.12.6.8	The divine Hotars, may they praise this our sacrifice, may they make it acceptable to Agni, may they make our offering acceptable.
2.12.6.9	The three goddesses, Ida, Sarasvati and Bharti, sing this auspicious oblation.
2.12.6.10	May Tvashtri bestow on us that wonderful, powerful, most excellent, and abundant prosperity, and may he spread out the navel for us.
2.12.6.11	O Vanaspathi, let loose your radiance, yourself, to the gods. Agni, the pacifier, consumes the oblation.
2.12.6.12	O Agni, do thou, O knower of beings, offer oblations to Indra and the gods. May all the gods accept this oblation.
2.13.1.1	Some rivers flow together, others flow separately. They fill the common ground. The pure, shining one, the bestower of water, is surrounded by the waters.
2.13.1.2	He who is golden-hued, who has a golden appearance, who has descended from the waters, he is indeed golden-hued. Having sat down on the golden womb, the golden ones give him food.
2.13.1.3	The golden-hued ones, the pure ones, the shining ones, in whom Kasyapa was born, in whom Indra was born, the ones who bore Agni as their embryo, the ones who are of various forms, may those waters be auspicious and gentle for us.
2.13.1.4	The waters which King Varuna goes through in the middle, looking at the truth and untruth of men, which are sweet-flowing, pure, and bright, may they be auspicious and peaceful to us.
2.13.1.5	The waters which the gods make their food in heaven, which are many in the atmosphere, which are bright and drink the milk of the earth, may they be gracious and peaceful to us.
2.13.1.6	May I not be seen by the eye of Shiva, may my body touch the water of Shiva. May all the Agni-s who dwell in the waters bestow upon me splendor, strength and energy.
2.13.1.7	The rivers that flow from the mountains, they are called rivers because they flow from the mountains. These are your names, O rivers.
2.13.1.8	The waters which Varuna had let loose, Indra quickly gathered together. From that (gathering) the waters have flowed.
2.13.1.9	The waters which flowed unwillingly, they have gathered together for you. Indra with his power has bound you, O goddesses. From that (binding) your name is Varuṇa.
2.13.1.10	One god alone stood firm, flowing as he willed. The waters flowed forth, hence water is called.
2.13.1.11	"I see, I hear, the sound comes to me. The waters are indeed strong, the sweet-speaking ones. The strong one has come to me with breath and with radiance."
2.13.1.12	The divine waters, the honey-flowing, the waters, bearing Agni and Soma, those waters I think of. When you were satisfied with the golden-hued one, then you were satisfied with me.
2.13.1.13	"You are the waters, three, dwelling in heaven, striving in the atmosphere, arising from the earth, go to the light."
2.13.2.1	You are the source of austerity.
2.13.2.2	I place you with all-knowing thoughts, without a flaw.
2.13.2.3	The womb is truth.
2.13.2.4	The womb of truth.
2.13.2.5	The Brahma womb.
2.13.2.6	The womb, the kingdom.
2.13.2.7	The womb earth.
2.13.2.8	The womb space.
2.13.2.9	The womb sky.
2.13.2.10	The womb directions.
2.13.3.1	Extend from the out-breath the in-breath.
2.13.3.2	Extend from in-breath the through-breath.
2.13.3.3	From the Vyana (wind) the eye is extended.
2.13.3.4	From the eye the ear is extended.
2.13.3.5	 From the ear the earth is extended.
2.13.3.6	from the earth the sky is extended.
2.13.3.7	 from the sky the heaven is extended.
2.13.3.8	from the heaven the directions are extended.
2.13.3.9	from directions the heavenly world is extended.
2.13.4.1	I settle you with the Rg verse.
2.13.4.2	I settle thee with the Vasatkara verse.
2.13.4.3	I settle you with the hymn of praise.
2.13.4.4	I settle you with the chant.
2.13.4.5	I settle with the hymn of the Udgitha.
2.13.4.6	I settle thee with the hymn of response.
2.13.4.7	I settle thou with the hymn of eulogy.
2.13.4.8	I settle ye with the hymn of conclusion.
2.13.5.1	The messenger, the knower of all, the immortal bearer of oblations, the most worthy of sacrifice, you honour with speech.
2.13.5.2	We have approached the most excellent one with great reverence, the one who shines brightly in his own abode, the one with variegated radiance, the one who is worshipped from all directions, the one who faces everywhere.
2.13.5.3	Here he has been praised by those who know him, and all the hymns of praise have been recited. He is like a wheel that has been turned.
2.13.5.4	O Suścandra, lord of the universe, may we be seated in the seat of prosperity. And may we not be excluded from the praises, O lord of strength. Bring us food with the praise-singers.
2.13.6.1	Indra, with Dadhīci's bones, struck down the nine enemies, the invincible ones.
2.13.6.2	Here they determined the name of the cow, the unchanging one of Tvashtri, in the house of the moon.
2.13.6.3	He who desired the head of the horse, which was hidden in the mountains, found it in the valley.
2.13.6.4	The singers praise Indra, the great, with hymns, the singers with hymns, the poets with poems.
2.13.6.5	Indra, with his long-sighted eye, raised the sun to heaven, and with the cows he made the mountain move.
2.13.6.6	Indra, the lord of the two bays, is united with them, yoked with speech. Indra, the wielder of the thunderbolt, is golden.
2.13.6.7	O Indra, in our contests for booty, in the contests for thousands, be fierce with fierce aids.
2.13.6.8	We invoke that Indra to the great deed of slaying Vritra. He is the bull, the bull among us.
2.13.6.9	Indra, the wielder of the thunderbolt, is the most powerful, the most strong, the most brilliant, the most eloquent, the most Soma-worthy.
2.13.6.10	The thunderbolt has been assembled by speech, with strength, without falling, the fierce one has been stretched out.
2.13.7.1	This Agni is the thousandfold. Agni, thou art the head. Agni, they have known thee from the Pushkara, Agni, the kindler of the people. Like a cow hastening to her calf, like the dawn, the swift, the shining ones, like the young, are stretching forth the lights, they are shining in the sky.
2.13.7.2-3	I have spoken to the wise poet, to the bull, to the bull of the Vṛṣṇi clan, to the lord of cattle. Agni, like the sun, has risen in the sky, shining brightly, in the east. The Hotṛ has awakened the gods for the sacrifice. Agni, the upright one, has risen in a good mood. The shining light of the kindled one is seen. The great god has emerged from darkness.
2.13.7.4	The people have produced the watchful Agni, the well-working, for a new blessing, the giver of ghee, the bright one touching the sky, shining for the Bharatas.
2.13.7.5	The Angiras found thee, O Agni, hidden in the forest, in the forest, thou art born when churned, the great strength. They call thee the son of strength, O Angiras.
2.13.7.6	This is the sweetest of your words, O Agni, this is the thought that is in me. May it be well for your heart. Your praises, like rivers, fill you, O Agni, and increase you with their strength.
2.13.7.7	O Agni, the Bull, you are united with the All-Gods, you blaze in the place of worship. Bring us the gifts.
2.13.7.8	I praise Agni, the ancient, the god of wealth, the most beloved, the friend, the one who accomplishes the field.
2.13.7.9	The creatures in the villages call you, O Agni, the one with beautiful fame, the one with radiant hair, the most beloved. You are Agni, the carrier of offerings.
2.13.7.10	We desire to kindle thee, O Agni, the bright, the divine, the imperishable, the most excellent, the most brilliant, the most radiant, the most glorious, the most splendid, the most luminous, the most shining, the most brilliant. O Agni, I think of thee, the one who is praised, whom the cows approach, the horses, the swift ones, the steeds, the strong ones. O Agni! I think of thee who is praised, the one who has wealth, whom the cows, the horses, and the swift ones approach, the well-born ones, the noble ones. O thou who art praised, O Agni, I praise thee, the one with wealth, whom the well-born cows approach, the wellborn horses, the swift, the well-bred steeds.
2.13.8.1	We invoke Agni, the God, the giver of food, the dear, the standing, the unwearied, the good sacrificer, the messenger of all, the immortal.
2.13.8.2	O Agni, thou art the lord of the house, thou art our Hotar at the sacrifice, thou art the protector, the all-knowing, the wise, thou knowest and givest the boon.
2.13.8.3	May the god who gives wealth, the giver of wealth, pour down upon you the full (stream of) water. Pour it up or pour it down. The god will help you. O Agni, the lord of wealth and cattle, the knower, the bestower, grant us greatness, O Jātavedas, the great fame.
2.13.8.4	He, the giver, the wise one, Agni, the one to be praised with speech, the shining one, grant us the best, the one who shines in front.
2.13.8.5	O Agni, O Kshapa, O King, by your own self, by the morning light, by the dawn, burn the fierce-jawed demon.
2.13.8.6	O Agni, today with praises we have reached the horse, the sacrifice, the good, the one who touches the heart, with your Oaths. For you are the charioteer of Agni, of the sacrifice, of the good, of the right, of the great truth. We are singing to you today with these praises. O Agni, may we be able to give you. The clouds roar for you from the sky with their power. I think of Agni as the Hotar, the giver, the Vasu, the son, the one born from strength, the knower of beings, the one who is praised, the one who has the highest sacrifice, the one who follows the shining path of ghee, the one who shines with bright light, the one who invites, the one who offers clarified butter. The swan, the pure one, approaches that divine Savitar. O Agni, you are our last (resort). For you are Agni, for you are Agni.
2.13.9.1	Come, for these are thy well-loved Soma draughts; drink thou this Soma here, O Indra, on my sacred grass.
2.13.9.2	May the two bay steeds yoked with holy power bring thee hither, Indra, to our holy rites.
2.13.9.3	We, yoked with holy rites, call thee, O Indra, yoked with the Soma-drinker, to our Soma-drinking rites.
2.13.9.4	We invoke thee, O hero, like milked cows, as the lord of this world, as the lord who sees heaven, as the lord, O Indra, of those who stand. No one else, divine or human, born or to be born, is thy equal. O Indra, O Maghavan, we invoke thee, O steed-riding, treasure-winning one, O horse-winning one.
2.13.9.5	We invoke thee, O Indra, for the sake of wealth, for the sake, O thou who art the giver of wealth, of the good steed. Thee, O Indra, as the true lord of men in battles, thee as the racer in the races.
2.13.9.6	Thou, O Indra, with thy bright arm, with thy might, with thy power, with thy help, the giver of wealth to the worshipper, grant us cattle, horses, chariots, the prize to be won by the strong.
2.13.9.7	By what boon has the bright one, the ever-increasing friend, been won by us? By what most excellent boon?
2.13.9.8	Who is thy truth, the most powerful of the intoxicating draughts, the most powerful in the assembly? Thou hast firmly placed the wealth.
2.13.9.9	Be thou our helper, O Agni, of our friends, of our worshippers, be thou a hundredfold with thy aids.
2.13.9.10	To Agni, the knower of all sacrifices, to Agni, the giver of all gifts, we sing praises, as to the immortal, as to the dear friend.
2.13.9.11	The giver of strength, the protector, the one who is with us, the giver of gifts, the one who has been, the one who will be, the one who protects in battles, the one who grows, the one who saves the bodies,
2.13.10.1	This is the wife of the seasons, the first to come, the eye of the days, the mother of the offspring, the one who gives birth to the creatures. The one who is true, she shines in many ways. You, O Age, have aged everything else.
2.13.10.2	Who knows the union of Viraj? Who knows her seasons? Who knows her form? Who knows her milkings, how many are milked? How many are her abodes, how many her dwellings?
2.13.10.3	She who first shone forth, she who entered the waters, the bride who moves about, the young mother, three great ones attend her.
2.13.10.4	The two goddesses, Chanda and Usha, who desire to drink, follow the same path. The wife of the sun, moving about, knowing, the leader, the two goddesses, Chande and Usha, are immortal, with abundant seed.
2.13.10.5	The three goddesses follow the path of truth, the three hot seasons follow with seed. One nourishes offspring, one nourishes strength, one protects the kingdom of the gods.
2.13.10.6	The four-fold (verse) he placed, the fourth part of the sacrifice, the Rishis, becoming the Gâyatrî, the Tristubh, the Jagatî, the Virâj, the Arka, yoking, brought down this heaven.
2.13.10.7	Dhatr, with five, arranged this, he created their heaven, five, five of them go by the impulse of the wind, five different forms, the rites, clothed.
2.13.10.8-9	The first of the waters, the first of the sun, the first of heat, the first of Savitar, the first of all, the first of gods, the first of men, the first of cattle, the first of plants, the first of heaven, the first of earth, the first of light, the first of darkness, the first of day, the first of night, the first of truth, the first of falsehood, the first of good, the first of evil, the first of life, the first of death, the first of birth, the first of rebirth, the first of union, the first of separation, the first of love, the first of hate, the first of joy, the first of sorrow, the first of happiness, the first of misery, the first of pleasure, the first of pain, the first of wealth, the first of poverty, the first of gain, the first of loss, the first of success, the first of failure, the first of victory, the first of defeat, the first of peace, the first of war, the first of rest, the first of movement, the first of sleep, the first of waking, the first of knowledge, the first of ignorance, the first of wisdom, the first of folly, the first of beauty, the first of ugliness, the first of strength, the first of weakness, the first of health, the first of sickness, the first of youth, the first of old age, the first of creation, the first of destruction, the first of time, the first of eternity, the first of existence
2.13.10.10-11	May I be in your good opinion, O knower of all, may I be established, for I know the depth of the truth. The truthful ones, having attained greatness, have gone beyond you. The two-formed, with the same mind, going before, knowing the way, the Dawn has come. She, destroying the enemies of the gods, the Brahmins, with darkness, and covering all the enemies, has gone.
2.13.10.12	The five lights, the five milkings, the five names of the cow, the five seasons, the five directions, the fifteen are created by the five, having one head, they have approached one world.
2.13.10.13	The thirty-five Svasaras, having released the banner of the same form, the sages create the seasons, knowing them, shining in the middle of the metres.
2.13.10.14	The luminous ones release the sky, the goddess Night, the observances of the Sun are seen, the animals being born in various forms at the side of this mother.
2.13.10.15	The first one dwelt, she became a cow, she who milks us with milk, the one after the other.
2.13.11.1	Asked in heaven, asked on earth, asked in all the plants, Vaishvānara Agni entered, asked suddenly, Agni, may he protect us by day and by night.
2.13.11.2	O Agni, thou most powerful, protect the men who offer gifts, hear our songs, and guard our offspring and ourselves.
2.13.11.3	O Agni, the names of thy dwelling-places, O Jātavedas, are the divine, eternal, immortal ones. Those which the Magicians, the all-knowing, have placed in thee, the binder of the past, are thy former names.
2.13.12.1	The barley, the barley, the barley-corn, the year, the sea, the good, the one.
2.13.12.2	O Agni!
2.13.12.3	O Agni! What is the name?
2.13.12.4	O Agni, the swift one!
2.13.12.5	O Agni, the forest-dweller!
2.13.12.6	O Agni of the hearth!
2.13.12.7	The one called "the young arrow," with her we worship.
2.13.12.8	To her we offer salutations.
2.13.12.9	May we be her sons, living under her protection.
2.13.12.10	We place in her mouth him whom we hate and who hates us.
2.13.13.1	The Agni who is in the waters, who is in Vritra, who is in man, who is in stone, who has entered the plants, who is in the trees, to those Agneis may this be offered.
2.13.13.2	The Agni who is in Soma, who is in cows, who has entered birds, who has entered beasts, who is in bipeds and quadrupeds, to those Agneys may this be offered.
2.13.13.3	By whom Indra's chariot was made, who is Vaisvânara, the all-knowing, the wise, the strong, the invincible, the ruler, to those Agni-s let this oblation be offered.
2.13.13.4	The Agni whom they call the lord of the world, the giver, the receiver, whom I invoke in battles, to them, to these Agneis, may this oblation be offered.
2.13.13.5	To the giver of food, to the giver of wealth, to the Soma-backed, to the creator, let us offer Agni with praises.
2.13.13.6	This oblation is offered to those Agni-s, the most excellent ones.
2.13.14.1	The metre is Mā.
2.13.14.2	That is the earth.
2.13.14.3	The deity is Agni.
2.13.14.4	By that metre, by that Brahman, by that deity, may I be firmly established like Angiras.
2.13.14.5	The metre (is) Prama.
2.13.14.6	That is space.
2.13.14.7	The deity (is) Vayu.
2.13.14.8	The metre(is) Pratima.
2.13.14.9	That is heaven.
2.13.14.10-24	The Sun is the deity. The Asriviś is the meter. That is the directions. Soma is the deity. The Gāyatrī is the meter. That is the goat. Brihaspati is the deity. Triṣṭubh is the meter.That is gold. Indra is the deity. Jagatī is the meter. Translation: The Sun is the divinity. The Asrivish is the meter. The directions are that. Soma is divinity. The Gāyatri is the meter. It is the goat. The directions are the directions. Brihaspatī is the divinity. The Tristubh is the metre. That is gold. The directions are the directions, Indra is the divinity. Jagatī the meter. It is the cow. Prajāpati is the divinity. Anuṣṭubh the meter. Life is that.
2.13.14.25-37	Mitra is the deity. The Uṣṇīṣa metre. That is the eye. Pūṣan is the deity.  The Virāṭ metre. That the horse. Varuṇa is the deity.   The Brhatī metre. That agriculture. Parjanya is the deity. The Paṅkti metre. That man. Parameṣṭhin is the deity.
2.13.14.38	By that metre, by that Brahman, by that deity, may I be firmly seated like Angiras.
2.13.15.1	You are Earth, born of birth, obedient.
2.13.15.2	You conceived Agni as your embryo.
2.13.15.3	You have become mine.
2.13.15.4	You are the atmosphere, born of birth.
2.13.15.5	You conceived Vayu as your embryo. 
2.13.15.6	You have become yours.
2.13.15.7	You are Heaven, born of birth
2.13.15.8	You conceived Aditya as your embryo.
2.13.15.9	She is me, the source of origin.
2.13.15.10	You are the stars, born by me, under my control.
2.13.15.11	You conceived the moon as your embryo.
2.13.15.12	She is me, the origin.
2.13.15.13	You, the Rig Veda, are born by me, controlled by me.
2.13.15.14	You conceived Sama as your embryo. 
2.13.15.15	She is me the origin.
2.13.15.16	Vid, you are born by me and controlled by me. 
2.13.15.17	You conceived the king as your embryo. She is me,
2.13.15.18	the origin.
2.13.15.19	You speech, are born by and controlled by me
2.13.15.20	You conceived the life force as your embryo.
2.13.15.21	She is the one who has arisen from me.
2.13.15.22	You are water, born from the womb.
2.13.15.23	She conceived the sacrifice as her embryo.
2.13.15.24	She is the one who arose from me.
2.13.16.1	O goddess, you who are the maiden, the one who dwells in the eastern direction, may I be with you, like a wife with her husband.
2.13.16.2	O goddess who are the maiden who dwells in the western direction, may I dwell with you, like the wife with her husband.
2.13.16.3	The Goddess who is in the auspicious place, the young woman, the companion, may she be with me, as a wife is always with her husband.
2.13.16.4	The Goddess who is in auspicious place, the giver of life, the giver of breath, the giver of out-breath, the giver of through-breath, the Giver of sight, the Giver of hearing, on earth, in the atmosphere, on the back of heaven, the companion, she may be with me, like a wife is always to her husband.
2.13.16.5	The goddesses who are the bricks, the well-loving, the well-guarding, may they protect you, like a wife her husband always.
2.13.17.1	To the one of the same age as you.
2.13.17.2	To the elder than you.
2.13.17.3	To one older than you.
2.13.17.4	For the one of great age.
2.13.17.5	For the stronger than you.
2.13.17.6	The one who is strong.
2.13.17.7	The one with strength.
2.13.17.8	The one of strength.
2.13.17.9	For the protector.
2.13.17.10	I place thee in the overlord.
2.13.17.11	I place thee in the conqueror of foes.
2.13.17.12	I place tee in the slayer of foes.
2.13.18.1	Thou art the increaser.
2.13.18.2	Thou art that which increases.
2.13.18.3	Thou art in the east.
2.13.18.4	Thou art above.
2.13.18.5	Thou art space.
2.13.18.6	I place the one who has strength in strength.
2.13.18.7	I place one who has milk in milk.
2.13.18.8	I place him who has brilliance in brilliance.
2.13.18.9	I place you in fame.
2.13.18.10	I place you in radiance.
2.13.18.11	I place thee in the wealth of earth.
2.13.18.12	I place thou in the wealth of the atmosphere.
2.13.18.13	I place in the wealth of heaven.
2.13.18.14	I place thy in the wealth of directions.
2.13.18.15	I place the in the wealth of wealth.
2.13.18.16	Thou art seated in water.
2.13.18.17	You are the seat of vultures.
2.13.18.18	You are the seat of hawks.
2.13.18.19	You are a seat of Suparna.
2.13.18.20	You are an aerial seat.
2.13.19.1	I place you in the luminous one.
2.13.19.2	I place thee in the luminous one created.
2.13.19.3	I place thou in the luminous one known.
2.13.19.4	I place in the upward luminous one.
2.13.19.5	In the great luminous one I place thee.
2.13.19.6	I place you in the world of light.
2.13.19.7	I place you in the constant one.
2.13.19.8	I place thee in the shining one.
2.13.19.9	I put thee in the blazing one.
2.13.19.10	I set thee in the shining.
2.13.19.11	I place thou in the burning.
2.13.19.12	I place in the glowing.
2.13.19.13	I place the watchful one.
2.13.19.14	I placed the awakening one.
2.13.20.1-12	The constellation Krittika. The deity is Agni. O Agni, you are the radiance. The essence of Prajapati Soma. To the Rg verse, to you. To the radiance, to you. To the shining, to you.To the light, to you. With that meter, with that Brahman, with that deity, may I be firmly established like Angiras. The constellation Rohini. The deity Prajapati. The constellation Anvaga.
2.13.20.13-26	Maruts are the deities. The constellation is Bahu. Rudra is the deity. The constellation Punarvasu. Aditi is the deity.  The constellation is Tisya. Brihaspati is the deity. The constellation is Ashlesha. Serpents are the deities. The constellation is Magha. The Pitrs are the deities.The constellation is Phalgunis. Bhaga is the deity.The constellation is Phalguni.
2.13.20.27-40	Aryama is the deity. Hastā is the constellation. Savitā is the deity.  Citrā is the constellation.  Tvaṣṭṛ is the deity.   Niṣṭyā is the constellation.   Vāyu is the deity.    Viśākhā is the constellation Indra and Agni are the deities. Anurādhā is the constellation.
2.13.20.41-53	Nirriti is the deity. Asharadha is the constellation. The waters are the deity. Aṣāḍha is the constellation The Viśve Devas are the deities. Abhijit is the constellation. The Brahmā is the deity. The Śravaṇa is the constellation. Viṣṇu is the deity. Śraviṣṭhā is the constellation. Vasus are the deities. Indra is the deity. Prone Prone is the constellation.
2.13.20.54-65	The serpent Budhnya is the deity. The Proshthapada constellation. The goat Ekapada is the deity.  The Revati constellation. Pusha is the deity.   The Ashvayuja constellation. The Ashvins are the deities. The Bharani constellation. Yama is the deity. The Brahmana constellation. Soma is the deity. "O Agni, may your rays be here."
2.13.21.5	And to your lord and protector, salutations to them both.
2.13.21.6	May they be gracious to us.
2.13.21.7	We place in their jaws him whom we hate and who hates us.
2.13.21.8	You are the name of strength.
2.13.21.9	The southern direction.
2.13.21.10	Indra is its lord.
2.13.21.11	The protector is the queen of the eastern region.
2.13.21.12	And to your lord and protector, salutations to them both.
2.13.21.13	May they be kind to us.
2.13.21.14	We place in their jaws him whom we hate and who hates us.
2.13.21.15	The name of the eastern direction is Prachi.
2.13.21.16	The name is Pratichi.
2.13.21.17	Soma is its lord.
2.13.21.18	Svaja is its protector.
2.13.21.19	And to your lord and protector, salutations to them both.
2.13.21.20	May they be gracious to us.
2.13.21.21	We place in their jaws him whom we hate and who hates us.
2.13.21.22	Your name is Susada.
2.13.21.23	The northern direction.
2.13.21.24	Varuna is its lord.
2.13.21.25	Sridaghu is its protector.
2.13.21.26	And to your lord and protector, salutations to them both.
2.13.21.27	May they be gracious to us.
2.13.21.28	We place in their jaws him whom we hate and who hates us.
2.13.21.29	You are the direction called Avásthá.
2.13.21.30	The direction Avásthá is the lower direction.
2.13.21.31	Vishnu is your lord.
2.13.21.32	Kalmáshágriva is your protector.
2.13.21.33	And to your lord and protector, salutations to them both.
2.13.21.34	May they be gracious to us.
2.13.21.35	We place in their jaws him whom we hate and who hates us.
2.13.21.36	You are named the overlord.
2.13.21.37	The upward direction.
2.13.21.38	Its lord is Brihaspati.
2.13.21.39	Citra is its protector.
2.13.21.40	And to your lord and protector, salutations to them both.
2.13.21.41	May they be gracious to us.
2.13.21.42	We place in their jaws him whom we hate and who hates us.
2.13.22.1	Shining, with sharp horns, he himself makes the easy path, looking at the ancient abode, Agni has stretched the divine thread.
2.13.22.2	You are the thread and the bridge, O Agni, you are the path that leads to the gods. By you, O Agni, may we ascend the back, where we may rejoice with the gods.
2.13.22.3	The Maruts, seeing the path of the two men who give away too much, enjoyed this sacrifice, which bestows rain, immortality, and knowledge of heaven.
2.13.22.4	Turning in the middle of the world, creating and generating diverse beings, the Parameshthin, the one who upholds the vow, may he protect our sacrifice from the highest realm.
2.13.22.5	May the year give us offspring. May the creator bestow it, being well-disposed. Many, together, in many ways, of various forms, may they all, of one vow, approach me.
2.13.23.1	The golden embryo arose first. The one who was born became the lord of beings. He supported this earth and heaven. To which god shall we offer oblation?
2.13.23.2-3	The king who is the protector of all beings, who is the lord of all beings, the ruler of all beings, and the lord of all bipeds and quadrupeds, to whom god shall we offer oblations? To whom shall we offer oblation? To whom shall we offer sacrifice? To whom shall the oblation be offered? To whom shall oblation be offered by us? To whom shall be offered oblation? To which god shall we offer sacrifice with oblation? To whom does strength belong? To whom does power belong? To whom do all beings belong? To whom are the gods subject? To whom is immortality? To whom is death? To whom shall obeisance be made? To whom shall homage be paid? To whom shall salutations be offered? To which god shall we offer oblation with oblation?
2.13.23.4	To whom these worlds have bowed in reverence, whose greatness is the ocean, who is with the ocean, whose are the five goddesses, the directions and sub-directions, to which god shall we offer oblation?
2.13.23.5	To whom the firm heaven and earth are firm, to whom the sky is established, to whom the heaven is established, who has measured the great firmament, to which god we shall offer oblation?
2.13.23.6	He who supports these shining heaven and earth, in whom the gods are spread out, to what god shall we offer oblation? The great waters, when they all flowed, carrying the embryo, generating Agni, from that the gods turned away. To what god shall we make oblation?
2.13.23.7	May Prajapati generate our progeny, may the creator bestow it, being well-disposed. May the lord of growth bestow prosperity on me, in accordance with the seasons and the year.
3.1.1.1	He first anoints the Juhu.
3.1.1.2	The Juhu is indeed the mouth of the sacrifice.
3.1.1.3	He thus takes the sacrifice from the mouth.
3.1.1.4	The gods invoked Viraj through the Juhu.
3.1.1.5	The ladle becomes the ladle by means of that.
3.1.1.6	Food is Viraj.
3.1.1.7	Food is the ladle.
3.1.1.8	The fire is the sun.
3.1.1.9	When one offers with the ladle, it is for the purpose of securing food and the sun.
3.1.1.10	One takes up the ladle eight times.
3.1.1.11	The Gayatri has eight syllables.
3.1.1.12	The Gayatra is the mouth of the sacrifice.
3.1.1.13	One has obtained the mouth of the sacrificie.
3.1.1.14	The Savitrī verses are offered for the sake of progeny.
3.1.1.15	And also for the sake of the different powers of the Yajus verses.
3.1.1.16	Wherever Agni went, he saw Savitr.
3.1.1.17	The Savitrī verses (are offered) for the sake of Agni's following.
3.1.1.18	Having placed Agni in the light, he brought it up from the earth.
3.1.1.19	Savitar brought forth the light first from the earth.
3.1.1.20	Therefore he says thus.
3.1.1.21	He offers with the appropriate and with the mental.
3.1.1.22	For the sacrifice is performed with the appropriate and the mental.
3.1.1.23	There are six verses.
3.1.1.24	There are indeed six seasons.
3.1.1.25	He stands firm in the seasons.
3.1.1.26	He who approaches another deity before the Agniya, goes away from the mouth of the sacrifice.
3.1.1.27	If the Savitri verses were not to be there, one would go away from the Savitri-inspired activity.
3.1.1.28	These are eight Yajus verses.
3.1.1.29	The Gayatri has eight syllables.
3.1.1.30	The Gayatra is the mouth of the Yajna.
3.1.1.31	Thus he does not go away from the mouth.
3.1.1.32	By that he does not go to the Savitrī-s.
3.1.1.33	He offers with the metres.
3.1.1.34	He thus offers a sacrifice to Agni with the metres. He who offers with the metres,
3.1.1.35	many of his offerings are offered.
3.1.1.36	The Rg is the near one of the sacrifice.
3.1.1.37	The Yajus is of the sacrificer.
3.1.1.38-41	If one desires, "May I offer the sacrifice with the glory of the sacrifice," one should perform the last verses. One offers the sacrifice with the fame of the sacrifice. If one desires, "I may offer the sacrificer with the fame of sacrifice," one should offer the last verses. One offers the sacrificer with fame of the sacrifice.
3.1.1.42	The sacrificer prospers by the offering of oblations.
3.1.1.43	If one desires, "May he prosper," one should offer all the oblations in succession.
3.1.1.44	He prospers.
3.1.1.45	If one wishes, "May he be worse," one should offer the oblations separately.
3.1.1.46	He becomes worse.
3.1.1.47	"One should offer the Stoma with a verse," it is said.
3.1.1.48	By prosperity.
3.1.1.49	The Rathantara is (sung) in the Gayatri metre.
3.1.1.50	This (earth) is the Gayatri.
3.1.1.51	This is the Rathantara.
3.1.1.52	That is the Brihat.
3.1.1.53	This is performed in both these worlds, as far as possible.
3.1.1.54	There are eight such mantras.
3.1.1.55	The Gayatri has eight syllables.
3.1.1.56	Thus he pleases the Gayatri by means of syllables.
3.1.1.57	And when the oblation is the ninth,
3.1.1.58	Therefore, he does not go to the three-fold mouths of the sacrifice.
3.1.1.59	Now, when he offers one oblation with eight Yajus verses, therefore many offer oblations to one hundred.
3.1.1.60	Many will offer oblations to him.
3.1.1.61	The Yajus verses are the highest.
3.1.1.62	Brahman is the Yajus.
3.1.1.63	At the very end of the sacrifice, the sacrificer stands firm in Brahman.
3.1.2.1	He takes up the wooden sword with the Savitrī verses for prosperity.
3.1.2.2	He takes it up with four (verses).
3.1.2.3	There are four metres.
3.1.2.4	He takes (the sword) with the metres.
3.1.2.5	Moreover, the metres are Brahman.
3.1.2.6	He thus takes (the sword ) with Brahman.
3.1.2.7	This (earth) is the Gāyatrī.
3.1.2.8	The sky is the Tristubh.
3.1.2.9	The heaven is the Jagatī.
3.1.2.10	The directions are in Anushtup.
3.1.2.11	He collects Agni from these worlds and from the directions with the metres.
3.1.2.12	Where Agni, the Hotar, fled from fear, he settled in all beings.
3.1.2.13	Where he settled in the trees, he settled in the Vena.
3.1.2.14	Where he burned them, that became the black (part).
3.1.2.15	Where he walked along, that became the hole.
3.1.2.16	Where he stayed, that became the mountain.
3.1.2.17	When the sacrificial grass is of bamboo, he gathers it with its own source.
3.1.2.18	Of trees, the bamboo is the most fruitful, and it is the most vigorous.
3.1.2.19	Of trees the bamboo is the best fruiter.
3.1.2.20-29	He is the most vigorous of them. Food is the fruit. Food is Agni. Agni is the sun. With the sun he gathers food, Agni, the sun. It should be made a fathom long. This much is the vigour in a man. It is made the size of vigour. And this much is the greatness in a man. For the attainment of greatness.
3.1.2.30	It should be made the size of an arm-span.
3.1.2.31	It is measured by the Yajna Parusha.
3.1.2.32	It should be made the length of a span.
3.1.2.33	It is determined by the sacrifice of Vishnu.
3.1.2.34	It should have two edges for the securing of both kinds of food.
3.1.2.35	It should only have one edge.
3.1.2.36	Because the plough has only one edge.
3.1.2.37	He makes it the size of the sun.
3.1.2.38	The sun is food.
3.1.2.39	for the securing of food.
3.1.2.40	It should be made of the Udumbara tree.
3.1.2.41	The Udumbara tree is energy.
3.1.2.42	For the securing of energy.
3.1.2.43	It should have an unlimited number of leaves.
3.1.2.44	For the unlimited securing of food. 
3.1.2.45	It should be of any tree that bears fruit. For the securing of food
3.1.3.1	The gods first won victory with the horse.
3.1.3.2	When they go with the horse, it is for victory.
3.1.3.3	Agni went wherever he wanted to go, and Prajapati saw him there.
3.1.3.4	The horse is Prajapati's.
3.1.3.5	When they go with a horse, it is to follow Agni.
3.1.3.6	Prajapati, about to build up Agni, created a horse from these worlds and built up Agni from the directions.
3.1.3.7	As it is said, "Your birth is in heaven, your navel in the atmosphere, your womb on earth." Thus, having created the horse for these worlds according to the deities, he collects Agni from the directions.
3.1.3.8	He says, "Join the donkey, you two," for the purpose of yoking.
3.1.3.9	He collects with a donkey.
3.1.3.10	This is the most unnourishing of animals.
3.1.3.11	Agni, when this animal was created first, burnt its semen in the womb.
3.1.3.12	Therefore, it carries semen only after all other animals have done so, and then the youngest.
3.1.3.13	They lead the horse first and the donkey last, for the exclusion of evil.
3.1.3.14	Therefore the better one goes first, and the worse one follows.
3.1.3.15	If one wishes, "May the worse one be worse," they should lead the donkey first and the horse afterwards.
3.1.3.16	By this, Vipujan Sauraki made the worse one worse.
3.1.3.17	By this one makes the worse one worse.
3.1.3.18	The Vājavatī (hymn) is the highest in each sacrifice.
3.1.3.19	Food is Vāja.
3.1.3.20	The hymn is the strength.
3.1.3.21	For food and strength Agni is indeed built.
3.1.3.22	When they go with the Vājavatīs and the Utimati (hymns), it is for the securing of food and strength.
3.1.3.23	He who builds Agni becomes all.
3.1.3.24	All become prosperous.
3.1.3.25	The horse is indeed the thunderbolt of Prajapati.
3.1.3.26	When he says, "Come, O Prativakra, advancing, without enemies," he advances with the thunderbolt against the enemies who are without enemies.
3.1.3.27	Animals are indeed Rudra.
3.1.3.28	Agni is Rudra.
3.1.3.29	If one were to build the fire without having excluded the animals from Rudra, Rudra would be the owner of his animals.
3.1.3.30	When he says, "Obeisance to the lord of Rudra's followers," he excludes the animals from Ruddra and builds the fire.
3.1.3.31	The owner of animals does not harm his animals.
3.1.3.32	"He says, 'May the sky be firm,' for the sake of the stability of these worlds.
3.1.3.33	The Rakshas are indeed about to destroy the two who are about to kindle the fire.
3.1.3.34	When he says, 'May there be prosperity and safety, making the fearsome things harmless,' he makes prosperity for them.
3.1.3.35	The abode of Agni is the ashes.
3.1.3.36	The Angiras first collected this (fire).
3.1.3.37	He says, "I am gathering Agni, the lord of the house, like Angiras." He gathers him with the deities.
3.1.3.38	If one were to meet a person, one should recite this mantra:
3.1.3.39	"I am gathering Agni the lord of the House, like Angiras" One takes the strength from him.
3.1.3.40	They say, "One should recite to Prajapati and Agni should be contemplated."
3.1.3.41-46	From where the sun rises, he should recite, removing the mound of earth, saying, "We shall bear Agni, the lord of the house, like Angiras." This indeed is Prajapati. His ear is this mound of earth. Therefore, reciting from there, he builds the fire. They hear him saying, "We are building the fire," and he says, "The fire is not moving."
3.1.3.47	Therefore, the one who is worse than the one who is better, Karna, says.
3.1.3.48	Karna says to Karna:
3.1.4.1	"Agni has followed the foremost of the dawns," he says, following the foremost.
3.1.4.2	"Having come, O Agni, shake off all obstacles on the path."
3.1.4.3	He indeed shook off the obstacles.
3.1.4.4	Prajapati desired him with the earlier verse.
3.1.4.5	He found him with the later verse.
3.1.4.6	He desired him with the former verse.
3.1.4.7	He knew him with the latter verse.
3.1.4.8	"The sky is your back, the earth is your seat."
3.1.4.9	For the sky is indeed his back.
3.1.4.10	"The earth is his seat, the atmosphere is his self, the ocean is his womb."
3.1.4.11	For the atmosphere is indeed his self.
3.1.4.12	The ocean is his womb.
3.1.4.13	"You stand with your eyes open, you stand over the enemy." He stands over the enemy.
3.1.4.14	If he hates someone, he should say, "Stand over so-and-so."
3.1.4.15	He stands over him.
3.1.4.16	He says, "Go out!" He goes out by means of the going out.
3.1.4.17	Where the sacrifice is performed in accordance with its form, there the sacrificer prospers.
3.1.4.18-22	The Agni who became black entered the horse. He went to the place where the deer-skin is. When one offers at the horse's foot, one offers in Agni, in the place of Agni. The Adhvaryu would be blind if one were to offer in a place not meant for it.
3.1.4.23	This is what they call it.
3.1.4.24	He offers with the two verses addressed to Marishci and Anara.
3.1.4.25	For offerings are obtained by the mind.
3.1.4.26	He offers by the three verses, for the securing of power.
3.1.4.27	He offers the two verses containing the word 'food', for the securing of food.
3.1.4.28	He draws (the altar) with the Gayatri verse.
3.1.4.29-37	He thus encloses him with this (verse). With a Tristubh (verse). From the atmosphere. He draws the line with an Anushtubh (verse). The Anushtubh is the overlord of all metres. Therefore he draws the line with the Anushtubh. He takes up the spade with two Savitrī verses for prosperity. He digs with two (verses). The sacrificer has two feet; for stability.
3.1.4.38	Where the fire is kindled or piled up, there the fire-god comes.
3.1.4.39	When he says, "May it be peaceful to the creatures, harmless," he makes it peaceful to the creatures.
3.1.5.1	He says, "You are the back of the waters."
3.1.5.2	For this is the back of the water.
3.1.5.3	He makes it the back with the back.
3.1.5.4	"The womb of Agni,"
3.1.5.5-10	The lotus leaf is indeed the womb of Agni. The womb-destroyer is the navel. The womb and the navel are indeed joined together. "Spread yourself with the measure of heaven." He spreads him with the measure of these two. "Be the shelter and the armour." He spreads the black antelope skin and the lotus leaf.
3.1.5.11	These very ones cover him with the heaven and earth.
3.1.5.12	"May you be united in the same abode."
3.1.5.13	Men are not worthy to approach him.
3.1.5.14	He embraces him with these (heaven and earth).
3.1.5.15	He collects (the bones) in a black antelope skin.
3.1.5.16	This is the most nourishing of animals.
3.1.5.17	And he also entrusts the wild animals to purity.
3.1.5.18	He collects from the hair.
3.1.5.19	Therefore, the black antelope skin is indeed divine.
3.1.5.20	He collects the sacrifice with the sacrifice.
3.1.5.21	He collects with a lotus leaf.
3.1.5.22	The lotus leaf is indeed the womb of Agni.
3.1.5.23	He collects it with its own womb.
3.1.5.24	He collects for a Brahman with Gāyatrī verses.
3.1.5.25	For the Brahman is Gāyatrī.
3.1.5.26	With Tristubh for a Kṣatriya.
3.1.5.27	The Rajanya (warrior) is of the Tristubh (metre).
3.1.5.28	The Vaishya (merchant) is of the Jagati (metre).
3.1.5.29	For the Vaishya is of the Jagat (metre).
3.1.5.30	He whose desire is that he may prosper, for him one should collect (the verses) with the Gāyatrī and Tristubh (verses).
3.1.5.31	He prospers.
3.1.5.32	Thou art the purifier, the supporter of all, Atharva first churned thee, Agni.
3.1.5.33	Prajapati is Atharva.
3.1.5.34	He churned this (fire) first.
3.1.5.35	He generated it.
3.1.5.36	He himself churns it.
3.1.5.37	He generates it.
3.1.5.38	He collects it with three (verses).
3.1.5.39	These are the three worlds.
3.1.5.40	He collects him from these worlds.
3.1.5.41	The fourth is the Yajus.
3.1.5.42	He collects from the directions.
3.1.5.43	The wind blows in front of the rain.
3.1.5.44	The plants follow the year.
3.1.5.45	The animals follow the plants.
3.1.5.46	The men follow the animals.
3.1.5.47	These are the foundations.
3.1.5.48	The sacrificer obtains them.
3.1.5.49	He says, "Let the divine waters flow forth, full of honey," for the foundation of the plants.
3.1.5.50	From their abode they have grown up, the plants, very fragrant.
3.1.5.51	Therefore, from this place of origin, the plants grow up, very fragrant.
3.1.5.52	May the wind, the son of Aditi, grant you this.
3.1.5.53	Therefore, whatever is sown and reaped from this place, it is gathered together.
3.1.5.54	If one were to offer with ghee, one would offer this world.
3.1.5.55	And if one were to sprinkle water, one would pacify.
3.1.5.56	"He who moves among the gods with the breath of life, to whom be the Vasat-call, O god!"
3.1.5.57	There are six seasons.
3.1.5.58	He establishes the rain in the seasons.
3.1.5.59	Therefore all seasons have rain.
3.1.5.60	"Well-born, in the light," he makes him heavenly.
3.1.5.61	"O Agni, assume the garment of all forms, with the light,"
3.1.5.62	The metres are the garment of Agni.
3.1.5.63	He wears the metres.
3.1.5.64	He gives him away with the metres.
3.1.5.65	His garment in this world is for the future. He is without Agni in the other world, he who knows thus.
3.1.5.66	This is indeed the garment of Varuna.
3.1.5.67	"He makes her stand up with the verse, 'Stand up for your own sacrifice.' He releases the Varuna-noose upwards.
3.1.5.68	He releases her with two verses.
3.1.5.69	The sacrificer has two feet; for stability.
3.1.5.70	'You are the embryo born, of the two worlds.'
3.1.5.71	This is the embryo of these two.
3.1.5.72	Through these he is born.
3.1.5.73	He generates him through these.
3.1.5.74	Agni, the beautiful one, is borne among the plants.
3.1.5.75	Therefore Agni is in all plants.
3.1.5.76	He has gone beyond his mothers, the cows.
3.1.5.77	The plants are his mothers.
3.1.5.78	He drives him away from them.
3.1.5.79	Prajapati desired him with the eastern half of the verse.
3.1.5.80	He stood in the following half.
3.1.6.6	What Shiva said, "Be auspicious to the creatures," he made him auspicious to the creatures.
3.1.6.7	"Do not step on the life of the one who is in front," he places life in him for the sake of completeness.
3.1.6.8	"Carrying the bull Agni, the bull,"
3.1.6.9	for this is indeed a bull carrying a bull.
3.1.6.10	"The embryo of the waters, the ocean-like,"
3.1.6.11	for this indeed is the embryo of the waters that is ocean-like.
3.1.6.12-19	"Come, O Agni, with the Vitas!" With Agni as their mouth, the gods conquered these worlds. With Agni as his mouth, the sacrificer conquers these worlds. Truth and truth. He stands in truth and truth. This one is truth. That one is truth. He stands in both.
3.1.6.20	The day is truth.
3.1.6.21	The night is truth.
3.1.6.22	He stands firm in the day and night.
3.1.6.23	"The plants hold this Agni."
3.1.6.24	He makes him firm with the plants.
3.1.6.25	"The flowering, the well-sprouting." He makes the plants bear fruit.
3.1.6.26	Therefore the plants bear fruit at the top.
3.1.6.27	Now this is the Varuna-bond that is being tied.
3.1.6.28	"He ties the Varuna-knot with the Anurūpa verse, "Do thou shine with thy bright and wide radiance."
3.1.6.29	He ties it with two (verses).
3.1.6.30	The sacrificer has two feet; for stability.
3.1.6.31	" "He sprinkles water with the verse, "The waters are standing, the bountiful ones."
3.1.6.32	" "The waters are the pacifiers of the one who is not pacified."
3.1.6.33	Therefore he sprinkles it for peace.
3.1.6.34	He sprinkles it with three (verses).
3.1.6.35	For Agni is threefold.
3.1.6.36	Now indeed this (earth) is Varuna's garment.
3.1.6.37	"He sprinkles the garment of Varuna with Mitra," he says; he sprinkles the garment of Mitra with Mitra.
3.1.6.38	"He sprinkled the earth with Rudra," he says;
3.1.7.4	This is the mouth of the sacrifice.
3.1.7.5	"May the Vasus make thee with the Gayatri metre."
3.1.7.6	It is made with the metres and the deities.
3.1.7.7	He makes it with the metres and deities.
3.1.7.8	"Thou art firm, thou art the earth."
3.1.7.9	This is the wish of the metres.
3.1.7.10	He makes it with the Yajus formula, "May Aditi's rope be at the mouth, may Aditi's pit be grasped."
3.1.7.11	For men make it without the Yajus, for exclusion.
3.1.7.12	She gave it to her sons, saying, "May they be obedient."
3.1.7.13	The men are indeed the sons of Aditi.
3.1.7.14	She gave them to them only.
3.1.7.15	It should be made with three knots.
3.1.7.16	These are the three worlds.
3.1.7.17	This is the mold of these worlds.
3.1.7.18	It should be made with eight nipples.
3.1.7.19	It has the form of the Gāyatrī verse.
3.1.7.20	It should have four nipples.
3.1.7.21	For the milking of Aditi.
3.1.7.22	It should two nipples.
3.1.7.23	The mold is the atmosphere.
3.1.7.24	These two worlds are the nipples.
3.1.7.25	He who knows this, indeed, milks these two worlds.
3.1.7.26	It is to be made the size of a vyāma.
3.1.7.27	This is the extent of a man's strength.
3.1.7.28	It is made according to the extent of strength.
3.1.7.29	And this is the extent of the greatness of a man, for the attainment of greatness.
3.1.7.30	It should be made the size of an arm-span.
3.1.7.31	It is measured by the size of the sacrificial man.
3.1.7.32	It should measure the size of a span.
3.1.7.33	It is determined by the sacrifice of Vishnu.
3.1.7.34	And also for not exceeding the size of Prajapati.
3.1.7.35	He fumigates with seven (sticks).
3.1.7.36	There are seven vital airs in the head.
3.1.7.37	This is the head of the sacrifice with the Yajus.
3.1.7.38	He places the vital airs in the heads.
3.1.7.39	He fumigates with seven (kinds of) incense.
3.1.7.40	There are seven metres.
3.1.7.41	He fumigated with the metres.
3.1.7.42	And the metres are indeed Brahman.
3.1.7.43	He fumigats with Brahman.
3.1.7.44	This is a vessel for Vishnu.
3.1.7.45	He makes it prosper with his own deity, when he offers it with other deities.
3.1.7.46	When he says, "May Vishnu offer thee," he makes it prosper with its own deity.
3.1.7.47	He offers it with a horse-hair.
3.1.7.48	For the horse is a bull, and Agni is a bull; for prosperity.
3.1.7.49	And the horse is of Prajapati.
3.1.7.50	Prajapati is the fire.
3.1.7.51	From that he fumigates with horse dung for the sake of having a womb.
3.1.8.1	Prajapati thought, "Whoever digs this first will suffer harm."
3.1.8.2	He saw this mantra:
3.1.8.3	"May Aditi, the goddess, the one with all the goddesses, dig you in the abode of the earth, like Angiras, in the pit."
3.1.8.4	This is the goddess Aditi, the goddess of all gods.
3.1.8.5	By her he dug out that (earth) for non-injury.
3.1.8.6	For one does not injure oneself.
3.1.8.7	The goddesses, the wives of the gods, the goddesses of all gods, the wives of Angiras, may they place you on the earth's surface.
3.1.8.8	The plants are the wives of the goddesses, the goddesses of the gods.
3.1.8.9	He establishes her in the plants.
3.1.8.10	"The goddess Dhishana, having all the goddesses, may bind her in the abode of the earth, like Angiras, in the pot."
3.1.8.11	The goddess Dhishani is speech, having all the deities.
3.1.8.12	He binds her with speech.
3.1.8.13	"The goddesses Gnas, having all the gods, may melt her in the abode on the earth, like the Angiras, in a pot."
3.1.8.14	The Chhandas are the goddesses, the goddesses of all the worlds.
3.1.8.15	He cooks her with the Chhandas.
3.1.8.16	"The goddess Varutrii, the goddess of all the worlds, may cook you in the cauldron, as Angiras did, in the abode of the earth."
3.1.8.17	The goddess Varutri is indeed the day and night, the goddess of the worlds.
3.1.8.18	She cooks her with the day and night.
3.1.8.19	The goddesses, the Jānas, the goddesses of all the worlds, the goddesses with severed leaves, cook her in the abode of the earth, like the Angiras.
3.1.8.20	The Jānas are indeed the stars, the goddesses with the severed leaves, the goddesses of the whole world.
3.1.8.21	He cooks her with the stars.
3.1.8.22	These indeed were the first deities to cook her for Prajapati.
3.1.8.23	Therefore these are the verses with the Pāṅkti metre.
3.1.8.24	He cooks it with the same (kindling-sticks).
3.1.8.25	He cooks it with two (kindling- sticks).
3.1.8.26	The sacrificer has two feet for stability.
3.1.8.27	Now he is indeed bound by Varuna's noose.
3.1.8.28	"Mitra's supporter of the people."
3.1.8.29	He approaches Varuna's snare with Mitra.
3.1.8.30	May the god Savitr, with his good hand, with his good thumb, bless thee. He blesses her with the impulse of Savitr, for the sake of non-injury to himself.
3.1.8.31	"He says, "Rise up, be great," for support.
3.1.8.32	" "May I encompass the directions without injury on the earth,"
3.1.8.33	" "Therefore Agni shines in all directions."
3.1.8.34	I give this pot to my friend for the sake of non-breaking.
3.1.8.35	He gives it to his friend saying, "May this not be broken." For the sake of nonbreaking.
3.1.8.36	If it were to be broken by one who is not a friend, it would have to be made again.
3.1.8.37	May the Vasus hold you with the Gayatri metre.
3.1.8.38	It is made with metres and deities.
3.1.8.39-44	And he listens to it with the metres and with the deities. He listens to it with his own place, with goat's milk. Goat's milk is indeed Agni's milk. The pot is indeed Agni' s. He listens with his own milk to his own pot. Goat' s milk is indeed the supreme milk.
3.1.8.45	This is the supreme vessel, namely the Ukhā.
3.1.8.46	He fills the supreme vessel with the supreme milk.
3.1.9.1	He offers these six oblations of the Veda-recitations.
3.1.9.2	There are six seasons.
3.1.9.3	He thus draws the strength of the earth through the seasons.
3.1.9.4	He offers them separately.
3.1.9.5	The vital airs are of different strengths. For the support of the vital airs.
3.1.9.6	If one wishes, "Let him be deaf," one should offer all of them together.
3.1.9.7	It severs his life-force.
3.1.9.8	He becomes deaf.
3.1.9.9	Therefore the deaf speak with their mouths but do not hear.
3.1.9.10	For his sense of speech is not functioning.
3.1.9.11	These are the other metres, the life-forces.
3.1.9.12	Speech is the Anushtubh.
3.1.9.13	When he offers the seventh (oblation) with the Anushtubh verse, then he unites speech with the vital airs.
3.1.9.14	Therefore this speech is the seventh of the vital airs. "
3.1.9.15	He says, 'Do not be broken, do not be injured.'
3.1.9.16	This was the Asura's magic.
3.1.9.17	The gods destroyed it with this Yajus. The Asura's sorcery was made by its own nature.
3.1.9.18	By this the sacrificer wins over his enemy.
3.1.9.19	He wins over by means of two (verses).
3.1.9.20	The sacrificer has two feet; for stability.
3.1.9.21	One should win over for one who desires prosperity.
3.1.9.22	One lives on what is to be.
3.1.9.23	One attains what is to be only.
3.1.9.24	One becomes better and better every day.
3.1.9.25	One should place the (sacrificial) grass for one who has lost his prosperity.
3.1.9.26	He who has lost his glory is born again.
3.1.9.27	He begets him with the one who is born.
3.1.9.28	One should take it from a trough if one desires,
3.1.9.29	"He should be a food-eater."
3.1.9.30	This is indeed the food-eater among the fires.
3.1.9.31	The trough is the maker of food.
3.1.9.32	It bestows food on him.
3.1.9.33	If one wishes to take from a river, one should take from the river. If one wishes to make his country prosperous and fruitful, one should take it from the river.
3.1.9.34	His country becomes prosperous and fruitful.
3.1.9.35	If one wishes to make the evil-doing enemy of another person be born again, one should take and place it from wherever one likes.
3.1.9.36	This is indeed the abode of the sacrificer.
3.1.9.37	He generates his own evil, his own enemy, in his own abode.
3.1.9.38	He places the Crumakas, anointed with ghee, with the verse, "O Agni, may the ghee be your nourishment."
3.1.9.39	The Crumakas are Agni's beloved body.
3.1.9.40	Ghee is brilliance.
3.1.9.41	He makes him prosper with his own beloved body and brilliance.
3.1.9.42	"The one beyond the Samvatsara (year)," so says the Audumbari.
3.1.9.43	Where the gods divided the strength, from there the Udumbara tree stood up.
3.1.9.44	By the Audumbari one obtains strength.
3.1.9.45	"The one beyond the Paravasu (year)," so is said of the Vaikankati.
3.1.9.46	When Agni was created, his radiance departed.
3.1.9.47	It entered the Vaikankata.
3.1.9.48	Whatever is the radiance of the Vaikankati, one obtains that.
3.1.9.49	"The one made of Shami wood, with the words, "Whatever, O Agni, are your own".
3.1.9.50	For Agni did not relish anything that was not cut with an axe."
3.1.9.51	To him, with this (verse), the sacrificer relished everything.
3.1.9.52	"The words, "whatever, O Agni, etc."
3.1.9.53	With this, Agni relishes everything."
3.1.9.54	Everything is agreeable to him.
3.1.9.55	"He who, night after night, brings the Apravaran (oblation)," he prays for a blessing."
3.1.9.56	"He who has conquered the enemy," he says, for he has conquered the enemy."
3.1.9.57	When Agni was created, the Rakshas attacked him.
3.1.9.58	They were driven away by these (verses).
3.1.9.59	The ones who are the army of the gods. Thus he removes the demons with these (verses).
3.1.9.60	One should place these very kindling woods where one fears demons, for the removal of demons.
3.1.9.61	And those who are thieves become the victims of the demons.
3.1.9.62	One should place a kindling wood of oil-tree for the purpose of subjugation.
3.1.9.63	This is indeed the thunderbolt of trees.
3.1.9.64	He is struck down immediately.
3.1.9.65	He should then mentally contemplate the one whom he hates.
3.1.9.66	The mind is more important than speech.
3.1.9.67	He offers a portion of himself to Agni.
3.1.9.68	"He says, "May he who hates us and the one who hates our people"."
3.1.9.69	Therefore, one who has kindled the fire should not utter indecent words, nor should one who knows about Agni.
3.1.9.70	My Brahman is sharp, my energy is sharp, my strength is sharp. He thus unites the Brahman with the Kshatra, and the Kshatra with the Brahman.
3.1.9.71	And he makes the Brahman and the Kshattra united.
3.1.9.72	This is what he says:
3.1.9.73	"The Brahman and the Kshtra do not suffer from separation."
3.1.9.74	The Brahman says: "The Kshatriya conquers."
3.1.9.75	The Kshatra and the Brahmana, they both stimulate the Brahman. They perform their deeds in unison.
3.1.10.1	They are offered to Agni.
3.1.10.2	If one desires something, that desire is fulfilled.
3.1.10.3	They satisfy.
3.1.10.4	They make them fit for sacrifice and worthy of worship.
3.1.10.5	They release them after having been offered to Agni, so that they may not be exhausted.
3.1.10.6-11	They establish it with one (verse) for the uninterrupted continuity of the sacrifice. They become Puskaras for the possession of the senses. The Yajya and Anuvakya verses are in Tristubh metre for the securing of the senses. Now this is the one for Agni Vaisvānara with twelve potsherds. Agni Vaisvānari is indeed the year. This is Agni's dear form, namely Vaisvānaran.
3.1.10.12	He makes it complete with the same body as his beloved.
3.1.10.13	And also for the sake of not being deficient.
3.1.10.14	For Vaisvânara is not deficient.
3.1.10.15	One who desires brilliance should offer a white (animal) to Vâyu, with the Nîyut formula.
3.1.10.16	Vâyu is the brilliance of Agni.
3.1.10.17	Therefore Agni follows Vâyu.
3.1.10.18	Because of Vâyu's brilliance, Agni is brilliant.
3.1.10.19	If the Vayu-offering were to be made in one form, the sacrificer would become mad.
3.1.10.20	If it is made in two forms, for the sake of the second.
3.1.10.21	And for the sake of stability and non-madness.
3.1.10.22	This is the form of all animals.
3.1.10.23	If the Vayu-oblation were to be made into one form, the Sacrificer would become mad;
3.1.10.24	If this Prajapati-offering with twelve potsherds is made in two ways, for the sake
3.1.10.25	Then for firmness and non-madness.
3.1.10.26	Now this is the Agniavisnava (offering) on eleven potsherds.
3.1.10.27	Agni is all the deities.
3.1.10.28	Vishnu is the sacrifice.
3.1.10.29	He has obtained both the deities and the sacrifice.
3.1.10.30	Now this offering of cooked rice in ghee to Aditya.
3.1.10.31	The Adityas went to heaven from here, the highest.
3.1.10.32	He goes to heaven, having announced to them.
3.1.10.33	The Adityas are prosperous in this world, the Adityas in the other world.
3.1.10.34	The gods prospered in this world with the cake, in the other world with the oblation.
3.1.10.35	One prospers in this world with a cake, in the next world with an oblation.
3.1.10.36	Now this one to Agni Vaiśvānara with twelve potsherds.
3.1.10.37	Agni Vaiśvānāra is the abode of the gods.
3.1.10.38	He carries the fire in the temple of the gods.
3.1.10.39	Now, indeed, Kama is Vaiśvānara.
3.1.10.40	Whatever desire one has, that desire bends to him.
3.2.1.1	"He releases the golden (thread), saying, 'The golden one shines far and wide.'
3.2.1.2	Gold is immortal.
3.2.1.3	Death is Agni.
3.2.1.4	The noose is 
3.2.1.5	He makes death disappear with immortality.
3.2.1.6	Now these are the obstacles.
3.2.1.7	The gods and the Asuras were competing.
3.2.1.8	The gods saw these obstacles.
3.2.1.9	With them they obstructed the Asuras from these worlds.
3.2.1.10	That is why they are called obstacles.
3.2.1.11	The sacrificer, by means of these unobstructed (bricks), obstructs his enemy from these worlds.
3.2.1.12	He becomes unobstructed in twenty-one (ways) for the sake of stability.
3.2.1.13	He places the unobstructed one above.
3.2.1.14	He places unobstructed one below for the sake of obstructing the enemy.
3.2.1.15	Night and Dawn are of one mind, of different forms.
3.2.1.16	He places the fire with the day and night.
3.2.1.17	They make him grow, the one child, in the right way.
3.2.1.18	For this they make him grow, one child, in a right way.
3.2.1.19	The light shines within the heaven and earth.
3.2.1.20	For this light shines within them.
3.2.1.21	The gods, holding Agni, give wealth.
3.2.1.22	The gods are the vital airs, giving wealth.
3.2.1.23	He takes up Agni with his own life.
3.2.1.24	"He releases all forms, the wise one."
3.2.1.25	For Agni has all forms.
3.2.1.26	"He has brought forth good for the two-footed and four-footed." He says this because of the offspring.
3.2.1.27	"Savitar has pierced the sky, the most excellent one."
3.2.1.28	He carries Agni because of being born by Savitar.
3.2.1.29	"The dawn has followed the course of Viraj."
3.2.1.30	Therefore Agni is placed at the rising of the dawn.
3.2.1.31	You are the bird Garuda.
3.2.1.32	The three-fold is your head.
3.2.1.33	The Gayatri is your eye.
3.2.1.34	This is the collection of Agni.
3.2.1.35	He collects Agni.
3.2.1.36	Therefore he collects.
3.2.1.37	Therefore the animal is born with all its limbs.
3.2.1.38	Agni is indeed an animal.
3.2.1.39	"He says, 'Go to heaven, O lord of heaven,' for the attainment of the heavenly world."
3.2.1.40	Now these are the steps.
3.2.1.41	The gods and the Asuras were in competition.
3.2.1.42	The gods saw these steps.
3.2.1.43	With them they drove away the Asuras from these worlds.
3.2.1.44	They conquered them without being conquered.
3.2.1.45	In this way, the sacrificer drives away his enemy from these worlds.
3.2.1.46	He conquers what is unconquerable.
3.2.1.47	The sling is six cubits long.
3.2.1.48	There are six seasons.
3.2.1.49	He encloses Agni with the seasons.
3.2.1.50	He carries it above the navel.
3.2.1.51	For the gods are above the navel.
3.2.1.52	The gods, indeed, bear the gods in themselves.
3.2.1.53	If one were to wear it below the navel, one would burn the womb.
3.2.1.54	And it would be a killer.
3.2.1.55	One goes forth.
3.2.1.56	Therefore, the domestic animals go forth.
3.2.1.57	And when it returns again,
3.2.1.58	Therefore, they return again.
3.2.1.59	This is the energy that goes out with the animals. It goes out together.
3.2.1.60	"Come back again, O energy!"
3.2.1.61	He thus again wins the animals.
3.2.1.62	They become prosperous.
3.2.1.63	He returns with four (verses).
3.2.1.64	Animals have four feet.
3.2.1.65	He thus wins animals.
3.2.1.66	He thus turns around.
3.2.1.67	Thus the sacrifice is completed.
3.2.1.68	And also this is in accordance with the sun's covering.
3.2.1.69	"He says, "I have brought thee near, I have become within."
3.2.1.70	For now he is within.
3.2.1.71	"Release us from the highest noose of Varuna."
3.2.1.72	He releases the noose of Varunā for the sake of non-injury to himself.
3.2.1.73	"He stands high above the lights, the bright ones." He thus makes him prosper by means of light.
3.2.1.74	"He is the swan, the pure, the good, the one who sits in the sky." He thus settles him.
3.2.1.75	He thus establishes him in the seven Hotr-priests.
3.2.1.76	And indeed, he prospers through these seven the sevenfold Agni.
3.2.1.77	He becomes a food-giver from the seventh man.
3.2.1.78	The semen is Agni.
3.2.1.79	The semen is indeed deposited in the atmosphere.
3.2.1.80	If one were to place it below, the embryos of animals would be unstable and would fall.
3.2.1.81	And if one were to place above,
3.2.1.82	he would make it to be in the atmosphere, for the stability of the embryos.
3.2.1.83	This one who is being piled up is indeed the one who is generating the fires.
3.2.1.84	Therefore this one is to be placed on a seat.
3.2.1.85	"You are the support of your mother."
3.2.1.86	This is the womb of Agni.
3.2.1.87	He places him in his own womb.
3.2.1.88	He approaches with three (verses).
3.2.1.89	Agni is threefold.
3.2.2.1	Now this is the Vatspara (hymn).
3.2.2.2	By this hymn Vatsaprin Bhālandana attained the dear abode of Agni.
3.2.2.3	He thus attains Agni's own dear abode.
3.2.2.4	He becomes dear to him in the future.
3.2.2.5	The sages spoke about the dearness of the calf.
3.2.2.6	He saw this hymn.
3.2.2.7	He conquered the slander with it.
3.2.2.8	He went to reconciliation with it.
3.2.2.9	With this he conquers slander.
3.2.2.10	He goes to the Apciti.
3.2.2.11	He approaches with twelve (verses).
3.2.2.12	Twelve months are a year.
3.2.2.13	Having obtained the year, he secures it.
3.2.2.14	They are in Triṣṭubh metre, for the securing of power.
3.2.2.15	He approaches on another day after having gone on another day.
3.2.2.16	He supports the prosperity and welfare of creatures.
3.2.2.17	Therefore the Yāyāvaras are the other castes, and the Kṣemyas are the other castes.
3.2.2.18	Now when he rises after having gone forth,
3.2.2.19	therefore the Yāyāvara goes to the Kṣemya.
3.2.2.20	Therefore the food of the Yāyāvaka became the Kṣemyo.
3.2.2.21	If one is to perform on a certain day, one should combine both on that day.
3.2.2.22	One should go forth and also stand up.
3.2.2.23	The sacrificer, indeed, takes away the food and prosperity of his enemy.
3.2.2.24	"He says, "The All-gods have raised you up."
3.2.2.25	Because all the gods are the men here.
3.2.2.26	"He (the sacrificer) says, "O Agni, do thou fill with thoughts."
3.2.2.27	With that thought for which Agni is installed, he fills him with that thought.
3.2.2.28	"O Agni, go with light," (thus) having made him prosperous with light, he sends him forth.
3.2.2.29	If the axle should be shaken, one should recite, "Agni cried, like the thundering sky."
3.2.2.30	This (axle) is indeed the lord of the sacrificer's progeny and cattle, shaking them.
3.2.2.31	It is indeed his crying.
3.2.2.32	Then he prays for blessings, having appeased them.
3.2.2.33	One should place the fire-wood with the Gayatri verse, "May the fire be pleased."
3.2.2.34	For a Brahmin, because the Brahmin is Gayatri.
3.2.2.35	With the Tristubh verse, for a Kshatriya.
3.2.2.36	For a Kshatriya, because the Kshatriya is Tristubh.
3.2.2.37	With two Gayatri verses, for a Vaishya.
3.2.2.38	For the two Gayatri verses are the Jagati.
3.2.2.39	Or else he makes this food a share for Brahman.
3.2.2.40	If the ashes were to be filled up, he should put it in water.
3.2.2.41	Water is the womb of Agni.
3.2.2.42	He puts it back in its own womb.
3.2.2.43	One should make it into dung for one who desires cattle.
3.2.2.44	Dung is cattle.
3.2.2.45	One becomes possessed of cattle.
3.2.2.46	One should mix it with bricks.
3.2.2.47-51	Therefore all his bricks are Agni-related. He is indeed falling away from the energy of cattle. "Come back to energy again." Thus he again wins the energy of cattle.
3.2.2.52	He approaches with two (verses).
3.2.2.53	The sacrificer has two feet; for stability.
3.2.3.1	He says, 'Gone, departed, gone away.'
3.2.3.2	This world is connected with Yama.
3.2.3.3	Yama has taken over the lordship of this world.
3.2.3.4	If one were to build a fire-altar without having gone to the assembly of Yama, the fire-altar would be connected with Yama and would not lead to heaven.
3.2.3.5	What Yama said at the beginning, the Fathers have made this world the end. This is our world. From Yama he sought this divine sacrifice.
3.2.3.6	When he remembers the divine sacrifice, he builds the fire. Yama is his deity. His fire becomes heavenly.
3.2.3.7	They strike up.
3.2.3.8	Whatever is impure and unfit for sacrifice, they remove.
3.2.3.9	They remove it to the extent of a fathom.
3.2.3.10	That is the extent of a man's strength.
3.2.3.11	It is piled up to the extent of strength.
3.2.3.12	And that is the extent of the greatness of a man.
3.2.3.13	For the attainment of greatness.
3.2.3.14	He sprinkles.
3.2.3.15	Whatever he did wrong in removing it, he makes it right.
3.2.3.16	He pacifies it.
3.2.3.17	Now, indeed, water is the womb of Agni.
3.2.3.18	It is deposited in its own womb.
3.2.3.19	"Agni's ashes, Agni's excrement."
3.2.3.20	He scatters sand.
3.2.3.21	Indeed, sand is the ashes of Agni Vaisvānara.
3.2.3.22	It is placed in its own ashes.
3.2.3.23	Sand is the womb.
3.2.3.24	Semen is sand.
3.2.3.25-32	When he puts down the sand and sows the seeds, he places the seed in the womb. Therefore seed is placed in the womb. Therefore seed is generated from the womb. Prajapati created the creatures. He created them from the womb itself. The seeds are the generation. Here Agni is indeed generated in the generation. These two were indeed together.
3.2.3.33	They said to each other, "Let us have a pleasant abode together."
3.2.3.34	The waters are her sacrificial, her purifying.
3.2.3.35	They are those (waters).
3.2.3.36	The morning dew is her sacrificial, her purifiying.
3.2.3.37	They are these (waters).
3.2.3.38	When the waters and the morning dew become one, then he obtains that which is sacrificial and purifying of them.
3.2.3.39	And he places him in his own pleasant abode.
3.2.3.40	The Sāman is the dawn.
3.2.3.41	Both kinds of animals, those that are domesticated and those that are wild, recognize these (animals).
3.2.3.42	Both kinds of cattle recognize him.
3.2.3.43	He places four in the east.
3.2.3.44	There are four metres.
3.2.3.45	The gods went to heaven by means of the metres.
3.2.3.46	They conquered the directions.
3.2.3.47	They were weakened.
3.2.3.48	They have established them by these (verses).
3.2.3.49	In that these (bricks) are deposited, (it is) for the stability of the directions.
3.2.3.50	The bricks are indeed the cattle.
3.2.3.51	The cattle stand near the Garhapatya.
3.2.3.52	He deposits two bricks in a row in front and two in a row behind.
3.2.3.53	He deposits the cattle on both sides for him. For the protection of the cattle.
3.2.3.54	He deposits eight.
3.2.3.55	The Gayatri has eight syllables.
3.2.3.56	Agni is Gayatri.
3.2.3.57	He builds him as big as Agni.
3.2.3.58	It should be made of twenty-one (bricks). For stability.
3.2.3.59	For the twenty-one is stability.
3.2.3.60	And the Garhapatya is indeed of twenty-one kinds.
3.2.3.61	It should have three layers.
3.2.3.62	For these three are the worlds.
3.2.3.63	He attains these worlds.
3.2.3.64	The five-layered (fire-altar) should be made.
3.2.3.65	The sacrifice is fivefold.
3.2.3.66	He obtains the sacrifice as much as it is.
3.2.3.67	He lays down with four (bricks).
3.2.3.68	There are four metres.
3.2.3.69	He lays them down with metres.
3.2.3.70	And indeed, the metres are Brahman.
3.2.3.71	He lays it down with Brahman.
3.2.3.72	The Agni which is being built is indeed the Kshatra (of the fires).
3.2.3.73	The Ukhya (Agni) is the Kshatra.
3.2.3.74	The Brahman is the Yajus.
3.2.3.75	When he lays down with the Yajus, he lays down the Kshatra with the Brahman.
3.2.3.76	Therefore the Kshatra is laid down with the Brahman and is separated from it.
3.2.3.77	These two become tigers.
3.2.3.78	They are powerful, not peaceful, and are about to harm the sacrificer.
3.2.3.79	He says, "May you be of one mind, of one intention, of one thought, of one purpose." He pacifies.
3.2.3.80	He is pacified and placed down for the non-injury of the sacrificer.
3.2.3.81	The power of the earth is raised by the seasons.
3.2.3.82	It is released again by the seasons.
3.2.3.83	Prajapati, the creator of all, said, "Let it be released." Prajapati himself, the creator of everything, releases it.
3.2.4.1	Now these are the offerings to Nirriti.
3.2.4.2	Three are cooked in husks.
3.2.4.3	This is the Nirriti form of food, namely, husks.
3.2.4.4	They are black.
3.2.4.5	This is Nirriti's form.
3.2.4.6	They take this direction.
3.2.4.7	This is the direction of Nirriti.
3.2.4.8	She places them in the direction of Nirrti, turned away from her own work.
3.2.4.9	This is the place of Nirriti on the earth.
3.2.4.10	He indeed releases Nirriti from the place of Nirrti.
3.2.4.11	He releases his breath with the first (verse), his out-breath with the second, and his through-breath with the third.
3.2.4.12	And indeed the man has three syllables.
3.2.4.13	As much as the man is, he is freed from the sin of Nirriti.
3.2.4.14	Nirriti is the observer of deeds.
3.2.4.15	Having appeased her with her own share, then one builds the fire with Savitri's impulse.
3.2.4.16	"What the goddess Nirriti bound you with..."
3.2.4.17	Placing the net on the bricks,
3.2.4.18	Release the noose of Nirriti for the sake of non-injury to oneself.
3.2.4.19	The bright light that is beyond the great expanse of this world,
3.2.4.20	May that assembly of Agni Vaiśvānara protect us from enemies.
3.2.4.21	Sprinkling water with "Svāhā," one moves around for the sake of not being affected by Nirriti.
3.2.4.22	Having said "For prosperity, I bow," one turns back.
3.2.4.23	Having become prosperity, he turns for the non-injury of himself.
3.2.4.24	Not expecting, they come to Nirriti for non-injury.
3.2.4.25	They sweep the outer cow-pen.
3.2.4.26	They appease Nirriti in the outer cow- pen.
3.2.4.27	One who places the Nirriti-bricks is deprived of his power and strength.
3.2.4.28	The dwelling place, the meeting place of the Vasus.
3.2.4.29-35	He attends on the Garhapatya with the Indra-verse. He thus makes himself prosperous by means of Indra. He attends on it with a Tristubh verse. The Tristubh is strength and vigour. He thus stands firm in strength and vigour. The Garhapatya is spread first for stability. The gods, having established themselves on the Garha-patya, went forward and conquered the heavenly world.
3.2.4.36	The bamboo measures as much as a man with arms outstretched.
3.2.4.37	This is the extent of a man's strength.
3.2.4.38	He measures with strength.
3.2.4.39	And this is the extent of the greatness of a man.
3.2.4.40	For the attainment of greatness.
3.2.4.41	Of trees, the bamboo is the one that bears fruit most abundantly, and it is the most vigorous.
3.2.4.42	The bamboo is the tree that bears fruit most
3.2.4.43	He is the most vigorous of them.
3.2.4.44	Food is the fruit.
3.2.4.45	Food is Agni.
3.2.4.46	Agni is the sun.
3.2.4.47	He measures out food, the sun, Agni, by the sun.
3.2.4.48	It measures out seven men.
3.2.4.49	One obtains the world from seven men.
3.2.4.50	From the seventh man one becomes a food-giver.
3.2.4.51	He places the two (bricks) of the size of an arm's length at the wings.
3.2.4.52	For the wings are the great age.
3.2.4.53	He ploughs with six (ploughmen).
3.2.4.54	There are six seasons.
3.2.4.55	He ploughes with the seasons.
3.2.4.56	They turn back thus.
3.2.4.57	He ploughses.
3.2.4.58	This is the turning back of the gods.
3.2.4.59	Or they turn back following the turning back of this sun.
3.2.4.60	He makes three furrows each time.
3.2.4.61	For Agni is threefold.
3.2.4.62	There are twelve furrows.
3.2.4.63	There are twleve months in a year.
3.2.4.64	This is the form of the year.
3.2.4.65	This earth was afraid,
3.2.4.66	"Agni will burn me."
3.2.4.67	When he ploughs, this is made twice as much for non-burning.
3.2.4.68	Now, indeed, they take up the strength of Agni with a twofold (amount) of earth.
3.2.4.69	They let it go in this direction.
3.2.4.70	This is the direction of the gods.
3.2.4.71	And indeed they let it go to the heavenly world.
3.2.5.1	He sows in the ploughed (land).
3.2.5.2	For in the ploughed land the plants stand firm in the greatest abundance.
3.2.5.3	He sows the seeds of plants with the Rg verses.
3.2.5.4	Brahman is the Rg.
3.2.5.5	He thus obtains food by means of Brahman.
3.2.5.6	He sows with fourteen (verses).
3.2.5.7	Twelve months are a year.
3.2.5.8	And these two, namely, the fourteenth day and the fourteenth night.
3.2.5.9	By this he wins food and drink for a year.
3.2.5.10	Food is the fruit.
3.2.5.11	Food is Agni.
3.2.5.12	Agni is the fire.
3.2.5.13	By this he wins food, Agni, the fire.
3.2.5.14	If one eats of the food for which one has offered, one will be deprived of the food that has been won.
3.2.5.15	He should make it on the fire.
3.2.5.16	Then he should meditate on it with the mind.
3.2.5.17	He obtains it by that alone.
3.2.5.18	If he does not obtain everything, he should sow barley mixed with honey.
3.2.5.19	By the barley he obtains food from the village,
3.2.5.20	and by the honey he obtains food from forest.
3.2.5.21	He obtains both by that alone.
3.2.5.22	Now these are the materials.
3.2.5.23	He collects the strength from the directions and from the earth.
3.2.5.24	The Agni is piled up with strength.
3.2.5.25	If one desires a group of people to be hungry, one should say, "I take strength from here." One should take it from half of it.
3.2.5.26	That group of people becomes hungry.
3.2.5.27	One touches it, saying, "O Cow of Wishes, yield as desired."
3.2.5.28	Therefore all his bricks become wish-granting.
3.2.5.29	He lays down the northern altar.
3.2.5.30	The Agni is indeed being piled up on the northern altar. So it is said.
3.2.5.31	And also because the sacrificial ground is not to be obstructed.
3.2.5.32	The northern altar is indeed Agni when laid down.
3.2.5.33	When he piles up Agni having laid down the northern altar, he piles up Agni in Agni.
3.2.5.34	"O Agni, thy fame is great." He pours sand.
3.2.5.35	These are the bricks of Vaisvânara, unlimited.
3.2.5.36	The unlimited is piled up for Agni.
3.2.5.37	This is the hymn of Agni Vaisvânar.
3.2.5.38	This is Agni's dear body, namely Vaisvânaras.
3.2.5.39	Agni is piled up on his dear body.
3.2.5.40-47	The sun, with his body, is deposited. This is the verse of the Lomasa metre, which is for cattle, deficient and excessive, for procreation. It has eighty syllables. By this the gods went to heaven. That is why it has eighty syllables. It is the metre of the ocean. The ocean is the womb. Soma is the seed-giver.
3.2.5.48-53	When he places it in the womb, he places the seed in the womb. Therefore the seed is placed in the womb. It becomes full of water. Therefore the semen is nourished in the womb. The verses are recited with the metres. When Agni is being carried to the Uttaravedi, one should mentally contemplate the verses that are recited then.
3.2.5.54	He strikes the Uttaravedi with the metres.
3.2.5.55	He recites with the mind.
3.2.5.56	For this is indeed unsaid, undifferentiated.
3.2.5.57	It goes away differentiated by sin, by the enemy.
3.2.5.58	They lead the horse in front for the removal of the Rākṣasas.
3.2.5.59	They make it enter.
3.2.5.60	They strike the enemy who is equal to him with the thunderbolt.
3.2.5.61	They make it move forward.
3.2.5.62	He drives away with the thunderbolt him who is his enemy.
3.2.5.63	They make it turn back.
3.2.5.64	He drives back with the thunderbolt him (the enemy) who follows him.
3.2.5.65	This is indeed the driving away of the enemy.
3.2.5.66	Having become black, Agni entered the horse.
3.2.5.67	He went to that place where the deer-skin is.
3.2.5.68	When they step on the horse, it is for the sake of the Agni's own share that is here.
3.2.6.1	"You are the womb of Tapas."
3.2.6.2	He places the lotus leaf.
3.2.6.3	The lotus leaf is indeed the womb of Agni.
3.2.6.4	The navel is the killer.
3.2.6.5	The womb and the navel are indeed built together.
3.2.6.6	This (earth) was afraid:
3.2.6.7	"Fire will burn me."
3.2.6.8	When he places the lotus leaf, it is for her non-burning.
3.2.6.9	He places it below the navel.
3.2.6.10	For the establishment of plants.
3.2.6.11	And also those fires which are in the waters, he indeed wins them.
3.2.6.12	Prajapati created beings.
3.2.6.13-18	Those by which Brahma created in the past, he did not succeed. Then those by which he created from the mouth of Brahma, by those he succeeded. What Brahma created first, the golden one, he placed down for prosperity. He indeed prospers. And for the sake of union.
3.2.6.19	They say that Agni should not be kindled on the earth, nor in the sky, nor in heaven.
3.2.6.20	Gold is indeed immortal.
3.2.6.21	Agni is kindled in the immortal.
3.2.6.22	They are kindled in the cremation ground.
3.2.6.23	He places a piece of gold on the kindled and kindled (bricks).
3.2.6.24	By that he is in the cremation ground,
3.2.6.25	by that he is in heaven.
3.2.6.26	Now this is the golden man.
3.2.6.27	He indeed supports the world of the sacrificer.
3.2.6.28	This indeed is the sacrificer, who has Agni in the other world, for him this is laid down.
3.2.6.29	And in the middle indeed is the light laid down.
3.2.6.30	He touches (the fire) with the verse, "The drop has fallen along the earth and heaven."
3.2.6.31	He establishes him in the Hotr-s.
3.2.6.32	Now these are the names of serpents.
3.2.6.33	Death is the name of serpents.
3.2.6.34	If one were to place them, one would be dying.
3.2.6.35	Therefore one directs them.
3.2.6.36	One is the radiance of Soma,
3.2.6.37	one is the tiger,
3.2.6.38	one is a serpent.
3.2.6.39	One obtains them.
3.2.6.40	One recites with the Rakshas-destroying hymn of Vamadeva.
3.2.6.41	By this (rite) Vamadeva set ablaze the head of Kusita, for the destruction of Rakshas.
3.2.6.42	He sprinkles with five (kinds of) grass.
3.2.6.43	The sacrifice is fivefold.
3.2.6.44	He obtains as much as the sacrifice is.
3.2.6.45	And as much as the Rakshas are destroyed.
3.2.6.46	Now these two ladles.
3.2.6.47	He places the one made of wood on the right side for the sake of removing the Rakshas.
3.2.6.48	For the Rakshas attacked the sacrifice of the gods on the right side.
3.2.6.49	They removed them with wood.
3.2.6.50	When he places the one made out of wood on the righ side, it is for the sake of removal of the Rakshas
3.2.6.51	It is filled with ghee.
3.2.6.52	This is Agni's dear body, namely ghee.
3.2.6.53	He makes it grow with the same body as his beloved.
3.2.6.54	He lays it down with the Gayatri verse.
3.2.6.55	The Gayatri is indeed brilliance, the radiance of Brahman.
3.2.6.56	He obtains brilliance and the radiance of Brahman itself.
3.2.6.57	He lays down the Udumbara (wood) on the north, filled with curds.
3.2.6.58	The Udumbara is indeed strength.
3.2.6.59	Curds are food.
3.2.6.60	He makes his food strong.
3.2.6.61-69	He lays down with Tristubh verses. Tristubh is strength and energy. He thus wins strength and energy. He lays down with full (verses). They stand in the world of the sacrificer. He lays down with the verses beginning with 'Murdhanvat'. (He does so) thinking, 'May I be the head.' They say, Agni should be conceived as Viraj. The two ladles are Viraj.
3.2.6.70	When he lays down with the ladle, then Agni is being built up in Viraj.
3.2.6.71	Now this is the self-perforated (brick).
3.2.6.72	This (earth) is the first self-perforated one.
3.2.6.73	The atmosphere is the second.
3.2.6.74	The sky is the third.
3.2.6.75	He lays down these worlds.
3.2.6.76	Having smelt the horse, he lays it down.
3.2.6.77	It becomes of Prajapati's form.
3.2.6.78	Then for the release of the vital airs.
3.2.6.79	One should carry the eastern direction with the formula, "Thou art the earth" if one's enemy is very powerful.
3.2.6.80	One should do the western direction with the formula "Thou art the ground" if one' is equal to him.
3.2.6.81	One should perform the diagonal direction with the formula,"Thou art Aditi, thou art the ground"
3.2.6.82	Aditi is this (earth).
3.2.6.83	By this the sacrificer pushes away his enemy.
3.2.6.84	With this (brick) he repels (his enemies).
3.2.6.85	With this (brick) one repels (his foes).
3.2.6.86	This is the repelling of his enemies.
3.2.6.87	It grows from stalk to stalk.
3.2.6.88	He lays down the Dūrvā brick.
3.2.6.89	For the establishment of plants.
3.2.6.90	For this (plant) stands from stalk to stalk,
3.2.6.91	The bricks are animals.
3.2.6.92	Animals do not delight in a place of confinement.
3.2.6.93	When he lays down the bricks of Dūrvā grass,
3.2.6.94	it is as if a dwelling is being made for the animals.
3.2.6.95	And this is the Vāmabṛt (brick) with two verses.
3.2.6.96	With one he supports the world of the sacrificer, with the other he conquers the world of his enemy.
3.2.6.97	By means of this the gods conquered the cattle of the Asuras.
3.2.6.98	That is why it is called Vāmabṛta.
3.2.6.99	The metres are the gods' left side, the cattle are their right side.
3.2.6.100	By means of these metres the sacrificer seizes his brother's left side and cattle.
3.2.6.101	These two are the seed-sower.
3.2.6.102	This is the Viraj.
3.2.6.103	That is the Svaraj.
3.2.6.104	He (the sacrificer) scatters seed there.
3.2.6.105	This one generates.
3.2.6.106	Agni eats.
3.2.6.107	He who has these two placed becomes the giver of food.
3.2.6.108	If the daughter were to choose, she would place one in the first layer and another in the last.
3.2.6.109	For the retention of the semen that has been sprinkled.
3.2.6.110	If he has no son, both should be placed in the first layer.
3.2.6.111	For when they become united, they sprinkle semen.
3.2.7.1	Now these are the Viśvajyotiṣa (verses).
3.2.7.2	In these worlds he places the luminous Agni.
3.2.7.3	And also for the support of the vital airs.
3.2.7.4	Now this is the three-lined one.
3.2.7.5	These worlds are the three-lined ones.
3.2.7.6	He places these worlds.
3.2.7.7	Both gods and Asuras placed this (Agni).
3.2.7.8	The gods placed it above the mark.
3.2.7.9	Below the Lakṣmaṇa brick, the Asuras.
3.2.7.10	Then the gods became victorious over the Asuras. The gods became victorious over their enemies.
3.2.7.11	One who has an enemy should place the Lakṣmaṇā brick above, the one whom he loves.
3.2.7.12	He becomes victorious over his enemy.
3.2.7.13	This is the brick for one who has no enemy.
3.2.7.14	One who places this becomes one who has no enemies.
3.2.7.15	Now, this is the mark of the gods.
3.2.7.16	He places it on the mark of the god.
3.2.7.17	One should make this for the clay that remains after the Soma-pressing.
3.2.7.18	By this, all the bricks become related to Agni.
3.2.7.19	Now, this is the tortoise.
3.2.7.20	They are laid down as being from the cremation ground.
3.2.7.21	The tortoise is to be laid down as living.
3.2.7.22	By this he is from the cremation ground.
3.2.7.23	Therefore it is impetuous.
3.2.7.24	This is the sacrifice of animals.
3.2.7.25	Those who see this sacrifice, animals stand near them in this world.
3.2.7.26	He places it facing east.
3.2.7.27	For animals stand facing east near the sacrifice.
3.2.7.28	He places (it) with the Dyaus-Pṛthivī (verse).
3.2.7.29	For animals stand near heaven and earth.
3.2.7.30	He thus establishes him in the right direction with animals.
3.2.7.31	They say, "Agni should be kindled in the navel of Vishnu."
3.2.7.32	A mortar should be made the size of a span.
3.2.7.33	Vishnu is of this size.
3.2.7.34	Agni is kindled in the navel region of Vishnu.
3.2.7.35	They say Agni should be kindled for nourishment.
3.2.7.36	The Udumbara tree is nourishment.
3.2.7.37	The mortar is made of Udumbara wood.
3.2.7.38	The fire is indeed being built with strength.
3.2.7.39	One settles it with the Vaisnava (mantra).
3.2.7.40	For the mortar is indeed Vaisnava.
3.2.7.41	With its own deity.
3.2.7.42	Now this is the pestle.
3.2.7.43	The strength and energy of the earth is indeed being collected here.
3.2.7.44	The strength, the energy is indeed placed in the middle of the fire.
3.2.7.45	Then in the middle, the light itself is spread.
3.2.7.46	If one were to look at an empty one, the sacrificer would be hungry.
3.2.7.47	If one looks at a full one,
3.2.7.48	then one becomes free from hunger.
3.2.7.49	It should be filled with sand.
3.2.7.50	Sand is the ash of Agni Vaisvānara.
3.2.7.51	One pleases it with its own ash.
3.2.7.52	It should be filled with curds.
3.2.7.53	Curd is indeed energy.
3.2.7.54	One indeed obtains energy.
3.2.7.55	It should be filled with ghee.
3.2.7.56	Ghee is indeed Agni's beloved body.
3.2.7.57	He makes him prosper with his beloved body.
3.2.7.58	It should filled with honey.
3.2.7.59	One is born in one's progeny as one who enjoys honey.
3.2.7.60	The animals with the heads of animals, whose senses are impaired, are unfit for sacrifice and impure.
3.2.7.61	If he puts gold pieces in the holes,
3.2.7.62	he makes them whole with his own strength.
3.2.7.63	He makes them fit for sacrifice and pure.
3.2.7.64	Half of a man is equal to a thousand.
3.2.7.65	The other animals give half.
3.2.7.66	Therefore he places this one in the middle, and the others around it, for the sake of the animal's strength.
3.2.7.67	And also for the sake of its being a support.
3.2.7.68	If he wishes, 'May he be possessed of cattle', he should place the heads of the animals in the right order.
3.2.7.69	He places the animals in the proper order for him.
3.2.7.70	He becomes possessed of cattle.
3.2.7.71	Now, if one desires (to make) him (the sacrificer) without cattle, one should place the animal-heads in the opposite direction.
3.2.7.72	He places the animals in the opposite direction for him.
3.2.7.73	He becomes without cattle.
3.2.7.74	These are the thousand bricks, the animal bricks.
3.2.7.75	Somadatta Kauśreya knew them.
3.2.7.76	He placed them for Śyāparṇi.
3.2.7.77	He obtains a thousand cattle.
3.2.7.78	He who has these (bricks) laid down, obtains a thousand cattle
3.2.7.79	This Agni is called the most excellent.
3.2.7.80	One should not pass between him and the fire while one is building him up.
3.2.7.81	If one were to pass (between them), one would injure his life.
3.2.7.82	He approaches with the offerings.
3.2.7.83	He releases the cattle of the forest for purification.
3.2.8.1	He places the head of a man.
3.2.8.2	For this is the most vigorous of animals.
3.2.8.3	He places vigour in it.
3.2.8.4	He places one.
3.2.8.5	He places the vigour in it in one way.
3.2.8.6	He offers the head of a human being to Surya.
3.2.8.7	For the completion of the heavenly world.
3.2.8.8	This is indeed the Surya-offering, but it is offered by the Maitrāvaruṇa.
3.2.8.9	The day is Mitra.
3.2.8.10	The night is Varuna.
3.2.8.11	He stands firm for a day and night.
3.2.8.12	He offers with two half-verses.
3.2.8.13	This is the half-verse.
3.2.8.14	That is the half- verse.
3.2.8.15	He stands firm in these two.
3.2.8.16	And when he offers twice with one verse,
3.2.8.17	then because of that, a man, though one, has two feet.
3.2.8.18	Whatever this is done, it is done from the source.
3.2.8.19	In that he lays down these bricks,
3.2.8.20	he places the seed in that very womb.
3.2.8.21	This (earth) was afraid,
3.2.8.22	"Agni will burn me."
3.2.8.23	She saw these bricks,
3.2.8.24	and some say, Prajapati saw them.
3.2.8.25	He placed them.
3.2.8.26	In that they are placed, for her non-burning.
3.2.8.27	"This (earth) said, 'He gives food."
3.2.8.28	He who lays down these (bricks) is the nourisher of food.
3.2.8.29	He who has these laid down becomes the nourisher offood.
3.2.8.30	From the seed moistened by it this animal is produced.
3.2.8.31	That these are the metres,
3.2.8.32	Animals are the metres.
3.2.8.33	If he were to lay them down on the right side, his offspring would be carried away by Varuna.
3.2.8.34	Therefore he lays them down on the left side.
3.2.8.35	He carries them away.
3.2.8.36	Now these are the breaths of the animal.
3.2.8.37	When the animal is formed, he places the breath, eye, ear, and voice in it.
3.2.8.38	He settles it with the eye.
3.2.8.39	He steps on the animal.
3.2.8.40	Therefore animals go with their limbs struck by the eye.
3.2.8.41	The sages succeeded with ten by ten bricks.
3.2.8.42-48	Those who are laid down for him who is to be prosperous, they prosper. Now these (bricks) are restrained. When the fire is built, it is indeed the seed that is sown. When these (bricks) are laid down, it is for the restraint of the sown seed. "It fills the world, it fills the gap." This is the brick without a gap. The bricks are built without a gap by this (brick).
3.2.8.49	Indra-Agni, Brihaspati, etc.
3.2.8.50	Indra-Agni are strength and vigour.
3.2.8.51	It is with strength and vigour that Agni is built up.
3.2.8.52	They (the priests) pour it out with the Sudadoha (verse). He places the juice in the Parusha (verse).
3.2.8.53	They press Soma with the Prisni (verse).
3.2.8.54	The Prisni is food.
3.2.8.55	He wins food.
3.2.8.56	"The birth of the gods is the best," he says, indeed, for the sake of progeny.
3.2.8.57	"In the three shining heavens," he says.
3.2.8.58	The three pressing-times are the shining ones.
3.2.8.59	He makes it pressed-time-shaped.
3.2.8.60	This is indeed the Anushtubh.
3.2.8.61	Speech is the Anushtubb.
3.2.8.62	Speech is indeed the breath.
3.2.8.63	When this (brick) moves along all the bricks,
3.2.8.64	Therefore, Prāṇa moves through all the limbs.
3.2.8.65	This is indeed the Agni in color.
3.2.8.66	Agni is indeed built with its own meter.
3.2.8.67	One who knows this does not suffer any harm while being an Adhvaryu.
3.2.9.1	The Agni that is being built is indeed a lost sacrifice.
3.2.9.2	Who knows what is done to it and what is not?
3.2.9.3-8	The Asvins are the physicians of the gods, the creators of the uncreated. In that these (bricks) named Asvini are laid down, (it is) for the creation of the uncreated.
3.2.9.9	Now these (verses) of Asvinī are to be recited in the Rituya (Sāman).
3.2.9.10	He (Asvin) placed the seasons on the seed which was sprinkled.
3.2.9.11	Therefore, semen is deposited in all seasons.
3.2.9.12	Therefore, he is born after all seasons.
3.2.9.13	Now these (verses) are to be recited at the Rituya in the Vāyuya (Sāma).
3.2.9.14	Therefore Vayu encloses all the seasons.
3.2.9.15	Now these Vayu-apsyas are placed in the water.
3.2.9.16	Therefore animals, though of different vows, are united in the water. They are of the same vow.
3.2.9.17	He places four in front.
3.2.9.18	For the head is fourfold.
3.2.9.19	Breath, sight, hearing, and speech.
3.2.9.20	He places them with the tips pointing upwards.
3.2.9.21	"The tips are the head."
3.2.9.22	He places five bricks each time, for the sake of the animal's strength.
3.2.9.23	And for the sake of its being a support.
3.2.9.24	Therefore the animal is bigger and has a bigger rump behind.
3.2.9.25	Therefore it is brought forward.
3.2.9.26	"O Indra and Agni, you two, without being hurt, strengthen the brick."
3.2.9.27	This is the layer of the atmosphere.
3.2.9.28	The atmosphere is these creatures.
3.2.9.29	Indra and Agni are the bearers of the strength of the gods.
3.2.9.30	Indra-Agni are strength and power.
3.2.9.31	This is the strength and power of creatures placed in the middle.
3.2.9.32	Now these are the directions.
3.2.9.33	The gods went to heaven.
3.2.9.34	They stepped on the directions.
3.2.9.35	They slipped.
3.2.9.36	They have established them by these (verses).
3.2.9.37	In that these are placed, (it is) for the stability of the directions.
3.2.9.38	He places five (bricks).
3.2.9.39	The sacrifice is fivefold.
3.2.9.40	As great as the sacrifice is, he has attained it.
3.2.9.41	He places ten of these in front.
3.2.9.42	The Viraj has ten syllables.
3.2.9.43	The eye, the light, is indeed Viraj, the metre.
3.2.9.44	He places the eye as the light in front of the animal.
3.2.9.45	Therefore the eye is in front of this (animal).
3.2.9.46	Now Viraj is food.
3.2.9.47	He places food in the mouth.
3.2.9.48	The metres are Ma, Prama, Pratima.
3.2.9.49	This (earth) is Ma.
3.2.9.50	The atmosphere is Prama.
3.2.9.51	The heaven is Pratima.
3.2.9.52	He places these worlds.
3.2.9.53	Now these are the metres of the gods.
3.2.9.54	He places them in the metres of the Gods.
3.2.9.55	He places twelve times twelve (bricks).
3.2.9.56	That makes thirty-six.
3.2.9.57	The Brihatī has thirty-six syllables.
3.2.9.58	The Brihati indeed won the sovereignty of the metres.
3.2.9.59	He who has these placed (wins) sovereignty.
3.2.9.60	The Brhatī is indeed the animals.
3.2.9.61	The animals are the middle layer.
3.2.9.62	Therefore, these are placed in this layer.
3.2.9.63	The northern breaths are indeed the abode of the sun.
3.2.9.64	The southern breaths are the abode of the Angiras.
3.2.9.65	"You are the head, the king."
3.2.9.66	He supports the northern breaths with these.
3.2.9.67	"You control, the king."
3.2.9.68	Those who are the lower breaths, he supports them with these (verses).
3.2.9.69	Indeed, these (verses) are for the support of their breaths.
3.2.9.70	He places them in the same measure.
3.2.9.71	The breaths are in the same measure, for the support of the breaths.
3.2.9.72	He should place the eye-less one of him whom he hates.
3.2.9.73	He confuses his breaths.
3.2.9.74	He becomes short-lived.
3.2.10.8	Therefore the right half of the body is more vigorous.
3.2.10.9	Therefore the right half of man's body is more vigorous than the left.
3.2.10.10	The northern half has fifteen (bricks).
3.2.10.11	Fifteen is strength.
3.2.10.12	He thus places strength on the northern side.
3.2.10.13	The southern half has twenty-one (bricks) for stability.
3.2.10.14	He places the northern half with three (bricks).
3.2.10.15	The Trivṛt is the mouth of the sacrifice.
3.2.10.16	He thus places the mouth of the sacrificer at the mouth.
3.2.10.17	He places the fifteen-fold (brick) on the right side,
3.2.10.18	the seventeen-fold on the left side.
3.2.10.19	For the strength of the wings.
3.2.10.20	And for the stability.
3.2.10.21	Therefore food is eaten with both hands.
3.2.10.22	And the fifteen-fold is the thunderbolt.
3.2.10.23	The sacrificer thus cuts off his enemy on both sides with the thunderbolt.
3.2.10.24	The twenty-one-fold (bricks) are placed at the back for stability.
3.2.10.25	The twenty one is indeed stability.
3.2.10.26	One follows the form of the sun.
3.2.10.27	Food is the sacrifice.
3.2.10.28	One who places these becomes the bestower of food.
3.2.10.29	You are the share of Agni, the lordship of consecration, the Brahman is sprinkled, the Stoma is threefold.
3.2.10.30	These bricks are indeed called 'sprinkled'.
3.2.10.31	By these bricks indeed did Prajapati do whatever he desired.
3.2.10.32	Whatever the sacrificer desires by these, he obtains it. By one (brick) they praised.
3.2.10.33	The offspring prospered.
3.2.10.34	These are the names of the bricks.
3.2.10.35	By these Prajapati created whatever he desired.
3.2.10.36	Whatever the sacrificer desires by these, he creates.
3.2.10.37	"O Agni, drive away our enemies who are born."
3.2.10.38	He lays down in front.
3.2.10.39	Those enemies who are born, he drives them away by this.
3.2.10.40	"O Jātavedas, drive away those who are not born!" (he says) behind.
3.2.10.41	He drives away those who are born as enemies with this (verse).
3.2.10.42	This is indeed the driving away of one's enemy.
3.2.10.43	The Stoma is of forty-four verses.
3.2.10.44	He places it on the right side with the verse, "May we obtain wealth and splendour."
3.2.10.45	The Stoma consists of sixteen verses.
3.2.10.46	He puts it on the left side with the verse "May we obtain strength and wealth."
3.2.10.47	The Tristubh has forty-four syllables.
3.2.10.48	The Vajra is the Tristubh.
3.2.10.49	The Vajras are the Sodashis.
3.2.10.50	The Vajro is the one that is struck on the left side, not on the right side.
3.2.10.51	The Vajr is struck on the right side, not on left side. The sacrificer strikes his brother with the Vajra.
3.2.10.52	He places the one with excrement in the middle.
3.2.10.53	This is like the excrement in the middle of an animal.
3.2.10.54	Excrement is the middle of the self.
3.2.10.55	One builds the fire with one's own self.
3.2.10.56	Now these are the Viraj bricks.
3.2.10.57	Speech is indeed Viraj.
3.2.10.58	These bricks are indeed animals.
3.2.10.59	Herein he places the highest speech in animals.
3.2.10.60	Therefore one who has animals speaks the highest speech.
3.3.1.1	Now these Stomabhaga bricks.
3.3.1.2	Brihaspati brought this (earth) from the Asuras for the establishment of the sacrifice.
3.3.1.3	When these are placed, it is for the establishment of sacrifice.
3.3.1.4	The sacrifice of the gods failed.
3.3.1.5	The gods established it back with Stomabhaga.
3.3.1.6	When these (bricks) are placed, it (is done) for the establishment of (the sacrifice).
3.3.1.7-12	Prajapati indeed took the Agni from the earth. This is the Agni that is taken from the earth. This is the Agni that takes the Agni from the heaven. These are the heaven-dwellers. One who makes Agni for one who is in heaven, indeed, goes to heaven. There is nothing that goes to heaven. Therefore, they are heaven-dwellers.
3.3.1.13	He places the five-crested ones in the sky, for the attainment of the heavenly world.
3.3.1.14	This indeed is the sacrificer with his wives in the yonder world, for whom these are placed.
3.3.1.15	And in the middle, the light is indeed piled up.
3.3.1.16	These indeed are the sacrificer's wives in the yonderworld.
3.3.1.17	Therefore a woman should not approach one who has piled up the fire.
3.3.1.18	Jealousy is that.
3.3.1.19	He places the easternmost brick at the back.
3.3.1.20	For the wife follows her husband from behind.
3.3.1.21	Now these are the bricks.
3.3.1.22	Prajapati created the creatures.
3.3.1.23	They, having been created, went away from him.
3.3.1.24	Prajapti saw these bricks.
3.3.1.25	He placed them.
3.3.1.26	Then he became complete.
3.3.1.27	When these are placed, it is for the establishment of creatures.
3.3.1.28	Now these are the rules for rain.
3.3.1.29	Food and drink indeed fled from the gods.
3.3.1.30	Then all this dried up.
3.3.1.31	Then the gods approached Prajapati himself.
3.3.1.32	He, Prajapati, saw these bricks.
3.3.1.33	He placed them.
3.3.1.34	From them he obtained rain, food and drink.
3.3.1.35	When these are placed, it is for the securing of rain and food.
3.3.1.36	The uppermost layer is the covering.
3.3.1.37	He places different bricks.
3.3.1.38	He generates for him different animals.
3.3.1.39	The Svayambhu brick is the breath.
3.3.1.40	The Vayu brick is life.
3.3.1.41	He places the Samīci brick.
3.3.1.42	He makes life and breath yoked together.
3.3.1.43	Then, indeed, they eat with the two right ones, with life and with breath.
3.3.1.44	Breath indeed is self-supporting.
3.3.1.45	He places it as the highest one.
3.3.1.46	For life is indeed the highest.
3.3.1.47	If he were to place another one above it, he would obstruct its breath and it would die.
3.3.1.48	Therefore he places it as the uppermost one.
3.3.1.49	For the life is indeed the uppermost.
3.3.2.1	Now this is the rite of the Chandaśa.
3.3.2.2	The Chandaśas are the cattle of the gods.
3.3.2.3	The sacrificer wins back the cattle by means of the Chandašas.
3.3.2.4	Yajñasena of the Caitra clan laid down this (rite).
3.3.2.5	He became prosperous.
3.3.2.6	He who lays down this (rite) prospers.
3.3.2.7	He lays down with Gāyatrī verses in front,
3.3.2.8	Gāyatrī is indeed brilliance, and brilliance is Brahman-splendor.
3.3.2.9	He indeed obtains brilliance and Brahman-splendor (by this).
3.3.2.10	He places three (bricks).
3.3.2.11	Agni is indeed threefold.
3.3.2.12	He settles them with the (bricks) having the head.
3.3.2.13	(He does so) in order that he may be having the head. With the Tristubh (bricks) on the right side.
3.3.2.14	The Tristubh is indeed strength and energy.
3.3.2.15	He indeed wins strength and vigour.
3.3.2.16	With Jagatī verses at the end.
3.3.2.17	The animals are Jagatī.
3.3.2.18	He indeed wins animals.
3.3.2.19	With Anushtubh verses at the end,
3.3.2.20	Anushtubh is all the metres.
3.3.2.21	All his metres are indeed offered.
3.3.2.22	Then the Paṅktis.
3.3.2.23	Then the Bṛhatīs.
3.3.2.24	Now of the Ushnih.
3.3.2.25	Now of the Kakubha.
3.3.2.26	Now of Viraj.
3.3.2.27	Thus his metres are placed in order.
3.3.2.28	The last two feet are placed.
3.3.2.29	The sacrificer is established on two feet.
3.3.2.30	The metres are the left of the gods, the cattle are the right.
3.3.2.31	The Ahavaniya is the abode of the sacrificer.
3.3.2.32	The Dhishnyas are the abode of the adversary.
3.3.2.33	If he were to place it at the back, he would place the animals in the abode of his enemies.
3.3.2.34	But when he places it at the front,
3.3.2.35	he places the animals in the place of the sacrificer.
3.3.2.36	He places eight (bricks).
3.3.2.37	The Gayatri has eight syllables.
3.3.2.38	Agni is Gayatri.
3.3.2.39	He builds him as big as Agni is.
3.3.2.40	If his enemy is very strong, he should place eight Gāyatrī verses in front of the Bahiṣpavamāna.
3.3.2.41	Eleven Tristubh verses in front of Mādyandina Pavamāna.
3.3.2.42	Twelve Jagatī verses in front of Ārbhava Pavamāna.
3.3.2.43	If one's enemy is too strong, one should place these (bricks) at the end of the Pavamāna stotras.
3.3.2.44	Pavamāna is indeed the breath.
3.3.2.45	Pavamana is the brilliance of Agni.
3.3.2.46	By this brilliance the sacrificer drives away his enemy.
3.3.2.47	He drives away by brilliance.
3.3.2.48	He drives out by brilliance.
3.3.2.49	This is the driving out of the enemy.
3.3.2.50	One who is going to perform the first (kind of) sacrifice should perform the sacrifice with the Gāyatrī metre.
3.3.2.51	One who is going to do the second (kind of) should perform the sacrifice of the Tristubh metre.
3.3.2.52	One going to do the third (kind of) performance should perform the sacrifice in the Jagat metre.
3.3.2.53	If one were to choose a lesser sacrifice after having chosen a greater one, one would be approaching a lesser sacrifice, a lesser progeny, lesser cattle, and lesser food.
3.3.2.54	One would become worse.
3.3.2.55	Now when one builds the smaller one after having built the larger one, he approaches the larger sacrificial rite, obtains greater progeny, greater cattle, and greater food.
3.3.2.56	He becomes more prosperous.
3.3.2.57	This is Agni's northernmost layer.
3.3.2.58	He becomes better and better every day, he who knows this.
3.3.3.1	One should build with five layers.
3.3.3.2-10	The sacrifice is five-fold. The animals are five-fold. Therefore, it has five layers. There are five layers. Five kinds of ashes. It becomes Viraj. Whatever becomes Viraj, that is the praise of Agni. If it has five layers, it would be deficient from Viraj. If it had ten layers, it would exceed the sacrifice and the animals.
3.3.3.11	By that which has five layers, he does not go from the sacrifice and from the animals.
3.3.3.12	And by that which has five fires and five layers, he goes from Viraj.
3.3.3.13	By both these colors, he obtains the animals.
3.3.3.14	Because they are fivefold and because they are Viraj.
3.3.3.15	Two syllables are hair.
3.3.3.16	Two syllables is skin.
3.3.3.17	Two syllables for flesh.
3.3.3.18	Two syllables for bone.
3.3.3.19	Two syllables of marrow.
3.3.3.20	That is ten.
3.3.3.21	Ten syllables are Viraj.
3.3.3.22	Animals are Viraj. They are animals.
3.3.3.23	He indeed wins animals.
3.3.3.24	It should be made with five layers.
3.3.3.25	These are the three layers of the worlds.
3.3.3.26	The sacrificer is two.
3.3.3.27	He has established the sacrificer in these worlds.
3.3.3.28	What is the first layer?
3.3.3.29	What is the ashes? They say:
3.3.3.30	This very one is the first layer.
3.3.3.31	Plants are the ashes.
3.3.3.32	What is second layer?
3.3.3.33	What are the ashes? They
3.3.3.34	say: The sky is the second layer.
3.3.3.35	Birds are the ashes.
3.3.3.36-45	What is the third layer? What is the excrement? It is indeed the third layer. The stars are the excrement. What is the fourth layer? What are the excrement? It is said: The sacrifice is indeed the fourth layer. The Dakshina is the excrement. What is the fifth layer? What does the excrement mean? It is said:
3.3.3.46	The sacrificer is the fifth layer.
3.3.3.47	The progeny is the covering.
3.3.3.48	This much is there.
3.3.3.49	He touches what is there.
3.3.3.50	That he wins.
3.3.3.51	Now these are the Rituviya (verses).
3.3.3.52	The year is Agni Vaiśvānara.
3.3.3.53	This is Agni's dear body, namely Vaiśvānaran.
3.3.3.54	The bricks are laid down in the form of his day and night.
3.3.3.55	He lays down two-two bricks for stability.
3.3.3.56	Having placed the Avakā (brick) he settles it for peace and non-injury.
3.3.3.57	He lays four bricks in the middle layer.
3.3.3.58	For the space is unstable, for stability.
3.3.3.59	He lays twelve (bricks).
3.3.3.60	Twelve months are a year.
3.3.3.61	The year is indeed Agni Vaiśvānara.
3.3.3.62	This is indeed the dear body of Agni, namely Vaiśvānaran.
3.3.3.63	Agni is indeed being built on this dear body.
3.3.3.64	The body is deposited in the middle.
3.3.3.65	"You are the inner union of Agni."
3.3.3.66	Indeed, Agni is united with him for whom these are deposited.
3.3.3.67	The fire is connected with him for whom these are laid down.
3.3.3.68	"May heaven and earth be united."
3.3.3.69	He who knows this becomes united with the fire he is making.
3.3.3.70	He who knows thus attains the pre-eminence among his equals.
3.3.3.71	He who makes the fire is united with it.
3.3.3.72	He illuminates it with the Rituya verses.
3.3.4.1	Darkness indeed stands between the heaven and the world.
3.3.4.2	These are the bricks shining with light.
3.3.4.3	When he sprinkles with pieces of gold, he removes the darkness for the sacrificer.
3.3.4.4	He places light in it.
3.3.4.5	They are a thousand in number.
3.3.4.6	Prajapati is a thousandfold.
3.3.4.7	He indeed attains Prajapati.
3.3.4.8	The world beyond is as many thousands of yojanas away as this one is.
3.3.4.9	For the attainment of the world of heaven.
3.3.4.10	"These bricks of mine may be cows."
3.3.4.11	These bricks are indeed called cows.
3.3.4.12	It is with these that Prajapati milked whatever he desired.
3.3.4.13	Whatever the sacrificer desires with these, he milks.
3.3.4.14	"Those who are established in the seasons, those who increase the seasons."
3.3.4.15	He has made them established in the seasons and increasing the seasons.
3.3.4.16	"Those who have fallen from ghee, those who have fallen from honey."
3.3.4.17	He has indeed made them fall from ghee and honey.
3.3.4.18	"Those endowed with strength, those endowed with milk."
3.3.4.19	He has endowed them with strength and milk.
3.3.4.20	"Those that bestow good fortune, those that bestow the family."
3.3.4.21	These are the Kulayinī (cows).
3.3.4.22	They are called Virāj, the wish-granting cows.
3.3.4.23	Where the wish-granters granted the wishes of the gods, they also granted them here.
3.3.4.24	He thus obtains prosperity with these.
3.3.4.25	In this world and the other world.
3.3.4.26	For the other world Agni is built.
3.3.4.27-34	The gods, indeed, were obstructing Rudra from the sacrifice. He (Rudra) turned around them with a bow. From that they were afraid. Those gods approached Prajapati. Prajapati saw this Shaतरुद्रिय. With that he pacified him. He who knows this, indeed, knows him as Prajapati. This god does not harm him.
3.3.4.35	Where Rudra would pacify the creatures, he goes beyond that.
3.3.4.36	He who speaks this, moves in a circle.
3.3.4.37	He pacifies Rudra in his own direction with his own share.
3.3.4.38	He offers the first oblation at the knee.
3.3.4.39	He pacified him with that.
3.3.4.40	The second oblation at the navel.
3.3.4.41	With that from the atmosphere.
3.3.4.42	The third (verse) is for the head.
3.3.4.43	For the heaven.
3.3.4.44	He offers three times.
3.3.4.45	There are three worlds.
3.3.4.46	He appeases Rudra from these worlds.
3.3.4.47	Three times he offers again from there.
3.3.4.48	He appeasese those Rudras whom he offers here.
3.3.4.49	Three times from here, three times from there.
3.3.4.50	That makes six.
3.3.4.51	The seasons are six.
3.3.4.52	He offers to Rudra from the seasons.
3.3.4.53	He offers the equal share.
3.3.4.54	The shares of the Rudras are equal.
3.3.4.55	He offers for two days.
3.3.4.56	For two days he pacified him.
3.3.4.57	He pacifies him with two days.
3.3.4.58	He offers with an Arka leaf.
3.3.4.59	He offers with the Arka-grass, because the Arka-grass is the Arka.
3.3.4.60	If he were to offer with a vessel, he would bring Rudra upon his offspring.
3.3.4.61	Therefore he offers with the Arka.
3.3.4.62	The Agni is an animal.
3.3.4.63	It is born when it is piled up.
3.3.4.64	It desires its share, just as a calf born desires its mother's teat.
3.3.4.65	He looks at the Adhvaryu and the sacrificer.
3.3.4.66	He offers the Satarudriya.
3.3.4.67	He appeases him with his own share.
3.3.4.68	It should be offered in the upper part of the buttocks.
3.3.4.69	Having appeased Rudra in his own direction with his own share, he appeases him in his own direction.
3.3.4.70	The Angirasas, while ascending to heaven, poured down the Gharma on a she-goat.
3.3.4.71	She lamented and touched a leaf.
3.3.4.72	That became the Arka.
3.3.4.73	When one offers with an Arka leaf, one unites the Arka with the Arka.
3.3.4.74	One should place the cattle of the one whom one hates in the path of the Arka.
3.3.4.75	The one who first steps on it suffers misfortune.
3.3.5.1	"The sap of the rock, flowing down the mountain," thus sprinkling water, he moves around.
3.3.5.2	This is indeed the sap of Prajapati.
3.3.5.3	He sprinkles with the sap of Prajapat itself.
3.3.5.4	"The rock is your hunger," thus he makes the rock the object of hunger.
3.3.5.5	"The sap is in me," thus he places the sap in himself.
3.3.5.6	"May the curse reach him whom we hate."
3.3.5.7	He throws the Agnihotra-oblation into the fire, saying, "May the curse of Agni reach him whom he hates."
3.3.5.8	He goes around sprinkling three times.
3.3.5.9	There are three worlds here.
3.3.5.10	He appeases the Agnihotra-fire from these worlds.
3.3.5.11	He goes around three times sprinkling.
3.3.5.12	Three times not sprinkling.
3.3.5.13	That makes six.
3.3.5.14	The seasons are six.
3.3.5.15	From the seasons he appeases the purity of Agni.
3.3.5.16	If one were to perform an act of sorcery, one should recite this very formula, sprinkling again and again without stopping.
3.3.5.17	With the purity of Agni, he makes him offer it.
3.3.5.18	If he were to perform this rite, saying, "I am casting out so-and-so, the son of so-and- so, from the direction of so-and so,"
3.3.5.19	he should cast the pot on the lower part of his hips.
3.3.5.20	Whatever he casts out, he causes that one to suffer affliction.
3.3.5.21	And when he takes the name, he cuts off his abode.
3.3.5.22	He sings the Gayatri in the Agni Pavamana hymn.
3.3.5.23	Pavamana is the breath.
3.3.5.24	The head is the Gayatri.
3.3.5.25	When he sings the Gayatri hymn in the Agni Pavamanas, he places the breaths in the head.
3.3.5.26	This (earth) is the Rathantara.
3.3.5.27	The sky is the Vamadevya.
3.3.5.28	That (heaven) is the Brihat.
3.3.5.29	The sun is deposited in three forms.
3.3.5.30	The Atman is the Vamadevya.
3.3.5.31	The Pratiṣṭha is the Yajñāyajñiya.
3.3.5.32	The two wings are the Brhat and the Rathantara.
3.3.5.33	When one sings the Brhat and Rathantara on both sides, one places the wings on the Atman.
3.3.5.34	The gods were about to attack the sacrifice.
3.3.5.35	They repelled them with the Brhat and Rathaṃtara alone.
3.3.5.36	What is sung around the Brihat and Rathantara is for the destruction of the Rakshas.
3.3.5.37	The heart of Prajapati is sung on the wings.
3.3.5.38	Therefore, this wing of the self sings the heart without the Richik.
3.3.5.39	Therefore, the heart is without the Richiks.
3.3.5.40	They praise the Sun with the Sama hymns.
3.3.5.41	The Sun is deposited with the body.
3.3.6.1	He now stands bound by Varuna's noose.
3.3.6.2	He should study it then, and he would be exhausted by its breath.
3.3.6.3	He studies with a frog.
3.3.6.4	He is exhausted by its breath alone.
3.3.6.5	He does not harm domestic animals or wild animals.
3.3.6.6	He draws (the line) with a pot-herb.
3.3.6.7	The pot-herb is the womb of water.
3.3.6.8	He appeases the impurity of Agni with the source of water.
3.3.6.9	The Avaka is the form of water.
3.3.6.10	He appeases the impurity with the form of water of Agni.
3.3.6.11	He goes with the Vetasa.
3.3.6.12	The Vetasa is the flower of water.
3.3.6.13	With the flower of water he appeases the impurity.
3.3.6.14	He draws seven times.
3.3.6.15	There are seven metres.
3.3.6.16	By means of the metres he appeases the heat of Agni.
3.3.6.17	And the metres are indeed Brahman.
3.3.6.18	By means of Brahman he appeases theheat of Agni.
3.3.6.19	Agni, when created, desired a share.
3.3.6.20	He approached Prajapati.
3.3.6.21	He gave him food, saying, "Be it for you."
3.3.6.22	That became his food.
3.3.6.23	Food is indeed "kam".
3.3.6.24	He serves Agni with food, for Agni is the eater.
3.3.6.25	He who serves Agni becomes the eater.
3.3.6.26	One goes away from him.
3.3.6.27	For the animal is peaceful when it goes away.
3.3.6.28	And the animal deposits its seed when it goes away
3.3.6.29	"May your other curses fall on others, may Agni be auspicious to us."
3.3.6.30	Agni is food.
3.3.6.31	By this he conceals the heat of Agni.
3.3.6.32	He sprinkles with pieces of gold.
3.3.6.33	Gold is immortality.
3.3.6.34	Fire is brilliance.
3.3.6.35	By this he sprinkles brilliance with immortality.
3.3.6.36	He sprinkles five times.
3.3.6.37	The sacrifice is fivefold.
3.3.6.38	He obtains the sacrifice as much as it is.
3.3.6.39	The two kinds of gods come to the sacrificer's house.
3.3.6.40	When he sprinkles with curds mixed with honey, he pleases them.
3.3.6.41	He sprinkles all around.
3.3.6.42	He pleases them all.
3.3.6.43	He sprinkles with three (verses).
3.3.6.44	Agni is threefold.
3.3.6.45	He sprinkles (with verses) in Triṣṭubh metre, for the securing of strength.
3.3.6.46	He sprinkles with the Annavati verses for the securing of food.
3.3.6.47	He sprinkles with a handful of Darbha grass.
3.3.6.48	For that is Prajapati.
3.3.6.49	He who approaches the fire is deprived of his vital breath.
3.3.6.50	When he says, "You are the giver of life, the giver of breath," he places the vital breaths within himself.
3.3.6.51	He who goes to the fire is deprived both of offspring and of cattle.
3.3.6.52	The offspring is the radiance.
3.3.6.53	The cattle is the wealth.
3.3.6.54	When he says, "The bearer of radiance, the bearer of wealth," he takes to himself offspring and cattle.
3.3.7.1	Indra indeed slew Vritra.
3.3.7.2	He fled eastwards.
3.3.7.3	While fleeing, he encircled Indra with sixteen coils.
3.3.7.4-6	He burnt the body of Vritra with Agni, and was freed from sin and darkness by the two Vishvakarman deities. When he offers with the verse, "Agni with his sharp lustre," he burns the body of sin with Agni, and is freed from sin and the darkness by the two Visvakarman deities.
3.3.7.7	For the difference in the potency of the two verses.
3.3.7.8	He offers with sixteen spoonfuls.
3.3.7.9	For he surrounded him with sixteen (spoonfuls).
3.3.7.10	By this he was freed from Vritra's coils.
3.3.7.11	By this one is freed from sin and coils.
3.3.7.12	This is the chariot that cannot be countered.
3.3.7.13	By this the gods conquered the Asuras.
3.3.7.14	That is the reason why he is called Aparāthā.
3.3.7.15	By means of this very (rite) the sacrificer conquers his enemy.
3.3.7.16	One should perform this rite in a battle.
3.3.7.17	One conquers the battle.
3.3.7.18	One should offer this rite to one who is dear to him, if he has an enemy.
3.3.7.19	He becomes (powerful) by himself.
3.3.7.20	His enemy becomes defeated.
3.3.7.21	By this (rite) Bharadvaja bound Pratardana, the son of Daivodāsa.
3.3.7.22	He became a king.
3.3.7.23	If one desires (to make) a king, one should bind him with this (rite).
3.3.7.24	He becomes a king.
3.3.7.25	By this (rite) the gods conquered Viraj.
3.3.7.26	One should recite ten times.
3.3.7.27	Viraj has ten syllables.
3.3.7.28	By this one conquers Viraj.
3.3.7.29	The Rakshas demons tried to destroy the sacrifice of the gods from the south.
3.3.7.30	But they were driven away by the chariot-warrior Apra-ti-ratha.
3.3.7.31	When the Brahman recites the Apra-tiratha hymn from the south, it is for the destruction of the Rakshas.
3.3.8.1	He places the kindling woods on the north.
3.3.8.2	He makes a share for him who is being driven away.
3.3.8.3	He places three (kindling woods).
3.3.8.4	Agni is threefold.
3.3.8.5	"The All-Gods have raised thee up."
3.3.8.6	For the gods of this world are indeed all the men.
3.3.8.7	"Agni, with thy thoughts, do thou bear."
3.3.8.8	With that thought for which Agni is set up, he thus makes him complete.
3.3.8.9	"The five goddesses, the goddesses of the directions, may they protect the sacrifice."
3.3.8.10	These five directions make him shining.
3.3.8.11	"He is to be praised with the leaves raised up, with the leaves grasped."
3.3.8.12	For he has leaves raised up.
3.3.8.13	"They come to the sacrifice having grasped it."
3.3.8.14	For they come to it having grasped it.
3.3.8.15	"Harikeśa, the sun-ray, in front."
3.3.8.16	The sun is Harikeśa, a sun-ray, before.
3.3.8.17	"Savitar, the light, the ever-rising, he says, by means of the offspring itself.
3.3.8.18	Pusha, the wise, goes to the birth of him.
3.3.8.19	Pusha is indeed cattle.
3.3.8.20	He indeed wins cattle.
3.3.8.21	May the blessings of the Vakas be accepted by us, he says. This is the milking of blessings.
3.3.8.22	He milks the blessings themselves.
3.3.8.23	Indra, all have increased him, he says. They proceed with the verse of increase.
3.3.8.24	They go to the increase.
3.3.8.25	They go with the Anushtubh (metre).
3.3.8.26	Speech is Anushtubh.
3.3.8.27	Speech is Vaiśvadevī.
3.3.8.28	Vaiśvadevī is Agni.
3.3.8.29	Therefore they go with the Anustubh.
3.3.8.30	They go from the Āgnīdhra with six (verses).
3.3.8.31	There are six seasons.
3.3.8.32	They go by means of the seasons.
3.3.8.33	This is the celestial vehicle in the middle of heaven. He places the stone.
3.3.8.34	For the sun is indeed the celestial vehicle of the heavenly world.
3.3.8.35	May the inviter of good will come to the sacrifice. May Agni, the god, come to the god. This is indeed a blessing.
3.3.8.36	May the god Agni, the god, take the god to the sacrifice. May the god Agni take the god to heaven. Thus indeed is the benediction.
3.3.8.37	He seizes him with the impulse of the Vāja and the Udgṛbha.
3.3.8.38	The rising sun is the Udgṛbhi.
3.3.8.39	This is the Nigrābhi.
3.3.8.40	The rising one seizes the sacrificer.
3.3.8.41	He seizes his enemy.
3.3.8.42	Udgṛbh and Nigṛbh.
3.3.8.43	Brahma is Udgṛbh.
3.3.8.44	Nigṛbh is Brahma.
3.3.8.45	Brahma seizes the sacrificer.
3.3.8.46	Brahma takes his enemy.
3.3.8.47	Then may Indra and Agni, my enemies, be separated from me.
3.3.8.48	Indra and Agni are strength and energy.
3.3.8.49	The sacrificer thus drives away his enemy with strength and energy. He goes with four (verses).
3.3.8.50	He goes from the Ahavaniya with four (verses),
3.3.8.51	For there are four metres.
3.3.8.52	They go with the metres.
3.3.8.53	And the metres are indeed Brahman.
3.3.8.54	They go to Brahma himself.
3.3.9.1	"He says, "Go with Agni to heaven," for the sake of the complete attainment of the heavenly world."
3.3.9.2	"He says "Go to the back of heaven,"
3.3.9.3	for they go by the back."
3.3.9.4	"He (Agni) says, "Give us nourishment to the two-footed and four-footed,"
3.3.9.5	he gives nourishment to the two and four-footed animals."
3.3.9.6	"He prays, "Seeking nourishment with the Bhrigus,"
3.3.9.7	The Bhrigus indeed succeeded in the sacrifice for prosperity.
3.3.9.8	I ascend from the earth to the atmosphere.
3.3.9.9	From the atmosphere to heaven. This is the ascent of these worlds.
3.3.9.10	He ascends with five (steps).
3.3.9.11	The sacrifice is fivefold.
3.3.9.12	By means of the sacrifice, he thus ascends the sacrifice for non-rejection.
3.3.9.13	He offers with the milk of a black cow with a white calf.
3.3.9.14	The calf is the day.
3.3.9.15	The mother is the night.
3.3.9.16	He thus gives the night to the day.
3.3.9.17	He who knows this, indeed, gives the day and night when they are given.
3.3.9.18	All animals, though of different forms, are of one form in milk.
3.3.9.19	Whatever is of one form, that he wins for them.
3.3.9.20	Night and Dawn.
3.3.9.21	O Agni, thou art the thousand-eyed Suparna Garutman, thou sittest on the back of the earth.
3.3.9.22	He places the luminous Agni in these worlds.
3.3.9.23	And also for the support of the vital airs.
3.3.9.24	He settles it with two (verses).
3.3.9.25	The sacrificer with two feet is established for stability.
3.3.9.26	"He says, "The one who offers is Supratīka in front," for the attainment of the heavenly world."
3.3.9.27	"This is the milking of Agni that Kanva, the son of Śrāvaya, discovered: "The variegated one of Savitar, the desirable one."
3.3.9.28	This is indeed the milking of Agni.
3.3.9.29	One milks Agni with this.
3.3.9.30	All the desires that Agni has, he milks for him who knows this.
3.3.9.31	"He says, "We worship your supreme birth, O Agni," because of the increase.
3.3.9.32	" "O Agni, shine forth, shining in front!" This is the verse of Karnaka, the eternal light.
3.3.9.33	" He has indeed placed the eternal light for him.
3.3.9.34	Vasishtha Satyavakya, while sitting in a sacrifice, asked the question, "Do you know the Surmi with the ears?"
3.3.9.35	They said, "We know."
3.3.9.36	"Do you know the one in the forests?"
3.3.9.37	The ears of this (Surmi) are indeed cattle.
3.3.9.38	One becomes possessed of cattle.
3.3.9.39	The gods directed this hundred-striking thunderbolt against the Asuras.
3.3.9.40	He struck them with a hundred blows.
3.3.9.41	The sacrificer directs this very thunderbolt, the hundred-striker, the destroyer, against his enemies.
3.3.9.42	He strikes them with a hundred strokes.
3.3.9.43	He offers with the verse, "O Agni, today..." in the form of a line.
3.3.9.44	The line is the sacrificer.
3.3.9.45	He has established the sacrificer in Viraj.
3.3.9.46	Then he offers to the row of oblations.
3.3.9.47	"Seven are thy, O Agni, kindling-sticks, seven thy tongues."
3.3.9.48	So many are the forms of Agni.
3.3.9.49	Seven times seven.
3.3.9.50	He who, knowing this, kindles Agni, does not become thirsty.
3.3.9.51	He satisfies him with them.
3.3.9.52	"I offer the mind to the mind."
3.3.9.53	This is Agni's invincible offering to the All-worker.
3.3.9.54	One's foe cannot injure him who kindles Agni.
3.3.9.55	He who knows this attains the highest rank among his equals.
3.3.9.56	Agni thought, "I am not the one who has no share."
3.3.9.57	"I shall take away the brilliance,"
3.3.9.58	He took it with this offering.
3.3.9.59	This is the Agnihotra of Agni.
3.3.9.60	By this he makes Agni the fire-kindler.
3.3.9.61	He who knows this, Agni satisfies all his desires.
3.3.9.62	When one builds a fire, one kindles it.
3.3.9.63	Agni kindles the Agnihotra.
3.3.10.1	Now this is the one for Agni Vaiśvānara with twelve potsherds.
3.3.10.2	Agni Vaiśvānaran is indeed a year.
3.3.10.3	He pleases the year itself.
3.3.10.4	And he has made a share for him who has been deprived.
3.3.10.5	The sacrificer stands firm by the establishment of the oblations.
3.3.10.6	If the oblations are not established, he does not stand firm.
3.3.10.7	When he offers this, it is for the establishment of the offerings.
3.3.10.8	When they are established, the sacrifice follows them, and the sacrificer follows the sacrifice.
3.3.10.9	And indeed, Vaisvānara is desire.
3.3.10.10	When one has a desire, that desire bends towards him.
3.3.10.11	If one were to turn towards the east, the divine classes would be confused.
3.3.10.12	If it were to be in the south, it would be under the control of Yama.
3.3.10.13	The one facing the south is solar.
3.3.10.14	The one facing the north is Raudra.
3.3.10.15	The Homa should be performed straight for stability.
3.3.10.16	One should perform all the Homas for stability.
3.3.10.17	Vaisvānara is the Kshatriya.
3.3.10.18	The Maruts are the Vis.
3.3.10.19	Having performed this (Homa), if one performs the Marut Homa,
3.3.10.20	one yokes the Vis to the Kshatriya
3.3.10.21	and makes the Vis subservient to the Kshatriyas.
3.3.10.22	Prajapati created the animals with Agni as their mouth.
3.3.10.23	The Maruts are the animals.
3.3.10.24	When one offers to them after offering to Agni, Prajapati creates animals for him with Agni as their head.
3.3.10.25	There are seven potsherds.
3.3.10.26	The Marut groups are seven by seven.
3.3.10.27	Therefore there are seven potsherded.
3.3.10.28	One offers to each group.
3.3.10.29-34	The Maruts are indeed pleased only in a group. One should offer in the middle of the group of verses recited in the forest. This is indeed the Kshatra (royal class) of the Maruts. The other groups are the Vis (commoners). This is indeed making the Kshatra the middlemost among the Vis. If one wishes to destroy the Kshatra with the Vis, one should confuse the group of verses chanted in the forest with the other groups.
3.3.10.35	This indeed is the way to destroy the people by the nobility.
3.3.10.36	If one wishes, "May I destroy the people by nobility," then one should confuse the other groups with the group of verses in the forest.
3.3.10.37	This indeed is the way of destroying the people by nobility.
3.3.10.38	The Yajya and Anuvakya should be in Tristubh metre.
3.3.10.39	The Tristubh metre is strength and energy.
3.3.10.40	This is the strength and vigour of the Kshatriya.
3.3.10.41	If one wishes, 'May I destroy his Kshatriya with my Kshatriya, may he fall from his own abode', then one should make the Agni-sthana chariot-banner of the Maruts with the hymn in the forest.
3.3.10.42	This is the Kshatriya of the Maruts.
3.3.10.43	The Agni-sthana is the chariot-banner of Maruts.
3.3.10.44	It supports the Kshatriya.
3.3.10.45	He destroys his enemy with his own (enemy).
3.3.10.46	He falls away from his own abode.
3.3.10.47	"The divine hosts of Indra, the Maruts, following the path." This is indeed the path of the gods.
3.3.10.48	He makes him follow the divine and human hosts.
3.3.10.49	When one builds a fire, one builds it together with Agni.
3.3.10.50	It illuminates with the wind.
3.4.1.1	He offers a stream of ghee for the sake of the unestablished, for the sake of peace, for the sake the unconquered, for the sake being conquered, for the sake not being bound.
3.4.1.2	He offers continuously for the sake of continuity of the vital airs, for the sake continuity of these worlds, for the sake continuation of food.
3.4.1.3	He offers uninterruptedly for the sake of uninterrupted food.
3.4.1.4	If one wishes to cut off the life of someone, one should cut off the life.
3.4.1.5	If one wishes to harm someone, one should harm him.
3.4.1.6	One severs his food.
3.4.1.7	"One severs the food and the fire."
3.4.1.8	These are the forms of food.
3.4.1.9	One obtains food through its forms.
3.4.1.10	"Fire and water."
3.4.1.11	This is the source of food.
3.4.1.12	He wins the food along with its source.
3.4.1.13	"He offers the stream of ghee, saying, "May I obtain the stream of ghee."
3.4.1.14	This is the stream of ghee."
3.4.1.15	They approach the sacrificer in the other world.
3.4.1.16	He offers twelve times twelve.
3.4.1.17	Twelve months are a year.
3.4.1.18	He wins the year.
3.4.1.19	He offers half of the Indra-offerings.
3.4.1.20	The gods, with Indra as their leader, won the power and strength of the Asuras.
3.4.1.21	With these (verses) the sacrificer wins the power and strength (of his enemy).
3.4.1.22	The gods and the Asuras contended.
3.4.1.23	The gods said to Indra, 'With you as our leader we shall conquer them.'
3.4.1.24	He said, 'Let me have a share.'
3.4.1.25	"Choose," they said.
3.4.1.26	He said, "I am worthy of being the half-share of the deities."
3.4.1.27	Then they conquered.
3.4.1.28	Therefore he is the half-share-holder of the deities.
3.4.1.29	When the half-Indra oblations are offered, it is for victory.
3.4.1.30	The Indra-oblations are the best.
3.4.1.31	Indra is indeed power and strength.
3.4.1.32	At the sacrifice, the sacrificer stands firm in the strength of the senses.
3.4.1.33	The rays and the light.
3.4.1.34	The rays are the mouth of the sacrifice.
3.4.1.35	He obtains the mouth of the rite.
3.4.1.36	The lord and the Adabhya.
3.4.1.37	One who is about to kindle the fire is not overcome by his enemies.
3.4.1.38	He who knows this attains the highest position among his equals.
3.4.1.39	These are the Grahas.
3.4.1.40	These are indeed the forms of the sacrifice.
3.4.1.41	By means of the forms, he wins the sacrifice.
3.4.1.42	He collects the sacrificial implements, namely, the ladles and cups.
3.4.1.43	Having collected the sacrificial implements, he employs the sacrifice.
3.4.1.44	One offers in vessels.
3.4.1.45	Food is eaten in vessels.
3.4.1.46	He obtains food in accordance with his own nature.
3.4.1.47	The sacrificial grass and the altar are indeed a blessing.
3.4.1.48	The Avabhrtha and the Svaga-rite are indeed for stability.
3.4.2.1	Fire and heat are indeed the Brahmanical lustre of Agni.
3.4.2.2	By this he obtains both radiance and Brahmanical lustre.
3.4.2.3	He becomes lustrous and radiant.
3.4.2.4	The Rtu and the Vrata.
3.4.2.5	The day and night are the Rtu and the vrata.
3.4.2.6	By this one obtains the desired and the pleasing day and night.
3.4.2.7	One and three.
3.4.2.8	The divine metre is one and three.
3.4.2.9	One obtains the divine metre.
3.4.2.10	Four and eight.
3.4.2.11	The human metre is four and eight.
3.4.2.12	He obtains the human world by means of the human desire.
3.4.2.13	He prospers in the world of gods by means of the divine desire.
3.4.2.14	He succeeds in the human world by the human desire. Here is the text:
3.4.2.15	One, three, four, and eight.
3.4.2.16	This is the growth of these worlds.
3.4.2.17	The transition to the heavenly world.
3.4.2.18	The Adityas went to the heavenly world by the Stoma of two more (syllables), the Angirasas by the Stoma four more (syllabes).
3.4.2.19	When he offers these two Stomas, it is for the attainment of the heavenly world.
3.4.2.20	These two Stomas are in pairs, for procreation.
3.4.2.21	By the Stoma of twice more (sylla bles) he places the semen.
3.4.2.22	By the four more (s yllables) he procreates the deposited semen.
3.4.2.23	One and three.
3.4.2.24	Up to the thirty-three, the thirty-three deities.
3.4.2.25	Those very ones are pleased by this with what is desired.
3.4.2.26	Four and eight.
3.4.2.27	Up to eighty-four.
3.4.2.28	The Jagati has eighty-four syllables.
3.4.2.29	The animals are Jagati.
3.4.2.30	He indeed wins the animals.
3.4.2.31	Three-footed and three-footed.
3.4.2.32	These are the animals of the animals.
3.4.2.33	He indeed wins animals with animals.
3.4.2.34	Life is established by sacrifice.
3.4.2.35	Breath is established by sacrifice, thus it is the establishment of the sacrifice.
3.4.2.36	He indeed established the sacrifice.
3.4.2.37	To Vāja svāhā, to Prasu svāhā.
3.4.2.38	There are thirteen oblations.
3.4.2.39	Thirteen months are a year.
3.4.2.40	He places it in the year, in the heavenly world.
3.4.2.41	He stands firm in that very (world).
3.4.2.42	Stoma and Yajus.
3.4.2.43	Stoma and yajus are food.
3.4.2.44	Having placed food in himself, having become a giver of food, he finally departs to the divine world.
3.4.2.45	Agni is Vasu.
3.4.2.46	This is his stream.
3.4.2.47	He who knows this, Agni satisfies all his desires.
3.4.2.48	Agni indeed kindles the food here.
3.4.2.49	He kindles it with the stream of Soma.
3.4.3.1	He offers the Vāja-prasava.
3.4.3.2	Agni won the food here by this (offering).
3.4.3.3	By this he wins for the sacrificer the food, the strength.
3.4.3.4	He offers at each morsel of food with the Vājas prasuti verses.
3.4.3.5	Food is strength; for the winning of food.
3.4.3.6	He offers both the food of the village and the forest; for the winning both kinds of food.
3.4.3.7	With a spoon of Udumbara wood he offers.
3.4.3.8	The Udumbara is energy; for the securing of energy.
3.4.3.9	"With the impulse of the divine Savitr, with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of Pusan, with the speech of Sarasvati, I consecrate Brihaspati to the sovereignty with the vehicle of the Yantus." If a Brahman were to sacrifice, he should consecrate thus.
3.4.3.10	For this is the consecration of Brihaspati.
3.4.3.11	If a king were to sacrifice, he should consecrate him with the words, "I consecrate Indra for the kingdom."
3.4.3.12	For this is indeed Indra's consecration.
3.4.3.13	One should consecrate one desiring brahmic glory with a black antelope skin.
3.4.3.14	For this is the form of the Rg and Sāman verses of Brahman.
3.4.3.15	The Rg and Sāmāns are brahmic glory.
3.4.3.16	One indeed attains brahmic glory. 
3.4.3.17	One desiring cattle with a woolen skin.
3.4.3.18	The skin of a cow is the sacrificial robe.
3.4.3.19	He indeed wins cattle.
3.4.3.20	He who is being built up is being built up among the fires.
3.4.3.21	He makes him prosper with his own prosperity.
3.4.3.22	The gods won the battle when the plants were ripe.
3.4.3.23	They were won by Agni.
3.4.3.24	This is the consecration of Agni.
3.4.3.25	This indeed is the building up of food.
3.4.3.26	This is the only one among the Savas.
3.4.3.27	This is the Savas of Brihaspati.
3.4.3.28	The Brahman is the deity of Brihaspati,
3.4.3.29	he performs the Savas with his own Savas.
3.4.3.30	They say that one should perform the Homa.
3.4.3.31	For one who performs the Savas does not fall back on anyone.
3.4.3.32	One who performs the Savis is the deity of Agni.
3.4.3.33-40	The seasons indeed support the kingdom of one who offers with the Susaṃvasu (libations). There are six seasons. The seasons support the kingdom. When one offers with six (libations), one establishes his kingdom in the seasons. They support his kingdom. One offers with twelvefold (libations). There are twelve months in a year.
3.4.3.41	Having obtained the year, he secures it.
3.4.3.42	These oblations are indeed in pairs.
3.4.3.43	"To him svāhā, to them svāhā." Thus he places the semen in that very pair.
3.4.3.44	He offers the seventh oblation on the chariot-head for conquering the directions.
3.4.3.45	The directions are indeed conquered by the chariot.
3.4.3.46	Now these are the oblations to Vāta.
3.4.3.47-55	The Agnihotra is offered here and there. The wind blows for one who has kindled the fire. The wind is the breath. He wins the breath. One offers with joined palms. For there is no pouring out of it. And also because it is enclosed. The wind indeed is the breath. The hand is the most suitable for the breath.
3.4.3.56	Therefore one offers with joined hands.
3.4.3.57	One offers three times.
3.4.3.58	There are three worlds, indeed.
3.4.3.59	These worlds blow the wind for him.
3.4.3.60	"You are the ocean, the shining one, the moist follower."
3.4.3.61	These are the forms of Vayu.
3.4.3.62	By means of forms, he wins Vayu.
3.4.3.63	"You (are) the Marut, the group of Maruts."
3.4.3.64	Marut is the wind.
3.4.3.65	When one builds a fire, one is indeed building Agni.
3.4.3.66	One illuminates it with the Vātahoma offerings.
3.4.4.1	The Gayatri is indeed the breath.
3.4.4.2	The Havirdhana is the Gayatri.
3.4.4.3	The Jagati is indeed the out-breath.
3.4.4.4	The Sadasi is the Jagati.
3.4.4.5	The Vyana is the Tristubh.
3.4.4.6	The Agnidhra is the Tristubha.
3.4.4.7	The Asti is the Prisni.
3.4.4.8	He is placed in the middle of heaven, the Prisni on the stone.
3.4.4.9-15	He places the stone in the Agnidhra chamber. The breath-energies are nine. He thus places the breath-energies of the sacrificer in the world of the sacrificer. He places twenty-one in the Hotri. For stability. The twenty-one is indeed stability. Eleven Brahmanas are to be praised.
3.4.4.16	The Tristubh has eleven syllables.
3.4.4.17	The Tristubh is power.
3.4.4.18	One stands firm in power.
3.4.4.19	Eight syllables in the others.
3.4.4.20	The Gayatri has eight syllables.
3.4.4.21	Brahma is the Gayatri.
3.4.4.22	One stands firmly in Brahma.
3.4.4.23	Six in the Marjalis.
3.4.4.24	There are six seasons.
3.4.4.25	The seasons have driven him to the right.
3.4.4.26	The Fathers or the Seasons.
3.4.4.27	And the six metres.
3.4.4.28	He yokes it to the mouth of sacrifice.
3.4.4.29	"The year with the Ayus, in unison."
3.4.4.30	These are the deities of Agni, the parts in front.
3.4.4.31	He pleases them.
3.4.4.32	And here indeed are the dear forms of the gods.
3.4.4.33	He wins them.
3.4.4.34-40	"The year, with the Ayus, is united." The year is the year. The Ayus are the seasons. By this he pleases and satisfies the seasons of the year. "The dawn, with the Aruṇas, is united." He pleases the dawn. "The Asvins, with the Damsas, are united." The Asvins are the day and night.
3.4.4.41	By this he pleases the Sun and the Moon, his desired ones.
3.4.4.42	"He pleases the Sun with the verse, "The Suras have joined together with Etasha."
3.4.4.43	" "He pleases the Sun and Agni with the verse, "The Suras have united with Idā and ghee, svāhā!"
3.4.4.44	" The Sun is Agni.
3.4.4.45	Idā is cattle.
3.4.4.46	Ghee is cattle.
3.4.4.47	By this he pleases his cattle, his desired ones.
3.4.4.48	He offers on a bundle of darbha grass.
3.4.4.49	This is the immortal body of her.
3.4.4.50	Here indeed, Agni is being built up in the immortal.
3.4.4.51	Having placed gold, he offers.
3.4.4.52	He offers indeed in Agni, in the abode.
3.4.4.53	If one were to offer in an abodeless place, the Adhvaryu would be blind.
3.4.4.54	The divine chariot is yoked for heaven, the human chariot for desire.
3.4.4.55	"He yokes Agni with strength and ghee." He yokes Agni with this.
3.4.4.56	With the yoked one he goes to the heavenly world.
3.4.4.57	If he were to yoke with all (verses), his sacrifice would be yoked, the offerings would not be established.
3.4.4.58	He yokes with two (verses).
3.4.4.59	For the establishment of the offerings.
3.4.4.60	The sacrifice follows them as they stand.
3.4.4.61	The sacrificer follows the sacrifice.
3.4.4.62	He yokes with three (verses).
3.4.4.63	Agni is threefold.
3.4.4.64	He yoked him as much as Agni is.
3.4.4.65	When he is yoked, all the oblation is collected.
3.4.4.66	He yokens with five (verses).
3.4.4.67	The sacrifice is fivefold.
3.4.4.68	He yokened him as much as the sacrifice is.
3.4.4.69	The two fires are indeed the same as the one that is being piled up and the one that is Vaiśvānara.
3.4.4.70	In that he consecrates with the two verses containing the word 'water' in front of the Yajñāyajñiya, it is for peace.
3.4.4.71	This indeed is the measure of the sacrifice, namely, the Agniṣṭoma.
3.4.4.72	The earth is indeed the measure of the Agniṣṭomah.
3.4.5.1	He who does not yoke the Agni when it has come, or does not yoke it when it is being yoked,
3.4.5.2	"O Agni, do thou yoke those that are thine." He yokes Agni when he comes to the yoke, he yokes when they are being yoked.
3.4.5.3	He who does not unyoke Agni when he comes for unyoking, does not unyo ke when they are being unyoked.
3.4.5.4	"I unyoke thy reins, I unyoke thy ropes." He unyokes Agni when he comes unyoking.
3.4.5.5-11	When they are being released, he releases. Just as the installation, so the re-installation. He who prospers by the installation, he installs again. If one who is going to install a fire thinks: "May I prosper by the installation." He should install this re-installation. Even one who is installing for the first time should install it for prosperity. He prospers.
3.4.5.12	Then for the sake of the union.
3.4.5.13	The oblation which is offered in the fire without bricks, flows away.
3.4.5.14	The sacrifice follows that which flows away, the sacrificer follows the sacrifice.
3.4.5.15	When he puts down this layer again, it is for the establishment of the oblations.
3.4.5.16	The sacrifice, following that which stands firm, the sacrificer, follows the sacrifice.
3.4.5.17-24	He lays down eight (bricks). The Gayatri has eight syllables. Agni is Gayatri. He builds him as big as Agni is. Having laid down eight Lokamprana bricks, he covers them with clay. The Gayatri (verse) has eight syllables. The Gayatri is Brahman. He builds it with the Gayatri metre and Brahman.
3.4.5.25	Having placed eleven Lokamprinas, he covers with the excreta.
3.4.5.26	The Tristubh has eleven syllables, and is heroic.
3.4.5.27	He builds him with the Tristubh metre and with heroism.
3.4.5.28	Having placed twelve Lokamprinas he covers with the excretal.
3.4.5.29	The Jagati has twelve syllables.
3.4.5.30	The animals are Jagati.
3.4.5.31	He builds it with the Jagati metre and with animals.
3.4.5.32	This is the northern altar of Agni.
3.4.5.33	This is the northern altar which Agni is being built.
3.4.5.34	If there is an Agni already built here, one should perform the sacrifice after having approached it.
3.4.5.35	Just as when something is burning, one adds more fuel to it, so also in this (Agni) he places more and more brilliance.
3.4.5.36	They say, "Who will awaken the superior one who is asleep?"
3.4.5.37	By offering to him, he causes him to be deprived.
3.4.5.38	One who builds a fire makes a house.
3.4.5.39	Whatever one obtains from elsewhere, one brings it to the house.
3.4.5.40	One who wishes to perform an Iṣṭi, a Paśu sacrifice, or a Soma sacrifice, if one's fire has been previously consecrated, one should perform the sacrifice after approaching it.
3.4.5.41	Just as one brings wealth from elsewhere and brings it to one's house, so is it.
3.4.5.42	They say: The ladle is again used in this sacrifice.
3.4.5.43	Wherever one performs a sacrifice, one should perform it after placing these twenty-one (bricks). For stability.
3.4.5.44	The twenty-one (bricks) are the foundation.
3.4.6.1	"The seasons, the Sama (chants), may they increase thee." He thus kindles him with the Sama (chants) and the seasons.
3.4.6.2	"Shine with the divine light." He thus builds him with light.
3.4.6.3	"Thou shinest over the four quarters."
3.4.6.4	Therefore Agni shines over all quarters.
3.4.6.5	"May he be beyond that, whatever is the curse of Yama, O Brihaspati, may he be released from it."
3.4.6.6	One should perform for one suffering from a disease.
3.4.6.7	Yama is indeed death.
3.4.6.8	Brihaspati is Brahman.
3.4.6.9	He heals him with as much as Brahman.
3.4.6.10	"May the Asvins ward off death from him."
3.4.6.11	The Asvins are the physicians of the gods.
3.4.6.12	They have repelled death from us.
3.4.6.13	He has risen above the darkness, having removed sin, and has ascended to heaven.
3.4.6.14	The Hotri priest of the Agnihotra fire of all-knowing Apastha was summoned.
3.4.6.15	They asked him, "Which are the waters?"
3.4.6.16	Those Gandharvas and Apsarases then told him.
3.4.6.17	That the Sāmanis are connected with water is for peace.
3.4.6.18	He recites twenty-four times.
3.4.6.19	The Gāyatrī has twenty-four syllables.
3.4.6.20	The Gâyatrî is the mouth of the sacrifice.
3.4.6.21	He has obtained the mouth of the sacrîfice.
3.4.6.22	And the year consists of twenty-four half-months.
3.4.6.23-30	This indeed is the unchanging prosperity, namely, the year. He does not indeed lay down this prosperity. His prosperity does not decay. He recites the Gāyatrī verses. The Gāyatrī indeed is brilliance, the Brahmic lustre. He indeed obtains brilliance and Brahmic lustre. He recites the Tristubh verses. The Tristubh indeed is strength, valour.
3.4.6.31	He indeed wins strength and vigour.
3.4.6.32	If there are Gāyatrī and Triṣṭubh verses,
3.4.6.33	he wins both of them.
3.4.6.34	The verses to Agni should be irregular.
3.4.6.35	For this is irregular, not excluded.
3.4.6.36	One goes excluded by sin, by the enemy.
3.4.6.37	One should perform the rites of the Agniṣṭoma animal sacrifice.
3.4.6.38	For who would ascend twice the field of the gods?
3.4.6.39	They say that one should keep the fire burning for three nights.
3.4.6.40	The Viraj has three feet.
3.4.6.41	One attains Viraj.
3.4.6.42	They say that the fire should be kept burning for six nights.
3.4.6.43	There are six seasons in a year.
3.4.6.44	Viraj is spread over a year.
3.4.6.45	He indeed attains Viraj.
3.4.6.46	They say, one should keep the fire for ten nights.
3.4.6.47	Viraj has ten syllables.
3.4.6.48	He indeed atatins Viraj.
3.4.6.49	"They say, one shoud keep the fire for twelve nights."
3.4.6.50	Twelve months are a year.
3.4.6.51	Viraj is spread over a ycar.
3.4.6.52	He indeed attains Viraj.
3.4.6.53	They say, one should perform the Agnihotra for twenty-four nights.
3.4.6.54	Twenty-four half-months are a year.
3.4.6.55	Viraj is spread over the year.
3.4.6.56	He indeed attains Viraj
3.4.6.57	They say, should perform the Agnihotras for a month.
3.4.6.58	One indeed attains the year through the months.
3.4.6.59	The Vasus, eight in number, possessed this (earth).
3.4.6.60	They conquered this world and the Gāyatrī metre.
3.4.6.61	The Rudras, eleven in number,
3.4.6.62	They conquered the world of the atmosphere and the Tristubh metre.
3.4.6.63	The Adityas, twelve in number,
3.4.6.64	Conquered the world of heaven and the Jagatī metre.
3.4.6.65	They succeeded.
3.4.6.66-72	He who knows this, and carries the fire for a year, prospers. Therefore they say, "The fire carried for a year is indeed Agni." Now these are the Apryas. Prajapati, having created the creatures, thought, "I am alone." He saw these Apryas. With them he appeased himself. Agni is indeed Prajapati.
3.4.6.73	These are the ones who make one dear.
3.4.6.74	One makes the sacrificer dear to Agni with these (verses).
3.4.6.75	This is the hairy metre, the one for cattle, deficient and excessive, for procreation.
3.4.6.76	They become Viraj.
3.4.6.77	Viraj is all the metres.
3.4.6.78	All his metres are thus offered.
3.4.6.79	One should make them all-knowing.
3.4.6.80	The vital airs are indeed the greater and the lesser.
3.4.6.81	The vital airs are indeed greater and lesser than these.
3.4.6.82	He places the vital airs in himself.
3.4.7.1	If the fire follows the fire-pan, it is as if a son born dies.
3.4.7.2	If it follows, he should again put the fire-pan on that (place).
3.4.7.3	This is the womb of Agni.
3.4.7.4	He generates her from the womb itself.
3.4.7.5	He who builds the fire is indeed the lord of procreation.
3.4.7.6	"Those are your moist wombs, O Agni, those are your womb-like, those are your drops, O Agni, and those are your navel-like."
3.4.7.7	"Sit here in your body, knowing, in union with both of them."
3.4.7.8	For this is the womb of moisture, for peace.
3.4.7.9	The progeny is the nest.
3.4.7.10	The cattle are the nest.
3.4.7.11	Because of the nest, for progeny.
3.4.7.12	He who builds a fire becomes an offering.
3.4.7.13	If one approaches the wife of one who has built a fire, it would be like spilled offering.
3.4.7.14	Just as they desire expiation for a burnt offering that has been spilled, so they should desire expiation for him.
3.4.7.15	If he were to go to the Maitrāvaruṇa, he should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni-Soma.
3.4.7.16	He goes to the Maitrāvaruna-hood, for the non-spilling of himself.
3.4.7.17	The animal is Agni.
3.4.7.18	He who attends to the animal before (the sacrifice) destroys it.
3.4.7.19	Therefore, he does not step over the fire in front.
3.4.7.20	Therefore, he attends to the fire in the rear for the non-injury of himself.
3.4.7.21	He who builds the fire according to the prescribed procedure, the beings and the seasons become according to the prescribed form.
3.4.7.22	Those which are turned towards the right, he places on the right side; those which are turned towards left, he places on left side.
3.4.7.23	Then he lays down the bricks inscribed with three lines.
3.4.7.24	He builds the fire-altar in accordance with the order of creation, in accordance with the form of the seasons and the beings.
3.4.7.25	They say, "The Agni should be built with truth."
3.4.7.26	"Earth, heaven, sky."
3.4.7.27	In front of the naturally perforated stone.
3.4.7.28	This much is the truth of speech.
3.4.7.29	He builds the fire with truth.
3.4.7.30	The Svayamatrinna is indeed the breath.
3.4.7.31	Gold is immortality.
3.4.7.32	When he places the gold brick and the Svayamatrinn brick,
3.4.7.33	he places the breath in immortality.
3.4.7.34	He places the gold brick with the formula, "Thou art brilliance, do thou grant me brilliance."
3.4.7.35	These (bricks) support these worlds.
3.4.7.36	Then indeed he builds the fire with these (verses).
3.4.7.37	These worlds shine forth.
3.4.7.38	The gods, having slain the Asuras, were afraid of death.
3.4.7.39	They saw the metres.
3.4.7.40	They entered them.
3.4.7.41	Whatever they concealed from each other, they concealed themselves with that.
3.4.7.42	That is the metre-ness of the metres.
3.4.7.43	He recites the Agniya verse with the Citincti (verse) and touches the Agniya verse.
3.4.7.44	He enters his own deity for the non-injury of himself.
3.4.7.45	One desiring heaven should perform the Citincti of a hawk.
3.4.7.46	Having become a hawk, the Gāyatrī fell into this world for the attainment of the heavenly world.
3.4.7.47	One having an enemy should perform the Citinti of a chariot wheel.
3.4.7.48-52	Having made a chariot-wheel the thunderbolt, the gods hurled it against the Asuras. They (the gods) broke them (the Asuras) to a hundred pieces. Having made this very thunderbolt, the sacrificer hurls it against his enemy. He breaks him to a hundred pieces.
3.4.7.53	The gods and the Asuras were on both sides of them, some in front and some behind.
3.4.7.54	They drove them away with this (rite).
3.4.7.55	This is the driving away of one's enemy.
3.4.7.56	One who desires food should perform the Drona-sacrifice.
3.4.7.57	Food is eaten with the Drona.
3.4.7.58	One obtains food in accordance with one's own share.
3.4.7.59	The rice-gruel comes afterwards for conformity.
3.4.7.60-65	One who desires to go to the world of the ancestors should perform the Śmaśāna-citi rite. One who desires to go directly to the world of ancestors should perform the rite. One goes directly to the world of ancestors. One who desires a village should perform the Upaca rite. Just as one performs the Upaca rite, so one obtains a village. One who desires cattle should perform the Samūhya rite.
3.4.7.66	Just as he gathers him together, so he gathers the animals for him from the directions.
3.4.8.1	Prajapati first built this Agni with the seasons, the year.
3.4.8.2	He built it in the east with spring, in the south with summer, in the north with the rains, in the west with autumn, in the west the tail, in the west, in the middle with winter.
3.4.8.3	Brahma himself, in front, fashioned the fire-altar; with the Kshatra, the right wing; with the Vis, the left wing; with the cattle, the tail; with the Ashaya, the middle.
3.4.8.4	This much is there.
3.4.8.5	He touches what is there.
3.4.8.6	That he wins.
3.4.8.7	For the heavenly world, Agni is built. The thunderbolt is the eleven-fold.
3.4.8.8	If one were to offer the Ekadasini (oblation), the thunderbolt would seize him from the front.
3.4.8.9	He would be unworthy of heaven.
3.4.8.10	If one were not to offer it, he would be without cattle.
3.4.8.11	One should offer one animal with one stake and eleven animals.
3.4.8.12	By that one becomes possessed of cattle.
3.4.8.13	By that (oblation) one attains heaven.
3.4.8.14	If one were to perform a sacrifice that is smaller than the prescribed size, one would obtain a smaller progeny, smaller cattle, and smaller food. One would become worse.
3.4.8.15	Now when he lays down the bricks of the size of the altar, he builds up the greater (altar). He approaches the greater sacrificial rite. He obtains greater progeny, greater cattle, greater food, and becomes more prosperous.
3.4.8.16	This is Agni's northernmost layer.
3.4.8.17	He who knows this becomes better and better every day.
3.4.8.18	The fame of one who performs the Agnihotra goes either to Agni or to himself.
3.4.8.19	Grant us favour among the Brahmanas, favour among the kings.
3.4.8.20	Grant us honour among the Vaishyas and the Shudras, and grant me honour with honour.
3.4.8.21	What he offers.
3.4.8.22	He makes himself equal to the fame of Agni.
3.4.8.23	The one who approaches Agni is indeed the lord of the difficult skin.
3.4.8.24	I approach you with the Brahman, paying homage, and the sacrificer with oblations.
3.4.8.25	Unharmed, may I be found here by Varuna, may I attain the long-lasting life, may I be released from bondage."
3.4.8.26	When one offers oblations,
3.4.8.27	it is indeed the peace and protection of Agni, for oneself.
3.4.8.28	Agni is indeed the life.
3.4.8.29	Therefore, one should not destroy the fire-kindled birds. One who knows fire should not destroy them.
3.4.8.30	If one eats it, one should eat that.
3.4.8.31	He would lead him to misfortune.
3.4.8.32	Prajapati first kindled this fire, desiring supremacy.
3.4.8.33	He attained supremacy and greatness.
3.4.8.34	He who, knowing this, builds the fire, attains greatness and preeminence.
3.4.8.35	Prajapati, having created the creatures, entered them.
3.4.8.36	He said, "He who builds this for me will succeed."
3.4.8.37	The gods built it.
3.4.8.38	They succeeded.
3.4.8.39	That is the reason for the name of the sacrificial post.
3.4.8.40	He who thus knowing, builds the fire, builds Prajapati.
3.4.8.41	He prospers.
3.4.8.42	Therefore they say, "The fire is built by Prajapati."
3.4.9.1	When Agni was being built for the gods, he did not go away from them.
3.4.9.2	They offered a libation to Agni, saying,
3.4.9.3	"You first went away from us, but now you will go away from us."
3.4.9.4-12	He was separated from Agni by her. He was separated from Agni. He was not separated from the oblation. He was separate from the oblation by the sacrifice. He was separately from the oblation He was not separate from the sacrifice. To him, the sacrifice, he was separated by the Dakshina. He was divided from the sacrifice. He was not separated from Dakshina. He was not separate from Dakshina.
3.4.9.13	The Brahman (priest) was separated from her.
3.4.9.14	The Brahman was separated from her, but not from the Brahman.
3.4.9.15	The Brahman (priest) separated from him.
3.4.9.16	The Brahman separated from him,
3.4.9.17	but not from the Brahman (priest).
3.4.9.18	The Brahman (priests) separated from him through austerities.
3.4.9.19	These are the half-austerities of separation.
3.4.9.20	He who, knowing this, lays down the Vyuṣṭis, makes them shine forth for him.
3.4.9.21	He who knows the Vyuṣtis in the proper order, makes them shine in the proper order for him.
3.4.9.22	The morning is indeed the first Vyuṣṭi. They say, "It is the day."
3.4.9.23	Because it rises in the morning.
3.4.9.24	Because it shines.
3.4.9.25	Because Agni is installed.
3.4.9.26	Because the sun rises.
3.4.9.27	Whatever he touches with his hands,
3.4.9.28	Whatever he eats,
3.4.9.29	Whatever he drinks,
3.4.9.30	These are the blessings in the proper order.
3.4.9.31	He who, knowing this, places the blessings in the right order,
3.4.10.1	He who builds Agni without a womb, without a place, becomes wombless, placeless.
3.4.10.2	The waters are Agni's womb,
3.4.10.3	When he places the bricks in the pot,
3.4.10.4	he builds the fire with a womb and a place.
3.4.10.5	He becomes one with a womb and place.
3.4.10.6	They say, "The fire should be built with a lower enemy."
3.4.10.7	Water is the enemy of fire.
3.4.10.8	When he places the bricks into the pot,
3.4.10.9	He builds the fire with the lower enemy.
3.4.10.10	The lower one is the sin from this.
3.4.10.11	The lower one is the enemy.
3.4.10.12	The fire is the sun.
3.4.10.13	The waters are peace.
3.4.10.14	When he places the bricks in the pot, it is for peace.
3.4.10.15	What is the pot and the pot-shaped bricks, that is the pair.
3.4.10.16	What is a pair, it is for procreation.
3.4.10.17	He places twelve (bricks).
3.4.10.18	Twelve months are a year.
3.4.10.19	Having obtained the year, he secures it.
3.4.10.20	There is a cake on thirteen potsherds.
3.4.10.21	There is the thirteenth month.
3.4.10.22	Having obtained that, he secures it by this.
3.4.10.23	It is in milk.
3.4.10.24	By the milk of the village, he secures food; by the Nivara of the forest, he secures it;
3.4.10.25	By that alone he secures both.
3.5.1.1	He who places the head-stone severs himself from Prajapati, not the other limbs.
3.5.1.2	It becomes a bone-stone, a cremation-stone.
3.5.1.3	When he places this human-stone.
3.5.1.4	He does not sever himself from Prajapatı.
3.5.1.5	It becomes an ash-stone, a bone-stone.
3.5.1.6	There are thirty-six of these stones.
3.5.1.7	The Brihatī has thirty-six syllables.
3.5.1.8	Cattle are Bārhaspatya.
3.5.1.9	The man is Bārhaspaty.
3.5.1.10	The man's image is placed.
3.5.1.11	For he is placed.
3.5.1.12	He who places these (bricks) does not pass beyond this world.
3.5.2.1	Now these five are the five-fold.
3.5.2.2	The fire-altar is as if loose.
3.5.2.3	When he lays down the five or more than five (bricks), it is for the stability and firmness of Agni.
3.5.2.4	He lays down five (bricks).
3.5.2.5	The sacrifice is fivefold.
3.5.2.6	He has attained the extent of the sacrifice.
3.5.2.7	"He says, "Thou art the increaser, thou art the protector," he thus establishes Agni's greatness."
3.5.2.8	He becomes greater in offspring and cattle.
3.5.2.9	You are the seat of the waters, you are the seat of vultures.
3.5.2.10	The Agni is the life-force.
3.5.2.11	He makes it visible to the life-force itself.
3.5.2.12	Having become the life-force, he goes to the heavenly world for whom these are placed.
3.5.3.1	He places the sand with the verse, "You are the mind, you are the surrounding mind."
3.5.3.2	If one were to scatter sand without placing it, then the semen would be scattered and lost.
3.5.3.3	Now when he scatters sand without scraping, it is for the purpose of enclosing the seed that has been scattered.
3.5.4.1	The sacrifice is indeed interrupted when they release the animal before it is properly fixed.
3.5.4.2	Now Ashokeya used to fix it.
3.5.4.3	It should be fixed with ghee, for the continuity of the sacrifice, for non-interruption.
3.5.5.1	He who builds a fire-altar ascends to the world of heaven.
3.5.5.2	When he offers to the Anvarohas (the gods of the downward path),
3.5.5.3	he sends him to the world of Svarga and then he may do as he pleases.
3.6.1.1	One should offer a cake on eleven potsherds to Agni-Vishnu.
3.6.1.2	Agni is all the deities,
3.6.1.3	Vishnu is the sacrifice.
3.6.1.4	He has won the deities and the sacrifice.
3.6.1.5	Agni is the end of the sacrifice from the west, Vishnu from the east.
3.6.1.6	Thus the ends of the sacrifice are attained from both sides.
3.6.1.7	They say, "Let Indra be the truth and the sacrifice."
3.6.1.8	Since it is an eight-pot offering, it is Agni-related.
3.6.1.9	Since it is a three-pot offering, that makes it Vishnu-related.
3.6.1.10	When it becomes an eleven-pot offering, then it is Indra-related.
3.6.1.11	Agni is the purifier of the sacrifice.
3.6.1.12	Vishnu is the sacrifice.
3.6.1.13	He has obtained the sacrifice which is purified by the purifying (rites).
3.6.1.14	This is the form of the sacrifice, namely, the cake.
3.6.1.15	Therefore, it should be made in the form of a cake.
3.6.1.16	They make rice-gruel.
3.6.1.17	The milk of a cow is ghee, and the rice is from a bull.
3.6.1.18	That is a pair.
3.6.1.19	He places the pair at the mouth of his sacrifice.
3.6.1.20	Ghee is brilliance.
3.6.1.21	From the brilliance alone is born.
3.6.1.22	This man is indeed offered to Medha.
3.6.1.23	For this is a likeness of a man.
3.6.1.24	Therefore, the oblation should be made from the form of the man.
3.6.1.25	One consecrates oneself at the Veda-knowing (priest).
3.6.1.26	One consecrates at the Veda-knower, indeed, one who consecrates at the (priest) knowing the Veda.
3.6.1.27	One who consecrates at (the priest) knowing the Veda indeed obtains.
3.6.1.28	And he indeed consecrated himself on the path of sacrifice.
3.6.1.29	The gods, on the Veda, found this (earth) among the Asuras.
3.6.1.30	He who is initiated on the Veda finds this (earth) itself.
3.6.1.31	And he has also obtained the path of sacrifice.
3.6.1.32	They make the eastern beam.
3.6.1.33	When they divided these directions, they allotted this (earth) to the gods, this to the fathers, this to the Asuras, this to men.
3.6.1.34	He who is initiated approaches the deity.
3.6.1.35	He turns towards the direction of the gods.
3.6.1.36	He turns toward the eastern direction.
3.6.1.37	Then he enters the divine field. They cover it.
3.6.1.38	The human destruction is hidden from the divine destruction.
3.6.1.39	They hide him from the human destruction.
3.6.1.40	And for the non-pervasion of demons.
3.6.1.41	He who is initiated goes away from this world.
3.6.1.42	He goes to the people.
3.6.1.43	He ascends the world of the gods.
3.6.1.44	They make the shadows fall away.
3.6.1.45	By that he does not go away from this world,
3.6.1.46	By that he is held in this world.
3.6.1.47	One should perform the final rites in front for one who desires heaven.
3.6.1.48	The sun indeed is the heavenly world.
3.6.1.49-56	He sends him to the presence of the sun. One should perform the funeral rite on the right side for one whom one desires to prosper in the world of the fathers. This is the direction of the fathers. He prospers in the world of fathers. One should do the funeral rite behind for one who desires offspring. Behind is deposited the semen. The semen is the initiated one.
3.6.1.57-63	He places the semen in it. One should perform the funeral rite towards the north for one whom one desires to prosper in the world of men. This is the direction of men. He prospers in the world of man. One should do the funeral rite towards north-east for one whom one wishes to prosper in both worlds. This is both worlds.
3.6.1.64	He prospers in both worlds.
3.6.1.65	One should perform the funeral rite in all directions for one whom one desires, saying, "May he prosper in all directions."
3.6.1.66	He prospers in all directions.
3.6.2.1	Shaves his hair and beard.
3.6.2.2	Brings his teeth.
3.6.2.3	Cuts his nails.
3.6.2.4	Bathes.
3.6.2.5	This is the dead skin.
3.6.2.6	This is the impurity, the stain, in his body.
3.6.2.7	He removes it.
3.6.2.8	He approaches the sacrifice with purity.
3.6.2.9	Having introduced the consecration in the waters, the gods went to the heavenly world.
3.6.2.10	When he bathes in the waters, he obtains that very consecration.
3.6.2.11	And when he bathes in water as a concluding rite, he again introduces that consecration into the waters.
3.6.2.12	"O plant, protect him!" he says; he protects him indeed.
3.6.2.13	"O thunderbolt, do not injure him!" he says.
3.6.2.14	The thunderbolt is indeed the thunderbolt.
3.6.2.15	It is powerful, uncontrolled, and injures the sacrificer.
3.6.2.16	When he places grass in between, it is for the sake of protecting the sacrificer. "
3.6.2.17	"O Devashruti, these are the furrows!" he says. "
3.6.2.18	Devashruti indeed sows these furrows.
3.6.2.19	"May there be welfare in the north."
3.6.2.20	He says this, "May there be prosperity in the northern direction of this sacrifice."
3.6.2.21	"May the waters, my mothers, purify me."
3.6.2.22	For the waters are the sacrifice.
3.6.2.23	"May the ghee-knowers purify me with ghee." He purifies himself with the deities.
3.6.2.24	"May all the goddesses carry away the entire sin."
3.6.2.25	Whatever impurity, whatever stain there is in him, that they carry away from him.
3.6.2.26	"The ladle rises up from them, purified."
3.6.2.27	The ladle rises up, purified, fit for sacrifice, from them.
3.6.2.28	The consecrated one is the oblation.
3.6.2.29	When the oblation is sprinkled with the Yajus, then it becomes the oblation.
3.6.2.30	Whatever he sprinkles with the Yajus, he makes it an oblation.
3.6.2.31	He eats.
3.6.2.32	Food is the breath.
3.6.2.33	Having placed the breaths in himself, he initiates.
3.6.2.34	Man is hollow.
3.6.2.35	He is indeed all that when he is eating.
3.6.2.36	When he eats, he approaches the sacrifice with the sacrifice.
3.6.2.37-42	Just as one who has been initiated here, so is he in the other world. So one who has eaten too much stands in the other world.
3.6.2.43	He anoints himself.
3.6.2.44	He puts on a garment.
3.6.2.45	These are the body parts of a man.
3.6.2.46	He approaches the sacrifice with his body.
3.6.2.47	He anoints himself with fresh butter.
3.6.2.48	Butter is of the gods.
3.6.2.49	Ayuta is of men.
3.6.2.50	Niṣpakva is of Gandharvas.
3.6.2.51	Svayamelinam is of the ancestors.
3.6.2.52	This is of all the gods.
3.6.2.53	Therefore one anoints with fresh butter.
3.6.2.54	One goes together with two darbha-blades.
3.6.2.55	Did you anoint?
3.6.2.56	He anoints it for the sake of intelligence.
3.6.2.57	He says, "You are the milk of the great ones."
3.6.2.58	For this is the milk of the greater ones.
3.6.2.59	"The juice of the waters and plants."
3.6.2.60	For this indeed is the juice of the waters, and plants.
3.6.3.8	He anoints three times, and again three times.
3.6.3.9	For men anoint an unlimited number of times.
3.6.3.10	He does not anoint again.
3.6.3.11	For men do anoint again and again.
3.6.3.12	Indra killed Vritra.
3.6.3.13	His eye fell down.
3.6.3.14	It went to the Trikakubha (region).
3.6.3.15	He anoints the Trikakubhas.
3.6.3.16	The eye is truth.
3.6.3.17	He does not believe in speech.
3.6.3.18	He approaches the consecration after having obtained the truth.
3.6.3.19	"He places the enmity and ill-will within you, with the great mountain."
3.6.3.20	He places the enmity, ill-will within him with the mountain.
3.6.3.21	"You are the protector of the eye, protect my eye." He prays for a blessing.
3.6.3.22	He purifies above and below.
3.6.3.23	And this breath is both upward and downward.
3.6.3.24	One should purify the one whom one hates with the eye.
3.6.3.25	It confuses his breaths.
3.6.3.26	He becomes short-lived.
3.6.3.27	May Citpati purify you.
3.6.3.28	Citpati is indeed the sacrifice.
3.6.3.29	May Vacaspati purify you.
3.6.3.30	Vacaspati indeed purifies him for the sacrifice.
3.6.3.31	"May the god Savitr purify thee."
3.6.3.32	He purifies himself with these deities, impelled by Savitr, for wisdom.
3.6.3.33	"With the stainless purifier."
3.6.3.34	The rays of the sun are the stainless purifier.
3.6.3.35	He purifieth him with the stainless purifier. "
3.6.3.36	"O lord of purification, with thy purifier."
3.6.3.37	Sacrifice is the lord of purification.
3.6.3.38	For indeed, he purifies himself for sacrifice.
3.6.3.39	"He thinks, 'May I be able to perform a sacrifice."
3.6.3.40	Indra killed Vritra in the waters.
3.6.3.41	Of those waters, whatever was fit for sacrifice and worthy of being offered, that flowed out.
3.6.3.42	They became these plants.
3.6.3.43	Of those, what is bright is the darbha grass.
3.6.3.44	These are the dry waters.
3.6.3.45	Whatever brilliance they have, he wins.
3.6.3.46	There are three kinds of waters: divine, earthly, and oceanic.
3.6.3.47	All of them were held by the darbha grass.
3.6.3.48	Therefore, the darbha grass is sacred.
3.6.3.49	One purifies with two (kinds of water).
3.6.3.50	There are two kinds of purification.
3.6.3.51	The sacrificer has two feet.
3.6.3.52	He purifies as much as his body.
3.6.3.53	One putifies three times.
3.6.3.54	The gods are three times seven.
3.6.3.55	Now these three are the breaths: the out-breath, the in-breath, and the through-breath.
3.6.3.56	He purifies him as much as his self is.
3.6.3.57	He puricfies him with seven (verses).
3.6.3.58	There are seven metres.
3.6.3.59	He purifics him with the metres.
3.6.3.60	Now the metres are Brahman.
3.6.3.61	He puriciies him with Brahman.
3.6.3.62	He purities him with twenty-one (verses).
3.6.3.63	Ten fingers make a hand, ten hands make a foot.
3.6.3.64	The self is twenty-one.
3.6.3.65	He purifies it as much as it is.
3.6.3.66	There are three kinds of demons: dice, women, and sleep.
3.6.3.67	By initiating, one turns away from dice, women,
3.6.3.68	and sleep. By the first night of initiation that he keeps awake, he turns away from sleep.
3.6.3.69	With that first one, the initiated one dwells, he wins the sacrifice with it.
3.6.3.70	With that one, the offspring, when Soma is bought.
3.6.3.71	With that, the cattle, when bought for tomorrow.
3.6.4.1	To Akriti, to Pratiyuja Agni, svāhā.
3.6.4.2	"Akriti, indeed, says, "One who is going to sacrifice will be mine."
3.6.4.3	Indeed, they employ him for the sacrifice.
3.6.4.4	To Medha, to Manas, to Agni, svāhā.
3.6.4.5	For one attains the sacrifice with Medha and Manas.
3.6.4.6	To Dikṣā, to Tapas, to Agni, Svāhā.
3.6.4.7	One attains the sacrifice with Dikṣā and Tapas.
3.6.4.8	To Sarasvatī, to Pūṣan, to Agni,Svāhā.
3.6.4.9	Sarasvatī is speech.
3.6.4.10	One speaks with speech.
3.6.4.11	"One says, "I will perform a sacrifice."
3.6.4.12	Pūṣan, indeed, drank this sacrifice, he who drank it.
3.6.4.13	"The great goddesses, the waters, are the bestower of all prosperity."
3.6.4.14	For the waters are the sacrifice.
3.6.4.15	"Heaven and earth are the breasts in the sky."
3.6.4.16	Heaven and earth are indeed the sacrifice, which is established in the sky.
3.6.4.17	From there he obtained the sacrifice.
3.6.4.18	May Brihaspati increase us with oblations. Svāhā.
3.6.4.19	Brihaspati is indeed Brahman.
3.6.4.20	Here, having obtained all desires with Brahman, one undertakes the consecration.
3.6.4.21	Wherever his sacrifice is established, wherever it is dependent, from there, having collected everything with Brahman, he obtains the sacrifice.
3.6.4.22	One does not consecrate with a single oblation.
3.6.4.23	When he offers these, it is for the sake of the second.
3.6.4.24	Prajapati, whatever he thought, he obtained by means of the Adhītayajus.
3.6.4.25	That is why the Adhīta-yajus are called Adhīta.
3.6.4.26	He who, knowing this, offers the Adhītaya-yajus, whatever he thinks, he obtains by offering it.
3.6.4.27	These are the requisites of the sacrifice.
3.6.4.28	He who offers these oblations, indeed, performs the sacrifice with the collected materials.
3.6.4.29	This was said by Āharuṇa Aupaveśin:
3.6.4.30	"How can one perform a sacrifice without knowing the materials of the sacrifice?"
3.6.4.31	One offers with five oblations.
3.6.4.32	The sacrifice is fivefold.
3.6.4.33	One obtains the entire extent of the sacrifice.
3.6.4.34	One offers with six oblations.
3.6.4.35	The seasons are six.
3.6.4.36	He stands firm in the seasons.
3.6.4.37	The sacrifice was created.
3.6.4.38	It flowed forth as Sama, it flowed forth as Yajus.
3.6.4.39	It was held together by the Rig.
3.6.4.40	One Rig held it together.
3.6.4.41	Twelve Yajuses,
3.6.4.42	nine Sama hymns.
3.6.4.43	Therefore one recites nine hymns in the Bahispavamana.
3.6.4.44	Nine indeed, they have made him (the sacrificer) common.
3.6.4.45	Therefore, those who know the connection with Vāta offer the Udgrābhaṇa with twelve (oblations).
3.6.4.46	Twelve indeed, they have bound him with the Yajus.
3.6.4.47	Now indeed, when one is initiated, he is created.
3.6.4.48	When one offers the Udgrābhana with the Rk,
3.6.4.49	he creates the sacrifice and binds it with the Rk.
3.6.4.50	Therefore, they offer the Udgṛbhaṇa with the two verses of Āruṇi.
3.6.4.51	One verse alone has bound him.
3.6.5.1	Sacrifice is indeed Prajapati.
3.6.5.2	This is the Prajapati-related meter, the Anushtup.
3.6.5.3	When one offers with the Anushtupa, one binds him with his own meter.
3.6.5.4	One offers with one verse.
3.6.5.5	For Prajapati is one.
3.6.5.6	One offers without reciting the name.
3.6.5.7-14	Prajapati is not defined. One offers with a full (vessel). For Prajapati is full. If one were to offer with an incomplete (vessel), one would deprive one's brother of a world. But when one offers with a full vessel, one does not deprive one's brothers of a world. The full (vessel) is the form of nourishment. When one offers with a complete vessel, one places nourishment in the sacrifice.
3.6.5.15	The verse "The world is the guide of the gods" is addressed to Savitr.
3.6.5.16	"The mortal has sought friendship" is addressed to the Pitrs and the gods.
3.6.5.17	"The world is eager for wealth" is addressed to all the gods.
3.6.5.18	The verse "One chooses prosperity" is addressed to Brihaspati.
3.6.5.19	"The one who prospers" is addressed to Pusan.
3.6.5.20	The verse ending with "Svāhā" is addressed to Sarasvati.
3.6.5.21	This verse is addressed to all gods.
3.6.5.22	Therefore, this alone became the true Udgṛhṇā.
3.6.5.23	They say that the sacrifice is offered to all the deities.
3.6.5.24	This verse is indeed dedicated to all the deities,
3.6.5.25	When one offers the Udgṛhṇa with this verse,
3.6.5.26	One offers the sacrifice to all the deities.
3.6.5.27	The Anushtubh metre is the truth of this (Rgveda). There are three eight-syllabled feet and one seven-syllabled foot.
3.6.5.28	Of the seven-syllable one, four syllables are used in one foot.
3.6.5.29	Three in one.
3.6.5.30	Where four are used, that is the Jagati.
3.6.5.31	Where three, that is the Tristubh.
3.6.5.32	By the eight-syllable one it is the Gayatri.
3.6.5.33-38	Whatever is in Anushtup, that is Anushtup. Whatever is in Anushtupayoga, that is Anushṭup. Whatever belongs to Anushtup is Anushtupa. Whatever is Anushtubh, that is Anushadb. Whatever is not Anushtubha, that is not Anushtubha. Whatever is the Anushtup metre, that is Anushutab. Whatever is of Anushtup form, that is Anushka. Whatever is made of Anushtub, that is Anuska. Whatever is like Anushtup in form, that is like Anushtub. Whatever is similar to Anushtub in form, that resembles Anushtub. Translation: Whatever is in Anushṭup, that is in Anushțup. Whatever of it is in Anushthup, that is of it in Anushṭupa. Whatever belongs in Anushṭups, that belongs in Anushțups. Whatever is an Anushṭup metre, that belongs to Anushṭups. Whatever has the form of an Anushṭub, that has the form of Anushṭups Whatever is made from Anushṭups is made from Anushtups. Whatever resembles Anushṭups in form, resembles Anushṭup in form. Whatever is comparable to Anushṭup is comparable to Anushtups.
3.6.5.39-46	He made his sacrifice the same as the Pāṅkti, the rising of the Pāṅktis. Now indeed, speech is the metres. He indeed, having taken speech in the middle, has bound it. Therefore this speech speaks in the middle. For this speech is in the middle. The creator indeed, took his own daughter, the dawn. His seed fell down. The gods approached it.
3.6.5.47	Therefore the initiated one does not give or cook.
3.6.5.48	Then they approach him.
3.6.5.49	He seizes it.
3.6.5.50	That is why it is called Audgrabhan.
3.6.5.51	With that they spread out the sacrifice.
3.6.5.52	When the sacrifice first came into being, it became threefold.
3.6.5.53	It took refuge in the Rks with one-third, in the Sāmans with one-third and in the Yajuses with one-third.
3.6.5.54	The Yajus-verse was composed by him with that form of his which was dear.
3.6.5.55	The Rk is recited loudly, the Saman is chanted loudly, the Yajus is recited in a low voice.
3.6.5.56	For the dear form of the sacrifice is here.
3.6.5.57	If one were to recite the Yajus loudly, one would make the dear form of sacrifice to be lifted up.
3.6.5.58	One would become devoid of Brahmanic lustre, naked, and prone to death.
3.6.6.1	One who has established the sacred fire but does not offer the Agnihotra or perform the Darśa-Pūrṇamāsa sacrifices.
3.6.6.2	He makes the deities who are entitled to oblations think of him.
3.6.6.3	He emaciates himself.
3.6.6.4	By that alone his oblation becomes offered.
3.6.6.5	The gods, having killed the Asuras, expelled them from these worlds.
3.6.6.6	Their semen entered men.
3.6.6.7	This is the darkness within a man.
3.6.6.8	And it is like darkness within the eyes.
3.6.6.9	One should not eat it.
3.6.6.10	One removes the darkness.
3.6.6.11	When there is nothing at all within a man, when the darkness in his eyes disappears, then he is fit for sacrifice.
3.6.6.12	If one were to do it, one should do it at night.
3.6.6.13	The night is indeed darkness.
3.6.6.14	It is indeed made without the sun.
3.6.6.15	"It is indeed the speech that is being consecrated," said Āruṇi Aupaveśya. "He who anoints himself with oil and then speaks the words of consecration, he alone is consecrated."
3.6.6.16	In the evening and in the morning, the food of men is indeed the food of the gods.
3.6.6.17	Having eaten in the evening and in morning, one consecrates the vow for the exclusion of man.
3.6.6.18	"He does not eat."
3.6.6.19	The Vaikas say:
3.6.6.20	"He eats."
3.6.6.21	The men.
3.6.6.22	"He offers."
3.6.6.23	To the gods.
3.6.6.24	Or they say, "Take up this vow, O Vraty."
3.6.6.25	For this is his vow.
3.6.6.26	The sacrifice is continuous by means of the vow.
3.6.6.27	He makes the sacrifice continuous by means of vow.
3.6.6.28	The Rk and the Saman were half of the sacrifice.
3.6.6.29	Having placed those two, the two of great power, they turned back to the sacrifice.
3.6.6.30	Those two of great power became the day and the night.
3.6.6.31	This is their form, namely the black antelope skin.
3.6.6.32	What is white is the form of the day.
3.6.6.33	What is black is the form of night.
3.6.6.34	They (the two) indeed enter into the greatness of these two (the sun and the moon) for the purpose of crossing over.
3.6.6.35	"May they cross me over."
3.6.6.36	Day and night became a pair.
3.6.6.37	From them brilliance departed.
3.6.6.38	It entered the black (moon).
3.6.6.39	He indeed enters that (black moon).
3.6.6.40	Heaven and earth became a pair. From them
3.6.6.41	manliness departed.
3.6.6.42	It went into the black (moon)
3.6.6.43	That is indeed what he undertakes.
3.6.6.44	Just as one who wants to cross to the other shore of a river boards a boat, so he mounts the Ṛg and Sāman.
3.6.6.45	They lead him to the other side of the sacrifice.
3.6.6.46	From where the hair of the black antelope is, from there the sacrifice.
3.6.6.47	Where the sacrifice is, there the deities are.
3.6.6.48-54	If the hair on the outside is cut off, the initiated one would be hidden from the sacrifice. If the hair on the inside is cut off, the sacrifice would be hidden from (reaching) the deities. Two boundary lines should be marked. The initiated one would not be hidden from the (reaching of) the sacrifice. The sacrifice would not be hidden (from reaching) the deities. If there is only one (boundary line), one should mark the end.
3.6.6.55	By that alone he obtains both.
3.6.6.56	The initiated one is indeed the oblation.
3.6.6.57	If one were to sit elsewhere than the skin of a black antelope, it would be like spilled oblation.
3.6.6.58	Just as one desires expiation for spilled oblation, so they would desire expiation for him.
3.6.6.59	He ascends both the metres and the deities.
3.6.6.60	May the powerful ones repel them from you.
3.6.6.61	When he says, "Let there be salutations to you, do not harm me,"
3.6.6.62	this is a salutation for protection.
3.6.6.63	The gods are the protection of the sacrifice, the sacrifice is the protection of the sacrificer.
3.6.6.64	When he (the Adhvaryu) says, "You are the protection of Vishnu, protect me," he makes the gods the protection of the sacrificial rite, the sacrifice is protection of the sacrificers.
3.6.6.65	He moves forward.
3.6.6.66	For the initiated one is as if covered.
3.6.6.67	And this is indeed the form of the initiated one, that he is covered.
3.6.6.68	Therefore he puts on the garment.
3.6.6.69	He puts on the garment,
3.6.6.70	The garment is of all deities.
3.6.6.71	They thus cover themselves with all the deities.
3.6.7.1	When the sacrifice was created, it clung to the womb.
3.6.7.2	That became the garment of wool.
3.6.7.3	Therefore they consecrate with a kshauma (cloth), for the sake of the continuity of the sacrifice.
3.6.7.4	The wife is consecrated with the eastern measure.
3.6.7.5	The eastern measure belongs to Indra.
3.6.7.6	The strength of a woman is her offspring.
3.6.7.7	When the wife is consecrated with an eastern measure,
3.6.7.8	she places strength in her.
3.6.7.9	The consecrated one's womb is the consecrated one's measure.
3.6.7.10	The placenta is the black antelope skin.
3.6.7.11	The egg is the consecrated one’s garment.
3.6.7.12	The navel is the girdle.
3.6.7.13	The embryo is the consecrated one.
3.6.7.14	The consecrated one should place himself in his own womb.
3.6.7.15	Therefore, the consecrated one should walk in the steps of the consecrated one, not in those of the non-consecrated ones.
3.6.7.16	This is indeed his womb.
3.6.7.17	From this he is born, the embryo is the consecrated.
3.6.7.18	If one were to perform the consecration rite, the embryos would be born with their ends cut off.
3.6.7.19	If one were to smile falsely, his brilliance would be lost.
3.6.7.20	Therefore, one should not smile falsely to prevent the loss of brilliance.
3.6.7.21	The person is unborn.
3.6.7.22	He is born through the sacrifice.
3.6.7.23	He is truly born when the Soma is bought and poured out.
3.6.7.24	He proceeds from here.
3.6.7.25	Then indeed the man is born first.
3.6.7.26	He is born then, when he enters the water of the final bath.
3.6.7.27	Then he is released from that.
3.6.7.28	Prajapati created beings with the three-fold Stoma.
3.6.7.29	When the girdle is three-fold, it is for procreation.
3.6.7.30	The three-pronged thunderbolt is the belly, Vritra is sin, hunger is the enemy of man.
3.6.7.31	When he puts on the girdle, he strikes the thunderbolt at his enemy, his foe.
3.6.7.32	He should then mentally think of the one he hates.
3.6.7.33	He strikes the thunderbolt at him.
3.6.7.34	He indeed strikes.
3.6.7.35	The Angirasas, while performing the Svarya rite, dropped their girdles; from them the arrow was born.
3.6.7.36	Therefore it is made of arrow-grass.
3.6.7.37	Plants are strength.
3.6.7.38	He places strength in the middle of himself and of his offspring.
3.6.7.39	The wife is bound with a yoke, the initiated with a girdle.
3.6.7.40	And for the sake of union.
3.6.7.41	Above the navel of man is pure, below it is impure.
3.6.7.42	When one puts on the girdle, it is for the purpose of holding the pure and the impure.
3.6.7.43	When a person consecrates himself, he offers himself to the deities.
3.6.7.44	When one ties the girdle, it seems as if one is binding oneself.
3.6.7.45	Therefore, this is the food and nourishment.
3.6.7.46	For he is bound as if in distress.
3.6.7.47	Therefore, the food of one who is bound is the food of one bound.
3.6.7.48	"Just as a dog here, so is he in the other world, he who eats the food of one consecrated."
3.6.7.49	But his release is through sacrifice.
3.6.7.50	The consecrated one is indeed an oblation.
3.6.7.51	If one were to offer it, one would offer him alone.
3.6.7.52	One would be a deceiver.
3.6.7.53	All the deities are nourished by him who is consecrated.
3.6.7.54	If he were to offer it, he would deprive him of his sacrifice.
3.6.7.55	His sacrifice would be obstructed.
3.6.7.56	At the right time, he should offer all the well-prepared sacrifice to the deities.
3.6.7.57	When one is consecrated, the sin is divided into three parts.
3.6.7.58	He who eats her food is the third.
3.6.7.59	He who praises her lewdly is the third. 
3.6.7.60	Those ants that bite him are the third.
3.6.7.61	Therefore, her food is the food of the third.
3.6.7.62	One should not praise her lewdly.
3.6.7.63	One should wear the garment of the initiated.
3.6.7.64	Here are those ants that bite him.
3.6.8.1	Dakshina was among the gods, Yajna among the Asuras.
3.6.8.2	Yajna desired that Dakshina.
3.6.8.3	He turned around towards her.
3.6.8.4	She became united with him.
3.6.8.5	Indra knew, "Whoever will be born from this womb, he will be this."
3.6.8.6	Indra entered her.
3.6.8.7	Then Indra became united with her.
3.6.8.8	Then Indra was born.
3.6.8.9	When he was born, he knew, "Who will be born from this womb other than me? Who will be like me?"
3.6.8.10	He was born together with her.
3.6.8.11	Because he was born together with (her), he is called Ni-veshtata.
3.6.8.12	Because she became black when she was being born together with (him), she is called Krishna.
3.6.8.13	And he indeed seeks Indra and Dakṣiṇā.
3.6.8.14	And indeed he has obtained the womb of Indra and Dakṣinā.
3.6.8.15	And he indeed performs the sacrifice in its own womb.
3.6.8.16	He strikes the ground with the horn, saying, "May the crops be abundant."
3.6.8.17	He indeed makes his crops flourish.
3.6.8.18	He scratches with a Yajus.
3.6.8.19	For, indeed, men scratch themselves with the Yajus, for the purpose of exclusion.
3.6.8.20	One scratches oneself with the Yajush.
3.6.8.21	Therefore, the offspring of the waters are not the waters.
3.6.8.22	The offspring would be the waters if one were to scratch oneself with the Yajur.
3.6.8.23	"One scratches the head, saying, 'Make the plants very green.'
3.6.8.24	He makes the plants grasp the fruit.
3.6.8.25	Therefore plants take fruit from the head.
3.6.8.26	Speech, when created, became fourfold.
3.6.8.27	From that, what exceeded became the trees.
3.6.8.28	This is the speech of the Yakshas, the Dundubhi, the Tuṇava, and the Vīṇā.
3.6.8.29	He gives a stick.
3.6.8.30	He gives him that very speech.
3.6.8.31	Then he gives him the thunderbolt for protection.
3.6.8.32	He gives it to one who is of the same height as himself.
3.6.8.33	For this much does this speech speak.
3.6.8.34	And this much does speech accomplish.
3.6.8.35	If he were to give it to one who was taller, the Maitrāvaruṇa would divide his speech.
3.6.8.36	He gives him to the Maitrāvaruņa at the Svāṃśutyā.
3.6.8.37	The Maitrāvaruṇa priest distributes it among the Hotr, Potṛ and Neṣṭṛ priests on the next day.
3.6.8.38	"It goes to the Āhavanīya fire along with the Vasat-utterance, with the words, "Hotr, offer! Potṛ, offer! Neṣṭṛ, offer!"
3.6.8.39	The Adhvaryu priest distributes it in front."
3.6.8.40	"The Adhvaryū priest distributes the speech in front with the words, "Hotr, offer, Potṛ, offer, Neṣṭṛ offer!" The Maitrāvaruṇā priest distributes it from behind."
3.6.8.41	"Svāhā to the sacrifice in the mind!"
3.6.8.42	They approach the sacrifice with their minds.
3.6.8.43	He obtains the sacrifice from that very (place).
3.6.8.44	"Svāhā to heaven, svāhā to earth."
3.6.8.45	Heaven and earth are connected with the sacrifice in the intermediate space.
3.6.8.46	He obtains sacrifice from that very place.
3.6.8.47	"Svāha to the sky from the sky."
3.6.8.48	The sacrifice is in the sky.
3.6.8.49	If it is wind, if it is cattle, he obtains the sacrifice from there.
3.6.8.50	"Svāhā from the wind I take hold of, svāhā."
3.6.8.51	This indeed is the one who purifies, this is the sacrifice, he has obtained it.
3.6.8.52	He restrains speech.
3.6.8.53	He restraineth indeed the sacrifice.
3.6.8.54	If he were to release speech, he would release the sacrifice.
3.6.8.55	They say, "Having again initiated, speech should be restrained."
3.6.8.56	If he were again to initiate, he would exceed the oblations.
3.6.8.57-65	The Vaisnawi (hymn) should be recited and then the speech should be stopped. Vishnu is the sacrifice. He has obtained the sacrifice. The Agniavaishnavi (hymn) is to be recited and then speech should be stopped Agni is all the deities. Vishnu, the sacrifice. Deities and sacrifice have been obtained. The Sarasvati (hymn) being recited, speech should be stopped.
3.6.9.4	He announces him to the gods alone.
3.6.9.5	He says it three times.
3.6.9.6	The gods are three times as many.
3.6.9.7	Or these three worlds are three.
3.6.9.8	He announces him to these worlds.
3.6.9.9	Therefore they hear the initiated one from afar.
3.6.9.10	For he announces him to these two worlds.
3.6.9.11	Having seen the constellation, he releases speech.
3.6.9.12	Two seasons, day and night.
3.6.9.13	Having reached another season, he releases speech.
3.6.9.14	He releases speech, saying, "I am observing a vow."
3.6.9.15	For this is a vow.
3.6.9.16	The sacrifice is continuous through the vow.
3.6.9.17	He makes the sacrifice continuous through the vow.
3.6.9.18	"With the Yajus formula, 'The divine mind, the divine thought,' he touches the hands. With the Yajus, men touch (each other). For distinction, for being with Brahman and the gods.
3.6.9.19	And, 'May the waters not carry away my consecration.'
3.6.9.20	Indeed, food was generated for men.
3.6.9.21	The gods desired to give it to men.
3.6.9.22	Then the waters said, "We will purify this for you. Come back."
3.6.9.23	Then food returned to men.
3.6.9.24	This food is held by men.
3.6.9.25	Therefore, a Brahmin should be fed.
3.6.9.26	One should not wash one's hands after feeding.
3.6.9.27	For the purpose of securing food.
3.6.9.28	Or, he purifies himself for food.
3.6.9.29	The gods who are born of mind, who are yoked with mind, he makes the vow. These indeed are the gods who are born from mind, who are joined with mind, these are the breaths here in him.
3.6.9.30	He pleases her.
3.6.9.31	He makes the vow in her.
3.6.9.32	If he were to make the vow otherwise, he would injure him with the breaths.
3.6.9.33	He would be a deceiver.
3.6.9.34	"If one is going to sleep, or has slept, or is waking up, or if one is speaking in the course of an initiation, one should say, 'You are the guardian of the vow, O Agni.'
3.6.9.35	Agni is the guardian of the vows of the gods.
3.6.9.36	Therefore one takes the vow from him alone.
3.6.9.37	One should not lie down with the arms outstretched.
3.6.9.38	If one were to lie down with the limbs outstretched, these worlds would collapse.
3.6.9.39	One should turn away from Agni.
3.6.9.40	If the sacrifice were to be turned away, it would be turned away.
3.6.9.41	The sun should not rise or set for one who has been initiated, except for one who has measured the distance.
3.6.9.42	That is the vow of one who has been consecrated.
3.6.9.43	Indeed, the sacrifice did not succeed for the gods.
3.6.9.44	It was made to succeed by servants.
3.6.9.45	One who serves for a salary does so for the sake of the success of the sacrifice.
3.6.9.46	If he were to say, "Sing as much as is in the Soma," it would be just that much and no more.
3.6.9.47	When he says, "More to bear," it is for the restriction of the unlimited.
3.6.9.48	"The god Savitar, the giver of wealth, is the giver of wealth," he takes them back with these deities for the non-injury of himself.
3.6.9.49	Vayu is the protector, Tvashtri is the lord.
3.6.9.50	Pūṣan is the receiver.
3.6.9.51	He made Vayu the protector, Tvaṣṭṛ the lord, and Pūṣan the receiver.
3.6.9.52	The waters are the sacrifice.
3.6.9.53	If one who is consecrated were to enter the waters, he would diminish the sacrifice.
3.6.9.54	When he says, "The divine waters, from the feet of the waters,"
3.6.9.55	He does not transgress that which is sacrificial and pure among them.
3.6.9.56	If a consecrated person were to bathe in the waters, they would become agitated.
3.6.9.57	Therefore, one should not bathe.
3.6.9.58	If one were to bathe, one would cross by breaking the ice.
3.6.9.59	One crosses that very bridge.
3.6.9.60	The deities do not cross with a consecrated person who is crossing.
3.6.9.61	One crosses with the fire-sticks.
3.6.9.62	One crosses together with the deities.
3.6.9.63	The sacrifice does not follow the initiated one who is crossing.
3.6.9.64	One crosses with the axle of the chariot.
3.6.9.65	One crosses together with the sacrifice.
3.6.10.1	All the words go to this sun or to all.
3.6.10.2	They are released when they rise.
3.6.10.3	When he says, "Those which are of the animals in the bull," he again offers the speech which is being released.
3.6.10.4	"He directs her to Vayu, if she is lost; to Varuna, if she is drowned in water; to Rudra, if she is killed by a great god; to Nirriti, if she is dead; to Indra, if she is struck by lightning; to the Maruts, if she is slain by a thunderbolt.
3.6.10.5	These gods are servants, having lost their share.
3.6.10.6	He pleases them.
3.6.10.7	The gifts given to the gods are different from those given to men.
3.6.10.8	These are the gifts given to the Gods.
3.6.10.9	By these one gains more.
3.6.10.10	Than by others.
3.6.10.11	The gods and the Asuras were in competition.
3.6.10.12	The sacrifice then consisted only of the Agnihotra, the Darsa-Pūrṇamāsa and the Cāturmāsya sacrifices.
3.6.10.13	The gods saw the sacrifice.
3.6.10.14	They consecrated themselves.
3.6.10.15	What was their Agnihotra, that they took as a vow.
3.6.10.16	Therefore one should be doubly vowed.
3.6.10.17	For the Agnihotra is offered twice.
3.6.10.18	Whatever offering was made to Agni-Soma on the full-moon day, they offered the animal to Agni-Soma the previous day.
3.6.10.19	Whatever offering was made to Indra-Agni on the new-moon day, that to Agni the next day.
3.6.10.20	They performed the Visvadev offering at the morning pressing, the Varuna-prastha offerings at the midday pressing, the Sākamedha offerings at the evening pressing, and the Pitryajna.
3.6.10.21	The Tryambakas are the third pressing.
3.6.10.22	Therefore, at the third pressing, the entire form is praised.
3.6.10.23	For this is the entire form.
3.6.10.24	The Asuras followed their sacrifice.
3.6.10.25	They drove them away with that.
3.6.10.26	Then the gods became victorious over the Asuras.
3.6.10.27	He who knows this becomes the self.
3.6.10.28	His foe becomes defeated.
3.6.10.29	They went away, saying, "This is not the sacrifice."
3.6.10.30	That is why the sacrifice is called "adhwara."
3.6.10.31	Therefore one should be of one vow.
3.6.10.32	For the Agnihotra is offered only once.
3.7.1.1	This was not properly arranged.
3.7.1.2	The directions did not know each other.
3.7.1.3	The gods desired each other.
3.7.1.4	They did not find it.
3.7.1.5	The gods said to Aditi, "With your mouth we shall know the directions."
3.7.1.6	She said, "Let me have a share."
3.7.1.7	They said, "Choose."
3.7.1.8	She said (to them), "Let the Pravargya be dedicated to me.
3.7.1.9	Let the Udayaniya be dedicated to me,
3.7.1.10	Let you go to me.
3.7.1.11	May you go to me."
3.7.1.12	This is the oblation of the sun.
3.7.1.13	They are following Aditi, they are following Aditi.
3.7.1.14	From there they knew these directions.
3.7.1.15	He offers to Pathya.
3.7.1.16	By that he knew this direction.
3.7.1.17	Because of Agni.
3.7.1.18	By that this.
3.7.1.19	Because of Soma.
3.7.1.20	By that, this.
3.7.1.21	Because Savitar.
3.7.1.22	By that.
3.7.1.23-31	That which is Aditi. This is Aditi. The direction above is hers. By that he knew the direction above. From that it became established. The Pravargya is for the establishment of what is not yet established. He who, knowing this, performs the Pravargya, becomes established. The seasons become established for him. From that they saw these directions.
3.7.1.32	In which he offers the Pathya oblation.
3.7.1.33	He saw this direction by that.
3.7.1.34	In which Agni and Soma.
3.7.1.35	Agni and Soma are the eyes.
3.7.1.36	He saw them by following them.
3.7.1.37	In which Savitar.
3.7.1.38	He saw these directions by being impelled by Savitar.
3.7.1.39	In which Aditi.
3.7.1.40	Aditi is this (earth).
3.7.1.41	Having established themselves in this (earth), the gods performed the sacrifice.
3.7.1.42	When one offers to Pathya,
3.7.1.43	Pathya is speech.
3.7.1.44	One obtains speech.
3.7.1.45	When to Agni,
3.7.1.46	one obtains the deity by that.
3.7.1.47	When to Soma,
3.7.1.48	one obtains sacrifice by that.
3.7.1.49	 When to Savitar,
3.7.1.50	for propagation.
3.7.1.51	When to Aditi,
3.7.1.52	Aditi is these creatures.
3.7.1.53	One obtains them.
3.7.1.54	Those are the first ones not performed.
3.7.1.55	Whatever is within the sacrifice, that is the hole.
3.7.1.56	Through that the sacrifice flows.
3.7.1.57	Through that, the sacrificer offers to Agni.
3.7.1.58	Agni is the Samishti.
3.7.1.59	Agni the established.
3.7.1.60	One offers to Agni first and Agni last through the Samishti and the established.
3.7.1.61	This is the same deity for the fivefold (sacrifice).
3.7.1.62	The sacrifice is fivefold.
3.7.1.63	He attains the sacrifice as much as it is.
3.7.1.64	He offers the Svästi (oblation) for the prosperity of the sacrifice.
3.7.1.65	He offers to Pathya.
3.7.1.66	Pathya is speech.
3.7.1.67	They approach speech.
3.7.1.68	He offers it as the last on the Udayaniya (day).
3.7.1.69	Pathya is indeed speech.
3.7.1.70	They ascend speech.
3.7.1.71	The verses to Maruts are to Pathya.
3.7.2.3	The five seasons and the twelve months are the year.
3.7.2.4	From the year itself, the mouth of the sacrifice is extended.
3.7.2.5	They say, "The Samidheni verses should be fifteen, not seventeen."
3.7.2.6	"The seventeen should be for the year-long Ayana, for the prosperity of the year."
3.7.2.7	That should not be guarded.
3.7.2.8	The Samidhenis should be fifteen.
3.7.2.9	The Pravargya should be without the Anuyajas, like the Prayajas.
3.7.2.10	The Udayaniya should be without the Prayajas, like the Anuyajas.
3.7.2.11	The Prayajas and Anuyajas are both included in the sacrifice.
3.7.2.12	For this sacrifice is one and the same.
3.7.2.13	He places the strainer and the ladle.
3.7.2.14	By that the sacrifice is continuous.
3.7.2.15	The Prayaja are the self, the Anuyajas are the offspring.
3.7.2.16	The Devakṣetra.
3.7.2.17	When the sacrifice approaches the Devakṣetra, it obstructs the creatures. If it obstructs the Anuyājas,
3.7.2.18	it should be like the Prāyaṇīya. The Udayaniya should be like the Anuyāja.
3.7.2.19	It should be like the Udayaniya. The Prāyaṇīyas should be like the Prayāja.
3.7.2.20	The Prāyaṇīyās should be like the Payas. The Udayaniyas should be like Payas.
3.7.2.21	This is the bright part of the waters.
3.7.2.22	He wins the very bright (light) of the waters.
3.7.2.23	Cattle are the very bright (thing).
3.7.2.24	He wins cattle.
3.7.2.25	And also he places cattle in the going forth and in the coming back.
3.7.2.26	The going forth should be to the sun, the coming back to the sun.
3.7.2.27	Aditi is this (earth).
3.7.2.28	Here he stands with the mouth of sacrifice, above here.
3.7.2.29	Where the sacrifice is performed in two parts, it is performed in the beginning, and it is performed in completion.
3.7.2.30	The Prāyaniya (Sutra) is to be established for the completion of the sacrifice.
3.7.2.31	The Anuvākyās of the Prāyaniya should be the Yājyās of the Udayaniya.
3.7.2.32	The Anuvaākyās of Udayaniya should be the Yājyas of the Prāyanīya for the recognition of the path.
3.7.2.33	Then for the sake of continuity.
3.7.2.34	If they were to do otherwise, they would be doing something wrong.
3.7.3.1	This is indeed Kadru.
3.7.3.2	Speech is Suparni.
3.7.3.3	The metres are the Suparna ones: the Gāyatrī, the Tristubh, and the Jagatī.
3.7.3.4	She, Kadru, conquered Suparni as her own self.
3.7.3.5	She said, "Bring Soma."
3.7.3.6	"With that, redeem yourself."
3.7.3.7	She went forth to the metres, and brought Soma from afar.
3.7.3.8	"Let him redeem me with that!"
3.7.3.9	Then the Jagati fell down.
3.7.3.10	It came with the animals and with consecration.
3.7.3.11	Therefore they call the Jagati "animals."
3.7.3.12	Therefore when one obtains animals, then he consecrates.
3.7.3.13	Then the Tristubh fell down.
3.7.3.14	She came with Dakshina and Tapas.
3.7.3.15	Therefore, Dakshina is given in the world of Tristubh.
3.7.3.16	Therefore, it is said that Tapas is to be performed at midday.
3.7.3.17	Then Gayatri descended.
3.7.3.18	She brought Soma.
3.7.3.19	While it was being brought, the Gandharva Vishavasu stole it.
3.7.3.20	He stayed for three nights after being brought.
3.7.3.21	Therefore, he dwells for three nights as a purchased (slave).
3.7.3.22	They said, "We will ask again."
3.7.3.23	The gods said, "Gandharvas are desirous of women."
3.7.3.24	Having collected speech, they said, "We shall redeem him with that which is most pleasing to a woman."
3.7.3.25	They redeemed him.
3.7.3.26	Therefore, they say, "Speech is the price for Soma."
3.7.3.27	This is the price for speech, they say.
3.7.3.28	They said, "Let us follow the truth."
3.7.3.29	They followed the truth.
3.7.3.30	That is the origin of falsehood.
3.7.3.31	He who knows this and speaks the truth or falsehood does not get hurt.
3.7.3.32	They said "Let us cry out."
3.7.3.33	They cried out.
3.7.3.34	The gods sang a verse, Brahma and the Gandharvas spoke.
3.7.3.35	She returned to the gods.
3.7.3.36	Therefore, a verse is sung at a wedding.
3.7.3.37	Therefore, one who sings is dear to a woman.
3.7.3.38	He who knows this and sings, taking her hand,
3.7.3.39	He indeed ages together with her.
3.7.3.40	All life is from here.
3.7.3.41	He is not led to distress.
3.7.3.42	They say that she indeed went back again.
3.7.3.43	"The Soma-purchasing cow is not of any particular colour."
3.7.4.1	The cow which is of two colours is the Vārtraghni.
3.7.4.2	If one were to buy with her, his kingdom would be destroyed.
3.7.4.3	If one has a cow which is of such a colour, then the other one is killed.
3.7.4.4	The cow which has black skin, black hair, and black hoofs, is of the Pitrs.
3.7.4.5	If she is bought by that, the sacrificer would be short-lived.
3.7.4.6	If the one who is bought by that has such a form, then another one of them dies in the season.
3.7.4.7	The one who is bought for Soma should have the form of a reddish-brown-haired one, with white appearance, and pure eyes.
3.7.4.8	It is bought with its own form.
3.7.4.9	It should be without horns, without a cleft in the hoof, and with seven hooves.
3.7.4.10	and so is bought with all (the Soma).
3.7.4.11	It is bought with one year.
3.7.4.12	Soma is bought with speech.
3.7.4.13	Therefore, in a year, offspring speak.
3.7.4.14	It is bought in water.
3.7.4.15	Soma is plants.
3.7.4.16	Water is the juice of plants.
3.7.4.17	So that juice is bought.
3.7.4.18	"When buying Soma, I shall obtain the third pressing," so said Āruṇi Aupaveśya.
3.7.4.19	The third pressing is indeed cattle.
3.7.4.20	The skin is of cattle.
3.7.4.21	When he pours on the skin, he thereby obtains the third pressing.
3.7.4.22	He pours on a red (skin).
3.7.4.23	Therefore the colour of cattle is red.
3.7.4.24	He pours (Soma) on a black-spotted (skin).
3.7.4.25	The bull is the most virile of all the animals.
3.7.4.26	He obtains all the virile animals.
3.7.4.27	And he obtains much of the sacrifice.
3.7.4.28	They separate Soma for the removal of sin.
3.7.4.29	And they purify him for the gods.
3.7.4.30	The Adhvaryu should not mix Soma, nor the sacrificer, nor the sacrificers' men.
3.7.4.31	Those who are watching should not be mixed.
3.7.4.32	If those who are watching are mixed, they would lead the creatures to hunger.
3.7.4.33	The Adhvaryu would take the sacrificer to the wrong path, and the sacrificer would be hungry.
3.7.4.34	He should say, "Purify the Soma that has been brought in."
3.7.4.35	The Soma that has been drunk is indeed swallowed.
3.7.4.36	Those who separate the Soma from the Soma-juice swallow the Soma that has been swallowed.
3.7.4.37	Therefore, those who sell Soma, though they buy much and get much, are greedy.
3.7.4.38	For they swallow the Soma that is swallowed.
3.7.4.39	"Thou art mine."
3.7.4.40	This is his protection.
3.7.4.41	"The planets are yours, O Shukra," (thus) he takes Shukra.
3.7.4.42	"Him, the god Savitar, I invoke."
3.7.4.43	He takes it with the impulse of Savitar.
3.7.4.44	He takes it by the Atichandas metre.
3.7.4.45	All the metres are Atichandas.
3.7.4.46	He takes him with all the metres.
3.7.4.47	This is the armour of the metres.
3.7.4.48	He makes him go to the highest among his equals.
3.7.4.49	He takes it with five (verses).
3.7.4.50	The sacrifice is fivefold.
3.7.4.51	He obtains as much as the sacrifice is.
3.7.4.52	He measures each one by leaving out one.
3.7.4.53	He measures by what is not yet measured and what is already measured.
3.7.4.54	This much is the strength of each one of them.
3.7.4.55-64	Therefore he stretches them out and draws them in as he pleases. He measures ten times. The Viraj has ten syllables. He attains the Viraj. And the cattle are the Viraj. He wins cattle. He takes it twice. There are two Savanas. Whatever Soma is taken, that belongs to the sacrificer. What he presses, that belongs to his fellow-sacrificers.
3.7.4.65	He recites, "For the offspring."
3.7.4.66	For the offspring indeed move from one family to another.
3.7.4.67	Soma is the plants.
3.7.4.68	Life is unlimited.
3.7.4.69	If he were to take it in a limited quantity, life would be limited.
3.7.4.70	Therefore, when he recites, it is for the securing of the unlimited.
3.7.4.71	The sacrificer is indeed Prajapati.
3.7.4.72	The offspring are the portions.
3.7.4.73	When he puts on the Soma-cloth, he puts on the life of the creatures.
3.7.4.74	When he says, "May the creatures follow you," he has established life in them.
3.7.4.75	He puts on a silken cloth.
3.7.4.76	Silken cloth is indeed a herb.
3.7.4.77	The herbs are the source of Soma.
3.7.4.78	He places him in his own source.
3.7.4.79	When the sacrifice first went to the gods, the Raksases attacked it.
3.7.4.80	It (the sacrifice) moved away from the gods.
3.7.4.81	The garment is dedicated to all the gods.
3.7.4.82	When one puts on a woolen garment,
3.7.4.83	one drives away the Raksases from the sacrifice with all the deities.
3.7.4.84	And indeed, one makes the sacrifice complete with all the deities.
3.7.5.1	The ghee is taken in four spoonfuls.
3.7.5.2	Animals have four feet.
3.7.5.3	He indeed wins animals.
3.7.5.4	Having placed gold, he offers.
3.7.5.5	Ghee is Agni's.
3.7.5.6	Gold is born of Agni.
3.7.5.7	It is offered with the same body and brilliance.
3.7.5.8	This is indeed Agni's dear body, namely ghee.
3.7.5.9	Gold is brilliance.
3.7.5.10	When one offers having placed gold,
3.7.5.11	one enhances the dear body of Agni with brilliance.
3.7.5.12	And indeed, one makes it grasp the forms.
3.7.5.13	Cattle are ghee.
3.7.5.14	Semen is gold.
3.7.5.15	When one offers having placed the gold,
3.7.5.16	one places the semen in the cattle.
3.7.5.17	Therefore, from that non-bone semen, animals are born with bones.
3.7.5.18	One offers with a bound (animal).
3.7.5.19	Therefore, the foetuses of animals are not miscarried.
3.7.5.20	If one were to offer with an unbound (animal), the foetuses would be miscarried.
3.7.5.21	"One says, 'You are a swift one."
3.7.5.22	What indeed is swift?
3.7.5.23	'Thus it is, thus it is.'
3.7.5.24	This is its invocation.
3.7.5.25	"It is held in the mind."
3.7.5.26	For indeed, speech is held by the mind.
3.7.5.27	"It has been enjoyed by Vishnu."
3.7.5.28	He has made it enjoyed by Vishnu for the sacrifice.
3.7.5.29	"Its offspring is true, its offspring is true."
3.7.5.30	For indeed what is produced is produced by speech.
3.7.5.31	"May it be the instrument of the body, svāhā." He prays for a blessing.
3.7.5.32	"Thou art the semen, thou art the moon," he says, for the completion of the heavenly world.
3.7.5.33	The Soma-purchasing is speech.
3.7.5.34	It indeed teaches her.
3.7.5.35	Therefore, having created offspring, they are born.
3.7.5.36	The calf, being born, desires the teat.
3.7.5.37	The boy desires the teat. The boy desires the teat
3.7.5.38	"Thou art the mind," he says.
3.7.5.39	Whatever one does with the mind,
3.7.5.40	"Thus, thus, thus, thus."
3.7.5.41	This is her mind.
3.7.5.42	"She is the mind."
3.7.5.43	What one thinks with the mind, what one approaches with the mind, that one speaks with the voice.
3.7.5.44	"She has wisdom."
3.7.5.45	What one meditates on.
3.7.5.46	"Thus, thus, this, thus."
3.7.5.47	That is her wisdom.
3.7.5.48	"She gives Dakṣiṇā."
3.7.5.49	What is given by speech, that is its dakṣiṇā-ness.
3.7.5.50	"What is the sacrifice?"
3.7.5.51	Speech is the sacrifice.
3.7.5.52	"What are the Kshatriyas?"
3.7.5.53	He whom speech approves, he is a Kshatriya.
3.7.5.54	"Aditi is the one with two heads."
3.7.5.55	What is the Aditi-sacrifice? The Aditi-sacrifice is the one that is offered at the beginning and at the end. That is its two-headedness.
3.7.5.56	May it be for us the auspicious dawn, the auspicious evening.
3.7.5.57	For this is the auspicious dawn at the Pravargya, and the auspicious evening at the Udayaniya.
3.7.6.1	If one were to buy with a horn held to the ear, it would be for the destruction of enemies.
3.7.6.2	If with a horn pointed out, it would be dedicated to the human deities.
3.7.6.3	If with the foot bound, it would be to the Pitrs.
3.7.6.4	If without binding, it would be too long.
3.7.6.5-11	He says, "May Mitra bind thee in the place," he thus binds it with the noose of Mitra. "May Pusan protect the way," he says. This (earth) is Pusan. He thus makes this (earth) to bring together his way. "To Indra, the overlord," he says. For Indra is the most powerful among the gods. He thus made him his overlord.
3.7.6.12	"May your mother and father approve of you."
3.7.6.13	He buys him with the approval of his mother, father, brother, and friend.
3.7.6.14	"O goddess, may you reach the god."
3.7.6.15	For she is a goddess and he is the god Soma.
3.7.6.16	"Soma for Indra."
3.7.6.17	For he reaches Soma for Indra.
3.7.6.18	"May Rudra turn you around."
3.7.6.19	He places her beyond Rudra.
3.7.6.20	May Soma, your friend, return to you in safety.
3.7.6.21	He has obtained it directly.
3.7.6.22	He is indeed offering the animals to Rudra.
3.7.6.23	When he says, "May Rudra turn you back,"
3.7.6.24	and when he says, "Soma, your friend, may return to you in safely," he is indeed offering safety to him who has returned.
3.7.6.25	The Soma-purchasing cow is indeed speech.
3.7.6.26	It enters the forms of the gods.
3.7.6.27	What he says, "You are Vasu, you are Rudra."
3.7.6.28	"You are this, you are that."
3.7.6.29	This is what she says to him, whatever he does.
3.7.6.30	Whatever he says, whatever he does, he obtains her.
3.7.6.31	He goes out in six steps.
3.7.6.32	Speech is divided into six days.
3.7.6.33	Speech does not exceed the sixth day.
3.7.6.34	All speech is attained on the sixth day.
3.7.6.35	One attains as much as there is of speech.
3.7.6.36	One emerges following the right half with the right half.
3.7.6.37	Therefore, food is eaten with the right hand.
3.7.6.38	Therefore, the right half of the body is more vigorous.
3.7.6.39	Therefore the birds turn to the right.
3.7.6.40	He offers on the seventh step.
3.7.6.41	There are seven metres.
3.7.6.42	The metres are speech.
3.7.6.43	He wins as much as speech by means of the offering.
3.7.6.44	There are the seven metres.
3.7.6.45	There are (the seven) Hotras.
3.7.6.46	There are these seven domestic animals.
3.7.6.47	He wins those animals.
3.7.6.48	"May Brihaspati delight thee with good wishes."
3.7.6.49	Brihaspati is indeed Brahman.
3.7.6.50	He bestows it on her by means of Brahman.
3.7.6.51	"Rudra with the Vasus has made it."
3.7.6.52	He makes her maker Rudra with the Vasu.
3.7.6.53	"I have sought thee on the head of the earth."
3.7.6.54	This indeed is the head of the Earth, namely the place of sacrifice.
3.7.6.55	This is the place of Ida.
3.7.6.56	Ida is a cow.
3.7.6.57	This is her place.
3.7.6.58	By means of the Svāhā-form, he offers her.
3.7.7.1	Having placed gold, he offers.
3.7.7.2	He offers in Agni-rich, in the place of abode.
3.7.7.3	If one were to offer in a place without abode, the Adhvaryu would be blind.
3.7.7.4	Cattle are ghee.
3.7.7.5	Cattle are the place.
3.7.7.6	The thunderbolt is the spade.
3.7.7.7	When he draws a line with the spade or with the thunderbolt, he thereby encloses the animals for the sacrificer.
3.7.7.8	He draws a line with a horn.
3.7.7.9	He thereby encloses animals of the same kind.
3.7.7.10	He pours the line into a vessel.
3.7.7.11	This is his share.
3.7.7.12	This is the source of animals.
3.7.7.13	He places them in their own womb.
3.7.7.14	The animals are indeed distressed when they are cut off from the womb.
3.7.7.15	When one sprinkles water,
3.7.7.16	one pacifies (them).
3.7.7.17	He gives a place to the sacrificer.
3.7.7.18	Then the Adhvaryu becomes without animals.
3.7.7.19	For he has given the animals to the sacrificer.
3.7.7.20-25	When he says, "For thy wealth," he distributes the animals among the Adhvaryu. With that the Adhvaryus, having animals, place their feet in the houses. He places the animals in the houses. The Ahavaniya is the heavenly world. If one were to place the Ahavaniya, he would place the animals in another world. One places the Garhapatya.
3.7.7.26	The cattle stand on the Gārhapatya, on the high ground.
3.7.7.27	He thus places him in the right position with the cattle.
3.7.7.28	Cattle are the foot.
3.7.7.29	Agni is Rudra.
3.7.7.30	If one were to place him near Agni, he would give his cattle to Rudra.
3.7.7.31	Where there is peace, that is the place to be placed, to prevent the cattle from being given away.
3.7.7.32	With the Soma-purchasing (verse) they curse the wife for the sake of union.
3.7.7.33	"With the verse, 'You are the one with the mind of Tvashtra.'
3.7.7.34	For Tvashtra indeed fashions forms.
3.7.7.35	With the verse, '(May we) be together.'
3.7.7.36	For together with a foot, offspring are born.
3.7.7.37	With the words, 'The eye of the sun has ascended.'
3.7.7.38	This indeed is the path of the unseen, by which the sun moves.
3.7.7.39	He chooses this path of the sun.
3.7.7.40	"He says, "I obtain wealth."
3.7.7.41	For he who buys Soma obtains wealth."
3.7.7.42	"He says to the seller of Soma, "I buy Soma from you, a great, worthy, and beautiful one."
3.7.7.43	"I buy it from you for a price."
3.7.7.44	"I am buying it from you for (a price) in kind."
3.7.7.45	"I'm buying it from you with a hoof."
3.7.7.46	"I buying it from you by a step."
3.7.7.47	He proclaims the greatness of the cow.
3.7.7.48	He indeed magnifies it.
3.7.7.49	Or he measures the sacrifice in syllables.
3.7.7.50	"The good, the black, the charcoal, the black-coloured" - these are the Soma-guardians of the gods.
3.7.7.51	From them the metres brought down the Soma.
3.7.7.52	He directs them towards them.
3.7.7.53	And whatever of the sacrifice is connected with this, that he buys back.
3.7.7.54	He buys back with ten (coins).
3.7.7.55	The Viraj has ten syllables.
3.7.7.56	Thus one becomes Viraj.
3.7.7.57	He buys with eleven (coins).
3.7.7.58	There are ten breaths in an animal.
3.7.7.59	The self is the eleventh.
3.7.7.60	Thus one is made complete.
3.7.7.61	He buys (the animal) with a cow.
3.7.7.62	He buys it with the head.
3.7.7.63	Or else he takes speech itself.
3.7.7.64	He buys with gold.
3.7.7.65	He buys his brightness.
3.7.7.66	Or else he takes brightness itself.
3.7.7.67	He buvs with a garment.
3.7.7.68	He buys for him all the deities.
3.7.7.69	He buys (it) with a goat.
3.7.7.70	He buys its heat.
3.7.7.71	Where the eight metres brought Soma, they did not know him in darkness.
3.7.7.72-81	Then Gayatri, taking the goat, flew up. She announced it to them. Then the metres brought Soma. That is why it is called Soma. It is called a goat. One buys a goat. He buys it from Agni. He buys with a bull. He buys Indra.
3.7.7.82	If he buys with a bull, he buys with Prajapati.
3.7.7.83	He should buy with a young calf or a bull.
3.7.7.84	He buys the day with Indra.
3.7.7.85	He does not buy with Prajapati (the sun).
3.7.7.86	He buys with a pair of cows.
3.7.7.87	He buys a pair for him.
3.7.8.1	Soma was here.
3.7.8.2	Those gods sent forth Gāyatrī, saying, "Bring this Soma."
3.7.8.3	She saw the sacrifice spread out.
3.7.8.4	She thought, "If I enter the sacrifice, I will enter myself."
3.7.8.5	Soma told her this, her life-grasp:
3.7.8.6	"You are your own, you are your own."
3.7.8.7	This is Soma's life-grasp.
3.7.8.8	This is Soma's life-grasping.
3.7.8.9	He who knows this does not suffer misfortune while being an Adhvaryu.
3.7.8.10	Now he is indeed Varuna, for when he is tied up, Varuna may enter him.
3.7.8.11	When he says, "O Mitra, come, for the sake of good friendship," he makes him a friend.
3.7.8.12	He pacifies.
3.7.8.13	"Indra's right thigh."
3.7.8.14	The sacrifice is Indra's.
3.7.8.15	Indra is the womb of Soma.
3.7.8.16	He places him in his own womb.
3.7.8.17	Indra caught him when he came forward and fell on his thighs.
3.7.8.18	He attains that resemblance of the thighs.
3.7.8.19	He makes it flow.
3.7.8.20	As one makes it flow for the sake of prosperity, so does this.
3.7.8.21	"O Urva, do thou sprinkle the atmosphere."
3.7.8.22	Now this (atmosphere) is indeed the deity of the atmosphere.
3.7.8.23	It has fallen from here and has not yet reached there.
3.7.8.24	"Do thou sit always on Aditi."
3.7.8.25	The sun indeed is the sacrifice.
3.7.8.26	Aditi is the womb of Soma.
3.7.8.27	He places him in his own womb.
3.7.8.28	He makes him who is Varuna, a friend.
3.7.8.29	He thus makes him prosper by his own deity.
3.7.8.30	He says, "The bull has established the sky, has measured the atmosphere, has taken the extent of the earth, has become the overlord of all the worlds. All those are the vows of Varuna." He makes him Varuna himself.
3.7.8.31	He makes him prosper by the same deity.
3.7.8.32	"He has spread the atmosphere in the forests."
3.7.8.33-37	He covers himself with a garment. The garment is dedicated to all the deities. He covers the sacrifice with all the deities. He says, "You are the broom, sweep, sweep." For the sweeping away of the demons, for the removal of the demons. "You are Varuna's, Varuna may support you."
3.7.8.38	For now he is indeed under the sway of Varuna.
3.7.8.39	They carry it with the Anasā vessel.
3.7.8.40	They carry the greatness of it.
3.7.8.41	They carry with the Anasä vessel.
3.7.8.42	Therefore the fruits of plants ripen when they are carried by the Anasā.
3.7.8.43	If they were to carry the Soma bought with the head, the fruits of plants would ripen when they are taken away with the head.
3.7.8.44	Therefore, the plants are nourished by speech, and the fruit of the head ripens.
3.7.8.45	For the Soma is brought with the head.
3.7.8.46	"Go forth, O Lord of the World!"
3.7.8.47	For he is indeed the Lord of the beings.
3.7.8.48	"All the abodes!"
3.7.8.49	For he indeed goes forth to all the abodes.
3.7.8.50	May no one injure thee, may no one injure thee. May the wolves, the evil-doers, not find thee.
3.7.8.51	When he was being brought hither, the Gandharva Visvavasu seized him. From such as these he has made him safe through fear.
3.7.8.52	This is the ransom of the sacrificer's house.
3.7.8.53-58	That lord, being unpacified, would injure the sacrificer. What he says, "Salutations to Mitra and Varuna with the eye," he pacifies. He is pacified and is led for the non-injury of the sacrificer. He is led for the sake of all deities. If he were to stand with one Ulmuka, his sacrifice would be dedicated to the Pitrs. Agni is the great deity to be pacified.
3.7.8.59	Agni is all the deities.
3.7.8.60	He thus stands firm with all the deities at the sacrifice.
3.7.8.61	Agni and Soma are indeed generated together.
3.7.8.62	They may be generated for the sacrificer or for the sacrificer's cattle.
3.7.8.63	They are generated for the share of that animal which is to be offered.
3.7.8.64	The gods, when the animal was being held, did not approach it.
3.7.8.65	At this sacrifice, the Agni-Soma approached the one who was hoping for it, and that other one.
3.7.8.66	Therefore this (animal) is for Agni-Soma.
3.7.8.67	One who initiates himself offers himself to Agni-Soma for wisdom.
3.7.8.68	He himself redeems himself with this very animal.
3.7.8.69	One should be fat and strong for the redemption of oneself.
3.7.8.70	Therefore, one should not eat the meat of the animal dedicated to Agni-Soma.
3.7.8.71	For a man redeems himself with it.
3.7.8.72	Therefore, when the animal dedicated to Agnisomiya is finished, one should not be eaten in the house of the sacrificer.
3.7.8.73-79	Then he is redeemed, free from debt. This (rite) is indeed the slayer of Vritra. Soma is indeed Vritra. The slaying of Vritra is indeed the Soma sacrifice. On the previous day Indra killed Vritra. On the previous day he (Indra) indeed killed him. On the next day he (Indrathe sacrificer) releases him. One who consecrates himself is indeed addressed by the noose of Varuna. Day and night are the nooses of Varuna.
3.7.8.80	If one were to keep it during the day without releasing it from the noose of Varuna, one would be bound by the noose of varuna.
3.7.8.81	It should be kept at night.
3.7.8.82	One is released from the noose only by Varuna, for the non-injury of oneself.
3.7.9.1	One ox is yoked and another is released.
3.7.9.2	Then he offers the Atithi oblation for the continuity of the sacrifice.
3.7.9.3	He offers the oblation with the hands of his wife.
3.7.9.4	The wife is the other shore, for she rules over him.
3.7.9.5	The wife alone makes the sacrifice acceptable.
3.7.9.6	Whatever the wife does at the sacrifice, that is a couple.
3.7.9.7	For the sake of the couple, the wife offers the hands.
3.7.9.8	This is the wife's participation in the sacrifice, when she does something at the sacrifice.
3.7.9.9	For participation, the wife offers her hands.
3.7.9.10	"Thou art the body of Agni, for Vishnu thee." With this Gayatri verse he takes it. "Thou art the Body of Soma, for Vishnu thee," with this Tristubh verse. "Thou art hospitality to the guest, for Vishnu thee" with this Jagati verse. "For thee to Agni, for wealth and nourishment, for Vishnu thee", with this Anushtubh verse.
3.7.9.11	"For thee to the hawk, for Vishnu thee, who bears Soma."
3.7.9.12	Gāyatrī is the hawk, the bearer of Soma.
3.7.9.13	He again offers it, so that it may not be exhausted, for the sake of the fivefold (nature).
3.7.9.14	The sacrifice is fivefold.
3.7.9.15	He offers it as much as the sacrifice is.
3.7.9.16	This indeed is the grasping of the metres.
3.7.9.17	With those grasped metres he grasps the sacrifice.
3.7.9.18-24	The share of those who follow the guest, whatever they may be. The metres come to him from afar. A share is given to them. Varuna is the sacrifice bought. Vishnu is the bought. The sacrifice is bought now. Therefore it is bought by Vishnu. It is bought by Vishnu.
3.7.9.25	They extend the three-fold (rite) at the beginning of the sacrifice and conclude with the three-fold.
3.7.9.26	They are three with three cups.
3.7.9.27	The one with three cups is Vishnu as the deity.
3.7.9.28	The gods brought Vishnu, making him dwarf.
3.7.9.29	"He said, "As far as he can stride three times, that is ours."
3.7.9.30	He first strode over this (earth).
3.7.9.31	Then this (earth), then that (earth).
3.7.9.32	Therefore, the Trikapala is for Vishnu.
3.7.9.33	This is indeed Soma's hospitality, which is hospitality.
3.7.9.34	Or this is indeed Agni's hospitality, when they churn Agni for Agni.
3.7.9.35	Or they generate the deity for the bought sacrifice.
3.7.9.36	Or they indeed generate brilliance for him.
3.7.9.37	Now, indeed, they generate this hero for him at the Upasads.
3.7.9.38	He is born as a hero.
3.7.9.39	Those gods who were the Sadhyas and who transgressed the sacrifice, for them this is what is done in excess at the sacrifice.
3.7.9.40	What is done in excess in the sacrifice is when Agni is offered to Agni.
3.7.9.41	What is above the cup and the ladle, that alone touches it.
3.7.9.42-48	They discuss whether or not the Iḍā should be established. If one were to establish the Iḍā, one would establish the sacrifice at the beginning of the sacrifice. The Atithya, the Upasads, the Prayājas, the Tanūnaptr, and the Āśīrvāka. Therefore, the Iḍā alone should be performed. The Atithyā, the Upasad, and the Prayājas. Therefore, they are not Prayājas. The Upasads are the Anuyājas of the Atithya.
3.7.9.49	Therefore, those three.
3.7.9.50	For there are three Anuyājas.
3.7.9.51	The head is the Atithyas.
3.7.9.52	The neck is the Upasads.
3.7.9.53	Now this other sacrifice is complete.
3.7.9.54	These are the wings of Prajapati, namely the Ashvavara, his eyebrows, and the sugarcane stalk.
3.7.9.55	Prajapati is the mouth of the sacrifice.
3.7.9.56	He makes it grow from the mouth of the sacrificer.
3.7.9.57	The horse is indeed the sacrificial animal.
3.7.9.58	Sacrifice is Prajapati.
3.7.9.59	The horse is Prajapati's.
3.7.9.60	Therefore the Asvavarastra is the Prastara.
3.7.9.61	The enclosing sticks are made of Karasmarya wood for the sake of repelling the Rakshas.
3.7.10.1	The gods, standing in each other's supremacy, divided into four parts: Agni with the Vasus, Soma with the Rudras, Indra with the Maruts, Varuna with the Adityas.
3.7.10.2	Brihaspati performed the sacrifice with these (verses).
3.7.10.3	Among them Indra became the chief.
3.7.10.4	He who performs this sacrifice becomes the chief.
3.7.10.5	They were afraid of each other's attack.
3.7.10.6	Those who were their beloved forms, they played together.
3.7.10.7	Those who have not harmed us, and those who have not harmed each other, may they be destroyed from here.
3.7.10.8	When they came to know each other, then the gods became, and the Asuras were defeated.
3.7.10.9	Those who, knowing this, come to know each other become themselves, and their enemies become their brothers.
3.7.10.10	He whom one wishes to injure, one should first strike him.
3.7.10.11	He is injured.
3.7.10.12	If one wishes that all should be equal, one should strike all together.
3.7.10.13	All become equal.
3.7.10.14	Those who strike together, even now they do not injure each other.
3.7.10.15	Therefore, to the one who is the son of Satãnu, one should not do harm.
3.7.10.16	If one were to do harm, one would do harm to the beloved body.
3.7.10.17	They placed their beloved bodies in that yonder sun.
3.7.10.18	Therefore, he shines with the greatest brilliance.
3.7.10.19	Therefore, all Soma offerings are dedicated to the Sun-god.
3.7.10.20	Now, indeed, these are the dear bodies of the gods.
3.7.10.21	He obtains them.
3.7.10.22	"He says, "I take thee for the approaching one," for Agni; thereby he takes (the Soma) for the Vasus. "I take thee, the rushing one," for Soma; thereby for the Rudras. "For the body-born one," for Indra; thereby for the Maruts. "For the powerful one, the Shakra," for Varuna; thereby for the Adityas.
3.7.10.23	From these gods it is first taken.
3.7.10.24	He takes it from them alone.
3.7.10.25	He takes four (measures).
3.7.10.26	For they went forth in four directions.
3.7.10.27	"He takes himself with the formula, "For the approaching one thee." He takes the offspring with the formula, "For the spreading one thee." He (takes) the sacrifice with the formula, "For the spreading one, for the offspring." He takes the cattle with the formula, “For the strong one, for the Sakvarī."
3.7.10.28	He who knows the gods Sadhyas prospers for him.
3.7.10.29	Where he desires, "May I prosper here."
3.7.10.30	These worlds are the gods Sadhyās.
3.7.10.31	He touches himself with the initiation, the offspring with the intermediate initiation.
3.7.10.32	He puts on the girdle belt.
3.7.10.33	He approaches the lesser vow.
3.7.10.34	For the offspring is between himself and the self.
3.7.10.35	One should be in the two vows.
3.7.10.36	For there are two seasons, day and night.
3.7.10.37	If one were in one vow, one would obstruct the wife.
3.7.10.38	"That Rudra-like form of yours, O Agni," he makes the vow.
3.7.10.39	This is the deity in him now.
3.7.10.40	He pleases her.
3.7.10.41	He makes the vow in her.
3.7.10.42	If he were to make the vow otherwise, Rudra would be hostile to him.
3.7.10.43	One who is initiated attains union with the deities.
3.7.10.44	With the cold (water) he should sprinkle, they should pacify.
3.7.10.45	And as Agni is sprinkled with water, so it would be.
3.7.10.46	And when he sprinkles with heated (water), it is for peace.
3.7.10.47	And the Madanti (waters) are indeed brilliance.
3.7.10.48	He indeed obtains brilliance.
3.8.1.1	The Asuras had a city in this world, made of iron; in the sky, of silver; in heaven, of gold.
3.8.1.2	The gods defeated the Asuras in each of these cities.
3.8.1.3	They had no abode.
3.8.1.4	They built for themselves the Havirdhana in heaven, the Agnidhra in the sky, and the Sadas on earth.
3.8.1.5	They said, "Let us approach."
3.8.1.6	"Those who approach win the great city."
3.8.1.7	They approached.
3.8.1.8	That is the approaching of the Upasads.
3.8.1.9	They were driven out from these worlds.
3.8.1.10	Those who were driven out from those worlds sought refuge in the day.
3.8.1.11	When they approached the Upasad in the morning, they were driven out by that (day).
3.8.1.12	They were driven out by the day and sought refuge in the night.
3.8.1.13	When they approached the evening Upasad, the gods drove them out by that night.
3.8.1.14	Then the gods became victorious, the Asuras were defeated.
3.8.1.15	He who, knowing this, approaches the Upasad, drives his foe away from these worlds by day and night.
3.8.1.16	He becomes one with himself.
3.8.1.17	His enemy is destroyed.
3.8.1.18	Then indeed there was no arrow.
3.8.1.19	The gods then fashioned this arrow, Agni as the point, Soma as the barb, Vishnu as the sheath.
3.8.1.20	They said, "Who will shoot this arrow?"
3.8.1.21	The gods said, "This Rudra alone."
3.8.1.22	He said, "Let me have a share."
3.8.1.23	They said, "Choose."
3.8.1.24	He said, "Let not one arrow be shot at me. Let us examine."
3.8.1.25	Therefore, one arrow should not be shot at him. It should not be examined.
3.8.1.26	One should say, "Let it be true."
3.8.1.27	Rudra released it.
3.8.1.28	For he is the most cruel of the gods.
3.8.1.29	With that he broke through these (worlds) in front.
3.8.1.30	With Agni's power he broke through those (worlds).
3.8.1.31	Therefore Agni is worshipped first.
3.8.1.32	If one were to worship another deity first, they would be without power.
3.8.1.33	He takes eight times in the ladle and four in the Upabhṛt.
3.8.1.34	For the eastern half of the Isti is the most concentrated.
3.8.1.35	He steps over once.
3.8.1.36	The arrow fell only once, far away.
3.8.1.37	He announces after having crossed over, for the conquest of the sacrifice.
3.8.1.38	If he were to announce without crossing over, his sacrifice would be unconquered.
3.8.1.39	He offers the Upasads with the ladle.
3.8.1.40	This is the ascent of the conquered ones.
3.8.1.41	He offers one at one day, one at one day.
3.8.1.42	For they conquered one day, and one day they conquered.
3.8.1.43	One offers at three Upasads.
3.8.1.44	These three worlds are indeed three.
3.8.1.45	For the conquest of these worlds.
3.8.1.46	The gods, with Agni as their mouth, conquered these worlds, driving away the Asuras with the Upasads.
3.8.1.47	The sacrificer, with Agni as his mouth, follows these worlds, having overcome his enemy with the Upasads.
3.8.1.48	Those which are the evening Anuvākyās should be the morning Yājyās.
3.8.1.49	Those which were the morning Anuvākyā should be the evening Yājyā.
3.8.1.50	Thus both become powerful.
3.8.2.1	Having placed iron on the first, silver on the middle and copper on the last, he offers.
3.8.2.2	This indeed was the first offering made by Brihaspati to the gods.
3.8.2.3	One should offer with these (offerings) where there is a fight for a city.
3.8.2.4	This indeed is the beginning of the sacrifice.
3.8.2.5	Therefore, whatever is done before the Agniṣomiya (sacrifice), it is done in a low voice.
3.8.2.6	Or else, they release speech at this Agniṣṭoma.
3.8.2.7	Having attained the sacrifice, they release speech.
3.8.2.8	The gods, having made ghee into a thunderbolt, struck Soma.
3.8.2.9	The two ladles are the arms.
3.8.2.10	Therefore, the two ladles do not fail to offer the Soma oblation.
3.8.2.11	They have fixed the Soma in the two cups, the Soma and the butter.
3.8.2.12	"He says, "O Soma, the god, may I grow with thy rays," whatever injury they have done to him, that he makes harmless."
3.8.2.13	He makes it grow.
3.8.2.14	All the priests make it grow.
3.8.2.15	For all of them are healing him.
3.8.2.16	Those who have risen to swell the Soma go away from this world.
3.8.2.17	They go away from this (world).
3.8.2.18	They are masters of the measure.
3.8.2.19	When he says, "Sought by Indra, sought by Rāyā, sought by Bhaga, send forth the desirable things," then he does not go away from this.
3.8.2.20	Then he is held in this world.
3.8.2.21	This is the embryo of these two.
3.8.2.22	He who harms Soma is harmed by these two.
3.8.2.23	When he says, "Salutations to heaven, salutations to earth," he pays homage to these two.
3.8.2.24	The Upasads are the hospitality. The Prayajas are the blessings.
3.8.2.25	The Tanunaptra is the blessing.
3.8.2.26	Therefore one does not choose a Hotar or an Arsha.
3.8.2.27	He says only, "Sit down, O Hotar."
3.8.2.28	Four vows, three.
3.8.2.29	The arrow has four feathers.
3.8.2.30	The arrow has three feathers.
3.8.2.31	The shaft of the arrow has three joints.
3.8.2.32	The arrow-head, the arrow-shaft, and the arrow-feather.
3.8.2.33	The arrow shaft has two feathers.
3.8.2.34	The arrowshaft has two joints.
3.8.2.35	The shaft and the feather.
3.8.2.36	The arrowshaft has one feather.
3.8.2.37	The shaft has only one joint.
3.8.2.38-45	This is the highest consecration. One attains the lesser vow. One conquers the higher world. One with one vow, three. One with two vows, three. Three vows, three. Four vows, three. This is the one who is departing for heaven. One who knows this becomes better and better every day.
3.8.2.46	If the Upasads of the twelve-day Agniṣṭoma were to be performed, they would be incomplete and would not be able to burn.
3.8.2.47	If the three-day Ahina were to be performed.
3.8.2.48	Just as a heavier load is placed on the Uṣṇīsa, so is it.
3.8.2.49	Therefore, the Upasads should be performed only three times for the Agniṣṭoma and twelve times for the Ahina, for the sake of equal strength.
3.8.3.1	The sacrifice was half-way to the gods.
3.8.3.2	They did not know whether he was here or there.
3.8.3.3	But they knew that there was a sacrifice.
3.8.3.4	They desired to have a connection with it.
3.8.3.5	They desired that it should be sent forth.
3.8.3.6	They did not find it.
3.8.3.7	The birds flew up higher and higher, but did not go beyond.
3.8.3.8	Indra went beyond them higher and higher.
3.8.3.9	He understood it.
3.8.3.10	He knew: 'It is indeed mine.'
3.8.3.11-18	He said, "Who is he?" "I am the slayer of Durgā." "Then who are you?" "I have brought Durgā." He said, "You have indeed slain Durgā. This boar is on the other side of the twenty-one cities made of stone. In it, the Asuras have their wealth and their abode. Slay him!"
3.8.3.19	Indra, having pierced it, struck it down and broke its heart.
3.8.3.20	This is what she said:
3.8.3.21	"The mountain was pierced by the strong one, three times seven times, with the mountain ranges.
3.8.3.22	No god or man could have done what the bull, when he was strong, did."
3.8.3.23	He said, "The one who brings from the fort has spoken."
3.8.3.24	"Bring this."
3.8.3.25	Vishnu brought it.
3.8.3.26	Vishnu is the sacrifice.
3.8.3.27	The sacrifice brought that sacrifice from the Asuras.
3.8.3.28	The gods found that sacrifice through the sacrifice.
3.8.3.29	This is what he recited.
3.8.3.30	All of them, Vishnu, the one of great strides, the one who is sought after, has brought them.
3.8.3.31	One hundred buffaloes, milk-cooked rice, Varaha, Indra, and the one who is to be worshipped.
3.8.3.32	The gods found the sacrifice.
3.8.3.33	What they found was the sacrifice, that is the nature of the divine sacrifice.
3.8.3.34	Those who desire the divine sacrifice desire the sacrifice.
3.8.3.35	Those who find the sacrifice, find (it).
3.8.3.36	What the sacrificer offers, that is the divine sacrifice.
3.8.3.37	The sacrificer indeed offers the sacrifice.
3.8.3.38	This (earth) was the first of the Asuras.
3.8.3.39	As long as they saw from a sitting position, that was of the gods.
3.8.3.40	The gods said to Salavriki, "As far as she goes around this (earth) three times, that is ours."
3.8.3.41	She went around this (earth), three times. The gods found her.
3.8.3.42	That is the knowledge of the Veda.
3.8.3.43	The gods brought Vishnu, making him dwarf,
3.8.3.44	"As far as he goes around three times, that belongs to us."
3.8.3.45	He indeed first stepped on this (earth). Then he stepped on this.
3.8.3.46	The gods found this here.
3.8.3.47	That is the knowledge of the Veda.
3.8.3.48	This entire earth is the Veda.
3.8.3.49	The sacrificer takes hold of it as the girdle.
3.8.3.50	As much as the sacrificer makes of the Veda, so much, so much does he conquer of the earth.
3.8.3.51	Therefore, the greater should be done greater and greater.
3.8.3.52	The gods and the Asuras were in competition.
3.8.3.53	Whatever was the property of the Asuras, the gods found it in the Veda.
3.8.3.54	That is the knowledge of the Veda.
3.8.3.55	What was dear to them was Vasu, with that they ran, thinking, "We shall be free from this."
3.8.3.56	The gods found it in Uttaravedi.
3.8.3.57	That is the better of the two, we know not which.
3.8.3.58	That is the better of two, we know.
3.8.3.59	He who, knowing this, makes the Vedi and the Uttaravedi, he goes to the wealth of his enemy, the foe, taking it away from him.
3.8.4.1	Thirty-six steps in length, twenty-four in front, thirty in back.
3.8.4.2	Thus shines Viraja, the measured one.
3.8.4.3	Now, indeed, the metres are Viraja.
3.8.4.4	He yokes her to the mouth of the sacrifice.
3.8.4.5	This is what she has sung.
3.8.4.6	Indrani conquered her husband in a good fight, and with a bite she broke the knowledge of her husband.
3.8.4.7	Her hips are thirty yojanas, and her thighs bear the old Indra.
3.8.4.8	Whatever is sloping towards the east is the place of sacrifice to the gods.
3.8.4.9	For they found him lying facing east.
3.8.4.10	And whatever is sloping towards the west and sloping towards the north, one should sacrifice there if one desires:
3.8.4.11	"May I prosper in both worlds."
3.8.4.12	For both worlds are here.
3.8.4.13	One prospers in both worlds.
3.8.4.14	Now he, for whom there is another sacrifice to the north, should offer that sacrifice, if he desires, "May the sacrifice to the north bow down to me."
3.8.4.15	This is the sacrifice called Uttara-van.
3.8.4.16	The sacrifice to the north bows down to him.
3.8.4.17	Now he, for whom in the middle there are many plants, should offer that, if he desires cattle.
3.8.4.18	Plants are cattle.
3.8.4.19	He becomes possessed of cattle.
3.8.4.20	He who has fallen from prosperity should offer to the deity that is established in the same place.
3.8.4.21	This is established,
3.8.4.22	and he who has fallen from prosperiy is established.
3.8.4.23	He establishes him in that very place.
3.8.4.24	For he is sinful,
3.8.4.25	and falling from that,
3.8.4.26	One should offer to the god whose water is in front if one desires, "May the sacrifice be higher and not lower."
3.8.4.27	This is the sacrifice to the gods called Purohavir.
3.8.4.28	The later sacrifice bows down to him.
3.8.4.29	Now, if one has to perform a sacrifice to the gods where the path is obstructed or there is a river or a brotherly enemy, one should perform this sacrifice.
3.8.4.30	This is the sacrifice to gods which is attained along with the gods.
3.8.4.31	If one were to perform a sacrifice of the gods after the sacrifice to the Gods, one would be performing the world for one's brotherly enemy.
3.8.4.32	Now if the waters flow towards the east from the Ahavaniya of a sacrifice to a deity, and towards the west from the Garhapatya, one should offer to him whom they are examining on the bed or in the vessel.
3.8.4.33	For he is indeed connected with sin.
3.8.4.34	Now they examine this:
3.8.4.35	This indeed is turned away from sin.
3.8.4.36	They turn him away from sin.
3.8.4.37	Whatever sacrifice is performed, its prosperity goes forward and its adversity goes backward.
3.8.4.38	Animals are the prosperity of the sacrifice.
3.8.4.39	Animals are indeed water.
3.8.4.40	If one were to enter the Avabhṛtha from the west, one would enter the adversity of the sacrifice. One would enter adversity.
3.8.4.41	But when one enters the Avabhṛta from the east, one enters the prosperity of the sacrific. One enters prosperity.
3.8.4.42-47	One whose three (hearths) are elevated should offer sacrifice to his enemies. For him whose Ahavanīya and Havirdhāna are elevated in between. For him, whose Havirdhāna and Sadas are elevated in between For him, who has the Sadas and Garhapatya elevated in between. Herefrom indeed Vishnu conquered these worlds. One conquers these worlds following the conquest of Vishnu.
3.8.4.48	He drives away his foe from these worlds.
3.8.4.49	If the sacrificial ground is elevated on the south, one should perform the sacrifice for one who has a foe.
3.8.4.50	The gods, having driven away the Asuras from this direction, went to the heavenly world.
3.8.4.51	Then they placed this sun as a boundary around them, so that they would not return.
3.8.4.52	The sacrificer, having pushed away his enemy, goes to the heavenly world in this direction.
3.8.4.53	Then he places this sun as a boundary for him, so that he may not return.
3.8.4.54	One who desires to go to the light of both gods and men should offer on dry land.
3.8.4.55	This is the name of the divine sacrifice.
3.8.4.56	It becomes known to both gods and men.
3.8.4.57	One should sacrifice for one who is being cursed.
3.8.4.58	The curse is hidden, in the forest, the curses follow the back.
3.8.4.59	The curse that they curse him with is hidden.
3.8.4.60	He makes a more hidden and worse curse than that.
3.8.4.61	Now, if the Hotṛ, reciting the Prātaranuvāka, should see Agni, water, and the sun, one should perform this sacrifice for the sake of brahmavārcas.
3.8.4.62	Agni is brahmavārcasa.
3.8.4.63	Water is brahmavārasasa.
3.8.4.64	The sun is brahmavārsasa.
3.8.4.65	One attains brahmavārcasas.
3.8.4.66	One becomes brahmavārsas.
3.8.4.67-73	Now, if in the middle of the sacrifice to the gods there are many plants, then from there the Angiras created cattle. One who desires cattle should offer this sacrifice. If in the middle of a sacrifice to the gods it is elevated, then from that the Angiras went to heaven. One who wishes for heaven should offer this sacrifice.
3.8.4.74	Just as he decides this (victim), so he decides the one whom he attacks.
3.8.4.75	If one thinks that something should be done, one should offer a sacrifice.
3.8.4.76	If one is thought to be capable of doing something,
3.8.4.77	the sacrifice is the self.
3.8.4.78	He indeed makes it.
3.8.4.79	The young, the students, the priests, the fires - that is the sacrifice.
3.8.4.80	Therefore they say, "Only the young are capable of performing sacrifices."
3.8.4.81	Agni indeed is the divine sacrifice.
3.8.4.82	He who, knowing this, having kindled the fire anywhere, offers sacrifice, offers sacrifice to the divine sacrifice. The divine sacrifice is the fire.
3.8.5.1	What of it is fit for sacrifice, what is fit for offering, that stood back, having become like a lion, between the gods and the demons, who were engaged in battle.
3.8.5.2	They knew that whichever of them she would go to, that would be the one to have it.
3.8.5.3	Both of them desired her.
3.8.5.4	She did not go to either of them.
3.8.5.5	The gods called her.
3.8.5.6	"They said, "Come to us."
3.8.5.7	She said, "Let me have a share."
3.8.5.8	"They said "Choose."
3.8.5.9	She said to me, "Let Agni be spread out first."
3.8.5.10	"He who desires such and such a thing should spread me out, he will attain that desire."
3.8.5.11	The gods spread out Agni first.
3.8.5.12	Then the gods became victorious, the Asuras were defeated.
3.8.5.13	He who, knowing this, offers the first oblation to Agni, becomes (himself) and his foe becomes (his) inferior.
3.8.5.14	When he stepped out and stood between the gods and the Asuras, who were engaged in battle, assuming the form of a lioness, that was the northern altar.
3.8.5.15	"Thou art my heated one."
3.8.5.16	For they found her when she was heated.
3.8.5.17	"Thou are my found one."
3.8.5.18	For they did not find her.
3.8.5.19	"They found me, O protector!"
3.8.5.20	"She found them, O protector!" "They found her, O protector!" They found her, O savior!
3.8.5.21	"She found those who were distressed!"
3.8.5.22	"She finds those who are distressed!"
3.8.5.23	"It was by this that the gods found the Asuras."
3.8.5.24	"It is by this that the sacrificer finds his foe."
3.8.5.25	"O Agni, the Angiras, who art in this earth."
3.8.5.26	He thus wins those very fires which are in these three worlds.
3.8.5.27	"O Agni, the sky is known as 'videh.' That is your name."
3.8.5.28	For the sky was indeed the name of that fire.
3.8.5.29	The sky is knee-high.
3.8.5.30	This much is the living, the sacrificial, of this earth.
3.8.5.31	He thus obtains it.
3.8.5.32	"Thou art a lioness, thou art a she-buffalo."
3.8.5.33	For it stood in the form of a lioness and in the form of she-buffalo.
3.8.5.34	"Purify for the gods, purify for the gods."
3.8.5.35	They purify it for the gods.
3.8.5.36	They purify it.
3.8.5.37	He drives it out.
3.8.5.38	Whatever cruel deed they did to him, he made it non-cruel.
3.8.5.39	He expels it.
3.8.5.40	Indraghosas protect you from the east with wealth.
3.8.5.41	These are the directions presided over by Indra.
3.8.5.42	He threw it in the direction presided over by Indra alone.
3.8.5.43	From here the gods, having driven away the Asuras with their minds, went to heaven.
3.8.5.44	Those deities placed them at the end for the non-following of the Asuras.
3.8.5.45	From here indeed, the sacrificer, having mentally driven away his enemy, goes to the heavenly world.
3.8.5.46	He places those deities at the end for non-following of his enemy.
3.8.5.47	They desired: "May we be with our enemy, the foe."
3.8.5.48	"Thou art the lioness, the conqueror of foes; svāhā!" thereby he attains his desire.
3.8.5.49	"The enemies, the rivals, desired, 'May we have cattle!'
3.8.5.50	"Thou art the lionness, the finder of wealth and nourishment; svāhā!" thereby he attains his desired.
3.8.5.51	The enemy, the rival, having divided the cattle, they desired, "May we have offspring."
3.8.5.52	"You are the lioness, the bestower of good offspring, svāhā," thus they attained that desire.
3.8.5.53	"You are a lioness, the one who bestows the sun, the one who gives birth, svāhā."
3.8.5.54	For she is with the Ādityas.
3.8.5.55	Together with offspring.
3.8.5.56	They desired, "May the gods know our sacrifice."
3.8.5.57	"You are a lioness, bring the gods to the sacrificer who is worshipping, svāhā." By that he attained his desire.
3.8.5.58	He dedicates to the beings.
3.8.5.59	For the gods are indeed the beings.
3.8.5.60	Where Agni, the Hotar, had gone away from here, he dwelt in all beings.
3.8.5.61	He dwelt in the cattle, he dwelt between the horns of the bull, he dwelt in the trees, in the Puutu tree, he dwelt in herbs, in the fragrant and shining one.
3.8.5.62	What he gathers together is the collection.
3.8.5.63	What is deposited in the fire here, that he gathers together.
3.8.5.64	What Agni had deposited there, he gathered together. He became the Puutu tree.
3.8.5.65	What is flesh, that is guggula.
3.8.5.66	What is pus, that is the fragrant incense.
3.8.5.67	What are these things, they become
3.8.5.68	What is the fire's offering here, that is for its confinement.
3.8.5.69	You are the universal life, you hold the earth.
3.8.5.70	For these are offered for the support of these worlds.
3.8.5.71	You are the firm earth. You are the firm sky.
3.8.5.72	The sacrifice is indeed the sky.
3.8.5.73	You are the firm sky, you are the firm heaven.
3.8.5.74	He indeed reached heaven.
3.8.5.75	You are Agni's ashes, you are Agni's excrement.
3.8.5.76	For this is indeed Agni's ashes and Agni's excreta.
3.8.5.77	The northern altar is the divine vessel.
3.8.5.78	The cup for the gods is called the "cup of the gods".
3.8.5.79	The gods are the Vibhrājas.
3.8.5.80	When Vibhrāja says, "Let the great one drink the sweet Soma", he says this to the gods, the cup for the gods.
3.8.5.81	One obtains the cup of the most prosperous.
3.8.5.82	One should not examine the Brahman in the cup, for he who is like the cup-bearer
3.8.6.1-7	The altar is as big as the earth. He takes it away from the unlimited enemy and gives it to the sacrificer. The altar is impure. The oblation is water. When he sprinkles, he makes it pure. The altar was impure. When he spreads the sacrificial grass, he makes it pure.
3.8.6.8	This much is the earth as much as the altar.
3.8.6.9	The sacrificial grass is the offspring.
3.8.6.10	When one spreads the sacrificial grass, he establishes the offspring in it.
3.8.6.11	The sacrificial straw is the sacrificer.
3.8.6.12	The sacrificial grasses are the offspring.
3.8.6.13	In that he places the sacrificial straw beyond the sacrificial grass, then he places the sacrificer above the offspring.
3.8.6.14-20	Now when he puts the grass inside, thereby the sacrificer turns away from the sacrificer. One should spread grass abundantly. His cattle become free from disease. One should strew the grass towards the east. For the sacrifice is towards the east. If one were to strew it towards the west, his country would be destroyed. The altar is the gods.
3.8.6.21-25	Where the gods desire to go, that they reach. When he lays down the altar, he conforms to the gods. With that conformity, wherever the sacrificer desires to go, that he reaches. Three fires formerly went forth, carrying oblations to the gods. The Vasat-call fell down.
3.8.6.26	Now he who is this one, who now ran away in fear,
3.8.6.27	he will be the one who will be the enemy.
3.8.6.28	The gods said to him, "Do not turn back."
3.8.6.29	He said, "Let there be a share for me."
3.8.6.30	They said, "Choose."
3.8.6.31	He said: "Three of my brothers have gone before, carrying oblations to the gods,
3.8.6.32	"May the Vasat-call be their share."
3.8.6.33	They said, "Choose."
3.8.6.34	He said, "Whatever is offered outside the boundary, that shall be their share." They said, "So be it."
3.8.6.35	This is their share.
3.8.6.36	For they were without bones.
3.8.6.37	Then they stretched out.
3.8.6.38	He said, "I will not offer the oblations in the wrong place."
3.8.6.39	"I will go back," he said.
3.8.6.40	They followed him.
3.8.6.41	They sat down all around for the protection of the sacrifice.
3.8.6.42	This is indeed offered to the sacrifice, this to the sacrificer, this to the adversary.
3.8.6.43	He makes this one the upper one, that one the lower one.
3.8.6.44	By the sacrifice he makes the sacrificer pass over, by the sacrifice he makes his enemy pass over.
3.8.6.45	He offers at the junction.
3.8.6.46	For the oblation does not pass over the fire.
3.8.6.47	He pleases them only from the mouth.
3.8.6.48	And also he makes the oblations pass over by the good ford.
3.8.6.49	This indeed is the lord of the earth.
3.8.6.50	This is the lord of this world.
3.8.6.51	This is the lord of the beings.
3.8.6.52	Now this is the prosperity.
3.8.6.53	If what is offered falls outside the boundary, one should recite this mantra over it:
3.8.6.54	"Svāhā to the lord of the earth, svāhā to the ruler of the world, svāhā, to the lord of beings."
3.8.6.55	This is indeed their share.
3.8.6.56	He pleases them.
3.8.6.57	Now, indeed, with the oblation that has been spilled, one obtains the second blessing.
3.8.6.58	Now, indeed, this was said by Āharuṇa Aupaveśya: "How can one who knows how to obtain the second blessing with the oblation spilled, perform a sacrifice?"
3.8.6.59	One obtains the second blessing with this.
3.8.7.1	Those who were formerly the texts, they let them slip away for the exclusion of man.
3.8.7.2	He pronounces.
3.8.7.3	Whatever impurity and uncleanliness is settled on them, they purify it.
3.8.7.4	"He offers with 'They yoke the mind and they yoke with wisdom.' He offers with 'They are yoked.'
3.8.7.5	He offers with Savitri.
3.8.7.6	They proceed with the impulse of Savitrī.
3.8.7.7	The oblation is indeed the oblation-holder.
3.8.7.8	When he anoints, he moves forward as an oblation.
3.8.7.9	And when the wife anoints, she anoints only what has been turned towards her.
3.8.7.10	What the wife does at the sacrifice, that is the union.
3.8.7.11	The wife anoints for the sake of union.
3.8.7.12	This is the wife's participation in the sacrifice, when she does something at the sacrifice.
3.8.7.13	The wife anoints (the husband) for the sake of union.
3.8.7.14	He anoints (the wife) from the east.
3.8.7.15	For the sacrifice is in the east.
3.8.7.16	He anoint three times, then three times again.
3.8.7.17	For men anoint (their bodies) without limit.
3.8.7.18	He anointes from the south.
3.8.7.19	For these (men) turn towards the world of men from the north.
3.8.7.20	He is seized by Nirriti, he is bitten on both sides, he is dry,
3.8.7.21-27	Whatever he sprinkles, he pacifies. The dry one is the evil speech that speaks in the house of the sacrificer. It is powerful, not pacified, and harms the sacrificer. Therefore, they go to pacify it. If it were to be shaken, one should say, "Speak well, O god, against the evil ones." He pacifies. And having pacified, he seeks a blessing.
3.8.7.28-34	The oblation is indeed in the sacrificial posts. Having passed over the sacrificial grass, they place the oblation. Therefore, having passed over the Prastara, they spread it. The oblation is indeed at the sacrificial posts. The oblation is placed when the Samidheni verses are recited. Therefore, when the Prastara is being spread, the Hotṛ recites. These indeed are the two.
3.8.7.35	These (people) are indeed the ones who set it in motion, because they are the ones who set the sacrificial post in motion.
3.8.7.36	Therefore, the people of the eastern region ascend the field of the people of the western region.
3.8.7.37	When they are about to set it in motion (the Hotṛ) should recite mentally, stepping towards the people.
3.8.7.38	He removes the fear of the people.
3.8.7.39	This is indeed a spell.
3.8.7.40	He removes (the fear) from the people.
3.8.7.41	The mouth of one who does not approach (the fire) becomes a field of excreta.
3.8.7.42	The Rakshas obstruct the sacrifice.
3.8.7.43	When one offers on the path, it is for the removal of Rakshas.
3.8.7.44	One offers with the Vaishnavi (mantra).
3.8.7.45	Vishnu is the sacrifice.
3.8.7.46	One removes the Rakshas from the sacrifice with the sacrifice itself.
3.8.7.47	When one makes an offering with the Gayatri (mantra), one conquers this world.
3.8.7.48	The Tristubh is the atmosphere. By that (verse) he goes to the atmosphere.
3.8.7.49	And when he goes to the Ahavaniya, he goes to heaven by that (verse).
3.8.7.50	He advances three steps.
3.8.7.51	These three worlds are three.
3.8.7.52	He bestows these worlds on the sacrificer.
3.8.7.53	"He says, 'Thou art Vaishnavam, Vishnu has supported thee.'
3.8.7.54	For the Havirdhana is Vaishnavam.
3.8.7.55	He removes the knots from the southern Havirdhāna-shed, saying, "From heaven, O Viṣṇu, or from earth."
3.8.7.56	He thus secures the blessing of the sacrifice at the very outset.
3.8.7.57	The Adhvaryu first unties the knot which he had tied.
3.8.7.58	If he were to untie another knot first, he would be afflicted with urine.
3.8.7.59	Which of Vishnu's powers shall I praise? He destroys the thorns of the northern Havirdhana with the Vishnu-verse.
3.8.7.60	For the Havirdhana belongs to Vishnu.
3.8.7.61	With his own deity.
3.8.7.62	He who has stretched out the northern abode.
3.8.7.63	The northern abode is indeed here.
3.8.7.64	He arranges the Havirdhana in the yonder world.
3.8.7.65	The gods who are not hostile, who are worthy of sacrifice, may they sit on your lap.
3.8.7.66	Here today with the Soma-drinking.
3.8.7.67	Those who are worthy of sacrifices, he places them on the sacrificial posts.
3.8.7.68	The next day he offers to them.
3.8.7.69	The stick is the Uparā (sacrificial post). He strikes it down with the Vasat-utterance.
3.8.7.70	When he places the roof, it is for covering and for being without holes.
3.8.7.71	"Thou art the back of Vishnu."
3.8.7.72	It is indeed so.
3.8.7.73	"Thou art the belly of Vishnu."
3.8.7.74	Indeed so.
3.8.7.75	"The thighs of Vishnu are here."
3.8.7.76	These are indeed so.
3.8.7.77	He indeed offers the head of the sacrifice with his own deity from the mouth.
3.8.7.78	"Thou are the navel of Vishnu."
3.8.7.79	Therefore this head is sixfold.
3.8.7.80	"He praises him with the strength of Vishnu." Having stepped forward, he says.
3.8.7.81	From here Vishnu conquered these worlds.
3.8.7.82	He conquers these worlds following the conquest of Vishnu.
3.8.7.83	He drives away his enemies from these worlds.
3.8.8.1	"With the impulse of the divine Savitr," he takes it with the impulse of Savitr.
3.8.8.2	"With the arms of the Asvins."
3.8.8.3	The Asvins are the Adhvaryus of the gods.
3.8.8.4	"With the hands of Pusan."
3.8.8.5	With the deities.
3.8.8.6	"You are the goad, you are the goad."
3.8.8.7	The goad is indeed fierce.
3.8.8.8	It appeases.
3.8.8.9	"This I cut off from the neck of the Rakshas," he says, for the destruction of the Rakshasas, for the exclusion of the Rakshasa.
3.8.8.10	"This I cut off for him who is equal to Soma, for him who is unequal and injures," he says.
3.8.8.11	For he who is equal or unequal injures.
3.8.8.12	He completely overcomes everything with this.
3.8.8.13	The Uparavas are the vital airs.
3.8.8.14	The Havirdhana is the head.
3.8.8.15	The vital airs are the head.
3.8.8.16	Therefore, in the Havirdhāna.
3.8.8.17	The vital airs are within the head.
3.8.8.18	Hence, within.
3.8.8.19	There are four vital airs in the head.
3.8.8.20	There are five in the other.
3.8.8.21	The vital air is the other.
3.8.8.22	It is held above.
3.8.8.23	The vital breaths are held above.
3.8.8.24	The vital airs are in the eastern half of the mouth.
3.8.8.25	This is indeed the eastern half of Havirdhana, namely the southern Havirdhana.
3.8.8.26	Therefore on the southern Havirdhāna.
3.8.8.27	"Thou art great, O great one."
3.8.8.28	The gods are indeed great.
3.8.8.29	"Speak the great speech to Indra."
3.8.8.30	The sacrifice is indeed Indra's.
3.8.8.31	"The destroyer of Rakshas, the destroyer of Valagas" - he says this for the destruction of Rakshas and for the removal of Rakshas.
3.8.8.32	"The Vishnu-like one" - he says.
3.8.8.33	Vishnu is indeed the sacrifice.
3.8.8.34	The Asuras dug these Valagas into the vital breaths of the gods.
3.8.8.35	They found them at the length of an arm.
3.8.8.36	Therefore, one should dig up to the length of an
3.8.8.37	Whatever is done, whatever is cut, whatever is attacked, that he cuts off.
3.8.8.38	The vital airs are the Uparavas.
3.8.8.39	When he sprinkles, therefore these vital airs are watery.
3.8.8.40	The vital breaths are the Uparava.
3.8.8.41	When he covers, therefore these vital breaths are hairy.
3.8.8.42	And when he sprinkles and covers,
3.8.8.43	This is made to be the brain.
3.8.8.44	The two ears are the Adhiṣavaṇa.
3.8.8.45	The head is the Havirdhāna.
3.8.8.46	The ears are the head.
3.8.8.47	Therefore, in the Havirdhâna.
3.8.8.48	The ears of the head are inside.
3.8.8.49	Therefore, inside.
3.8.8.50	These two are these.
3.8.8.51	If one were to pierce them, one would pierce these.
3.8.8.52	Therefore, it is to be done here.
3.8.8.53	It should be two fingers apart.
3.8.8.54	This is two fingers apart.
3.8.8.55	The sky is indeed between (the two).
3.8.8.56	The head is the Havirdhāna (shed).
3.8.8.57	The back is the Agnidhra (shed).
3.8.8.58	(The body) is the Sadas.
3.8.8.59	For the sacrifice is indeed united towards the east.
3.8.8.60	The jaws are the Adhisavana (sheds).
3.8.8.61	The tongue is the Adhisavana.
3.8.8.62	The stones are the teeth.
3.8.8.63	From the mouth they drink Soma of Prajapati.
3.8.8.64	Indra indeed slew Vritra.
3.8.8.65	He entered this (earth).
3.8.8.66	The gods wanted to send him.
3.8.8.67	They did not know it.
3.8.8.68	The beings gathered around him, saying, "He who was our lord, let us not lose him."
3.8.8.69	That is why they are called "Uparavanas" (gatherers).
3.8.8.70	When they gathered around him, they wanted to divide it into four parts.
3.8.8.71	One found it in one part.
3.8.8.72	From that which was divided into four parts,
3.8.8.73	one part remained.
3.8.9.7-14	The barley is food. The Udumbara is energy. When one sprinkles with barley-containing (water), one thus increases the food with energy. The Rksa is impure. The water is the oblation. When one pours (water), one makes it pure. The Rkṣa is impure. When one spreads (grass), one makes it pure.
3.8.9.15-21	The buried (earth) belongs to the Pitrs, the uncovered belongs to other deities. Indeed, these plants are the upper half of this (earth). When he spreads it, he places it in the upper half of it. It became uncovered. Barley is food, the Udumbara is strength. When he spreads barley, he places food and strength.
3.8.9.22	Food does not nourish without truth.
3.8.9.23	Truth does not nourish without food.
3.8.9.24	May the wind, the Nițānas, protect you.
3.8.9.25	The Nițānas are the mind.
3.8.9.26	The Maruts are the vital airs.
3.8.9.27	May Mitra and Varuna protect you with the firm law.
3.8.9.28	Mitra supports her, Varuna establishes her.
3.8.9.29	And indeed, this is done for the sake of maintaining and establishing these creatures.
3.8.9.30	Mitra and Varuna are the upholders of the law among the gods.
3.8.9.31	They upheld the divine law.
3.8.9.32	That which is made of Udumbara wood.
3.8.9.33	"You are the abode of Brahman, you are the abode of the Kshatriya." This is a blessing.
3.8.9.34	"May Brahman be firm, may the Kshatra be firm." This is indeed a blessing, a protection.
3.8.9.35	"May I fill heaven and earth with ghee." He fills heaven and earth with the ghee.
3.8.9.36	The assembly hall is indeed the belly.
3.8.9.37	The Udumbara is energy.
3.8.9.38	When it is the Udumbara, he places energy in the middle of himself and of his offspring.
3.8.9.39	The assembly hall is indeed the belly of Prajapati.
3.8.9.40	The Udgata is the son of Prajapati;
3.8.9.41	therefore one appoints the Udgata.
3.8.9.42	The Udumbara is the sacrificer;
3.8.9.43	it should be the largest.
3.8.9.44	It makes him attain the highest position among his equals.
3.8.9.45	It is the shade of the Vishvajanas.
3.8.9.46	He places the covering over it.
3.8.9.47	For they spread from one family to another.
3.8.9.48	The assembly hall is indeed a belly;
3.8.9.49	Because it is mixed with something else, the belly is connected with something else.
3.8.9.50	The belly is indeed the assembly hall.
3.8.9.51	If one were to mix it from the front, the food would go beyond the back.
3.8.9.52	Therefore, when one mixes it from the side, the food is eaten.
3.8.9.53	It follows all the limbs.
3.8.9.54	This is the proper mixing of offspring.
3.8.9.55	His subjects return to him in order.
3.8.9.56	He becomes like a stream.
3.8.9.57	One should do the same kind of work.
3.8.9.58	These breaths are the same.
3.8.9.59	One should draw the eyes of one whom one hates.
3.8.9.60	He confuses his breaths.
3.8.9.61	He becomes short-lived.
3.8.9.62	If one desires, "Let it rain," one should draw the eyes below the assembly hall.
3.8.9.63	One restrains the rain.
3.8.9.64	If he wishes, "Let it not rain," he should offer the high-pitched Sadahuta.
3.8.9.65	He indeed takes away the rain.
3.8.9.66	There should be a nine-layered fire altar in the Agniṣṭoma.
3.8.9.67	It is measured by the three-layered brilliance.
3.8.9.68	There should a fifteen-layered altar in the Ukthya.
3.8.9.69	It is equal to the fifteen-layered thunderbolt.
3.8.9.70	There should seventeen-layered altar in Atiratra.
3.8.9.71	Prajapati is seventeenfold.
3.8.9.72	The night of Prajapati is in the Anushtubh metre.
3.8.9.73	This is indeed the turning back of the Yajna-kratus.
3.8.9.74	He lays down the Havirdhana with the front-end.
3.8.9.75	For the sky is above.
3.8.9.76	He lays the Agnidhra with the front-ends.
3.8.9.77	For the atmosphere is above.
3.8.9.78	The Sadas with the side-ends.
3.8.9.79	This (earth) is indeed side-ways.
3.8.9.80	He lays out the Havirdhana by means of the Yajus.
3.8.9.81-87	The sky is indeed well-defined. The Sadas (hall) is by the Yajus. This (earth) is well-defined. The Agnidhra (shed) is by the Anjuṣas. The atmosphere is indeed undefined. He places half of the Agnidhra (house) within the altar and half outside the altar. For half of the atmosphere is in this world and half in the other world.
3.8.10.1	Suvaṅ, Nabhrāt, Anghare, Bambhare, these are the Soma-guardians of the gods.
3.8.10.2	From them the metres brought down the Soma.
3.8.10.3	They became exhausted by drinking the Soma.
3.8.10.4	Then they took these second names for Angalechchaya:
3.8.10.5	"Soma-drinking does not approach."
3.8.10.6	Therefore they have two names.
3.8.10.7	They followed.
3.8.10.8-13	They did not reach it. Therefore, they are offered after skipping them. They did not reach it.
3.8.10.14	These are their share, since they are sprinkled.
3.8.10.15	They are pleased with him by that.
3.8.10.16	Pavamana is the mouth of the sacrifice.
3.8.10.17	When the Pavamana is praised, the fires are carried away.
3.8.10.18	They are carried away from the mouth of the sacrificie.
3.8.10.19	There was an Asura named Jambha.
3.8.10.20	He stole the sacrifice.
3.8.10.21	He did not reach the Agnidhra.
3.8.10.22	He again won it from the Agnidhra.
3.8.10.23	This is indeed the living (soul).
3.8.10.24	Therefore they are taken away from the Agnidhr.
3.8.10.25	The Asuras conquered the sacrifice from the gods on the right side.
3.8.10.26	They stood in front of the Agnidhra,
3.8.10.27	He again conquered it from the Agnidh.
3.8.10.28	This is the unconquered (soul).
3.8.10.29	That is why they are taken away.
3.8.10.30	The gods won the sacrifice from the Asuras in this way.
3.8.10.31	They won the sacrifice back from the Adhvaryu with the Bahispavamāna, and having placed the fires, they spread the sacrificial grass.
3.8.10.32	They move in the direction of the Bahispavamaņa, knowing that they will be victorious.
3.8.10.33	When the Bahispavana has been chanted, he says:
3.8.10.34	"O Agni, spread the fires."
3.8.10.35-40	He strews the sacrificial grass. After having placed the fires and having won the sacrifice by means of the Bahispavamāna (hymn) from the Agnidhra, they strew the sacrificial grass. Here indeed is the sacrifice, where the hymn is sung. Having gone round the sacrifice, he offers. The morning pressing is indeed bright. The third pressing is not bright.
3.8.10.41	The Jyotishmati verses which are recited at the third pressing.
3.8.10.42	By that the third pressing becomes bright.
3.8.10.43	The Agniṣṭoma is a year.
3.8.10.44	Its forms are the Dhishnyas.
3.8.10.45	Having raised them up and made them Jyotishmati, they praise with the Agniṣṭoma.
3.8.10.46	The Agnișṭoma is a Year.
3.8.10.47	The twelve months are a year.
3.8.10.48	The oblations are offered towards the east, the Dhishnyas are poured out towards the west, for the support of the year.
3.8.10.49	The gods and the Asuras were on both sides of each other.
3.8.10.50	Some were in front, some were behind.
3.8.10.51	The oblatioins are offered towards the East, thereby they drove away those who were in front.
3.8.10.52	The Dhishnyas are placed in the east, those who were in the west are driven away by them.
3.8.10.53	This is the driving away of the enemy.
3.8.10.54	The sacrifice is held by the Adhvaryu.
3.8.10.55	This is as it were the sacrifice, namely the Dhishnyas.
3.8.10.56	If the Adhvaryus were to go beyond the Dhishnyās in the east, he would draw away from the breath.
3.8.10.57	He would be a deceiver.
3.8.10.58	If he were to go beyond the sacrificial ground, he would go beyond the sacrifice.
3.8.10.59	One should recite the verse addressed to Indra.
3.8.10.60	For the assembly hall is indeed Indra's.
3.8.10.61	One serves it with its own deity for the sake of non-injury to oneself.
3.8.10.62	The Adhvaryu's world is indeed in front of the sacrificial posts.
3.8.10.63	If the Adhvaryu were to go beyond them facing the opposite direction, the people of another clan would be inclined to ascend his territory.
3.8.10.64	Others are offered to others.
3.8.10.65	This is their union for procreation.
3.8.10.66	Some are described, others are not described.
3.8.10.67	Those that are described are for this world.
3.8.10.68	Those that aren't described are for the other world.
3.8.10.69	Just as a girdle is put on for the sake of holding together the pure and the impure, so these (bricks) are put on for the holding together of the sacrifice.
3.8.10.70	What is in front of the sacrificial posts belongs to the gods.
3.8.10.71	What is behind belongs to men.
3.8.10.72	Therefore they drink Soma facing east, the sacrificial posts do not overstep (the Soma).
3.8.10.73	For he goes to the people.
3.8.10.74	He ascends to the world of the gods.
3.8.10.75	They are carried away from the sacrificial post.
3.8.10.76	This is indeed the womb of the fires.
3.8.10.77	They are indeed carried away from their own womb, for non-loss.
3.8.10.78	This is their going and coming, that which is between the sacrificial post and the fire-chamber.
3.8.10.79	This is the sacred place of the sacrifice.
3.8.10.80	Therefore one moves along it.
3.8.10.81	He who moves without knowing this, suffers pain.
3.8.10.82	But he who moves knowing this, does not suffer any pain.
3.9.1.1	This sacrifice moves from the Pravargya to the Atithya, from the Atithya to the Upasads.
3.9.1.2	It is carried forward from the Upasads.
3.9.1.3	If they were to offer the oblations without taking up the clarified butter, it would destroy the sacrificer.
3.9.1.4	But when they offer the oblations after taking up the clarified butte
3.9.1.5	r, then the sacrificer follows the sacrifice.
3.9.1.6	They proceed towards the east with Soma. The wife approaches the Agni in the east.
3.9.1.7	They proceed with the king Soma, conquering.
3.9.1.8	When a human king comes to his house, then he has that power.
3.9.1.9	When he flees from there, then it is theirs again.
3.9.1.10	Therefore they are called Apivratas.
3.9.1.11	For they have a vow in that.
3.9.1.12	Soma, the king, came to this house.
3.9.1.13	Then he had that power.
3.9.1.14	When he falls away from that, then he releases it to them.
3.9.1.15	That is the reason why the releases are called releases.
3.9.1.16	"You, O Soma, are the maker of the body," he says, because it is the body and the other that are made by this.
3.9.1.17	He offers on the Garhapatya with two (verses).
3.9.1.18	The sacrificer has two feet for stability.
3.9.1.19	On the Agnidhra with the Agniya verse.
3.9.1.20	Having reached the sky, he assumed another form.
3.9.1.21	In the sacrificial fire of Vishnu.
3.9.1.22	Having reached the same place.
3.9.1.23	Vishnu is indeed the sacrifice.
3.9.1.24	He made Vishnu the sacrifice.
3.9.1.25	The demons desired this of the gods.
3.9.1.26	The gods, having made it water, brought it to this world.
3.9.1.27	When one offers to Aptumaty, having made him (the deceased) a recipient, they take him to this world.
3.9.1.28	He is taken away from all beings.
3.9.1.29	When one offers to Saumya, he is taken away by men; when to Aptumaty he is taken away to the fathers; when to Agnieya, he is (taken away) to the gods; when to Vaishnavya, he is then taken away to the sacrifice.
3.9.1.30	All these beings are released from Varuna.
3.9.1.31	When he offers to Soma, he releases men from Varuna; when to Aptumayati, the ancestors; when to Agni, the gods; when to Visnu, the sacrifice.
3.9.1.32	All these beings are released by him from Varuna.
3.9.1.33	The gods conquered these worlds with Agni as their mouth, with the Garhapatya this world, with the Agnidhra the atmosphere, and with the Ahavaniya that world.
3.9.1.34	Therefore they are placed in three places for the conquest of these worlds.
3.9.1.35	Indra and Agni are the two fires.
3.9.1.36	Agni is the other.
3.9.1.37	Indra is the former.
3.9.1.38	Prajapati is the Ahavaniya.
3.9.1.39	Therefore, he is offered to him.
3.9.1.40	For the father is superior to the son.
3.9.1.41	He who knows this becomes superior to his brother.
3.9.1.42	One should offer with the head, for the one who has lost his glory, for the sake of acquiring glory.
3.9.1.43	The Brahman is indeed the deity Soma.
3.9.1.44	With his own deity.
3.9.1.45	The offspring are the animals, the shares.
3.9.1.46	Rudra is the Ahavaniya.
3.9.1.47	If he were to offer the animals to Rudra first, he would be offering them to the wrong deity.
3.9.1.48	One should offer the animals to the right deity, namely, to the east.
3.9.1.49	"One should say, "May the earth be your support."
3.9.1.50	The earth is the deity of this (rite).
3.9.1.51	It has fallen from here and has not yet reached there.
3.9.1.52	"One says, "May it always be in the abode of Aditi."
3.9.1.53	Aditi is the sacrifice.
3.9.1.54	Aditi is the womb of Soma.
3.9.1.55	He places him in his own womb.
3.9.1.56	"This Soma is yours, O divine Savitar."
3.9.1.57	He was formerly among humans.
3.9.1.58	He gave him to the gods.
3.9.1.59	"You, O divine Soma, have approached the gods."
3.9.1.60	For he approaches the gods.
3.9.1.61	"This I offer to men along with prosperity and offspring." He prays for blessings.
3.9.1.62	"Salutations to the gods, svadha to the fathers."
3.9.1.63	Salutations are to the gods.
3.9.1.64	Svādhā is to the fathers.
3.9.1.65	"He is released from Varuna's noose." He is released from Varunapāśa for the sake of non-injury to himself.
3.9.1.66	"The heaven is manifest."
3.9.1.67	The sacrifice is heaven.
3.9.1.68	He sees the sacrifice.
3.9.1.69	"The light, the all-pervading."
3.9.1.70	The sun is the light, the allpervading.
3.9.1.71	He who consecrates himself, he puts on the body of Agni.
3.9.1.72	Agni is Rudra.
3.9.1.73	If Agni were to assign the body again and again, Rudra would be hostile to him.
3.9.1.74	He says, "O Agni, lord of vows, whatever form of yours was in me, that is in you."
3.9.1.75	"O Agni, lord or vows, whatever form or mine was in you, that is in me."
3.9.2.7	Therefore, one should not be afraid of that.
3.9.2.8	One should kindle the fire at the end of the sacrificial post and then offer the oblation.
3.9.2.9	This is indeed both.
3.9.2.10	One offers the oblation. The Hotr says:
3.9.2.11	One does not offer in the fire of one who is consecrated.
3.9.2.12	"One goes beyond others, not to others."
3.9.2.13	One indeed goes beyond others, does not go to others.
3.9.2.14	"I have found thee, O Agni, from those who are below thee, from those who art above thee."
3.9.2.15	He finds him from those who are above him, from those who arc below him.
3.9.2.16	"We delight in thee for the sacrifice to the gods."
3.9.2.17	For he delights in this.
3.9.2.18	"Delightful to Vishnu."
3.9.2.19	He makes him delightful to Vishnu for the sacrifice.
3.9.2.20	He anoints him with "To Vishnu thee!"
3.9.2.21	He severs it as if it were an oblation.
3.9.2.22	Or rather, it is indeed anointed.
3.9.2.23	He who knows thus, he who is straight, he who is upright, he who is of the highest rank, he who is turned away from the highest rank,
3.9.2.24	he who is straight, who has the upper shell, he indeed is present at the highest rank.
3.9.2.25	He who is straight, below, who is turned down,
3.9.2.26	He who is of the higher rank, he is the womb.
3.9.2.27	He who comes forth from it, he is the one with the womb.
3.9.2.28	This is the source of all trees.
3.9.2.29	One should cut it in a dry place.
3.9.2.30	If one were to cut it in a wet place, it would be like cutting a dry tree.
3.9.2.31	A tree that is not attached to a rock and is not growing is suitable.
3.9.2.32	If one cuts a tree that is attached to a rock, one becomes a thunderbolt and strikes the sacrificer's cattle.
3.9.2.33	It should be five cubits long.
3.9.2.34	It should measure the length of a row.
3.9.2.35	It should be six cubits in length.
3.9.2.36	It should be equal to the seasons.
3.9.2.37	It should have seven cubits.
3.9.2.38	It should equal the seven-foot Sakvari.
3.9.2.39	It should measure eight cubits.
3.9.2.40	Equal to the Gayatri.
3.9.2.41	It should cover nine cubits.
3.9.2.42	equal to the three-fold brilliance.
3.9.2.43	It should span ten cubits.
3.9.2.44	it should be equal to Viraja.
3.9.2.45	It should extend eleven cubits.
3.9.2.46	Equaling the Tristubh.
3.9.2.47	It should be twelve cubits in length.
3.9.2.48	It is equal to the Jagati (metre).
3.9.2.49	It should be thirteen cubits in length
3.9.2.50	It is equal in length to the Prajapati (metre). It is equal to the Prajapti (metre).
3.9.2.51	The length of the altar should be fifteen cubits.
3.9.2.52	It is the length of the thunderbolt.
3.9.2.53	The length of altar should be seventeen cubits.
3.9.2.54	The length is equal to the length of the Prajapati.
3.9.2.55	The length should be twenty-one cubits.
3.9.2.56	Its length is equal to that of the Prajapti.
3.9.2.57	It should be made with twenty-three cubits.
3.9.2.58	It is equal to twenty-three.
3.9.2.59	It should be made with thirty-five cubits.
3.9.2.60	Equal to thirty-five.
3.9.2.61	It should have thirty-seven cubits.
3.9.2.62	equal to thirty-seven.
3.9.2.63	It should measure thirty-nine cubits.
3.9.2.64	Thirty-nine.
3.9.2.65	It should cover thirty-one cubits.
3.9.2.66	It is the size of a man with arms raised.
3.9.2.67	It should be the size of a person standing on a chariot, or the size of a standing man.
3.9.2.68	The size of a man standing with arms raised is the smallest size.
3.9.2.69	Then it should be made larger and larger.
3.9.2.70	It should have many branches and leaves, and be on the ground.
3.9.2.71	For he has taken the ground.
3.9.2.72	He takes hold of his earth.
3.9.2.73	His cattle stand on his earth.
3.9.3.1	He says, "O herb, protect him." He protects him.
3.9.3.2	"O thunderbolt, do not injure him."
3.9.3.3	The thunderbolt is the thunderbolt.
3.9.3.4	He places him within the thunderbolt for protection.
3.9.3.5	Or the splinter that falls in front of the one that is struck, that goes after his brilliance.
3.9.3.6	When he brings it back again, it is for the sake of having brilliance.
3.9.3.7	He makes it go forward.
3.9.3.8	He makes him turn after the brilliance.
3.9.3.9	The sacrificial post is a thunderbolt.
3.9.3.10	From which these worlds are afraid when it is being dragged.
3.9.3.11	For this is the Lord, the unassuaged, being driven out, he injures these worlds.
3.9.3.12	He says, "Do not injure heaven with the front, the atmosphere with the middle, the earth with the back." He pacifies it.
3.9.3.13	He is indeed pacified, being driven out for the sake of non-injury to these worlds.
3.9.3.14	This one who is consecrated is indeed the friend of all.
3.9.3.15	He did not injure this.
3.9.3.16	The lords of the forest are also the fire-places.
3.9.3.17	When one offers in the covering, one again generates it.
3.9.3.18	Therefore, from the covering, more offspring are born.
3.9.3.19	It should be made equal to an animal.
3.9.3.20	There are ten vital breaths in an animal.
3.9.3.21	The self is the eleventh.
3.9.3.22	It has eight supports.
3.9.3.23	Brahma is in the tenth.
3.9.3.24	The self being the eleventh.
3.9.3.25	So it is equal to the animal.
3.9.3.26	It should be made eight-cornered.
3.9.3.27	It has the form of the Gāyatrī verse.
3.9.3.28	For the sacrificial post is Gāyatrī.
3.9.3.29	When the Gāyatrī fell down, a leaf fell from it, and from that Parna was born.
3.9.3.30	Therefore it is made of Parna.
3.9.3.31	This is indeed the essence of Parna, namely Khadira.
3.9.3.32	Therefore it should be made of Khadira.
3.9.3.33	Here indeed was the sun.
3.9.3.34	They brought him from this world to the other world.
3.9.3.35	From where they brought him from this to the other world,
3.9.3.36	from there Bilva was born.
3.9.3.37	From that, the Bilva.
3.9.3.38	It should be performed by one who desires brahmic glory for the sake of attaining brahmic glory.
3.9.3.39	And by means of light, one overcomes darkness.
3.9.3.40	Indra gave Yati to the Salavarika sages.
3.9.3.41	Among them this Brahmacari was the Soma-priest.
3.9.3.42	The Soma-drink of that deer became his own.
3.9.3.43	Therefore the deer eats its own.
3.9.3.44	For this is his Soma-drink.
3.9.3.45	When he placed the pot, then the red one was born.
3.9.3.46	Therefore, Rohita.
3.9.3.47	From that, Rohita. From Rohita, Rohita was born.
3.9.3.48	He sprinkles with, "For earth thee, for atmosphere thee, for heaven thee."
3.9.3.49	For these worlds is he measured for support.
3.9.3.50	He sprinkles thrice.
3.9.3.51	The gods are threefold.
3.9.3.52	Then he sprinkled him with the three-footed Gāyatrī.
3.9.3.53	The sacrificial post is indeed a thunderbolt.
3.9.3.54	The barley is food.
3.9.3.55	When he sprinkles with barley-bearing (grasses), he conquers food with the thunderbolt.
3.9.3.56	The sacrificial posts are indeed brilliance.
3.9.3.57	This indeed is the brilliance of plants, namely barley.
3.9.3.58	Therefore the plants follow it in winter.
3.9.3.59-67	Whatever he puts down, he puts down in the brilliance. The body is impure. The waters are the oblation. When he sprinkles, he makes it pure. The body itself is impure. When he spreads, he makes it clean. He is naked, as it were, when he puts down the potsherd. When he puts down the broken potsherd, he makes it fireless.
3.9.3.68	He places him in his own place.
3.9.3.69	He becomes uninjured.
3.9.3.70	"He anoints the heaven and earth with ghee, saying, "With ghee I fill the heaven and earth."
3.9.3.71	He fills the heaven and earth only with ghee.
3.9.3.72	The sacrificer is Agni, ghee is brilliance.
3.9.3.73	He anoints it uninterruptedly.
3.9.3.74	He anointes the sacrificer with brilliance.
3.9.3.75	"May the god Savitr anoint thee with honey, he says."
3.9.3.76	This is indeed the honey of the gods, namely ghee.
3.9.3.77	He anoints him with honey, indeed, with the impulse of Savitr.
3.9.3.78	"It is the cup of Indra."
3.9.3.79	For the cup is indeed of Indra.
3.9.3.80	"Make the plants very green."
3.9.3.81	He makes the plants bear fruit.
3.9.3.82	Therefore plants bear fruit at the top.
3.9.3.83	He fills the heaven with the front, the atmosphere with the middle, and the earth with the rear.
3.9.3.84	For these are measured for the support of these worlds.
3.9.3.85	He places them with the verse, "We approach your shining abodes; do you come." With the Vaisnavya verse.
3.9.3.86	For the sacrificial post is Vaisnava.
3.9.3.87	With its own deity.
3.9.3.88	He contemplates, "One sees the deeds of Vishnu." For the purpose of being measured.
3.9.3.89	"Thou art the abode of Brahman, thou art the abode of the Kshatra, I have surrounded thee." This is indeed a blessing.
3.9.3.90	"Thou art Brahman, thou art Kshatra." This is indeed the blessing and the protection.
3.9.3.91	He sprinkles water over (the post) for firmness.
3.9.4.1	The sacrificial post is indeed a thunderbolt.
3.9.4.2	If he were to erect it within the altar, it would burn.
3.9.4.3	If outside the altar, it will be unprotected.
3.9.4.4	He places half of it within the altar and half outside the altar.
3.9.4.5	He is not obstructed and does not burn.
3.9.4.6	One should not make a hole in the upper part.
3.9.4.7	If one were to make a hole in it, one would be a charioteer.
3.9.4.8	The sacrificer would have a short life.
3.9.4.9	One should make it neither too thick.
3.9.4.10	One would lead the creatures to hunger.
3.9.4.11	Nor too thin.
3.9.4.12	Both are in between.
3.9.4.13-18	The gods went to heaven by means of sacrifice. They thought, "By this (sacrifice) others will not ascend to our world." They approached it with a sacrificial post. That is why the sacrificial post is called a sacrificial post. If the sacrificial post falls down in front, it is for the attainment of the heavenly world. "That is Vishnu's supreme abode," he cleanses it for the attainment of heaven.
3.9.4.19	He offers it to the navel-piercing (deity).
3.9.4.20	The plants are strength.
3.9.4.21	He places strength in the middle of himself and of his offspring.
3.9.4.22	If one desires, 'May my offspring be free from hunger', one should erect posts with nooses.
3.9.4.23	They free offspring from hunger.
3.9.4.24	If he desires, "May the rain fall, may the energy of the sacrificer prosper," he should carry it upwards.
3.9.4.25	By the rain he indeed carries this (earth) away and the energy of the Sacrificer prospers.
3.9.4.26	If he desires, "Let the rain not fall, may the Sacrificer's energy be diminished," he should carry (the earth) downwards.
3.9.4.27	By the absence of rain he indeed carries away this (earth) and the energy of Sacrificer is diminished.
3.9.4.28-34	The sacrificial post is dedicated to all the gods. What is buried in the ground belongs to the Fathers. What is above belongs to men. Where the rope is, that belongs to the plants. What is beyond the rope belongs to all the gods.
3.9.4.35	It should be made the size of a finger.
3.9.4.36	It was the size of a little finger.
3.9.4.37	If one were to make it smaller than that, it would become a thunderbolt and destroy the sacrificer's cattle.
3.9.4.38	Indra hurled the thunderbolt at Vritra.
3.9.4.39	It slipped.
3.9.4.40	This is the reason why it has a handle.
3.9.4.41	It should be made the width of a palm.
3.9.4.42	The tip of it was as big as a palm.
3.9.4.43	Since he took it from the one who was small, it is called Aṇimata.
3.9.4.44	Since Indra took it, it is called Indra.
3.9.4.45	If one wishes that others may ascend to his world, one should perform the Svāru rite of another tree.
3.9.4.46	Others ascend to his world.
3.9.4.47	If one desires to continue the progeny, one should make the Yūpa's sap.
3.9.4.48	One continues the progeny.
3.9.4.49	The Yajamāna is the Agniṣṭhā.
3.9.4.50	The Agni is the brilliance.
3.9.4.51	If one were to make it in this way or that way, one would diminish the Yajamāna's brilliance.
3.9.4.52	One should make it resembling Agni.
3.9.4.53	For the Yajamana's brilliance. 
3.9.4.54	Having placed the sacrificial post in the fire at the conclusion of the sacrifice, he offers the oblations.
3.9.4.55	The gods thought, "Let us perform this sacrifice."
3.9.4.56	They said, "Let our oblations be offered with the enclosing sticks, the sacrificial post with the stone, and the Svadha always."
3.9.4.57	This is their offering.
3.9.4.58	Mahadeva does not kill a man before.
3.9.4.59	Then Rudra followed this.
3.9.4.60	The gods saw this protection of Rudra.
3.9.4.61	He anoints three times beyond and three times below.
3.9.4.62	That is six.
3.9.4.63	There are six seasons.
3.9.4.64	From the seasons he protects Rudra.
3.9.4.65	The seasons are the recipients of oblations, the stomas are the recipients of praise.
3.9.4.66	They are pleased with him through this.
3.9.4.67	When he offers on the sacrificial post, he propitiates the trees; when he offers on the rope, the plants; when he offers to himself, the men.
3.9.4.68	He says, "May your smoke go to heaven" from the Havirdhana; "May your light go to the atmosphere" from the Agnidhra; "May your ashes go to the earth" from the Sadasi.
3.9.4.69	He thus propitiates Rudra from all sides.
3.9.4.70	When the men have offered the oblation, they are driven away from the trees.
3.9.4.71	It is absorbed into his own deity.
3.9.4.72	The sacrificial post releases the evil of the sacrifice.
3.9.4.73	If one touches the sacrificial post, one releases the evil of sacrifice.
3.9.4.74	Therefore, the sacrificial post should not be touched.
3.9.4.75	This is indeed a curse.
3.9.4.76	It is powerful, restless, and is about to destroy these worlds with its heat.
3.9.4.77	If there is one, he should say, "This is your wind."
3.9.4.78	If there are many, he should say "These are your winds."
3.9.4.79	The Vāyus are the protectors of the plants.
3.9.4.80	He releases his own deity for their non-injury.
3.9.4.81	Just as a rope is tied to a post, these worlds are tied to the sacrificial posts.
3.9.4.82	They lead him to distress.
3.9.4.83	When he says, "Salutations to the two Svara gods," he pays homage to them.
3.9.4.84	They are pleased with him.
3.9.4.85	They bestow the world on him.
3.9.4.86	These are the gods who have come to this world, settled in the Svara gods, the protectors.
3.9.4.87	Those whom he does not see, they are settled.
3.9.4.88	Then he sees those who are great in strength.
3.9.4.89	When he says, "Salutations to the great Maruts, the lords of the atmosphere, may I not be excluded from them," he indeed encircles them.
3.9.4.90	These indeed are the dispensers of food in the other world.
3.9.4.91	They indeed bestow food on him.
3.9.4.92	"May I be behind the food," he says.
3.9.4.93	After that, the food is eaten.
3.9.5.1	The gods were the sacrificers.
3.9.5.2	Then there was no other oblation.
3.9.5.3	The gods having churned out Agni, offered oblations into Agni.
3.9.5.4	Having created animals by that oblation, they then offered the animal.
3.9.5.5	When one offers into Agni after having churned out, 
3.9.5.6	Having created the animals with that oblation, they then offer the animal.
3.9.5.7	Or, indeed, the animals are offered to the deity when they are generated.
3.9.5.8	Or, they generate brilliance for him.
3.9.5.9	"You are the womb of Agni." It is as if a dwelling place is being made.
3.9.5.10	"The testicles are firm." He places the semen there.
3.9.5.11	For he who does not have these two does not have seed.
3.9.5.12	"You are Urvashi."
3.9.5.13	Urvashi is speech.
3.9.5.14	"You (are) Pururava."
3.9.5.15	That is the union of the vital breath.
3.9.5.16	"You have life." He anoints it.
3.9.5.17	He places the seed in that very union.
3.9.5.18	"You belong to the Gayatri metre, you belong to the Tristubh metre, you belong the Jagati metre."
3.9.5.19	He generates him with the metres.
3.9.5.20-26	He recites Savitri first for the sake of propagation. For the offspring are propagated by Savitri. Then the one for heaven and earth. For the animals are indeed on heaven and earth. Heaven and earth are the animals. He recites the Gayatri verses. For Agni is Gayatri, the Gayatri metre.
3.9.5.27	The Anväh is unlimited.
3.9.5.28	For Agni's forms are unlimited.
3.9.5.29	With Agni's army Indra slew Vritra.
3.9.5.30	When he had been pressed and was frightened, he was destroyed there. From that place the earth was created.
3.9.5.31	Therefore one should not recite the Dharmasûtras there.
3.9.5.32	For that (earth) is hostile to the Râkshasas, and is unconquerable.
3.9.5.33	The Paridhâs are recited.
3.9.5.34	If one were to strike the enclosing sticks after offering them, the demons would attack the sacrifice.
3.9.5.35	One should strike the enclosing sticks from the front, for the non-attack of the demons.
3.9.5.36	Indeed, what is done at the sacrifice is cruel, when the Agni-s offer Agni.
3.9.5.37	When he says, "Be ye both of one mind, of one intention, of one thought, without enmity," he pacifies.
3.9.5.38	The sacrificer is indeed pacified for the sake of non-injury.
3.9.5.39	He offers with the ladle.
3.9.5.40	He offers the share with the two joining together.
3.9.5.41	If there is a hornless, one-eyed, or dry animal, its share is exhausted.
3.9.5.42	The one that has fallen and is impure, that is for the animals.
3.9.5.43	The animal dedicated to Agni is to be offered at the Agniṣṭoma.
3.9.5.44-52	The Agniṣṭoma is indeed connected with Agni. The animal sacrifice of the Ukthya is connected with Indra and Agni. The Ukthyas are indeed connected with Indra and Agn. The animal of the Ṣoḍaśin is connected with Indra. The animal is indeed connected with Indra. The Ṣoḍasī is connected with Indra The female goat of the Atiratra is connected with Sarasvatī. Sarasvatī is indeed speech. Speech is the Anushtubh.
3.9.5.53	The night is in the Anushtubh metre.
3.9.5.54	This is indeed the turning away of the sacrificial rites.
3.9.5.55	Just as a fish, not cut, shakes off the people, so do these, being born, shake off the people.
3.9.5.56	He who knows them thus, they shake him off with this.
3.9.5.57	If one were to ask, 'How can I make the Savanas animal-possessing?'
3.9.5.58	Whatever is offered at the morning pressing, that makes the morning pressing animal-yielding; whatever is offered with cakes at the midday pressing, that makes midday pressing animal-yielding. Whatever is offered with limbs at the third pressing, that makes third pressing animal-yielding.
3.9.5.59	How much do they move the animal? When they move it with the Vayu-oblation. How much do they do it with the Puronuvākyā-oblations? How much do they with the Avadāna-oblations?
3.9.5.60	They move the animal with its form when they move it with Vayu-oblations. They do it with its self when they do it with Puronuvākyat-oblations. When they do it with Avadāna- oblations, they do it with its body.
3.9.5.61	To whom is the animal dedicated?
3.9.5.62	It is dedicated to the east.
3.9.5.63	It is placed on the right side.
3.9.5.64	He should ask, "Is it to be offered towards the east?"
3.9.5.65	If it is employed towards the west, one conquers this direction by that. If it is placed on the south, one conquers that direction by that.
3.9.5.66	If it is offered towards the east, one conquers by that.
3.9.5.67	When it is taken towards the north, one conquers the world of men by that.
3.9.5.68	 When it is placed on south, one conqueres the world of the fathers by that.
3.9.5.69	The oblation that is offered first, that leads to the world of the gods.
3.9.5.70	The smoke that rises upwards from the oblation,
3.9.5.71	that leads to the heavenly world.
3.9.5.72	The oblation that is called out and is taken away towards the west, that leads to this world.
3.9.5.73	One who offers oblations to animals conquers all these directions, all the worlds.
3.9.5.74	All these directions are conquered by him, all the worlds.
3.9.6.1-7	Now these are the Apryas. Prajapati, having created the creatures, thought, "I am alone." He saw these Apryas. With them he gratified himself. Yajna is Prajapati. When these become Apryas, the sacrificers gratify Yajna with them.
3.9.6.8	The gods, with the Vayu, went to the heavenly world at the morning pressing.
3.9.6.9	They perform with the Vayu at the morning pressing
3.9.6.10	The sacrificer, with the Vaya, goes to the heavenly world.
3.9.6.11	They, going to heaven, shook off the immobile bodies.
3.9.6.12	They perform at the third pressing with the limbs.
3.9.6.13	For the release of the immobile bodies.
3.9.6.14	They sprinkle the animal.
3.9.6.15	Whatever impurity, whatever uncleanliness is in it, they purify it.
3.9.6.16	Having prepared the animal, they churn out fire.
3.9.6.17	For the securing of animals.
3.9.6.18	There are two kinds of thunderbolt:
3.9.6.19	One is terrible,
3.9.6.20	The other is auspicious.
3.9.6.21	The one that is dry is terrible,
3.9.6.22	the one that is wet is auspicious.
3.9.6.23	By the thunderbolt indeed, one makes effort.
3.9.6.24	One takes up the thunderbolt.
3.9.6.25	For effort.
3.9.6.26	"For the wish, for thee."
3.9.6.27	He indeed makes effort for the wish.
3.9.6.28	"Thou art the one who shines forth."
3.9.6.29	For he indeed shines forth.
3.9.6.30	"Thou hast gone to the gods, to the divine clans."
3.9.6.31	These indeed are the divine clans, namely, the cattle.
3.9.6.32	"The Agni-priests."
3.9.6.33	These are the fires, the wise ones, namely the priests and the Hotṛs.
3.9.6.34	"O Brihaspati, with the support of wealth."
3.9.6.35	Brihaspati is indeed Brahman.
3.9.6.36	He indeed gives it to him through Brahman.
3.9.6.37	"May your offerings be enjoyed."
3.9.6.38	He indeed enjoys it.
3.9.6.39	"O divine Tvashtar, in the contest for wealth."
3.9.6.40	For Tvashtar indeed creates forms.
3.9.6.41	"The Revatī is impure."
3.9.6.42	The Revatī are indeed cattle.
3.9.6.43	It is indeed the cattle that he gives away.
3.9.6.44	"By the impulse of the divine Savitr,"
3.9.6.45	he takes it with the impulse of Savitr.
3.9.6.46	"By means of the arms of the Asvins,"
3.9.6.47	The Asvins are the Adhvaryu of the gods.
3.9.6.48	"By hands of Pūṣan,"
3.9.6.49	By means of the deities.
3.9.6.50	There are two kinds of noose.
3.9.6.51	The other is terrible.
3.9.6.52	The other is auspicious.
3.9.6.53	He who is fit for sacrifice is terrible.
3.9.6.54	He who does not fit for sacrifice is auspicious.
3.9.6.55	With the noose of the divine oblation of truth, he says.
3.9.6.56	He binds him with the noose that is fit for sacrifice.
3.9.6.57	He says, "I release."
3.9.6.58	For men bind (others) indeed.
3.9.6.59	"For him you are dear," he says.
3.9.6.60-67	He makes it acceptable to the deity to whom the animal is offered. "The human beings are the ones who are to be protected." "The animal is indeed dry and impure." When one ties up an animal, he makes both of them pure. He ties it facing east, because animals facing east approach the sacrificial post.
3.9.6.68	The deities are present in his vital airs.
3.9.6.69	When he ties up the animal,
3.9.6.70	he ties up the deities for him facing towards the west.
3.9.6.71	"He says, "For the waters and plants."
3.9.6.72	For the waters and the plants is this (animal).
3.9.6.73	"He sprinkles it, "For the beloved of the deities."
3.9.6.74	He makes it beloved of the deity for whom the animal is offered.
3.9.6.75	"May your mother and father approve of you."
3.9.6.76	He is approved by his mother, father, brother, friend.
3.9.6.77	"He carries him (the sacrificer) to the gods, to the god who is the sacrificer."
3.9.6.78	He points him out to the deities.
3.9.6.79	"You are the protector of the waters."
3.9.6.80	He is indeed the protector of the water.
3.9.6.81	"May the waters, the goddesses, approve of the oblation."
3.9.6.82	He offers it to him only when it is cooked.
3.9.6.83	And when he takes it up and sprinkles it,
3.9.6.84	he makes it complete in every way.
3.9.6.85	"May the wind go with your wind."
3.9.6.86	He makes his breath follow the wind.
3.9.6.87	"May your limbs be united with the sacrificial rites."
3.9.6.88	He makes him fit for sacrifice.
3.9.6.89	"May you be united with the lord of sacrifice and his blessings."
3.9.6.90	He thus blesses the sacrificer with the blessing of the sacrifice.
3.9.6.91	The offering-spoon is the head.
3.9.6.92	The oblation is the body.
3.9.6.93	When one anoints the animal with the offering-spoon after having offered it,
3.9.6.94	he thus restores the head of the sacrifice to the body.
3.9.6.95	The ladle is indeed the thunderbolt.
3.9.6.96	The ladle-stand is the thunderbolt.
3.9.6.97	When one smears (the oblation) with the ladle-stand,
3.9.6.98	he thus strikes it with the thunderbolt.
3.9.7.4	When he makes the fire go around, it is for the removal of the Rākṣasas.
3.9.7.5	He makes the fire go round three times.
3.9.7.6	There are three worlds here.
3.9.7.7	He removes the Rākṣasa from these worlds and from the sacrifice.
3.9.7.8	He also goes around the sacrificial pit.
3.9.7.9	This is the womb of the fires.
3.9.7.10	The oblation spills over and is smeared when it spills over.
3.9.7.11	Agni is all the deities.
3.9.7.12	Here indeed is that deity for whom the animal is offered.
3.9.7.13	When one performs the paryanna, one sends it to that deity.
3.9.7.14	How much is this animal?
3.9.7.15	How much are the Prayāja offerings?
3.9.7.16	Now indeed, all are pleased.
3.9.7.17	Therefore, after being called, one is requested.
3.9.7.18	The gods first heard the cry.
3.9.7.19	Or else he makes the animal hear the call.
3.9.7.20	Therefore one who is called is not to be given away.
3.9.7.21	All animals, both domestic and wild, are bound together with the one that is being bound.
3.9.7.22	Those who see the one being bound are bound together with it.
3.9.7.23	When he offers.
3.9.7.24	This is their release.
3.9.7.25	If he were not to offer, they would not be released.
3.9.7.26	"He says, "Carry the earth."
3.9.7.27	This is indeed the deity of the atmosphere.
3.9.7.28	The demons indeed desire to injure him who has fallen from here and has not reached there.
3.9.7.29	They place Agni in front for the sake of overcoming the demons and for the sake of destroying the demons.
3.9.7.30	Then indeed the deities place the oblation in front of the one being led to the sacrifice.
3.9.7.31	He places Agni in front, for non-leakage.
3.9.7.32	When the animal is being led to slaughter, it approaches the Āhavanīya fire.
3.9.7.33	He who then takes up the animal, he obtains the blessing of the sacrifice.
3.9.7.34	What is said in the verse, "O Revanta, enter the lord of sacrifice" - where the blessing of the sacrifice goes to the sacrificer.
3.9.7.35	One follows with the Vapa and Srapanis.
3.9.7.36	This is indeed both.
3.9.7.37	"The sky is the breast, with the wind as the deity."
3.9.7.38	The sky is indeed the animals.
3.9.7.39	Wind is the breath.
3.9.7.40	He places the breaths in it.
3.9.7.41	"He pleases the deities by saying, 'May this oblation be for you.'
3.9.7.42	He makes him whole again by saying, 'Let him be whole with his body.'
3.9.7.43	'The younger with the younger,' thereby the sacrificer becomes more prosperous.
3.9.7.44	When they call the sacrifice an animal, and when they think of it as such,
3.9.7.45	where then is the sacrifice?"
3.9.7.46	When he says, "To the sacrifice, to the lord of sacrifice," he establishes the sacrifice in the lord of sacrifice. Then they offer the animal.
3.9.7.47	The oblation indeed leaks out when it drips or is smeared.
3.9.7.48	When he sprinkles grass, it is for non-leakage.
3.9.7.49	They sprinkle it facing each other.
3.9.7.50	The animals, indeed, are the Prajñā (wisdom) of the sacrificer. They stand up to the Prajñās. They turn away with their feet pointing towards the east.
3.9.8.1	The priests are chosen.
3.9.8.2	The priests, indeed, are metres.
3.9.8.3	He chooses the metres.
3.9.8.4	When he chooses the Hotri, he chooses the Jagati; when he chooses the Adhvaryu, he chooses the Pankti; when he chooses Agni-dhr, he chooses the Ati-chhandas; when he chooses Maitra-varuna, he chooses the Gayatri; when he chooses Brahmana-sambhin, he chooses the Tristubh; when he chooses Potri, he chooses Ushnih; when he chooses Ne-shtr, he chooses Kakubha.
3.9.8.5	He says, "Agni is the leader of the divine hosts." He chooses the sacrificer.
3.9.8.6	He, being chosen, utters the Vasat-call.
3.9.8.7	He does not choose the Acchavaka.
3.9.8.8	It is indeed after this that the Hotr-priests are chosen.
3.9.8.9	They are the ones leading to heaven.
3.9.8.10	When the Acchavaka recites the hymns of the two deities,
3.9.8.11	the sacrificer has two feet for stability.
3.9.8.12	And when he chooses the Agnidh in the middle,
3.9.8.13	Therefore this Agni is in the middle of the plants.
3.9.8.14	Because he who offers the best of those who offer, offers.
3.9.8.15	Therefore when churned, he is born above.
3.9.8.16	These indeed are his hymns, which were covered and yoked.
3.9.8.17	If they were to offer the Vasat-call without covering, the enemy would go to the blessing of the sacrifice.
3.9.8.18	But when they offer the Vasat call with covering,
3.9.8.19	In one way only does the blessing of the sacrifice rest on the sacrificer.
3.9.8.20	Therefore one makes the Vasat-call for the animal.
3.9.8.21	For one chooses one.
3.9.8.22	There are ten deities of the animal.
3.9.8.23	There are the ten breaths in it.
3.9.8.24	There are eleven Prayajas.
3.9.8.25	He sacrifices to those deities which are in it.
3.9.8.26	And that which is the eleventh,
3.9.8.27	He thereby sacrifices to the very deity to whom the animal is offered.
3.9.8.28	And why there are eleven Anuyājas?
3.9.8.29	He thereby pleases the very deities that have approached him.
3.9.8.30	He is indeed dead, slain, and become yonder.
3.9.8.31	There are ten deities of the animal.
3.9.8.32	There are also ten vital airs in it.
3.9.8.33	The vital airs are indeed the deities of the animal.
3.9.8.34	The ten Prayājas are indeed the breaths, he offers them to him.
3.9.8.35	The self is the eleventh of the breaths.
3.9.8.36	The self of the animal is the Vapa.
3.9.8.37	That this (animal) is the eleventh, which is offered.
3.9.8.38	He offers the self to the self.
3.9.8.39	And that the eleven Anuyājas are offered,
3.9.8.40	He places the breaths in him.
3.10.1.1	The wife, when she is about to fall away, falls away from the world of the sun.
3.10.1.2	He indeed injures him who falls away from his world.
3.10.1.3	When he says, "Salutations to the spread out," he makes salutations to the other world.
3.10.1.4	"Go beyond," he says; that is, "Go beyond this."
3.10.1.5	"May the stream of ghee flow to the sacrificer together with the prosperity of wealth." He prays for a blessing.
3.10.1.6	"The divine waters, you are pure, you are united with the gods."
3.10.1.7	They purify the waters.
3.10.1.8	They move about with the purified ones.
3.10.1.9	Therefore the waters do not harm this one, which moves about with much filth and impurity.
3.10.1.10	He is killed, or he is dead, or he has become a ghost in the other world.
3.10.1.11	From the waters are born creatures.
3.10.1.12	The wife generates.
3.10.1.13	When he sprinkles with water, he generates him again.
3.10.1.14	He touches all the vital parts, all the limbs.
3.10.1.15	For this is the extent of an animal.
3.10.1.16	When an animal is being killed, the vital parts are injured.
3.10.1.17	"He says, 'Do not injure his speech, do not injure his life.'
3.10.1.18	With water he thus releases his vital airs from impurity.
3.10.1.19	'Whatever is cruel in you, whatever is settled, purify it with this.
3.10.1.20	Purify yourself for the gods.'
3.10.1.21	Whatever he has done that is cruel, whatever he has settled, he makes it non-cruel.
3.10.1.22	He appeases it.
3.10.1.23-29	Those who fall down in small numbers reach this (world) without being pacified. Then he reaches this world with the curse. When he says, "May there be peace to the waters," he pacifies (them). They reach this (world), being pacified, for non-injury. He says, "O herb, protect him." He protects (him). "O thunderbolt, do not injure him." The thunderbolt is the thunderbolt.
3.10.1.30	He puts it inside the thunderbolt for non-injury.
3.10.1.31	An animal is offered to all the deities.
3.10.1.32	When he says, "You are the share of the Rakshas," by this oblation he excludes the Rakshas from the animal.
3.10.1.33	"This I drive away from the Rakshas, this I lead to the lowest darkness." He says this for the destruction of the Rakshas and for the separation of the Rakshasa.
3.10.1.34	The Vapa is indeed the cattle.
3.10.1.35	If one were to sprinkle, one would injure the cattle.
3.10.1.36	 If one were not to sprinkle, they would be irregular.
3.10.1.37	Wherein he would place it, he should place it on the animals, for the sake of the animals.
3.10.1.38	"With the words, "For Iṣa, for Urja."
3.10.1.39	For Iṣa is this (earth).
3.10.1.40	For Urja is this (earth)."
3.10.1.41	"He purifies her for the gods, he cleanses her for the gods."
3.10.1.42	"He says, "May heaven and earth be anointed with ghee."
3.10.1.43	He anoints the heaven and earth with ghee.
3.10.1.44	"He says, "For him, for the one who is dear."
3.10.1.45	He makes it dear to the deity for whom the animal is being offered.
3.10.1.46	" "He says, "Salutation to the sight of the sun," making salutation to the one who is yonder."
3.10.1.47	It turns in this way.
3.10.1.48	For thus does the sacrifice turn.
3.10.1.49	Now, indeed, this (Soma) turns around following the covered part of the sun.
3.10.1.50	"He says, 'Strike the earth!'
3.10.1.51	Now, indeed, this is the deity of the atmosphere.
3.10.1.52	Now, indeed the Rakshas want to injure him who has fallen from here and has not reached there.
3.10.1.53	The wooden ladle is made of wood, for the removal of Rakshas.
3.10.1.54	Because they carry the fire from that side to this side, therefore the offering of the gods comes back to this side.
3.10.1.55	He takes it up at the end of the rite for the sake of the Aśambatkara.
3.10.1.56	If he were to carry it beyond, he would carry it beyond this (fire).
3.10.1.57	For Agni has faces on all sides.
3.10.1.58	"He says, 'The Rakshas is repelled, the Arati is repelled,' for the destruction of the Rakshas, for the separation of the Rakshasa.
3.10.1.59	He places grass with the words, 'For the Vayu's offspring.' For the protection of the offspring.
3.10.1.60	For the Vayu indeed releases them from there for the establishment of offspring.
3.10.1.61	This is the foremost of the offerings, the foremost of the plants.
3.10.1.62	He piles up the front part with the front part.
3.10.1.63	He piles up the front portion of the oblation, the front portion of plants.
3.10.1.64	These are the drops of the oblation.
3.10.1.65	The oblation falls down when it is spilt or smeared.
3.10.1.66	When he says, "Accept the most excellent speech, the most excellent of the divine songs, as you offer the oblations," then his offerings are made, not spilled, and consecrated with "Vasat!"
3.10.1.67	Animals are offered to different deities in the Ekadashina sacrifice.
3.10.1.68	Here, the Agni-related one is mentioned first.
3.10.1.69	Agni is all the deities.
3.10.1.70	Here, that deity to whom the animal is offered is also present.
3.10.1.71	He thus sends her to the same place.
3.10.1.72	When it is cooked like a reddish-brown (cow), then it is Raudri.
3.10.1.73	If one were to offer then, one would consign one's cattle to Rudra.
3.10.1.74	When it has been cooked like a tawny (cow), then (it is) Agni's.
3.10.1.75	Then it should be offered.
3.10.1.76	Thus Rudra does not harm his cattle.
3.10.1.77	The animal is now dead.
3.10.1.78	If one were to pour the clarified butter over the omentum and then over the clarified butter, one would offer the animals to Rudra.
3.10.1.79	But when one pours the clarified butter over clarified butter and then over the omentun,
3.10.1.80	one approaches the animal in the proper order.
3.10.1.81	Thus indeed, his cattle are not harmed by Rudra.
3.10.1.82	The gods who are in front of him are those who are called Svāhā.
3.10.1.83	The gods above are those who are Svāhā. They are both the gods who are called Svāhākāra.
3.10.1.84	They are both the gods called Svāhā and are bound to the sacrificial animal.
3.10.1.85	One should offer the oblation in front of the animal with the words "Svāhā to the gods" and above with the words "To all the gods, Svāhā."
3.10.1.86	Thus both of them are bound.
3.10.1.87	When an animal is being killed, the breath goes to the Sūkta.
3.10.1.88	Having taken the breath, one should offer the Vapa.
3.10.1.89	The Vapa is the self of the animal.
3.10.1.90	He places the breath in the self.
3.10.1.91	The Dakshina-yana (the southern course) is the right one, so say the followers of Daksha. Thus it becomes the right course for the whole animal.
3.10.1.92	He offers the Vapa and Sramani with the verse, "May we go to the heaven, to the Marut, the wind-god."
3.10.1.93	The heaven and the wind are the share of Marut.
3.10.1.94	He sends them to that (heaven).
3.10.1.95	These two are the two straight lines, for the support of these two.
3.10.2.1	The gods offered a man to Medha.
3.10.2.2	His wisdom fled.
3.10.2.3	It entered a horse.
3.10.2.4	They offered a horse.
3.10.2.5	His wisdom again fled.
3.10.2.6	It went into a cow.
3.10.2.7	They offered the cow.
3.10.2.8	His wisdom then fled.
3.10.2.9	It then went into a sheep.
3.10.2.10-20	They offered the goat. His intelligence departed from him. It entered the sheep. They offered the sheep. His intelligence again departed from him.  It entered the barley. They offered barley. His intelligence then departed from him. It entered the rice. They offered rice. They obtained the rice.
3.10.2.21	When the cake is made of rice, it is placed in the middle of the animal, for the animal's vital essence is placed in the centre.
3.10.2.22	When the animal is cut open, it is hollow.
3.10.2.23	When the cake is made from rice, it is to cover it up and make it non-hollow.
3.10.2.24	It is made with twelve potsherds.
3.10.2.25	The year has twelve months.
3.10.2.26	The animals are born in a year for reproduction.
3.10.2.27	A cake on eleven potsherds should be offered.
3.10.2.28	The Tristubh metre has eleven syllables.
3.10.2.29	The Tristup is a metre of Indra.
3.10.2.30	Animals are of Indra.
3.10.2.31	He places animals in animals.
3.10.2.32	The gods offered animals to each other and went to heaven.
3.10.2.33	They thought, "By this (sacrifice) others will not ascend to the other world."
3.10.2.34	He sent it to be cooked in the Plakṣa.
3.10.2.35	It became a Plakṣa tree.
3.10.2.36	That is why the Plakṣas are called Plakṣas.
3.10.2.37	He sent it from the heart to be cooked in Plakṣa
3.10.2.38	Therefore it is hollow.
3.10.2.39	When he cuts a branch of the Plakṣ tree, he cuts it from the heart.
3.10.2.40	Having offered the clarified butter, he goes away.
3.10.2.41	"The cooked oblation is offered."
3.10.2.42	For the purpose of cooking.
3.10.2.43	He says three times.
3.10.2.44	The gods are threefold.
3.10.2.45	And also as this cooked rice is offered to the Brahmanas, so this oblation is offered to the gods.
3.10.2.46	Having gone around on the north, he pours it down for the securing of cattle.
3.10.2.47	The Prṣadājya is the Prāṇāpānas.
3.10.2.48	The heart is the Self.
3.10.2.49	When one anoints the heart with Prṣadājyas, one places the Prāṇās and Apānas in the middle of the animal.
3.10.2.50	The sacrificial grass is indeed the Soma.
3.10.2.51	And this is the northern sacrificial grass of the animal. The northern sacrificial grass is the animal.
3.10.2.52	He has made the oblation with faith.
3.10.2.53	"May my offering go to the gods without being spilled or disturbed."
3.10.2.54	The minds of all the gods go to the Pasha when it is being offered.
3.10.2.55	The mind is indeed the Manota.
3.10.2.56	When one recites the Manota, one unites their minds.
3.10.2.57	He is indeed killed, dead, and gone to the other world.
3.10.2.58	The mind indeed is the Manota.
3.10.2.59	He offers it again to Manota, thus he makes it grow again.
3.10.3.1	He offers on the heart.
3.10.3.2	He offers it on the mind.
3.10.3.3	It becomes the share of the animal.
3.10.3.4	He offers at the tongue.
3.10.3.5	He offers to the speech.
3.10.3.6	For by this one eats the first juice of plants.
3.10.3.7	He offers in the hawk.
3.10.3.8	He offers over the breast.
3.10.3.9	Then indeed, that juice stands firm here.
3.10.3.10	Having taken the two sides of the two thighs, he cuts.
3.10.3.11	For the grasping of the sacrifice.
3.10.3.12	The sacrificer cuts.
3.10.3.13	He cuts it from the middle.
3.10.3.14	He cuts the two sides of fat.
3.10.3.15	He cuts its form.
3.10.3.16	Having cut the anus, he cuts the rectum.
3.10.3.17	That is the best (part) of the sacrifice. He cuts the best (part).
3.10.3.18	For the best (part of the sacrifice) is the best (of all).
3.10.3.19	If one were to put the life of another animal in the mouth of this one, it would die.
3.10.3.20	It would be a dying animal.
3.10.3.21	Therefore one puts the life of the superior animal in the mouth.
3.10.3.22	For the superior animal has superior life.
3.10.3.23	Having put the life of the heart, one puts it in the mouth. Or else,
3.10.3.24	one approaches the animal in the order of the parts.
3.10.3.25	And thus the entire animal is put in the mouth.
3.10.3.26	He cuts eleven times.
3.10.3.27	There are ten vital airs in an animal.
3.10.3.28	The self is the eleventh.
3.10.3.29	Thus it becomes the entire animal.
3.10.3.30	There are eleven cuts.
3.10.3.31	He cuts them twice each.
3.10.3.32	That makes twenty-two.
3.10.3.33	There are three triads.
3.10.3.34	That makes fifty-five.
3.10.3.35	Manu created beings with the twenty-five-fold Stoma.
3.10.3.36	This is indeed the Stoma of Manu.
3.10.3.37	For procreation.
3.10.3.38	This is the offering of all animals.
3.10.3.39	And indeed of the vital airs, the out-breath, the through-breath, and the up-breath, of them.
3.10.3.40	When he offers to the three-limbed ones,
3.10.3.41	then by that alone the offering of the vital airs the out-breath the through-breath and the up- breath of them becomes made.
3.10.3.42	Viśvarūpa, the son of Tvaṣṭra, let loose the animals.
3.10.3.43	Therefore, the animals are of Viśvarūpas.
3.10.3.44	The animal is purified by letting loose.
3.10.3.45	Therefore, marrow of the ribs is not eaten first.
3.10.3.46	It did not reach below.
3.10.3.47	This is the life.
3.10.3.48	Therefore, one offers from here.
3.10.3.49	One offers the limbs with the eyes.
3.10.3.50	He steps on the animal.
3.10.3.51	Therefore animals, with their limbs wounded, go to the slaughter-house.
3.10.3.52	The whole animal is dedicated to Agni.
3.10.3.53	Or else it is dedicated to some other deity.
3.10.3.54	When he offers to Agni from the right half of the liver, from the middle of the anus, from the hips and from the buttocks,
3.10.3.55	then his offering becomes complete for Agni.
3.10.3.56-62	It divides the anus into three parts. For the animal is divided into three parts now. The cuttings are of three parts. He places life in the animal as much as it is. It divides the fat into three parts. For animals are of the form of fat. All the parts of the animal which are fat, become fat.
3.10.3.63	Whatever fat there is in the animal, that becomes its form.
3.10.3.64	"The Yajna-kunapi (the sacrificial ladle) has many boundaries."
3.10.3.65	Yajnavaca Rajastambayana said:
3.10.3.66	"Here, indeed, men sacrifice animals,
3.10.3.67	saying, 'They do not go to the other world.'
3.10.3.68	When one offers with gold placed (in the fire),
3.10.3.69	one sends him to the heavenly world of golden light.
3.10.4.1	He offers the Vasahomas.
3.10.4.2	He offers the essence.
3.10.4.3	He offers with the Svadhā.
3.10.4.4	For by this he offers the other limbs.
3.10.4.5	This is indeed an offering.
3.10.4.6	And he also averts the oblation with the thunderbolt.
3.10.4.7	He pacifies with this the broth.
3.10.4.8	The essence is the food.
3.10.4.9	He thus nourishes the animal with energy and sap.
3.10.4.10	And he thus puts it together in the animal as much as it is.
3.10.4.11	He puts it on the side, for the sake of enclosing energy.
3.10.4.12	He is indeed killed, dead, and become yonder.
3.10.4.13	When he touches the animal, he thus revives it.
3.10.4.14-19	Having first sent the oblation to the gods, one should then ascend the body, they say. Having offered oblations, one touches the animal. Having first sent the offering to the gods, he then ascends the body. One offers at half a verse. This is half a verse. It is half a verse The atmosphere is between these two.
3.10.4.20	The beings in the sky.
3.10.4.21	He places the sap in the beings.
3.10.4.22	He offers to the tree.
3.10.4.23	Soma is the tree.
3.10.4.24	These beings are connected with Soma.
3.10.4.25	He places sap in the beings themselves.
3.10.4.26	The clarified butter is the exhalation and inhalation.
3.10.4.27	The body is the oblation.
3.10.4.28	When he offers clarified butter, he places the exhalation and the inhalation in the body of the animal.
3.10.4.29	He offers to the directions.
3.10.4.30	He thus anoints these directions with juice.
3.10.4.31	He offers the eastern direction as the last.
3.10.4.32	They return to the eastern direction.
3.10.4.33	They carry the pot for the Hotr to the rear.
3.10.4.34	The Hotr is connected with all gods.
3.10.4.35	These creatures are connected with all gods
3.10.4.36	The creatures indeed live on the rear.
3.10.4.37	All of them he makes yielding milk.
3.10.4.38	He offers at the anus.
3.10.4.39	The anus is the vital airs.
3.10.4.40	From the vital airs offspring are born. For reproduction.
3.10.4.41	He offers to the elder.
3.10.4.42	For from the elder offspring are born.
3.10.4.43	If he were to offer to the younger, he would destroy reproduction.
3.10.4.44	Therefore he offers to the elder.
3.10.4.45-52	He offers without spilling, for the non-spilling of the vital airs. If he were to spill, he would spill the vital airs. He should spill for him whom he hates. He would spill the vital air of him. One should not offer. If one were to offer, one would offer the vital airs. One would be a killer. They say, one should offer.
3.10.4.53	The Upayaja is the begetter.
3.10.4.54	He who performs the Upayaja rite begets offspring.
3.10.4.55	This is what Gaupalayana, the son of Sucirvaka, belonging to the Bharadvaja family, said.
3.10.4.56	What then were the offspring when there was no sacrifice with different Upayajas?
3.10.4.57	The offspring did not beget offspring.
3.10.4.58	The herbs did not bear fruit.
3.10.4.59	When the sacrifice was united with the Upasads, then the creatures were born.
3.10.4.60	Then the plants took fruit.
3.10.4.61	There are eleven Prayājas.
3.10.4.62	There are eleveṉ Anu-yājas.
3.10.4.63	There is eleven Upāyas.
3.10.4.64	That makes thirty-three.
3.10.4.65	There are thirty-three deities.
3.10.4.66	These are the ones he pleases with these.
3.10.4.67	This is the animal's boundary, beyond which it is either desired or undesired.
3.10.4.68	It takes him to the measure of his own size.
3.10.4.69	All animals are heavenly.
3.10.4.70	If one were to offer elsewhere than the Āhavanīya fire, it would be non-heavenly.
3.10.4.71	They bring the fire from the animal sacrifice.
3.10.4.72	By that, all animals are heavenly.
3.10.4.73	Because he first offers to the one who is not yet spoken to, then he offers to the one spoken to.
3.10.4.74	Therefore from the same womb animals are born with different forms.
3.10.4.75	The sacrifice indeed was the means of the gods' not being exhausted.
3.10.4.76	The gods offered it with the Upāyas, for not being exhausted. The Upāyas are the means of not being exhausted. They are the means of the sacrifice not being exhausted. Therefore they are called Upāyas.
3.10.4.77	When they are these Upāyas, they offer the sacrifice with them for not being exhausted.
3.10.4.78	When the man is in the shadow, the sacrifice is in the shadow.
3.10.4.79	The gods placed it with the Upāyas for the sake of being without a shadow.
3.10.4.80	When these are the Upāyas, one places the sacrifice with them for the sake of not having a shadow.
3.10.5.1	One should place the animals that are beyond the Ekādaśina on the northern half of the sacrificial post.
3.10.5.2	The animals are fierce.
3.10.5.3	Agni is the support.
3.10.5.4	They place Soma on the southern sacrificial post.
3.10.5.5	Thus Rudra does not harm his animals.
3.10.5.6	I know the Adhvaryu and the non-Adhvaryu in the vessels."
3.10.5.7	So said Haruna Aupaveshi.
3.10.5.8	If one asks, "How many vessels are there?"
3.10.5.9	There are twelve vessels.
3.10.5.10	The Upāṁśusavana is the thirteenth.
3.10.5.11	They debate whether the vessels are or are not vessels.
3.10.5.12	They debate the thirteenth month.
3.10.5.13	They debate if the months are or are not months.
3.10.5.14	There are five oblations at the morning pressing, four at the midday pressing and four at the third pressing.
3.10.5.15	Prajapati created this from himself.
3.10.5.16	Because he saw this, he covered it with these.
3.10.5.17	The gods and the Asuras were in conflict.
3.10.5.18	The Asuras had abodes, the gods did not.
3.10.5.19	These worlds were the abodes of the Asuras.
3.10.5.20	The gods defeated the Asuras in every battle.
3.10.5.21	Because they had no abodes.
3.10.5.22	They knew that the Savanas themselves were the abode.
3.10.5.23	They entered them.
3.10.5.24	They did not hold them.
3.10.5.25	They knew that the Purushas themselves were the abode of the Savanas.
3.10.5.26	They poured them down.
3.10.5.27	They held them.
3.10.5.28	Then the gods became victorious, the Asuras were defeated.
3.10.5.29	He who knows this becomes one who has an abode, he becomes one who has himself.
3.10.5.30	His enemy becomes defeated.
3.10.5.31	Therefore, the cakes should be offered after the Soma-pressing.
3.10.5.32	Therefore, the cake should be eaten after the Soma-drinking.
3.10.5.33	The gods, having made ghee as their thunderbolt, killed Soma.
3.10.5.34	Indeed, they pour it over him.
3.10.5.35	If one were to eat it, one would kill the Soma-drinking.
3.10.5.36	If he does not drink it, he would be deprived of the Soma-drink.
3.10.5.37	What is not drunk is to be drunk for the sake of drinking Soma.
3.10.5.38	It is not to be guarded.
3.10.5.39	It is to be drunk.
3.10.5.40	Indra killed Vritra.
3.10.5.41	He did not find anything to be his.
3.10.5.42	He found it in the cake.
3.10.5.43	Therefore the cake is to be drunk, for the sake of the drinking of Soma.
3.10.5.44	There are five cakes at the morning pressing.
3.10.5.45	There is a cake, a pot of cooked rice, cooked barley, a pot of gruel and a pot of milk.
3.10.5.46	This is the row of cakes.
3.10.5.47	There are two Nārāśaṃsa oblations at the morning pressing
3.10.5.48	There are two at the midday pressing.
3.10.5.49	There are one at the third pressing.
3.10.5.50	This is a row of Nārāśamsa oblations.
3.10.5.51	There are three pressings and the Avabhṛtha rite.
3.10.5.52	The fifth one is the one to be followed by the Savanas.
3.10.5.53	This is the line of Savanas.
3.10.5.54	That is the line which the Brahmavadins call.
3.10.5.55	Do you know that line by which they do not praise or chant?
3.10.5.56	Then they carry the sacrifice.
3.10.5.57	Then they establish the sacrifice.
3.10.6.1	The gods and the Asuras were competing.
3.10.6.2-7	Or their senses and energies departed from them. Or the Rk and Sama verses departed from them. The animals, speech, the senses and the breath departed from them. Then Indra desired, "May I attain union with them." "Having eaten the barley-meal, O Indra, the Hariva (verses) are yours." The Rk and Sama are Indra's Hariva (verses).
3.10.6.8	He attained union with the Rk and Sama.
3.10.6.9	"The Karambha of Pusha, the Sarasvati of Sarasvati, the Parivap of Parivap."
3.10.6.10	Pusha is indeed cattle.
3.10.6.11	He attained union with cattle.
3.10.6.12	"The Sarasvati of SarasvatI, the Parivapi of Parivapi."
3.10.6.13	Sarasvati is indeed speech.
3.10.6.14	He attained unity with speech.
3.10.6.15	"The Apupa of Indra, the Apupa of Agni."
3.10.6.16	Indra is indeed power.
3.10.6.17-23	He attained union with the senses. "The milk of Mitra and Varuna." Mitra and Varuna are the vital airs Prāṇa and Apāna. He attained union with the vital airs Prāna and Apāna. Then the gods became victorious over the Asuras. He who knows this attains union with these senses, these powers, these glories. He becomes one with himself.
3.10.6.24	His enemy is destroyed.
3.10.6.25	The long-tongued one is the morning pressing of the gods.
3.10.6.26	That is what it means.
3.10.6.27	It became the Payasya.
3.10.6.28	Therefore the Payasya is like a drunkard.
3.10.6.29	The Maitrāvaruṇa should be at the morning pressing.
3.10.6.30	Mitrāvaruṇa are the Prāṇāpāna.
3.10.6.31	The Prāṇāpaṇas are indeed taken out from the mouth of the sacrifice.
3.10.6.32	The anus should not be cut.
3.10.6.33	If one were to cut the anus, it would cause colic and the demons would not be defeated.
3.10.6.34	The sacrificial post is measured in front.
3.10.6.35	If they were to lead the animal past the sacrificial post, then the demons would defeat the sacrifice.
3.10.6.36	Having led it between the fire and the sacrificial post, it is for the non-defeat of the demons.
3.10.7.1	"He goes to the ocean, svāhā." He offers at the foot, for this is the foot.
3.10.7.2	"He goes to the atmosphere, svāhā," he places the semen there.
3.10.7.3	"He says, 'Go to the god Savitar, svāhā,' for the sake of propagation.
3.10.7.4	"He (goes) to the day and night, svāhā."
3.10.7.5	For indeed, beings are born in accordance with the day and night.
3.10.7.6	"He(goes) to Mitra-Varuna, svāhā."
3.10.7.7-15	Prāṇāpāna are indeed Mitra and Varuna. He places them in the waters. "He says, "Go to heaven and earth, svāhā." He thus takes them back with these two. "He (the sacrificer) says, "go to the metres, svāhā." The metres are indeed speech. He thus places speech in the waters. He says, " Go to Soma, svāhā.” Soma is indeed food.
3.10.7.16	He places the food in the water.
3.10.7.17	"He says, "Go to the sacrifice, svāhā."
3.10.7.18	He makes them fit for sacrifice.
3.10.7.19	" "Go to heaven, svāhā."
3.10.7.20	They lead the rain to them.
3.10.7.21	"He (the sacrificer) says, "May I go to Agni Vaisvānara, svāhā.”
3.10.7.22	Agni Vaisvānāra is the year.
3.10.7.23	He establishes them in the year.
3.10.7.24	He makes them live for a year.
3.10.7.25	He says, "Control the mind and heart," for the protection of the vital airs.
3.10.7.26	"For the plants," he says, placing the sap in the plants.
3.10.7.27	He who knows or does not know, if he offers the sacrificial offerings in pairs, he makes the vital airs in pairs.
3.10.7.28	He who says, "Control the mind and the heart," he indeed arranges the breaths in due order.
3.10.7.29	The animal that is caught, grieves.
3.10.7.30	Its middle is afflicted by the heat.
3.10.7.31	It comes to the hearts.
3.10.7.32	If one touches a man, one would afflict men with heat.
3.10.7.33	If one were to touch a cow, one would affict cattle with heat.
3.10.7.34	If he touches wood, he would incur the curse of trees.
3.10.7.35	If he touches grass, he would incur curse of plants.
3.10.7.36	If he touch water, he would incur a curse of water.
3.10.7.37	What is wet and near water is peaceful.
3.10.7.38	One should approach there.
3.10.7.39	There he appeases the deity of purity.
3.11.1.1	kindled, Indra, in the company of the dawns, the radiant, the former-maker, the increaser, with three gods and thirty, with his thunderbolt arm, he struck Vritra and opened up the distance.
3.11.1.2	The man-sacrificer, the hero, the one who measures, Tanunapat, the one who is worthy of the sacrificial place, the one who anoints with cows and honey, the one who adorns with gold, the wise one, the intelligent one, offers sacrifices.
3.11.1.3	Praised by the gods, the destroyer of the enemies of the gods, the one who offers oblations, the one who is eager, the lord of the gods, he who holds the lineage, the one with the thunderbolt in his hand, may he come to the sacrifice, accepting it.
3.11.1.4	Indra, the destroyer of enemies, accepting the sacrificial grass, may he sit down in the eastern direction of the earth, the one with great fame, the first, the auspicious one, anointed by the Adityas, in harmony with the Vasus.
3.11.1.5	The Duras, the sons of Kavya, running to Indra, the bull, approach him, the good wives, the doors, the goddesses, standing on both sides, the heroes, the hero, the great ones, spreading out.
3.11.1.6	Dawn and Night, the great ones of the great one, the milker, the well-milked, the strong Indra, the strong one, binding with the thread, the goddess, the god of the gods, the one who offers, the golden one.
3.11.1.7	The divine Hotr-priests, with their minds, in many ways, with the first speech, placing on the head of the sacrifice the honey, the eastern light, the growing one, with oblation.
3.11.1.8	The three goddesses, growing with oblation, Indra, the bull, the wives, the unbroken thread, Sarasvati, the goddess, the goddess Bharati, the one with all forms.
3.11.1.9	Tvashtri, the bull, bestowing strength on Indra, the uncorrupted, for fame, bestowing many (gifts), the bull, the bestower of much seed, may he anoint the head of the sacrifice and the gods.
3.11.1.10	The tree, released from the bonds, self-anointed, the god who is pacified, filling Indra's belly with oblations, may he sweeten the oblation with honey and ghee.
3.11.1.11	The heroes, the Indra, the Indra of the drops, the Indra of Indra, the Indra who is to be praised, the Indra who has been praised, the Indra of praise, the Indra of praises, the Indra of praising, the Indra of praised, the Indra to be praised, Indra, the Indra, Indra, the lord of Indra, the lord, the lord of the lord, the Indra, who is to be worshipped, the Indra, whose name is to be worshipped.
3.11.2.1	The Hotar should worship Agni on the sacrificial grass, Indra on the seat of the Idas, Sarasvati.
3.11.2.2	The goat, the smoke, the barley, the lotus, the medicinal grass, the honey, the grass, the brilliance, the power.
3.11.2.3-9	Soma is milk, ghee is honey. May the ghee be consumed. O Hotar, offer the sacrifice. O Hotā, may Tapanā, Sarasvatī, and the sheep bring healing. They brought the sweet path, the strength for Indra, with the Badaras, the Upāvakas, and the healing herbs. Soma is milk, ghee honey.
3.11.2.10	Let there be the pouring of ghee.
3.11.2.11	O Hotar, do thou offer.
3.11.2.12	O Hotṛ, do thou offer the sacrifice to Narāśaṃsa, to Nāgnahu, the lord of Sura, the medicine.
3.11.2.13	The ram is the physician, the chariot of Sarasvatī, the moon, of the Asvins.
3.11.2.14	The fat of Indra, the medicine with Badara fruits, with Upāvakas, with Tokma.
3.11.2.15	The milk is Soma, the flowing ghee, the honey.
3.11.2.16	Let there be the pouring out of ghee.
3.11.2.17	Hotr, offer!
3.11.2.18	Hotr, may the one who is invoked offer to Sarasvati.
3.11.2.19	Indra, increasing with strength, the bull, the Indra of cattle,
3.11.2.20	The Asvins, Indra's medicine, with barley and sugarcane,
3.11.2.21	Honey with rice, for a month.
3.11.2.22	Soma, milk, flowing ghee, honey,
3.11.2.23	May the butter be consumed.
3.11.2.24	Hotr, offer!
3.11.2.25	The Hotar, the bestower of wealth, the bestower, the Asvins, the bestower.
3.11.2.26	The horse, the young cow, the bestower; the bestower, Sarasvati.
3.11.2.27	For Indra, the bestower (of) strength,
3.11.2.28	the Soma, the bestower has flowed forth, the bestower is honey, the bestower ghee.
3.11.2.29	Let the bestower of butter be consumed.
3.11.2.30	O Hotar, offer!
3.11.2.31	The Hotar, the giver, the bestower gives the distant directions, the bestower.
3.11.2.32	The Asvins are the two directions, Indra is the two worlds.
3.11.2.33	The cow Sarasvati yields milk, the bright light, the power of Indra.
3.11.2.34	The Soma-juice flows, ghee, honey.
3.11.2.35	May the ghee be poured out.
3.11.2.36	O Hotar, offer!
3.11.2.37	O Hotar! May the Asvins, knowing each other in the night and day, be born together with the well-endowed Sarasvati.
3.11.2.38	The shining, the healing, Indra, the hawk with his mind and his rays,
3.11.2.39	Soma, the milk, the flowing, the ghee, the honey.
3.11.2.40	The ghee is poured.
3.11.2.41	Hotr, offer!
3.11.2.42	Hotr, let the divine Hotr-s, the physicians, the Asvins, wake up Indra.
3.11.2.43	By day and by night, with healing herbs, Sarasvati, the physician,
3.11.2.44	With lead, Indra's power is milked.
3.11.2.45	Soma is milk, ghee is honey.
3.11.2.46	The ghee has been poured.
3.11.2.47	O Hotar, offer the sacrifice.
3.11.2.48	O Hotā, offer to the three goddesses, the three medicines, the three kinds of remedies.
3.11.2.49	Indra's form is golden, the Asvins are the two, and Sarasvatī is the great one.
3.11.2.50	Sarasvatī with speech milks Indra's power.
3.11.2.51	Soma is milk, ghee flows as honey.
3.11.2.52	Let there be the end of the ghee.
3.11.2.53	Hotr, do thou offer.
3.11.2.54	Hotr! Do thou offer to Tvashtra, the creator of forms, the bull, the male, the healer.
3.11.2.55	Tvashtra, Indra, the Asvins, the healer, Sarasvati.
3.11.2.56	Strength, energy, power, the wolf, the swift, the healer,
3.11.2.57	Glory, the Sura, the healer, the month, the autumn.
3.11.2.58	Soma is milk, ghee is honey.
3.11.2.59	May the Hotar know the ghee.
3.11.2.60	Hotar, do thou offer.
3.11.2.61	Hotar do thou worship Vanaspati, the pacifier, Shatakratu.
3.11.2.62	The fierce one, the king of anger, the tiger, the Asvins with devotion.
3.11.2.63	Sarasvati, the healer, milks the power for Indra.
3.11.2.64	Soma is milk, ghee honey.
3.11.2.65	May he know the ghee.
3.11.2.66	Hotr, offer!
3.11.2.67	Hotr, offer Agni with svāhā to the drops of ghee.
3.11.2.68	Svāhā to the fats separately.
3.11.2.69	Svāha to the goat to the Ashvins.
3.11.2.70	Svāhe to the ram to Sarasvati.
3.11.2.71	Svāhá to the bull to Indra, to the lion, with a thousand powers.
3.11.2.72	Svāhé Agni with remedies.
3.11.2.73	Svāhä Soma with powers.
3.11.2.74	Svāhā Indra, the Sutrāmaṇas, Savitar, Varuna, the lord of physicians.
3.11.2.75	Svāhā to the tree-lord, the beloved, the path, with medicines.
3.11.2.76	Svāha to the gods who drink ghee, Agni, the healer,
3.11.2.77	Soma, milk, flowing ghee, honey.
3.11.2.78	May the ghee be consumed.
3.11.2.79	O Hotar, offer the sacrifice.
3.11.3.1	The Agni is kindled, the Asvins are heated, the Soma is pressed, the Soma is milked, the Soma is poured out, the Soma is drunk. The Soma is pressed, Soma is milked. The Soma flows, the Soma is offered. The Soma has been pressed, the Soma has been milked, the Asvins have been pressed, the Asvins, the physicians, have been milked, Sarasvati has been milked. May Sarasvati, the mother of the world, the mother of all beings, the mother of heaven and earth, the mother of men, the mother of cattle, the mother of plants, the mother of water, the mother of fire, the mother of wind, the mother of light, the mother of darkness, the mother of day, the mother of night, the mother of truth, the mother of falsehood, the mother of good, the mother of evil, the mother of happiness, the mother of sorrow, the mother of joy, the mother of grief, the mother of life, the mother of death, the mother of birth, the mother of rebirth, the mother of this world, the mother who is the other world, the mother, the mother of mothers, the mother
3.11.3.2	Indra and Sarasvati have placed the moon and the Nāgasaṃsa (tree) for Indra. The two Asvins have placed the honey and the medicine for the physician's son.
3.11.3.3	Sarasvati, offering oblations, has placed the powers and strength for Indra. The Asvins, with Ida, have placed the food, energy, and wealth.
3.11.3.4	The Asvins brought Soma, the son of Namuci, bright and flowing, Sarasvati brought it to Indra for the sacrifice on the sacrificial grass.
3.11.3.5	The Asvins, the two, are the milkers of the cows, the two Asvins are the milkers from afar, Indra is the milker of both the worlds, Sarasvati milks the desires.
3.11.3.6	Usha and Nakti, the Asvins, in the evening, with the powers, Indra, the knowing, the well-shaped, were born together with Sarasvati.
3.11.3.7	O Asvins, protect us by day, O Sarasvati, protect us by night. The divine Hotars, the physicians, have protected Indra with his son.
3.11.3.8	Sarasvati, Asvins, Bharati, Ida, the strong one, have poured forth Soma for Indra to drink.
3.11.3.9	The Asvins, the healing honey, the healing Sarasvati, Indra, Tvashtra, fame, glory, form, form, they have poured out in the pressed (Soma).
3.11.3.10	In the season, Indra, the tree, the flowing, the dripping, the Asvins, the honey, the cow, Sarasvati, the flowing, has milked the sweet flowing of the dripping.
3.11.3.11	The Asvins, with the cows, the flowing, in the month, Sarasvati, have mixed the Soma, the sweet flowing, in Indra, Svāhā.
3.11.4.1	The Asvins, Sarasvati, with the mind of Namuci, increased Indra's power. They brought the bright, intoxicating wealth from the Asura.
3.11.4.2	The Asvins and Sarasvati increased Indra with oblations. He broke the strength of Namuci, the intoxicating Asura, with his companion.
3.11.4.3	That Indra, with the cattle, the Asvins and Sarasvatī, accepting the oblation, approached with the power of sacrifice.
3.11.4.4	He who has given Indra, Indra's power, Savitar, Varuna, Bhaga, Sutrāma, the Lord of Sacrifices, has given to the sacrificer.
3.11.4.5	Savitar, Varuna has given, the giver, to the sacrificer who gives, the wealth of Namuci, Sutrāman, the power of Indra.
3.11.4.6	Varuna has given the kingdom, Indra the power, Savitar the glory with Bhaga, Sutráman has given the fame and strength, giving the sacrifice.
3.11.4.7	You two, O Asvins, with Surama, with Namuci, in the Asura, drinking together, Sarasvati, have come to Indra in his works.
3.11.4.8	The Hotar invokes the Asvins, Sarasvati, Indra. These Somas, the drinkers of Sura, are pressed with goats, rams, bulls, with young grass, with tender grass, with parched grains. They are great, strong, flowing in the month of Magha, bright, milky, immortal. They have been started, they have flowed out as honey. The Asvins, Sarasvatī, Indra enjoy the Soma-honey. Let them drink and be exhilarated. Let them be exhilarated, O Hotar, offer, like a son to his parents, the Asvins, both Indra and Agni, with the hymns of praise. When you drank the Sura with the Shachis, Sarasvati, O Maghavan, has come to you.
3.11.4.9-11	The Asvins, with cows, Indra with horses, Sarasvati with oblations, increased the sacrificer. Those two Asvins, with good forms, with golden garments, Sarasvati with offerings, may protect the sacrificer. They are the physicians, the good performers of deeds, the well-milking Sarasvati, the hundred-sacrificing Indra, the slayer of Vritra, gave Indra strength.
3.11.4.12	O Agni, the oblation is in your mouth. Like a ladle, like a vessel, do thou bestow on us the wealth of horses, the praised, the great, the bestowing of strength.
3.11.4.13	In whom the horses, bulls, heifers, rams, goats, and sheep, released, invited, are offered, for the Soma-backed, the wise, do I generate a charming thought with my heart.
3.11.5.1	The divine Barhi, Sarasvati, the well-deity, Indra, the Asvins,
3.11.5.2	They gave the eye, the eye of light, the eye of sight, the eye of Indra,
3.11.5.3	May they be accepted by Vasuvan, the one who is worthy of Vasu.
3.11.5.4	Offer!
3.11.5.5	The divine goddesses, the Asvins are physicians, Indra, Sarasvati,
3.11.5.6	They gave life, strength, the life-force, the life-breath, the life-gate, the life-eye, the life-power, the life-strength, the life-splendor, the life-light, the life-sight, the life-vision, the life-knowledge, the life-wisdom, the life-intelligence, the life-understanding, the life-mind, the life-heart, the life-body, the life-limbs, the life-head, the life-voice, the life-speech, the life-tongue, the life-taste, the life-smell, the life-touch, the life-form, the life-sound, the life-appearance, the life-name, the life-non-appearance, the eye of life, the eye of the life-gate.
3.11.5.7	May they be enjoyed by Vasuvan who is worthy of the Vasus.
3.11.5.8	Offer.
3.11.5.9	The goddesses Ushas, the Asvins, and Sarasvati have Indra.
3.11.5.10	They have placed strength and speech in the mouth, and power, through the Ushas,
3.11.5.11	In the forest of wealth, for the one who is worthy of wealth.
3.11.5.12	Offer.
3.11.5.13	The goddess Jushtrini, Sarasvati, and the Asvins have increased Indra.
3.11.5.14	They placed hearing in the ears, and fame, through the Jushtrinis,
3.11.5.15-22	In the forest of wealth, the one belonging to Vasu, the one belonging of Vasu, the Veda. Offer sacrifice. The goddess Urja-huti, the milker, the good milker, Sarasvati, The Asvins, the physicians, the bright light, the two breasts. She gives the offering, the power. In the forest of wealth... Offer sacrifice. The gods, the physicians of the gods, the Hotrars, Indra, the Asvins,
3.11.5.23	Sarasvati, with the Vasat-callings, placed her radiance in the heart.
3.11.5.24	The two Hotr-priests placed their power.
3.11.5.25	In the forest of wealth, in the forest of the one who is to be worshipped, they placed the wealth.
3.11.5.26	Offer!
3.11.5.27	The three goddesses, the three goddesses, the Asvinis, and Sarasvati,
3.11.5.28	Placed their power in the middle of the navel for Indra.
3.11.5.29	In the wood of wealth, in that which is to be worshipped.
3.11.5.30	Offer!
3.11.5.31	Indra, the god, the lord of men, the three-armed, with Sarasvati,
3.11.5.32	the chariot is drawn by the Ashvins.
3.11.5.33	The seed, the form, the immortal, the generator,
3.11.5.34	Indra, Tvashtra gives him the powers.
3.11.5.35	May he be taken by the one who is to be honored in the forest of wealth.
3.11.5.36	Sacrifice!
3.11.5.37	The god, the divine tree, with golden leaves, by the Ashvins,
3.11.5.38	Sarasvati, Supapala, Indra is cooked with honey.
3.11.5.39	Ojas, Juti, Vrishabha, Bhamam, the tree, giving us the powers,
3.11.5.40	May he be the Vasu-knower of the Vasu-owner.
3.11.5.41	Offer sacrifice.
3.11.5.42	The divine sacrificial grass of the Varitinas, spread at the sacrifice by the Ashvins,
3.11.5.43	The soft-rayed Sarasvati, the pleasant seat for you, O Indra.
3.11.5.44	They placed the king of the mind, Isha, on the sacrificial grass, for Indra.
3.11.5.45	May he be the one to be worshipped in the forest of wealth.
3.11.5.46	Offer!
3.11.5.47	The god Agni, the well-done one, may he worship the gods as they deserve.
3.11.5.48	The Hotr, Indra, the Asvins, Sarasvati,
3.11.5.49	Agni, Soma, the well-one, the well-offered Indra, the protector.
3.11.5.50	Savitar, Varuna, the physician, the desired god, the lord of the forest.
3.11.5.51	The gods who drink ghee have been well-offered, Agni has been well-offered with Agni.
3.11.5.52	The Hotar, the Hotri, the well-offerer, has given the strength of Indra.
3.11.5.53	Energy, prosperity, and nourishment.
3.11.5.54	May he take the Vasus in the forest for the one who is worthy of the Vasus.
3.11.5.55	Offer!
3.11.6.1	Soma, the king, the nectar, the juice of plants, the juice of waters, truth by means of truth, the power of Indra, the pure, the bright, the nectar of the Soma, this is the nectar, the honey, the power of the Indra, the Indra.
3.11.6.2	The Angirasas drank the milk from the waters, by the truth of their wisdom, by the truth, by the truth. The nectar of the Soma, the nectar of the Soma. This is the nectar, the honey, the nectar of Indra.
3.11.6.3	The swan, pure, drank the Soma from the waters, with the metres. With truth, with the truth of the Rishis, with the truth, with the true truth, with the truthful truth, with the most truthful truth, with truth, with the highest truth, with the supreme truth, with the eternal truth, with the immortal truth, with the imperishable truth, with the firm truth, with the unshakable truth, with the unbreakable truth, with the indestructible truth, with the invincible truth, with the untransgressable truth, with the inviolable truth, with the inviolate truth, with the immutable truth, with the unchanging truth, with the everlasting truth, with the ever-lasting truth, with the never-ending truth, with the unfailing truth, with the infallible truth, with the faultless truth, with the spotless truth, with the stainless truth, with the pure truth, with the purest truth, with the perfect truth, with the flawless truth, with the blameless truth, with
3.11.6.4	The juice that flowed from the food, Brahma drank, and the Kshatriya drank the truth, the sense-organ, the nectar of the Soma-juice, the pure essence. This is the nectar, the milk, the power of Indra.
3.11.6.5	The semen leaves the bladder, enters the womb, the sense-organs. The embryo, covered by the placenta, leaves the shell by birth.
3.11.6.6	The truth is the power of Indra, the drink, the bright juice of the Soma. This is the power of the Indra, the nectar, the honey.
3.11.6.7	Seeing the form, Prajapati declared the truth and falsehood. He placed disbelief in falsehood and belief in truth.
3.11.6.8	The truth, the power, the drink, the bright juice of the Soma, the nectar, the honey, is the power of Indra.
3.11.6.9	Prajapati drank the two, the Veda and the form, the truth, the power of Indra, the drink, bright juice of the soma, the nectar, honey, is the strength of Indra.
3.11.6.10	Seeing the flowing Soma juice, Prajapati drank the Soma juice, the Soma juice, with the Soma juice. The truth is the truth, the truth is the truth. The Soma juice is the drink of Indra, the Soma juice is the Soma juice. This is Indra's Soma juice, the nectar, the honey.
3.11.7.1	The Soma, which is poured around, the best of juices, which has been pressed, which has been born among the waters, which has been generated by the mountains,
3.11.7.2	Thou art Soma. Be cooked for the Asvins. Be cooked for Sarasvati. Be cooked for Indra, the bestower of good gifts. Let the daughter of the sun purify thy flowing Soma with her eternal power.
3.11.7.3	The Soma has been well-purified by Vayu's purifying (stream). He is the worthy friend of Indra.
3.11.7.4	The Soma has been well purified by Vayu' s purifying (stream).
3.11.7.5	Brahman and Kshatra are purified, the lustre, the power, the Soma, pressed for Indra, is purified for intoxication. O divine god, do thou nourish the divine deities with the bright (Soma) and the juice. Do thou bestow food on the sacrificer.
3.11.7.6-7	O Indra and Agni, the two of you, who are different from each other, protect the tiger, the wolf, the hawk, the flying one, the lion, and this one from harm. The bulls, with their heads lowered, are pressing the Soma, the juice of the Soma, the divine drink, the nectar, the ambrosia, the Soma, the drink of the gods, the drink of Indra, the drink of those who offer sacrifices. The bulls are pressing the Soma that is full of juice, that is full of nectar, that is full, that is full with juice, that is the drink of the bulls, that is the juice of the bulls, the Soma that is the drink, the Soma that has been pressed, the Soma that belongs to the gods, the Soma that brings joy, the Soma that gives joy, the Soma of the gods, that which is the drink of Indra. The bulls with their heads lowered are pressing the Soma for Indra, the Soma that makes one strong, the Soma that bestows strength, the Soma that increases strength, the Soma of Indra, the Soma of those who offer sacrifice, the Soma that grants strength, the Soma for Indra. The Soma that is the juice, the Soma that contains juice, the Soma of juice, the Soma for the gods, the juice of Indra, the juice of those who offer sacrificies, the juice of strength, the juice of heaven, the juice of immortality, the juice of life, the juice of happiness, the juice of joy, the juice of bliss, the juice of pleasure, the juice of delight, the juice of enjoyment, the juice of good fortune, the juice of prosperity, the
3.11.7.8	The juice of thee, collected in the plants, the strength of Soma, the pressed juice of Surā, therewith stimulate the sacrificer with the Madhu. Sarasvatī, the Asvins, Indra, Agni.
3.11.7.9	The one whom the Asvins, through Sarasvatī, drew forth from Namuci for Indra's strength, this bright, sweet, shining, kingly Soma here I eat.
3.11.7.10	Whatever of the Soma juice is left, which Indra drank with Śacī, I now consume that Soma, the king, with a friendly mind.
3.11.8.1	With the impulse of the divine Savitar, with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of Pūshan, I take thee.
3.11.8.2	The three gods, the eleven, the thirty-three, the gods who are the lords of the gods, the gods who have Brihaspati as their priest, the gods who belong to Savitar, the god, may the first gods consecrate you, the second ones may consecrate you with the second ones, the third ones may consecrate with the third ones. You are truth, truth consecrates you. You are Brahman, Brahman consecrates you. The Yajus verses consecrate you, you are the Sama hymns, the Sama hymns consecrate you. You are the Rig verses, the Rig verses consecrate you. The Puronuvakya verses consecrate you; you are the Yajya verses, the Yajya consecrates you. May the Vasatkaras consecrate you, may the Vasatkarah consecrate you. May the oblations consecrate you, and may the oblations fulfill your desires. I consecrate you with Sarasvati's splendor, with the splendor of the Asvins, for radiance. I consecrate with Sarasvati'S power, with Sarasvati' s power, for fame. I consecrate Indra's power, for food. I consecrate the power of Indra, for food. The head is my prosperity, the mouth is my fame, the luster is my hair and beard, the king is my breath, the immortal is my breath, and the king is my sight, the Viraj is my hearing.
3.11.8.3	My tongue is auspicious, my speech is great, my mind is anger, my lord is the sun, my joy is delight, my fingers are limbs, my friend is my strength.
3.11.8.4	My arms are strength, my hands are power, my body is the kingdom, my chest is mine.
3.11.8.5	My thighs, my country; my belly, my shoulders, my neck, my hips, my thighs, my knees, my shanks are my limbs everywhere.
3.11.8.6	My navel is my mind, my knowledge, my anus is my excretion, my excrement, my pleasure, my joy, my testicles are my bliss, my good fortune, my penis.
3.11.8.7	My hair is my effort, my skin is my coming, my flesh is my approach, my bone is my wealth, my marrow is my coming.
3.11.8.8	I am firm by my thighs, by my feet, by my head, by my eyes, by my ears, by my nose, by my mouth, by my heart, by my mind, by my speech, by my hands, by my arms, by my back, by my belly, by my sides, by my ribs, by my skin, by my nails, by my hair, by my body, by my joints, by my bones, by my marrow, by my flesh, by my blood, by my veins, by my sinews, by my fat, by my lungs, by my liver, by my kidneys, by my intestines, by my stomach, by my bladder, by my excrement, by my urine, by my semen, by my womb, by my womb-child, by my navel, by my heart-wood, by my heart's-wood-child, by the heart, by the mind, by the heart's-mind, by the heart-mind-child, by all the organs, by the organs of the body, by the organs, by all the limbs, by the limbs of the body, I am firm by the limbs, by all the parts, by the parts of the body, firm by the parts, by all the joints, by the joints of the body, Translation: I am firm by thighs, by feet, by head, by eyes, by ears, by nose, by mouth, by heart, by mind, by speech, by hands,
3.11.9.1	The wise, with the thread of wool, weave the mind of the thoughtful one with lead. The Asvins, Savitar, Sarasvati, Varuna, the healer, are the form of Indra.
3.11.9.2	That is his form, immortal, with the Shachis. The three goddesses, protecting, gave it many forms, with wool and hair, with many kinds of wool. His skin became flesh, not chaff.
3.11.9.3	The Asvins, the physicians, the Rudra-wardens, Sarasvati, make the flesh grow, the bone, the marrow, the fat, the skin, the hair, the nails, the teeth, the sinews, the joints, the blood, the lymph, the excrement, the urine, the body-parts, the organs, the flesh, the skin, and the hair.
3.11.9.4	Sarasvati, with her mind, makes the flesh grow, which is beautiful, the body, which is visible, the juice, which flows, the red, the naked, the wise, the fat, which is not to be seen.
3.11.9.5-6	From the milk, the semen, the nectar, the generator, from the urine, they generate the semen. The waters, the evil-minded, the wicked, the obstructing, from the wind, all that is far away. Indra, the protector, with the heart, the truth, Savitar generated the cake, Varuna, the physician, the liver, the spleen, he does not exceed the bile with the Vayu-offerings.
3.11.9.7	The intestines are the pots, the honey is the milk, the anus is the vessel, the cow is the udder, the spleen is the leaf of the hawk, the seat is the navel, the belly is the mother.
3.11.9.8	The pot is the womb, the father is the progenitor, in which the embryo is first placed in the womb, the pot is the womb that gives milk through a hundred streams, the pot gives its own milk to the fathers.
3.11.9.9	The mouth is the head, the tongue is the filter, the anus is the cup, the physician is the hair, the bladder is the sheath, the urine is the swift stream.
3.11.9.10	The eyes are from the Ashvins, the nectar is from the Grahas, the splendor is from the goat, the fat is from the ghee, the feathers are from the wheat and the lotus, the semen is from the dark-colored fat.
3.11.9.11	The goat is not on the altar for strength. The path of the vital breath, the immortal Grahas, Sarasvati, the Upavasas, the Vyana, the nasal breaths, the grass, the Badara fruits, she has produced.
3.11.9.12	The bull is the form of Indra for strength. The ears, the hearing, the immortal Graha, the barley, the grass, on the brow, the hairs, the Karkandhu, the honey, the essence, has been born in the mouth.
3.11.9.13	The hair of the wolf is on the body, the whiskers are the hair of the tiger, the hair on the head is for fame and glory, the mane of the lion is the radiance, the senses.
3.11.9.14	The two Asvins, with their limbs, healed the body, Sarasvati, with her limbs, healed the self. The form of Indra, the hundred-year life, the bright, immortal light, it holds.
3.11.9.15	Sarasvati, the wife of the Asvins, bears the well-done embryo in her womb. With the juice of the waters, Varuna, the king, generating Indra for prosperity in the waters, with the hymn.
3.11.9.16	The splendor of the animals, the offering, endowed with strength, flowing with milk, the nectar, the honey, milked by the Asvins, by Sarasvati, the physician, by the drinkers and the drunk, the Soma, the moon, the nectar.
3.11.10.1-4	May the Soma-worthy Fathers purify me, may the Grandfathers purify me, with the purifying (rite), with a hundred years, may they enjoy all life. May the Grandfathers purify, may the Great-Grandfathers purify me, by the purifying (rite) with a hundred years. May they enjoy all life.
3.11.10.5	May the divine people purify me, may the sages purify me with wisdom, may all beings purify me. O Jātavedas, purify me.
3.11.10.6	May Pavamāna purify me for sacrifice, for power, for life, and for seeing the sun.
3.11.10.7	O divine Savitar, with both, with the purifying and the flowing, purify me from all sides.
3.11.10.8	Purify me with the purifying, with the bright, shining one, O divine Agni, according to the rites and the rites.
3.11.10.9	Whatever is your pure, spreading light, O Agni, between the worlds, by that Brahman we purify ourselves.
3.11.10.10	The goddess who purifies, the goddess of all, has come, whose many forms are covered with golden backs. May we be joyful in the assemblies of the gods, may we be the lords of wealth.
3.11.10.11	May Vaishvanara purify me with his rays, the wind with his breath, the sun with his light. May heaven and earth with their milk, with their juices, the truthful ones, purify me for the sacrifice.
3.11.10.12	With the three greatest Savitar, with the most excellent, with the divine hymns, O Agni, with the powers, we purify ourselves.
3.11.10.13	Those who are equal, of equal mind, the Pitrs in Yama's realm, to them be the world, to them be Svāhā. May the sacrifice be established among the gods.
3.11.10.14	Those who are equal, equal-minded, the living among the living, my own, may their glory be established in me, for a hundred years in this world.
3.11.10.15	May the two Vedas be my offspring, may it be tenfold, with all its parts, for my welfare. For the self, for offspring, for the field, for cattle, for the world, for safety,
3.11.10.16	May Agni make my offspring abundant, may he bestow food, milk, and semen upon us.
3.11.10.17-18	Whatever harm we have done to the gods, the gods, O Agni, may you release me from that sin, from all sins. If while sleeping or awake we have done any harm, O Vayu, may you release us from that sin, from all sins.
3.11.10.19	If by day or by night we have done wrong, may the sun release us from that wrong, from all evil.
3.11.10.20	From every sin, from every sin, from all the sins of the gods, may the purifying one purify me, the purifying one of the sacrifice, the purifying one for the sacrificer. May it purify me from all sin, from all sin of the gods.
3.11.10.21	May he be released like Drupada, bathed and purified like one who has been cleansed of impurities, like ghee purified by the sacred fire. May all the worlds release me from my sins.
3.11.10.22	May the earth be covered, may the dawn be covered, may Surya be covered. May I be the light of the all-pervading fire. May I accomplish my desires. May the earth be covered. Svāhā.
3.11.11.1	The Agni who is kindled, well-kindled, the most excellent, the Gayatri metre, the Indra-like, the three-versed, the cow, and the life-giving ones have given.
3.11.11.2	The Tanunapas, the pure-vowed, the Tanu-protectors, and Sarasvati, the Ushnik metre, the Indra, the Diti-born, the cow, have given.
3.11.11.3	Agni is to be worshipped with Ida hymns, Soma is the immortal god, Anushtup is the metre, Indra is the power, the five-coloured cow gives life.
3.11.11.4	Agni is the well-spread out, with Pusan, the immortal, the spread out, Brihatl is the metre, the three-year-old cow gives life.
3.11.11.5	The Goddesses, the directions, the earth, the god Brahma, the god Brihaspati, the Pankti metre, the fourth quarter, the cow, and the life-force have given.
3.11.11.6	The Goddess Ushas, the Goddesses, the well-endowed, all the immortal gods, the Tristubh metre, the fourth part, the cow, the life-force, have given.
3.11.11.7	The divine Hotars, with Indra, the physician, united, united with the Jagati metre, the bull, the cow, gave the strength of life.
3.11.11.8	The three goddesses, Ida, Mahi, Bharati, the Maruts, the clans, the Viraj metre, the cow, the strength of life, gave.
3.11.11.9	Tvashtri, the wonderful, Indra and Agni, the increasers of prosperity, the two-footed, the Chhandas, the bull, the cow, have given the strength.
3.11.11.10	The tree, the controller, Savitar, the bestower, has given the blessing. The Kakup, the Chhandah, the bull, here, the cow, has given the strength.
3.11.11.11	Svāhā! Varuna, the lord of good power, bestows healing. The excessive hymns bestow Indra's power. The cows bestow the life of the great one.
3.11.12.1	By the spring season, the Vasus, the gods, praised with the Trivṛt (hymn), bestowed life on Indra with the Rathantara (hymn) and power.
3.11.12.2	In the spring season, the gods, the Rudras, were praised in the fifteenth stoma. With great fame and strength, they offered oblations to Indra, bestowing vigor.
3.11.12.3	In the rainy season, the Adityas were praised in the seventeenth stoma. With various splendor and vigor, they offered oblatioins to Indra, bestowiṅg vigor.
3.11.12.4	The gods, the twenty-one Rishis, were praised by the autumn season. With the glory of the king, they offered Indra the strength of life.
3.11.12.5	The gods, the thirty-three Maruts, were praised by winter. With the strength of the Sakvaris, they offered Indra strength and life.
3.11.12.6	In the winter season, the thirty-three gods praised the nectar. With truth, the Revati stars, the kingdom, and the oblation, they bestowed strength in Indra.
3.15.1.1	The teeth with the roots of the teeth, the gums with the teeth, the palate with the teeth, Sarasvati with the palate, the upper lip with Sarasvati, the tongue with the upper lip, the saliva with the tongue, the testicles with the mouth, the scrotum with the testicles, the sun with the beard, the path with the eyebrows, the heaven and earth with the nostrils, the lightning with the eyelashes, the ears with the nostrils, hearing with the ears, the Avarya plants with the ears, and the Pariya plants with the Avarya plants.
3.15.7.1	The head of Indra, the neck of Aditi, the shoulders of the quarters, the armpits of Aditi, and the bees of the heart, the sky of the navel, the ants of the belly, the clouds of the belly, and the anthills of the belly, with the belly, the cranes of the belly, heaven of the kidneys, the flowing rivers of the kidneys, and the mountains of the kidneys, with the kidneys, the stones of the kidneys, heaven of the spleen, the lakes of the spleen, with the spleen, the ocean of the belly, Vaiśvānara of the belly, ashes of the belly.
3.16.1.1	May Mitra, Varuna, Aryaman, Indra, the Rishis, the Maruts, the Pariskhads not deprive us of life. When the seven Vājinis of the divine race are praised, we shall proclaim their deeds in the assembly.
3.16.1.2	When the Niñjas, having covered the Reksas, bring the gift that is grasped from the mouth, the well-directed goat, knowing all forms, may it go to the path dear to Indra and Pūshan.
3.16.1.3	This goat is led forward, with the horse, the steed, as Pūṣan's share, to the All-goddesses. The horse, the steed (leads) the oblation which is dear to Tvashtri, and he makes it shine for him to win renown.
3.16.1.4	The horse, the steed which is to be offered at the seasons, the gods' way, the men thrice lead around. Here the goat, the first share of Pūṣan, goes, announcing the sacrifice to the gods.
3.16.1.5	He has come forward, he has bestowed on me his good will, the wish of the gods, with his back covered. The sages, the seers, rejoice in him, we have made a good friend in the prosperity of the gods.
3.16.1.6	The Hotṛ, the Adhvaryu, the kindler of the fire, the one who takes up the stones, the one who praises, the good sage, with that well-performed, well-offered sacrifice, you should satisfy the desires.
3.16.1.7	May the divine power of those who are the sacrificial posts, those who carry the sacrificial posts, and those who fashion the cup for the horse-post, and those who prepare the food for the Charvaka, be with us.
3.16.1.8	Whatever is the halter, the fastening, the neck-yoke, the rope, the grass in the mouth of the horse, may all that be with the gods.
3.16.1.9-10	Whatever is the smell of the blood of the cow, whatever is the smell of blood of the horse, whatever is the bad smell of the sheep, whatever is the odor of the goat, whatever is the stench of the pig, whatever is the stink of the dog, whatever is the foul smell of the cat, whatever is the putrid smell of the rat, whatever is the rotten smell of the crow, whatever is the stinking smell of the jackal, whatever is the disgusting smell of the owl, whatever is the nauseating smell of the vulture, whatever is the repulsive smell of the hawk, whatever is the loathsome smell of the kite, whatever is the sickening smell of the bat, whatever is the dreadful smell of the snake, whatever is the horrible smell of the scorpion, whatever is the terrible smell of the spider, whatever is the awful smell of the centipede, whatever is the frightful smell of the frog, whatever is the terrifying smell of the fish, whatever is the fearful smell of the shrimp, whatever is the frightening smell of the crab, whatever is the appalling smell of the oyster, whatever is the abominable smell of the mussel, whatever is the revolting smell of the snail, whatever is the repugnant smell of the worm, whatever is the odious smell of the maggot, whatever is the offensive smell of the fly, whatever is the disagreeable smell of the mosquito, whatever is the unpleasant smell of the bee, whatever is the unappealing smell of the ant, whatever is the unbearable smell of the dung beetle, whatever is the intolerable smell of the dung, whatever is the insufferable smell of the excrement, whatever is the noxious
3.16.1.11	Whatever of thee, when cooked in the fire, runs away from thy body when struck with a spear, may that not be on the ground, may it not be on the grass. May that be offered to the gods who are well-disposed.
3.16.1.12	Those who see the cooked horse, and say, "Carry it away fragrantly," and those who approach for a share of meat from the cooked, may their intention not be fulfilled.
3.16.1.13	The utensils of the Ukhā, the cooking-pot, the hot-water sprinklers, the coverings of the cooked rice, the pins and the posts, adorn the horse.
3.16.1.14	The covering-cloth which they spread over the horse, the golden things, the gift, the swift-going, the lord of the race, the horse, which the dear ones make to go among the gods.
3.16.1.15	Whatever he did when he went out, sat down, turned around, or was the leader of the herd, whatever he drank, whatever he ate, may all that be for you among the gods.
3.16.1.16	May Agni not have taken him, smelling of smoke, shining, with his mouth open, his belly exposed. The gods receive the horse that is offered, given, praised, and consecrated.
3.16.2.1	Well-kindled, the wise one, the eater of clarified butter, the honey-drinking Agni, carrying the strength, the carrier of strength, the knower, he will go to the dear abode of the gods.
3.16.2.2	Tanunapat, knowing the path of the gods, may the strong one go to the gods. May the seven directions follow you. Give him prosperity for the sacrificer with the gods.
3.16.2.3	You are worthy of praise, you are worthy of worship, O Vājin, you are swift, you are worthy to be offered, O Agni, may the gods with the Vasus, in harmony, carry you, the delighted fire, the all-knowing.
3.16.2.4	Accepting the spread out grass, the most excellent, the great, the first on earth, with the gods, Aditi, in accord, making it soft, may she place it in the womb.
3.16.2.5	These are your auspicious, all-ruling goddesses, shining with their wings, rising up with their rays, the bright ones, the shining ones, the bountiful ones, the goddesses of the gate, may they be well-leading.
3.16.2.6	Moving between Mitra and Varuna, the two who know the face of sacrifices, I place you here in the womb of truth, O Ushas, in your golden, well-fashioned form.
3.16.2.7-8	The first of you, O golden ones, with the charioteer, the two of you, the gods, looking at all the worlds, the two of us, the two of them, the two of her, the two of him, the two of it, the two of this, the two of that, the two of those, the two of these, the two of yonder, the two of here, the two of there, the two of then, the two of now, the two of today, the two of tomorrow, the two of yesterday, the two of the past, the two of future, the two of present, the two of all times, the two of everything, the two of everywhere, the two of every place, the two of each and every place, the one who is the two, the two who are one, the two who have one, the two of one, the two in one, the two as one, the two that are one, the one who has two, the two that have one, the one that has two, the one that is two, the two of two, the two in two, the two as two, the two which are two, the two-ness of two, the one who possesses two, the two possessed by one, the one possessed by two, the one which is two, the one of two, the ones of two, the many of two, the oneness of two, the twoness of two, the twos of two, the twain of two, the pair of two, the couple of two, the union of two, the conjunction of two, the combination of two, the association of two, the connection of two, the relation of two, the
3.16.2.9	Tvashtri, the god-loving hero, was born. The horse, the swift one, was born from Tvashtri.
3.16.2.10	Tvashtri has created all these worlds. The creator of many, the Hotr, may he be worshipped here.
3.16.2.11	The horse, anointed with ghee, may it go to the god in due season. The tree, knowing the world of the gods, may it convey the offerings that have been tasted by Agni.
3.16.2.12	The Agni who has grown by the austerities of Prajapati, born today, he offers the sacrifice. Go with the oblation of Svāhā. May the gods who are worthy of oblations eat.
3.16.3.1	They yoke the reddish-brown Brhaspati, the moving one, around the standing ones. The shining ones shine in heaven.
3.16.3.2	His desirable horses are yoked, the tawny ones, to the chariot, the red ones, the strong ones, with men as their leaders.
3.16.3.3	Making a banner for the bannerless, thou, O Peshas, art the protector of the boundary. Thou art born with the dawns.
3.16.3.4	As the banner of the cloud, when the warrior goes to the presence of the intoxicated ones, thou art victorious with thy unerring body. May the greatness of thy armour protect thee.
3.16.3.5	May we conquer with the bow, may we conquer with the arrow, may we conquer the strong with the bow. May the bow of the foe be bent to his own will. May we conquer all the armies with the bow.
3.16.3.6	The bowstring, as it were, is proclaiming, "I am coming," to the ear of its dear friend, as a woman sings when stretched on the bow, the string that goes along with the bow.
3.16.3.7	They are acting like a woman, like a mother bearing a son, in the presence of the enemy. They strike the enemies with sharp arrows, these two (arrows) shine forth, striking the enemies.
3.16.3.8	The father of many, the son of many, he makes them all equal by his knowledge. The arrow-bearer, the shield-bearer, the leader of all armies, bound to the back, he conquers when released.
3.16.3.9	Standing in his chariot, the charioteer leads his horses wherever he wishes to go. The horses follow the reins, which are attached to them.
3.16.3.10	The horses, with their trunks, make a loud noise as they gallop along with the chariots. They advance with their feet and destroy their enemies. They do not retreat.
3.16.3.11	O Vanaspati, be the one who grows, our friend, the one who saves, the one who bestows good heroes. You are bound with cows. Grow! Let your supporter conquer, the one who conquers.
3.16.3.12	From heaven, earth, and the atmosphere, from the trees, the power has been surrounded. The strength of the waters is surrounded by cows. Indra's thunderbolt, the chariot, is worshipped with oblations.
3.16.3.13	The thunderbolt of Indra, the army of the Maruts, the womb of Mitra, the navel of Varuna, may this our offering-bearer, accepting it, O god, receive the oblations.
3.16.3.14	The Fathers, seated on the sweet grass, the upholders of life, dwelling in the difficult to reach, the powerful, the deep, the variegated, the strong, the unvanquished, the heroic, the brave, the helpers of the host.
3.16.3.15	May the Brahmanas, the Pitrs, the Soma-drinkers, be propitious to us. May the two heaven and earth be auspicious to us. May Pusan protect us from evil, the increaser of truth. May the evil-wisher not injure us.
3.16.3.16	O Riji, protect us. Let our body be like a rock. May Soma proclaim to us. May Aditi grant us protection.
3.16.3.17	The hawk is her garment, the deer her tooth. She falls down, yoked with cows, when she gives birth. Where men run together and scatter, there may the arrows bring us shelter.
3.16.3.18	Like a snake with its coils, he moves his arm, restraining the arrow from the bowstring. The hand-striker, knowing all the ways, may the man protect the man from all sides.
3.16.3.19	May they strike the thighs of those who are against us. May the horses, born in the horse-stall, the wise ones, be raised among the enemies.
3.16.3.20	Do thou, O Dundubhi, with Indra and the gods, drive away the enemies from afar. Do thou, O Dundubi, with Indra and all the gods, drive the enemies from afar.
3.16.3.21	O Dūndubhi, you have roared, you have roared well. You have made the strength and vigour of the enemy cry out. You have driven away the evil ones. You have roared, O Dūndubi, you have roared very well. You are Indra's fist, you are crushing.
3.16.3.22	O Ajaka, let us turn back these enemies. The bannered Dūndubhī is roaring. Let the men with horse-maned chariots move around for us. O Indra, may our chariot-warriors be victorious.
3.16.4.1	May Agni, the god, the protector from evil ways, the unassailable, protect this kingdom. May he protect us. May the god Agni, the protector from the evil ways, the invincible, protect this kingdom.
3.16.4.2	May Rathantara, with the Sāman chants, protect us; the Gāyatrī metre, of universal form, the Trivṛt Stoma, the day, the ocean, the wind, may this strength protect us.
3.16.4.3	The fierce one, the overlord of the directions, the protector of the life-force, the pure one, in the bright day, for the one who is strong, may he be protected by Indra's lordship. May his great kingdom protect us from all sides.
3.16.4.4	The great Sama, the bearer of the Kshatra, the aged Vrishna, the Triṣṭubh metre, the shining, the fierce hero, Indra, with the fifteen-fold Stoma, may he protect this middle (region) with the wind and the ocean.
3.16.4.5	The eastern direction, with fame, the glorious, the All-gods, the rainy season, the heavenly, the Vairambha Sama, may I be able to do that. I place it in the Jagati, I spread it out in all directions.
3.16.4.6	May this kingdom be firm, may the strength be unassailable, may it be powerful, may it be possessed of power. All the gods with the seventeen (verses) have made this kingdom, the fierce one of water and wind.
3.16.4.7	May this kingdom, the supporter of the directions, support the regions, may the strength of the regions be friendly. May Mitra-Varuna, having healed in the autumn, grant us great protection for the kingdom.
3.16.4.8	The Vairāja Sāman, my mind, the Anushtubh metre, the collected strength, the power, this kingdom, friendly, with the moist Dānu, may Mitra-Varuna protect with their lordship.
3.16.4.9	The lord of the directions, the powerful, the powerful one, the winter season, may it nourish us with its own nature. The Brihatī, the Sakvari, the goddess of the directions, may Ghritachi protect us.
3.16.4.10	May Svāhā, the well-milking, the bountiful, protect this sacrifice. You are the protector, the leader, the one who is in front and behind, O Brihaspati, you yoke the speech of the southern direction.
3.16.4.11	The upward direction, the abundance of plants, Savitar with the year, the day, the excellent Sama, the Atichanda metre, Ajatasatru, may it be peaceful for us.
3.16.4.12	The Stoma is thirty-three. The wife of the universe, O Vivasvat, sing to us. The giver of wealth, the giver of milk, the giver of food, the giver of light, the giver of strength, the giver of happiness, the giver of prosperity, the giver of good fortune, the giver of heaven, the giver of the world, the giver of all, the giver of everything, the giver of every kind, the giver of cattle, the giver of grain, the giver of wealth, O Savitar, in the lordship of Savitar, may the giver of food be to us.
3.16.4.13	May Anumati today approve our sacrifice among the gods, and Agni, the bearer of oblations, may he be to the giver.
3.16.4.14	Do thou, O Anumati, be favourable to us, and do thou make us happy. Do thou not injure our sacrifice and our power. Do thou lead us across the life-spans.
3.16.4.15	Vaisvānara, with the hymn, may he go forth to the other world, Agni with the praise and strength.
3.16.4.16	Asked in heaven, the unperturbed, the terrible-faced, the lord of the directions, the consort of Vishnu, the one who is desired by the mind, Brihaspati, the wind, the one who causes agitation, may the winds praise us.
3.16.4.17	The supporter of heaven, the upholder of the earth, the lord of this world, the consort of Vishņu, the one who shines, the one who makes everything auspicious, may she be auspicious for us, on the lap of Aditi.
3.16.4.18	Who yokes us today to the yoke of the Rta, the shining, the beautiful, the difficult to be subdued, the near, the heart-loving, the loving, he who has the debt of their servants, may he live.
3.16.5.1	I meditate on Agni, the first, the immortal, whom many kindle as the five-fold, who has entered into all the worlds, the one who is all-pervading. May he release us from sin.
3.16.5.2	On whose breathing and blinking this moves, whose birth and generation are alone, I praise Agni. I invoke him for protection. May he release me from sin.
3.16.5.3	The praises of Indra, the first, the wise, the slayer of Vrtra, have come to me. May he who comes to the call of the worshipper, release us from sin.
3.16.5.4	He who leads in battle, who conquers in battle, who unites the three kinds of prosperity, I praise Indra, I call to him from afar. May he release us from sin.
3.16.5.5	We invoke you, O Mitra and Varuna, your power is true, your wrath is hard to withstand. You who go in your chariot, O kings, to the one who is to be punished, release us from sin.
3.16.5.6	The chariot of you two, O Mitra and Varuṇa, with its straight-shining rays, goes to the one who acts according to the true law, punishing him. I praise Mitra and Varuna. I call out to them. Release us from sin.
3.16.5.7-8	We invoke the rites of Vayu and Savitar, who are self-existent and who protect, who have become the rulers of the universe, may they release us from sin. The best, the most excellent, the firm ones of the gods, I praise Vayu and Savita. I call out to them for help. May they release us from sin.
3.16.5.9	The best of charioteers, O ye two, for help, the most auspicious, with your well-trained horses, Whose power is not to be resisted among the gods, may ye deliver us from evil.
3.16.5.10	Who, desiring to go to the assembly with the three-wheeled (chariot) of the sun, have come, I praise the divine Asvins. I call upon them. May they deliver us from evil.
3.16.5.11	May the Maruts, the minders of the Maruts, speak to us, may all the All-knowing ones protect us. I call the Yamas for help. May they release us from sin.
3.16.5.12	The sharp weapon, the divine weapon, the invincible weapon, the conqueror in battles, I praise the Maruts, I invoke them. May they release me from sin.
3.16.5.13	May the gods, in their own minds, speak to us. May all the Vasus protect our speech. I invoke the swift ones for our welfare. May they release us from evil.
3.16.5.14	What here grieves me, I praise with human and divine (praise). I invoke the All-gods. I am distressed. May they release me from evil.
3.16.5.15	May Anumati be with us today, may you be with us, O Anumati. With the aid of the all-knowing one, O Agni, with thy radiance, thou hast shone forth, thou hast filled the two worlds, thou hast been born. Thou hast freed the god from the curse, O all-knowing, O Jātavedas, with thy greatness.
3.16.5.16	O Urvī and Rodasī, do ye bestow ample room; ye are the wives of the fields, speak to us. I praise you, O Heaven and Earth, I call upon you, release us from sin.
3.16.5.17	Those who have spread themselves out with immeasurable powers, who have become the support of wealth, I praise you, Heaven and Earth, etc.
3.16.5.18	Whatever good deed we have done for thee, O most excellent man, with our thoughts, do thou, O Agni, make it prosper for us. Thou hast stretched out thy arms in all directions, O Agni, to those who have not come to Aditi.
3.16.5.19	Just as the Vasus, the Yajatras, released Gauri from the place where she was bound, so do you release us from the affliction. O Agni, lead us to the path of life.
4.1.1.1	The fierce god Devoudausat the trees.
4.1.1.2	He was pacified by the Shamya.
4.1.1.3	The Shamya became the Shami tree.
4.1.1.4	With the branch of the Shami tree, he removes the calves for peace.
4.1.1.5	It should be made with leaves.
4.1.1.6	This is the form of cattle.
4.1.1.7	One becomes possessed of cattle.
4.1.1.8	If it were leafless, that would be the form of the staff, and the staff is the thunderbolt. One would direct cattle with the thunderbolt.
4.1.1.9	In the third heaven, Soma was present.
4.1.1.10	The Gāyatrī, becoming a hawk, brought it down.
4.1.1.11	His leaf was cut off.
4.1.1.12	Then Parna was born.
4.1.1.13	That is the leafiness of Parna.
4.1.1.14	Therefore all other trees are leafy.
4.1.1.15	Now this Parna is said:
4.1.1.16	When he drives away the calves with the leaf and branch, he obtains that Soma.
4.1.1.17	The gods consulted together.
4.1.1.18	Parna heard that.
4.1.1.19	This is the name of the one who is well-known.
4.1.1.20	He who knows this does not become deaf.
4.1.1.21	Brahma is the leaf.
4.1.1.22	When one offers with a leaf and branch, one offers with Brahma itself.
4.1.1.23	"He places it in the sacrifice and in the lord of sacrifice, saying, "For food to thee."
4.1.1.24	"He says, "You are Vayu."
4.1.1.25	Vayu is the overlord of the atmosphere.
4.1.1.26	The animals are connected with the atmosphere.
4.1.1.27	Wind itself gives them to the atmosphere.
4.1.1.28	He indeed makes them go forward when he says, "Stand by the winds."
4.1.1.29	For the wind is like the forest.
4.1.1.30	"May the god Savitr set you free," he says. He indeed sets them free with the impulse of Savitr.
4.1.1.31	"To the best by deed," he says.
4.1.1.32	Sacrifice indeed is the best.
4.1.1.33	He offers them to the sacrifice itself.
4.1.1.34	"You all, O harmless ones, increase for the gods."
4.1.1.35	They used to increase for the calves and men in the past.
4.1.1.36	Now he makes them increase only for the gods.
4.1.1.37	"Do not let a thief approach you, do not let an evil-wisher approach you." He prays for blessings.
4.1.1.38	"May the many firm ones be in this protector of cattle." He indeed generates them.
4.1.1.39	"Drinking the pure waters from the good vessel," he indeed purifies them.
4.1.1.40	"May Rudra's curse surround you." He indeed protects them from Rudra.
4.1.1.41	"Pusha is your protector, Aditi your guardian, Indra your overseer, not lost, returning."
4.1.1.42	These are the three worlds.
4.1.1.43	He again turns them back from these worlds.
4.1.1.44	"Protect the animals of the sacrificer." He comes for the sake of protection and non-injury of the animals of the Sacrificer.
4.1.1.45	He covers the branch facing west.
4.1.1.46	Therefore, domestic animals come to the village in the evening from the forest.
4.1.1.47	Animals face him who knows thus.
4.1.2.1	"With the impulse of the divine Savitr, with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of Pusan, I take thee." He takes it with the impulse of Savitr, with deities.
4.1.2.2	Prajapati knew the plants as the horse-hair.
4.1.2.3	The horse is Prajapati's.
4.1.2.4	When one gives a horse-hair as the sacrificial grass, it is for the non-injury of the plants.
4.1.2.5	"Thou art the seat of the cows," (with these words) he bestows wealth on the sacrificer.
4.1.2.6	"The protection is repelled," (with these) for the removal of the Rakshas.
4.1.2.7	"The mind has gone to the sacrificial grass," (with these).
4.1.2.8	Mind is knowledge.
4.1.2.9	(He says this) because he wants to know.
4.1.2.10	"Made by Manu, established by Svāhā," (with these),
4.1.2.11	for Manu indeed made it, established by Svāhà.
4.1.2.12	The poets are led by her in front.
4.1.2.13	Brahmanas are poets.
4.1.2.14	Rishis are poets.
4.1.2.15	He makes it agreeable to the gods, for he says, "The grass has been spread here for the gods to be agreeable."
4.1.2.16	"You are the gift of the gods."
4.1.2.17	Whatever there is here, that is the gift of the Gods.
4.1.2.18	Just as one does a deed after having told it to one's own good, so he gives the sacrificial grass after having told it (to the gods).
4.1.2.19	Whatever he tells (the gods) he gives all that.
4.1.2.20	Whatever he does not give all that, that exceeds the sacrifice.
4.1.2.21	Whatever exceeds the sacrifice, with that he nourishes his enemy.
4.1.2.22	He tells (the gods about) one stalk.
4.1.2.23	He gives all that for the sacrifice not to exceed.
4.1.2.24	"This is the praise of Vishnu."
4.1.2.25	Vishnu's praise was cut off.
4.1.2.26	It entered the earth.
4.1.2.27	If one does not release it first, one would incur misfortune.
4.1.2.28	"He gives it with the words, 'With the impulse of the divine Savitr, with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of Pusan, I give the sacrificial grass, the abode of the gods.' He gives it indeed with the impulse of Savitr, with deities."
4.1.2.29	"May I be successful, O lower one, O upper one, O one in the middle." Thus for the non-injury of the plants.
4.1.2.30	"May I not be harmed by you."
4.1.2.31	As long as the Adhvaryu offers the sacrificial grass without knowing this, his own self is injured.
4.1.2.32	He whose own self is not injured, he who knows this.
4.1.2.33	"Therefore thou shalt grow up as a hundred-fold sacrificial grass," he says; he thus establishes the earth in the plants.
4.1.2.34	"May we grow up as a thousand-fold," he says; thus he prays for a blessing.
4.1.2.35	"Thou art the cord of Aditi," he says.
4.1.2.36	This is Aditi.
4.1.2.37	He makes it her cord.
4.1.2.38	"Thou are the armour of Indra," he says.
4.1.2.39	Indraani, the wife of Indra, first among the gods, bound herself for prosperity.
4.1.2.40	With prosperity, for prosperity.
4.1.2.41	He prospers who knows thus.
4.1.2.42	One binds the sacrificial grass.
4.1.2.43	Sacrificial grass is offspring; for the continuity of offspring, for the non-interruption of offspring.
4.1.2.44	Therefore offspring are continuous.
4.1.2.45	Pusan should bind your knot."
4.1.2.46	Pūṣan is indeed nourishment.
4.1.2.47	He bestows nourishment on the sacrificer.
4.1.2.48	"May it be for you." For the non-injury of the sacrificer. "
4.1.2.49	The waters have anointed you, the seven sages have anointed you.
4.1.2.50	The grass, the banner of the dawn, has been spread out by the rays of the sun."
4.1.2.51	The Asvins are indeed the physicians of the gods.
4.1.2.52	They heal him.
4.1.2.53	"With Indra's arms I raise thee," thus he raises him with Indra's arms.
4.1.2.54	"I carry thee with Brihaspati's head," thus he carries him with Brihaspati.
4.1.2.55	Brihaspati is Brahman.
4.1.2.56	He carries him with Brahman.
4.1.2.57	"The sky is broad," thus he places him on the sky.
4.1.2.58	"I place thee on Aditi's back," thus he places it on Aditi.
4.1.2.59	Aditi is this (earth).
4.1.2.60	He sits on it.
4.1.2.61	He recites the formula, "You are the sacrificial grass leading to the gods."
4.1.2.62	Much of it falls down here and there when it is brought in the previous day.
4.1.2.63	He gives it to the deities without spilling, for the sake of non-injury to the sacrificer.
4.1.3.1	On the previous day they prepare the kindling wood and sacrificial grass.
4.1.3.2	One prepares for the sacrifice.
4.1.3.3-9	Prajapati created the creatures. His two cauldrons were broken. He put them back together with these two cauldrons. Because these are cauldrons, he puts back together the cauldrons of Prajapati. "Purify yourselves for the divine rite." He purifies them for the gods. "You are the sieve of the Vasus." This is the share of the Vasus.
4.1.3.10	He does it for them alone.
4.1.3.11	He puts on the filter.
4.1.3.12	He mixes the milk of plants and animals.
4.1.3.13	He restrains speech for the stability of the sacrifice.
4.1.3.14	He sits holding (the pot).
4.1.3.15	They (the cows) seem to be holding (the pot) while they are milking.
4.1.3.16	You are heaven, you are earth.
4.1.3.17	He indeed makes it flow through these two.
4.1.3.18	The heat of the sun.
4.1.3.19-27	The heat of the sky is the heat of the sky, for the sake of holding the sky. Which one is the one that is washed? It is the one that has all life. It is the all-pervading one. It is called the all-creator. This one indeed has all life. The sky is all-pervasi This one is the all-creator He bestows these worlds in the proper order.
4.1.3.28	He who knows thus milks these worlds as they were in the beginning.
4.1.3.29	He recites three Yajus verses.
4.1.3.30	These are the three worlds.
4.1.3.31	He places the essence in these worlds.
4.1.3.32	Therefore the creatures of these worlds live.
4.1.3.33	He recits, "The oblation is small, the oblation is a drop," for non-falling.
4.1.3.34	"Indra to the gods, the oblation, has been milked much." He recites this three times.
4.1.3.35	For the gods are three times as many.
4.1.3.36	One should not milk into a wooden vessel.
4.1.3.37	The wooden vessel is Agni-possessed.
4.1.3.38	One should offer with exhausted oblation.
4.1.3.39	This is what the Dātrīyas say:
4.1.3.40	The oblation is with the Purorāśa as the face.
4.1.3.41	Or, it is not that the oblation of the cake is not to be offered. It is only that there is no milk to be milked.
4.1.3.42	A Śūdra should not milk.
4.1.3.43	He is born from what is not true.
4.1.3.44	He would be untrue.
4.1.3.45	What is true is that which passes through the strainer.
4.1.3.46	A Śudra should not milk the Agnihotra.
4.1.3.47	That is not purified.
4.1.3.48	"Ye are united with the streams, most sweet with truth,
4.1.3.49	Drinking the milk with milk, slowly, for the sake of wealth." Thus he sends it back for being cooked.
4.1.3.50	For the gods indeed desire cooking.
4.1.3.51	"To Indra thee, thy portion, with Soma I press." Thus he makes it Soma indeed.
4.1.3.52	He who knowing thus drinks the Sañnayya, his Soma-drinking is indeed uninterrupted.
4.1.3.53	"Thou art the Adastim (the unfallen) for Vishnu."
4.1.3.54	Vishnu is the sacrifice.
4.1.3.55	He makes it unfallen for the sacrifice.
4.1.3.56	"Protect the offering for Vishnu."
4.1.3.57	"Protect that portion of thine which is this." Thus he says to Vishnu.
4.1.3.58	"Protect this offering of thine."
4.1.3.59	One should not put it in a clay vessel.
4.1.3.60	The oblation would be dedicated to the Pitrs.
4.1.3.61	One should offer with a wooden vessel.
4.1.3.62	A wooden vessel has fire.
4.1.3.63	Fire indeed protects the offering.
4.1.3.64	It should be made with water.
4.1.3.65	Water indeed destroys demons.
4.1.3.66	Demons do not cross water. For the destruction of demons.
4.1.4.1	One who offers without faith, the gods and men do not have faith in his offering.
4.1.4.2	One offers water.
4.1.4.3-12	Water is indeed faith. Having obtained faith, one performs the sacrifice. Water is the sacrifice. Having understood the sacrifice, one proceeds. Water is a beloved abode of the gods. Having taken the beloved abode of the deities, one proceeds. Water is truth. Having obtained truth, one performs the sacrifices. Water is destructive of demons, for the destruction of demons. Water is Indra's thunderbolt.
4.1.4.13	He strikes the thunderbolt at his brother for the sake of covering.
4.1.4.14	Water is faith.
4.1.4.15	The gods have faith, and men have faith, they give to the one who knows this, and the one who knows thus, he makes the waters breathe.
4.1.4.16	The divine waters are the foremost, he makes the sacrifice go.
4.1.4.17-21	"With the impulse of the divine Savitr, with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of Pusan, I take thee." He takes it with the impulse of Savitr, with deities. "The sky is firm." With the firm (sky). "The Raksas is repelled." For the repelling of the Raksas. "Thou art the Dhura, thou art the Dhura." The name of this Agni is Dhura.
4.1.4.22	If the sacrificer were to cross over without having reached it, he would offer it to the fire.
4.1.4.23	There are indeed two enemies of a man:
4.1.4.24	He offers it to the fire to those whom he hates and those who hate him.
4.1.5.1	"Thou art the most brilliant, the most shining, the most praised, the most worshipped, the most invoked of the gods." He makes it the most brilliant, most shining, most praised, most worshipped, most invoked of the Gods.
4.1.5.2	"Thou art the uninjured Havirdhana; be firm, do not tremble." He makes it firm.
4.1.5.3	"Thou are the step of Vishnu; for wide expansion."
4.1.5.4	Whatever wind blows, it blows from Varuna.
4.1.5.5	He makes it free from Varuna. "
4.1.5.6	"Looking with the eye of Mitra." He makes them Mitra.
4.1.5.7	"He says, "I take the strength," he places strength in the sacrificer.
4.1.5.8	"For abundance." He makes them flourish.
4.1.5.9	In the impulse of the divine Savitr, with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of Pusan,
4.1.5.10	May they give five.
4.1.5.11	"For the protection of the cows, for the protection of the men, I pour out for you the offerings agreeable to Agni." He pours them out indeed with the deities impelled by Savitr.
4.1.5.12	"May they give five."
4.1.5.13	There are five seasons.
4.1.5.14	He indeed delights the seasons.
4.1.5.15	They are pleased with him and are favourable to him.
4.1.5.16	"For the destruction of the Rakshas, (he says), 'For the protection of the cows, for the protection of the men.'
4.1.5.17	"For the Agni, for the agreeable ones," he says; he makes them agreeable to the Agnis.
4.1.5.18	Or to whichever deity he offers, he makes them agreeable for that deity.
4.1.5.19	"This is for the gods, this is for us together," he says; for the separation.
4.1.5.20	"May the bad paths be firm."
4.1.5.21	When the oblation was taken, these worlds trembled.
4.1.5.22	The gods steadied them with this Yajus.
4.1.5.23	When one recites this Yajus, it is for the steadying of these worlds.
4.1.5.24	"One is freed from Varuna's noose." One is freed from Varunapasa itself, for the non-injury of oneself.
4.1.5.25	"One shines in heaven."
4.1.5.26	He approaches it as if it were darkness.
4.1.5.27	He sees the light, the fire of the sun.
4.1.5.28	The sun is the light, the Fire of the Sun.
4.1.5.29	He follows the expanse of the sky.
4.1.5.30	If he were to say, "What do you know?" the Adhvaryu would be exhausted. He says, "I follow the expanse of the Sky." The Adhvaryu is not exhausted.
4.1.5.31	"I place them on Aditi's lap."
4.1.5.32	This is indeed Aditi.
4.1.5.33	He indeed sat down on her.
4.1.5.34	He places them on the front (of the altar) with the verse, "O Agni, protect the offering."
4.1.5.35	Agni indeed protects the offering.
4.1.6.1	With the verse, "On the pure mind of Vishnu,"
4.1.6.2	Vishnu indeed is the sacrifice.
4.1.6.3	He indeed purifies them for the sacrifice.
4.1.6.4	"May the god Savitr purify you." He purifies them with the impulse of Savitr.
4.1.6.5	"For Agni, your beloved." He makes them beloved to Agni.
4.1.6.6	Or, he makes them beloved to the deity for whom he sprinkles.
4.1.6.7	"Whatever has been defiled by you, purify that." He purifie
4.1.6.8	"This is the skin of Aditi."
4.1.6.9	Aditi is this (earth).
4.1.6.10	He makes it the skin of her.
4.1.6.11	"The rejected (skin) is for the protection of the Rakshas," for the removal of Rakshas.
4.1.6.12	He spreads the black antelope skin with its neck towards the east.
4.1.6.13	Therefore the animals stand facing the east at the sacrifice.
4.1.6.14	"Thou art the stone of the tree, the stone," he makes it a stone.
4.1.6.15	"This is the tongue of Agni, the release of speech."
4.1.6.16	For this is indeed the tongue of Agni and the release of speech.
4.1.6.17	For when the animals eat the plants, then they release speech.
4.1.6.18	"For life," he says; he bestows life on the sacrificer.
4.1.6.19	"Thou art the great stone, the plant," he says; indeed he makes it a stone.
4.1.6.20	"To the gods, the offering is in the fire." Thus he makes it for the gods.
4.1.6.21	"Removed are the Rakshas." For the removal of the Rakshas.
4.1.6.22	"O Agni, come, the maker of offerings." He invites the one who makes offerings to the gods.
4.1.6.23	He invites thrice.
4.1.6.24	For the gods are threefold.
4.1.6.25	The speech of Manu, the sacrificer, who was born of faith, entered the sacrificial implements.
4.1.6.26	Those Asuras who listened to her while she was speaking, they did not exist on that day.
4.1.6.27	Thus knowing, a brahmin should perform sacrifice among his enemies.
4.1.6.28	Those who listen to the weapons of sacrifice, he takes away their energy, strength and valour.
4.1.6.29	You are the best, you are the honey-tongued, with you we shall conquer every group of enemies.
4.1.6.30	With this (verse) the sacrificer conquers his enemy group by group.
4.1.6.31	He says, 'Give me food, give me strength, give me prosperity.' He prays for blessings.
4.1.7.1	'You are the one who grows with the rain, I know you as the one who grows in the rain.' For stability.
4.1.7.2	The gods, by means of the chaff, drove away the Rakshas from the animals and the plants.
4.1.7.3	When he says, "The Rakshas is driven away, the Rakshas is far away," he drives away the Rakshases of the sacrifice by just that much.
4.1.7.4	"May the god Savitar separate you," he separates them with the impulse of Savitar.
4.1.7.5	He pronounces the benediction, "May you be well-separated and well-separated."
4.1.7.6	He should make them fruitful.
4.1.7.7	He makes them fit for sacrifice and fit for worship.
4.1.7.8	He makes it fruitful three times.
4.1.7.9	The gods are threefold.
4.1.7.10	"You are the skin of Aditi."
4.1.7.11	Aditi is this earth.
4.1.7.12	He makes this its skin.
4.1.7.13	"It is abandoned by the Raksas." For the removal of the Raksas.
4.1.7.14-19	He spreads the skin with the head towards the west. Therefore, the animals stand near the oblation with their heads towards the west. He places the wooden sword with the formula, "Thou art the prop of Aditi." These two were together. They went away by the extent of the wooden sword. When he places the wooden sword, it is for the support of these two.
4.1.7.20	"Thou art grain; do thou nourish the gods."
4.1.7.21	By the power of this very formula, as much as one deity desires,
4.1.7.22	as much as one deity, so much does her offering spread.
4.1.7.23	He who knows this spreads with offspring and cattle.
4.1.7.24	"For thy breath, for thy out-breath, for thy through-breath," he places the breath, the out-breath, the through-breath in the sacrificer.
4.1.7.25	You should touch the long and the short.
4.1.7.26	For life, indeed, he places life in it.
4.1.7.27	The gaze of Mitra is the gaze of Mitra. Indeed, he makes them Mitra.
4.1.7.28	May the god Savitar, with golden hands, receive you. Indeed, he receives them with the impulse of Savitar.
4.1.8.1	The fire is burnt, the protection is (thus) destroyed, for the destruction of the Rakshas.
4.1.8.2	He places the fire below, in this world he bestows light, above, in the atmosphere, he bestows light.
4.1.8.3	The fire is not (yet) here, the sun is in the other world, it becomes light.
4.1.8.4	Then indeed he becomes in the heaven and in the other world. All these worlds become luminous to him who knows thus.
4.1.8.5	He lays down three upright (bricks).
4.1.8.6	These three worlds are upright.
4.1.8.7	For the support of these worlds.
4.1.8.8	"O Agni, do thou cast away the raw Agni."
4.1.8.9	He who is the eater of raw flesh, having slain him, he places the sacrificial ones in the place of sacrifice.
4.1.8.10	"You are firm, you hold the earth firm." He makes the earth firm.
4.1.8.11	"You hold firmly, you hold the atmosphere firm." He makes atmosphere firm.
4.1.8.12	"Thou art the supporter, thou holdest the heaven firm." He makes heaven firm.
4.1.8.13	" Thou art the supporter, you hold all the worlds firm." He makes all the directions firm.
4.1.8.14	Prajapati, when he came into existence, came into existence in this very form.
4.1.8.15	First one skull-bone of the head comes into existence.
4.1.8.16	Then the second, then the third, then the fourth, then the fifth, then the sixth, then the seventh, then the eighth.
4.1.8.17	When he lays down eight, the sacrificer thus prepares himself.
4.1.8.18	That which is sanctified follows him in the other world.
4.1.8.19	He attains the Gayatri metre by means of eight, the Tristubh by means of eleven, and the Jagati by means of twelve.
4.1.8.20	Then he places all the metres in the prescribed order.
4.1.8.21	He makes them with the Yajus formula, "You are the known, you are the well-known."
4.1.8.22	The Vasus, Rudras, Adityas, Bhrigus, Angiras, and the heat of the sun, may you be heated by the austerities of these deities.
4.1.8.23	The sages who collect the skulls in the heat of the fire,
4.1.8.24	May Pusan, Indra and Vayu release them from their vow.
4.1.8.25	They are yoked with the Yajus, they are released with the Yajuh.
4.1.9.1	"With the impulse of the divine Savitr, with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of Pusan, I pour (the Soma)," thus he pours it with the deities impelled by Savitr.
4.1.9.2	He pours it with the strainer.
4.1.9.3	He makes the oblation.
4.1.9.4	"May the god Savitr purify you." He purifies them with the impulse of Savitr.
4.1.9.5	He sprinkles them.
4.1.9.6	Water is immortal.
4.1.9.7	He makes the oblation immortal.
4.1.9.8	"May the waters go together with the plants, may the plants go together with the juice."
4.1.9.9	"May the auspicious, the wandering ones go together."
4.1.9.10	The others of these (waters) invigorate.
4.1.9.11-18	The waters, the plants, the plants, they stimulate the waters. The waters, the plants have flowed together with the waters. Indeed, the waters are the Revati (stars). The plants are the Madhumati (stars). The cattle are the Jagati (stars). He makes them flow together in one way, the waters, the plants and the cattle, and makes them sweet. He says, "You are the head of the sacrifice." The sacrifice indeed is the Makha.
4.1.9.19	This is his head that is being made.
4.1.9.20	"He says, "May the clans sink down for the sake of the offspring," thus he makes a pair."
4.1.9.21	"He says (to the sacrificer), "You are the heat, the life of all, may the heat be in the heat. May you spread out, may your lord of sacrifice spread out." He makes him spread out."
4.1.9.22	"He (the sacrificer) says, "May you spread out the earth and the heaven." He makes these (spread out).
4.1.9.23	This heat is expelled every half-month.
4.1.9.24	He, the lord, is not peaceful, and with his heat burns the sacrificer's cattle.
4.1.9.25	When he makes the fire go around, he makes it an animal, for peace and non-burning.
4.1.9.26	He makes the fire go round three times.
4.1.9.27	These are the three worlds.
4.1.9.28	He pacifies him from these worlds.
4.1.9.29-33	The Purorasa, when placed on the fire, was attacked by the Rakshas. The fire in heaven, called "Naka," is the destroyer of Rakshas. He drove away the Rakshas from here. When he says, "May the god Savitar melt thee, the most excellent one in the highest heaven," it is for the driving away of the Rakshas.
4.1.9.34	The potsherds are like the skull.
4.1.9.35	The cake is like the brain.
4.1.9.36	It should be well baked for purity.
4.1.9.37	If one does not bake the cake, the brain would be exposed.
4.1.9.38	Since one bakes it, the brain is hidden.
4.1.9.39	He applies the skin.
4.1.9.40	Therefore, the brain is all around.
4.1.9.41	He covers with ashes.
4.1.9.42	Therefore, the bone is covered with flesh.
4.1.9.43	He covers it with flames.
4.1.9.44	Therefore, the head is covered with hair.
4.1.9.45	If he were to cover it with ashes without taking the skin, the Adhvaryu would become one who has grey hair.
4.1.9.46	He covers (the head) with flames.
4.1.9.47	The Adhvaryu becomes one who does not have grey hair.
4.1.9.48	Those gods did not find him in whom the sacrifice's cruelty would be found.
4.1.9.49	Agni said, "I will generate him for you in whom you will find the sacrifice's cruelties."
4.1.9.50	He struck the water with a burning coal.
4.1.9.51	From that one was born, from that two, from that three.
4.1.9.52	What he fashioned out of water, that is the reason why water is drinkable.
4.1.9.53	What he fashioned out of the self, that is the reaon why the self is drinkable. The self is drinkable for the self.
4.1.9.54	One offers within the altar.
4.1.9.55	One obtains that very thing.
4.1.9.56	One pours over it from above for the purpose of being cooked.
4.1.9.57	The gods are desirous of being cooked. They are cooked.
4.1.9.58	The Gods went to the extreme of impurity.
4.1.9.59	When the sun rises, they are cleansed.
4.1.9.60	He who sleeps when the sun rises, he who sleeps when the moon sets, he who is black, he who is very black, he who has nails, he who has a nail, he who has put on a garment, he who has taken off a garment, he whose garment is worn out, he who is wearing a worn-out garment, he who is killing heroes, he who kills heroes, he who is destroying embryos,
4.1.9.61	The slayer of a foetus does not escape from sin.
4.1.10.1	"He takes it with the formula, "In the impulse of the divine Savitr, with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of Pusan, I take thee."
4.1.10.2	"He takes him with the deities impelled by Savitr. "Thou art a thousand-streamed, hundred-shining," he says; he hurls the thunderbolt at his foe.
4.1.10.3	"O Earth, Goddess of sacrifice, may I not injure the roots of the plants." For the non-injury of the plants.
4.1.10.4	"Go to the village, to the cattle-shed."
4.1.10.5	The village is the cattle-shed of the Chhandas.
4.1.10.6	He makes for him the village, the cattle-shed, of the Chhandasa.
4.1.10.7	"May the Parjanya rain for you." He seeks rain from the Parjanya.
4.1.10.8	Bind, O god Savitar, with a hundred nooses the one who is most distant from us.
4.1.10.9	There are two enemies of a man, the one whom he hates and the one who hates him.
4.1.10.10	He binds them both in the most distant place.
4.1.10.11	He binds here the one who hates us and the one whom we hate.
4.1.10.12	May he release me from that." He prays for a blessing.
4.1.10.13	"May the drops not fall from heaven for thee."
4.1.10.14	The juice of this (earth) is the drops.
4.1.10.15	The creatures live on it.
4.1.10.16	He places it in this (earth) so that it may not fall.
4.1.10.17	"May the Araru not fall from heaven."
4.1.10.18	There was an Asura called Araru.
4.1.10.19	He lay down on the earth.
4.1.10.20	Indra saw him.
4.1.10.21	He drove him away from the earth, the place where the gods do not worship.
4.1.10.22	He fell down to heaven.
4.1.10.23	"He (the sacrificer) said, "Do not let him fall from heaven." He drove him away (from heaven).
4.1.10.24	He who knowing thus drives away the Stambayajus, he separates his foe from these worlds.
4.1.10.25	He drives it away three times.
4.1.10.26	These are the three worlds.
4.1.10.27	He wins his enemies from these very worlds.
4.1.10.28	He takes the fourth silently.
4.1.10.29	From the world that is described as unlimited, he wins his enemies.
4.1.10.30	This earth belonged to the Asuras.
4.1.10.31	The gods said, "Give us this earth."
4.1.10.32	They said, "You yourselves should speak."
4.1.10.33	Then the Vasus conquered the eastern direction, the Rudras the southern, the Adityas the western, and the Maruts the northern.
4.1.10.34	Then the gods found this (earth) among the Asuras.
4.1.10.35	Then the Gods drove the Asuras from these worlds.
4.1.10.36	Then the Devas became victorious, the Asuras were defeated.
4.1.10.37	In that he encloses the altar with these deities,
4.1.10.38	Herein the sacrificer seizes his enemy.
4.1.10.39	He seizes his enemy in this (earth).
4.1.10.40	He becomes superior to his enemy.
4.1.10.41	From the earth, the pure and the impure went forth.
4.1.10.42	The pure went forth towards the east and north; the impure towards the south and west.
4.1.10.43	He should make the altar slope towards the east or the north.
4.1.10.44	He makes them fit for sacrifice.
4.1.10.45	And also whatever harm they may have done while digging it, he makes it harmless.
4.1.10.46	He appeases it.
4.1.10.47	And also for the separation of the fit from the unfit.
4.1.10.48	He moves his arms towards the east.
4.1.10.49	He encloses the Ahavaniya with it.
4.1.10.50	The buttocks are the western direction.
4.1.10.51	He encloses the Garhapatya.
4.1.10.52	The Rakshas drink the root.
4.1.10.53	If one were to cut it with a nail, one would have a deformed nail.
4.1.10.54	One cuts it with a wooden wedge.
4.1.10.55	The wooden wedge is a thunderbolt.
4.1.10.56	One destroys the Rakshas with the thunderbolt.
4.1.11.1	He who, not knowing the union of the ladles, responds to the Adhvaryu's call, injures the deities.
4.1.11.2	He becomes without cattle.
4.1.11.3	But he who, knowing the union of ladles, responds, does not injure the deities.
4.1.11.4	One becomes with cattle.
4.1.11.5	The ladle is heaven.
4.1.11.6	The Upabhṛt is the atmosphere.
4.1.11.7	Earth is the fixed (altar).
4.1.11.8	The directions are the vessel for the clarified butter.
4.1.11.9	The sun is the spoon.
4.1.11.10	When he says, "Let it be heard," he unites the Juhu with it. When he says, "May it be heard," the Upamant, and when he says, "We shall offer," the Dhruva, and when he recites, "We shall sacrifice," the vessel for the ghee, and with the Vasat-call, the spoon.
4.1.11.11	He pours the Dhruva over the Juhu. He pours the Juhu over the Dhruva.
4.1.11.12	For this one gives to that one, and that one to this one.
4.1.11.13	The uninterrupted food is given to him continuously in this world and the other world.
4.1.11.14	The fame of one who knows this goes to the people before him.
4.1.12.1	And ghee and honey were Prajapati.
4.1.12.2	From where there was honey, from there he created beings.
4.1.12.3	Therefore there is reproduction from honey.
4.1.12.4	Therefore they do not use honey.
4.1.12.5	Because it is exhausted.
4.1.12.6	They use ghee.
4.1.12.7	Because ghee is inexhaustible, belonging to Prajapati.
4.1.12.8	The imperishable Prajapati is deposited on the Garhapatya.
4.1.12.9	The wife looks on.
4.1.12.10	This is the beginning of the sacrifice for the wife.
4.1.12.11	He begins the sacrifice for her.
4.1.12.12	And when the wife does something at the sacrifice, this is done for procreation.
4.1.12.13	This is impure, not fit for sacrifice, when the wife looks at it.
4.1.12.14	He places it on the Ahavaniya.
4.1.12.15	He purifies them.
4.1.12.16	He makes it pure, fit for sacrifice.
4.1.12.17	He lays down the path of the sacrificial grass for the removal of the Rākṣasas.
4.1.12.18	"He says, "May god Savitr purify you," purifying it with the impulse of Savitr.
4.1.12.19-24	"Thou art the oblation, O Vaiśvānara." These are the twelve Vyāhṛtis. Twelve months are a year. By means of the year the sacrificer seizes the brilliance, power and strength of his enemy on both sides. It is Vaiśvānaran because it is on both sides. For this is Vaiśvārara.
4.1.12.25	His enemy is born without energy, without power.
4.1.12.26	And he becomes more prosperous.
4.1.12.27	The gods and the Asuras were in conflict.
4.1.12.28	Indra saw this opportunity.
4.1.12.29	With it he overcame the Asuras.
4.1.12.30	He who knows this and performs sacrifice overcomes his enemy.
4.1.12.31	The other oblations are anointed with clarified butter. With what is the clarified butter anointed? The Brahmavādins say.
4.1.12.32	The clarified butter is anointed with truth.
4.1.12.33	He says, "I anoint you with truth."
4.1.12.34	Truth is the eye.
4.1.12.35	The sacrificer establishes the eye.
4.1.12.36	He recites this formula with his eyes closed.
4.1.12.37	He does not establish the eye.
4.1.12.38	The sacrifice is ghee.
4.1.12.39	The sacrifice is Vishnu.
4.1.12.40	This Vishnu has spread out, has placed his foot in three ways.
4.1.12.41	Having placed it in the Odanapacana (pot), then in the Garhapatya, then in the Ahavaniya, he places it.
4.1.12.42	This indeed is the three times Vishnu spreads out.
4.1.12.43-49	"The protection is repelled." For the removal of the Rakshas. He cleanses the ladles. He purifies them. He makes them pure and fit for the sacrifice. "Unsheathed, destroyers of enemies." For they are unsheathed and destroyers of enemies. He cleans the spoon.
4.1.12.50-56	First he pours down the Soma on the male (cup), then on the Juhu, then on the Upamant, then on the Dhruva. The sun is the Sruva. Heaven is the Juhu. The atmosphere is the Upamant. The earth is the Dhruva.
4.1.12.57	He first anoints the Juhu.
4.1.12.58	The Juhu is the Self.
4.1.12.59	He approaches the Self. Then the Upamant.
4.1.12.60	The Upamant is progeny.
4.1.12.61	He approaches progeny.
4.1.12.62	Progeny is indeed beyond the Self.
4.1.12.63	Then the Dhruva.
4.1.12.64	The Dhruva is cattle.
4.1.12.65	He approaches cattle.
4.1.12.66	Cattle are indeed beyond progeny.
4.1.12.67-72	If he were to wipe it with the upper part, the semen would not be firm. If with the lower part, the semen will not be firm. He wipes it with the side. The semen is indeed discharged sideways. The semen becomes firm. If he were to wipe the stick with the front part of the mouth, he would cause enmity with the Rakshas and the Asuras.
4.1.12.73	He wipes the mouth with the front part and the stick with the rear part.
4.1.12.74	He makes the oblation equal to the Rakshas and the Asuras.
4.1.12.75	He wipes the Juhu towards the east from within, the Upabhṛt towards the west from without, the Pratiśīra towards the east from without, the Dhruva towards the west from within.
4.1.12.76	He restores his vital airs as they were.
4.1.12.77	The Juhu is dedicated to the patron, the Upamant to the enemy.
4.1.12.78	Taking four spoonfuls, he takes the clarified butter in the Juhu.
4.1.12.79	Taking eight spoonfuls, he puts it in the Upamant, the lesser one.
4.1.12.80	He has made his enemy a subordinate.
4.1.13.1	One should put many (spoonfuls).
4.1.13.2	As many as the sprinkling water one puts, so many waters are there for him in the other world.
4.1.13.3	Therefore, many should be obtained.
4.1.13.4	The intelligence of Agni departed.
4.1.13.5	It became black and entered the trees.
4.1.13.6	When he says, "The black one is the best of the black ones,"
4.1.13.7	He obtains that very intelligence by saying, "Agni, may there be ghee for you."
4.1.13.8	"You are the altar, I sprinkle you for the sake of the sacrificial grass."
4.1.13.9	Sacrificial grass is indeed offspring.
4.1.13.10	The earth is the altar.
4.1.13.11	Herein he makes his own the creatures.
4.1.13.12	That he sprinkles above and below,
4.1.13.13	therefore from above the rain comes down and the plants grow below.
4.1.13.14	"He says, "Thou givest strength to the earth," he places strength in it."
4.1.13.15	Therefore these creatures live on it.
4.1.13.16	"He takes the Prastara from the mouth, saying, 'Thou art the praise of Vishnu.'
4.1.13.17	He makes it the chief, and thus it becomes the head.
4.1.13.18	He should take it as long as he can reach with his hand.
4.1.13.19	The sacrificer becomes free from anxiety.
4.1.13.20	He should not wipe it upwards.
4.1.13.21	He should wipe it as much as is to be known as his wealth, and not wipe it downwards.
4.1.13.22	Whatever he would have come to, he should ward off.
4.1.13.23	He should not shake it.
4.1.13.24	He should shake the offspring and cattle.
4.1.13.25	If he would have stood up, he should have taken it up.
4.1.13.26	As one accumulates according to one's food, so does that.
4.1.13.27	He spreads the metal on the right side.
4.1.13.28	Therefore, the loincloth is on the right side.
4.1.13.29	"May it spread out, may it be soft." He spreads it out.
4.1.13.30	"May it be at ease for the gods." He makes it for the gods.
4.1.13.31	Holding the sacrificial grass, he places the enclosing sticks.
4.1.13.32	The sacrificer himself encloses himself for protection.
4.1.13.33	He does not place them in front.
4.1.13.34	The rising sun has driven away the demons.
4.1.13.35	The rising sun itself destroys the demons.
4.1.13.36	He places the kindling woods above.
4.1.13.37	He thus destroys the demons above him.
4.1.13.38	He places two (kindling woods) for the sake of a pair.
4.1.13.39	He says, 'The supports are firm', he makes them firm.
4.1.13.40	He says 'I place you on the lap of Aditi'.
4.1.13.41	Aditi is this (earth).
4.1.13.42	He settled him in this very (earth).
4.1.13.43	"He is the seat of the Vasus, Rudras and Adityas."
4.1.13.44	These very deities conquered her first.
4.1.13.45	He makes her a seat for them.
4.1.13.46	"Thou art heaven, the name Juhu, dear to the gods, by the dear name, thou sittest in the firm seat."
4.1.13.47	This is their dear name, namely, that which contains ghee.
4.1.13.48	He thus obtains that very (Soma).
4.1.13.49	"He protects, he protects the sacrifice, he protects the lord of sacrifice, he protects me, the sacrificer."
4.1.13.50	"Thus he says to Vishnu, 'This is your share; protect it.' Thus he says, 'This is the ghee; protect it.'
4.1.13.51	The altar fled from the gods.
4.1.13.52	The gods found it with the Veda.
4.1.13.53	That is the reason why the Veda is called Veda.
4.1.13.54-60	The woman is the Veda. The man is the Veda. When one cleanses the woman with the Veda, it is for the sake of union. One goes on sprinkling continuously from the Ahavaniya fire, for the continuity of the sacrifice. He performs that continuous (sacrifice) in the northern half of the month. The Upavesha is the protector of the trees. For him whose Vesa is prosperous, he who knows this.
4.1.13.61	He strikes it in front of the Prati-cāma-sāman.
4.1.13.62	Therefore the Veshas are settled towards the west.
4.1.13.63	He strikes it in front (of the Prati-chāma-saman) of the Sthavira.
4.1.13.64	The Veshas do not censure him.
4.1.13.65	At every sacrifice, it is bought for all.
4.1.13.66	The serpent is the Upa-vesha.
4.1.13.67	The anthill is the Utkara.
4.1.13.68	Because he strikes the Upa-vesh at the Utkara, therefore the houses of serpents are anthills.
4.1.14.1	"You are the world," he says, for he seeks prosperity.
4.1.14.2	"Be extended," he says, indeed he extends it.
4.1.14.3	"Standing here, Indra performed his heroic deed, beginning with the deities."
4.1.14.4	For from here standing, Indra performed his deed, beginning with deities.
4.1.14.5	"Come, O Hotr!
4.1.14.6	Agni is calling you."
4.1.14.7	We shall worship the gods for the sake of worshipping the gods.
4.1.14.8	O ladle, come.
4.1.14.9	The god Savitar invites you.
4.1.14.10	We shall worship the gods, for the sake of worshiping the gods.
4.1.14.11	They are not known to be enjoyed by the ignorant.
4.1.14.12	For one transgresses the bonds of Varuna.
4.1.14.13	He takes it with these deities for the purpose of not transgressing the bonds of Varunah.
4.1.14.14	"Thou art the order of Vishnu," he says, for the non-transgression of the sacrifice.
4.1.14.15	"The sacrifice is upright, touching heaven, not fallen, of the lord of sacrifice," he says, pouring the oblation in a straight line upwards, for the shadow of the sacrifice. "
4.1.14.16	"With Indra, with wealth," he says, making the sacrifice with Indra.
4.1.14.17	And thereby he obtains power.
4.1.14.18	"You have approached the shadow of Vasumat."
4.1.14.19	Agni is Vasumat.
4.1.14.20	He approaches the shadow of Agni itself.
4.1.14.21	One should pour the oblation in a straight, upright manner.
4.1.14.22	The oblation is the breath.
4.1.14.23	The sacrificer attains the entire life.
4.1.14.24	If one hates someone, one should cut the oblation for him.
4.1.14.25	One cuts his breath.
4.1.14.26	He dies soon.
4.1.14.27	The offering of ghee is the head of the sacrifice.
4.1.14.28	The head of the sacrifice is the offering of ghee.
4.1.14.29	If one were to offer the offering of ghee and then were to cut off the head of the sacrificer with the Upabhṛt,
4.1.14.30	One anoints the vessel for ghee.
4.1.14.31	Anointed is the oblation, anointed is the ghee.
4.1.14.32	He has placed the head of the sacrifiice in its own place.
4.1.14.33	And he also places the mind in the sacrifice.
4.1.14.34-39	The creatures that have breasts live on the breasts. The Brahmanas say, "What is without breasts?" They say, "Those who are without breasts, those who are without breasts." They indeed live on this. "Having become a spotted cow, the Maruts go." The Maruts indeed control the rain. They send him rain.
4.1.14.40	Then he prays to the Maruts for rain, saying, "May we be blessed with rain."
4.1.14.41	"O Agni, thou art the protector of the eye; protect my eye," he says; he thus protects his eye.
4.1.14.42	"O Agni thou art the protector or the ear; protect my ear," he says; thus he protects his ear.
4.1.14.43	"O Agn, thou art the protect or of the body; protect my body," he says; (thus) he protects his body.
4.1.14.44	Whatever is deficient in my body, O Agni, do thou fill it up. He prays for a blessing.
4.1.14.45	The boundary which thou didst encircle, O Agni, the god, being pressed by the Pāṇis,
4.1.14.46	I follow that very boundary. Let him not go away from your mind.
4.1.14.47	They are yoked by means of the Yajus, they are released by means of theYajus.
4.1.14.48-54	Having struck the enclosing sticks with the formula, "The streams of Soma are flowing, the great ones are flowing," he offers the oblation. These are the fires; he pleases them. He appeases them with the share. The Brahmavadins say: "He who would employ the sacrifice from here, he would establish it." The gods knowing the path, having known the path, have gone to the path.
4.1.14.55	"O lord of the mind, O giver of nectar, this sacrifice, in heaven among the gods, in the wind, be accomplished, svāhā."
4.1.14.56	From here the Adhvaryu directs the sacrifice.
4.1.14.57	He establishes it in that very (place).
4.2.1.1	Prajapati was alone.
4.2.1.2	He desired, "May I be many, may I beget offspring."
4.2.1.3	He contemplated his own self with his mind.
4.2.1.4	He became the wind.
4.2.1.5-11	He was born with a fetus that was dark and black. He became dark and black inside. Therefore, one becomes dark and black inside, like him. His Asura (deity) alone became alive. With that Asura, he created the Asuras. That is the Asura-ness of the Asuras.  He who knows that Asura-ness of the Asuras becomes Asura-like. The Asura does not abandon him.
4.2.1.12-17	He created the Asuras and thought of them as his fathers. He created the Pitrs. That is the fatherhood of the Pitrs. He who knows that fatherhood of the pitrs becomes like a father to his equals. The Pitrs go to his call. To him who was creating the Pitrs, the day became. He created gods.
4.2.1.18	That is the divinity of the gods.
4.2.1.19	He who knows that divinity of the gods, indeed, becomes divine for him by day. The gods come to him, responding to his invocation of the gods. He creates men.
4.2.1.20	Having created the gods, he thinks, "What shall I create?"
4.2.1.21	With that he created men.
4.2.1.22	That is the humanity of men.
4.2.1.23	He who knows that human nature of men, becomes wise and his mind does not leave him.
4.2.1.24	When he speaks or acts too much, then his men stand in his human nature.
4.2.1.25	Then the form that remained was the cow.
4.2.1.26	This is the name of the womb.
4.2.1.27	This is its direct name.
4.2.1.28	Others say it is indirect.
4.2.1.29	He who knows this obtains a thousand cattle.
4.2.1.30	In that (river) they saw milk.
4.2.1.31	The gods milked it with a golden vessel, nectar.
4.2.1.32	He who knows this milks nectar.
4.2.1.33	Then the fathers milked it with silver vessel, the Svāhā.
4.2.1.34	He who thus knows milks the Svāhā.
4.2.1.35	Then the men milked into a wooden vessel.
4.2.1.36	He who knows this milks the food.
4.2.1.37	Then the Asuras milked into a vessel of iron, which flowed.
4.2.1.38	They flowed.
4.2.1.39	His enemy flows for him who knows this.
4.2.1.40	Therefore one should not milk with a flowing vessel.
4.2.1.41	One should not drink.
4.2.1.42	These are her two milkings.
4.2.1.43	He who knows this enjoys all her milkings and all his desires.
4.2.1.44	There are four kinds of water:
4.2.1.45	Gods, ancestors, men, and demons.
4.2.1.46	He who thus knows that all these are water, as it were,
4.2.1.47	They desired: "May it be in me, may it be in me."
4.2.1.48	The gods called her Kamaya.
4.2.1.49	She desired them.
4.2.1.50	Both gods and men desire him; those who know this become his priests.
4.2.1.51	The men are called Shravya.
4.2.1.52	She listened to them.
4.2.1.53	Both gods and men listen to him, and his fame comes to him from all sides, who knows this.
4.2.1.54	The fathers are called Ilānda.
4.2.1.55	From them he stood apart.
4.2.1.56	Animals stand in him, who knows this;
4.2.1.57	And as the Asuras call out, from them he was afraid.
4.2.1.58	One should call out to the cattle-pen of one whom one hates.
4.2.1.59	Animals are frightened of him.
4.2.1.60	One should offer with these (names).
4.2.1.61	One who desires cattle should offer the head of a cow with its horns, with the names of cows.
4.2.1.62	"Obeisance to Kamyaya, obeisance to Sravyaya, obeisance."
4.2.1.63	This is indeed the name of the cow-pen, Lakshmi.
4.2.1.64	The sacrificer seizes the cattle of his enemy in his own cow-pen.
4.2.1.65	By these (verses) they (the gods) won them.
4.2.1.66	By these (verses) he wins them.
4.2.1.67	(The verses) are connected with the Shringi (verses). For the purpose of taking possession of cattle.
4.2.1.68	He who knows the division of the eye becomes one who has sight, the eye does not leave him.
4.2.1.69	What we see by day, we see with the eye of the gods.
4.2.1.70	The sun is the eye of the god.
4.2.1.71	He who knows this sees the gods and knows the path leading to the gods.
4.2.1.72	What we see in the moonlight, we see with the eyes of the Pitrs.
4.2.1.73	The moon is the eye of the Pitrs
4.2.1.74	He does not lose his eye in the other world.
4.2.1.75	He who knows this knows the path leading towards the Pitrs.
4.2.1.76	What we see in Tamisra, we see with the eyes of men.
4.2.1.77	This is our own eye.
4.2.1.78	In this world, the eye does not leave him.
4.2.1.79	He who knows this attains the full span of life.
4.2.1.80	What we see at the end of Agni, we see with Asuras' eyes.
4.2.1.81	He shines up and down, and does not perish.
4.2.1.82	One should take it from the house of one's enemy while it is shining.
4.2.1.83	He takes away his wealth and prosperity.
4.2.1.84	One should stay awake until the sun rises.
4.2.1.85	If one sleeps, one will suffer.
4.2.1.86	That is what one should stay awake for.
4.2.1.87	One follows wealth and prosperity.
4.2.2.1-4	He who knows the cow of the Iḍa, all the quarters become cows for him, all the people are desirous of giving. The thunderbolt-wielder, the destroyer of enemies, made her known. All the quarters became cows for him, and all the people were desirous of giving. He who knows the Iḍa cow, all the quarters become cows for him, all the people are desirous of giving. From that he, being engaged with all the people,
4.2.2.5-12	All the quarters became cows for him, all the people were eager to give. He who knows this, all the quarters become cows for him, and all the people are eager to give. Here is the text: This is his foot. The atmosphere is his foot. The sky is his foot. Space is his foot. Earth is his foot. All this is his foot. This is the text. They also say: Agriculture is his foot.
4.2.2.13	Therefore, it stands for you now, but not for you now.
4.2.2.14	When there is good harvest, then it stands.
4.2.2.15	When there isn't a good harvest, then does not stand.
4.2.2.16	Indeed, he who knows this, his harvest becomes, and his harvest is not destroyed.
4.2.2.17	Its back is indeed the sky.
4.2.2.18	The atmosphere is the self.
4.2.2.19	This is the chest.
4.2.2.20	The directions are the sides.
4.2.2.21	The oceans are the belly.
4.2.2.22	The sun is the head.
4.2.2.23	Agni is the mouth.
4.2.2.24	Vayu is the breath.
4.2.2.25	The Gayatri is the udder.
4.2.2.26	He who knows this attains the entire life.
4.2.2.27	The Uttaravedi is the udder-region.
4.2.2.28	Pavamana is the calf.
4.2.2.29	This indeed milks her.
4.2.2.30	He who thus knows milks these worlds.
4.2.2.31	The two breasts are the Brihat and Rathantara.
4.2.2.32	Vamadevya and Yagyaya-jya are the two.
4.2.2.33	He drew the plants for the gods with Rathantara, the cattle with Brihat, the sacrifice with Vamadevya, and the sacrifice with Yagyaya- jya.
4.2.2.34	He who knows this, he draws the plants for him with Rathantara, cattle with Brihat. sacrifice with Vama- devya, and sacrifice with Yagyaja- jya. The sacrifice is the sacrifice.
4.2.2.35	Ida is all this.
4.2.2.36	He obtains a thousand cattle.
4.2.2.37	He who knows this obtains a thousand cattle
4.2.3.1	Where the ground slopes towards the east and is uprooted, one should pour down the hands of the sun at dawn, and place a bunch of darbha grass in a pit.
4.2.3.2	"One should say, "May my desire not turn away."
4.2.3.3	One's desire turns away for him by means of desire, whatever desire one may have.
4.2.3.4-8	He who knows the desire directly, his desires come to him. He becomes as he desires. Our desire is in cattle, the cattle's in plants, the plants' in water. The plants are the king of desire. They fulfill his desire, as he desires. Water is the king of plants.
4.2.3.9	This is the wind that has been let loose from her, the hairy one from the hairy one.
4.2.3.10	Therefore she goes on breathing.
4.2.3.11	For Agni is her mouth, Vayu her breath.
4.2.3.12	Where she meets with cows, he should say, "You are praised, you are auspicious."
4.2.3.13	This is she.
4.2.3.14	She makes her share in this.
4.2.3.15-19	Herein, those who know this become the cattle of the Asuras. The gods and the Asuras were in conflict. Aditi was among the gods, Kusta among the Asuras. They thought, "If we were to conquer, we would strike off the head of Kusta." "If we were to be victorious," the Asuras thought.
4.2.3.20	We would have struck the head of Aditi. The gods struck her at the time of victory.
4.2.3.21	For him whose victory is won, whose victory is not won, she is struck in his house.
4.2.3.22	This is indeed hunger.
4.2.3.23	He strikes hunger.
4.2.3.24	He who, knowing this, strikes a cow at the time of Ekastaka, strikes hunger for a year.
4.2.3.25	Prajapati was one.
4.2.3.26	He desired, 'May I be many, may I be propagated.'
4.2.3.27	He created himself.
4.2.3.28	He created mind.
4.2.3.29	That mind became one.
4.2.3.30	He created himself again.
4.2.3.31	He created speech.
4.2.3.32	That speech became one.
4.2.3.33	Again he created himself.
4.2.3.34	She created Viraj.
4.2.3.35	That Viraj became one.
4.2.3.36	She created herself again.
4.2.3.37	She created the cow.
4.2.3.38	That cow became one.
4.2.3.39	She took her own self.
4.2.3.40	She created the sheep.
4.2.3.41	The sheep became one.
4.2.3.42	It took its own self.
4.2.3.43	It created the pleasures of the sheep, by which men enjoy here.
4.2.3.44	These are its pleasures.
4.2.3.45	He who knows this enjoys all its pleasures and all desires.
4.2.3.46-53	Speech is indeed a cow. Virat is a cow. Ida is a cow. Cow indeed is a cow. A cow is this entire universe. All these (cows) indeed resort to him who knows this. What is that self which he obtained, it became Ida. That is the reason for Ida being called Ida.
4.2.3.54	He who knows the nature of Ida in that (verse) finds his own self for prosperity.
4.2.4.1	The tawny, the red, the white, the black.
4.2.4.2	Indra bestowed that form named Vasu on the animals.
4.2.4.3	One obtains wealth.
4.2.4.4	One who knows this does not lose wealth.
4.2.4.5	Those who are Shiti-pishta, those who are Mandis, those who are Enis, those who have black backs, those who are Shitibahus, those who are Shuddhavalas.
4.2.4.6	Brihaspati has recited the names and forms of animals.
4.2.4.7	Those who know this are indeed followed by many Idas.
4.2.4.8	Those who are Prishatis, those who resemble the color of saffron, those who are Sarangis, those who look like a black bee, those who are Kalmashi, those who are Pishnis, those who are white.
4.2.4.9	The Maruts have proclaimed it, the light, the form of cattle.
4.2.4.10	He who knows this becomes luminous.
4.2.4.11	The beautiful one, the dark one, the tawny one, the black one.
4.2.4.12	Prajapati has proclaimed it, the life, the form of the cattle.
4.2.4.13	He becomes long-lived who knows this.
4.2.4.14	Four in the beginning,
4.2.4.15	Four at the end,
4.2.4.16	Six times two in the middle.
4.2.4.17	They are two tens.
4.2.4.18	The Viraj has ten syllables.
4.2.4.19	Cattle are the Viraj.
4.2.4.20	He indeed wins cattle.
4.2.4.21	"One should say, 'For Vasvi, I invoke, for her I offer, for her may I be won,' before the Bahiṣpavamāna (hymn).
4.2.4.22	" "One should say, "For Ida, I invoke, I offer for her, for her may be won," before the Ajyas."
4.2.4.23-26	"He should recite the verse, 'O Jyotis, do thou grant me protection, do thou grant it to me.' before the Madhyamdina Pavamana. He should recite the verses, 'O Ayusha, do thou grant protection, do thou protect me.' before the Arbhava Pavamana. The sacrifice is the abode of animals. The sacrificer seizes the animals of his enemy in his own abode.
4.2.4.27	May the cattle not wander away from this (place).
4.2.5.1	Come, O Vasiyas!
4.2.5.2	Come, O श्रेयस्!
4.2.5.3	Come, О भूयस्!
4.2.5.4	O चित्ता, come!
4.2.5.5	O दधृष्य, come!
4.2.5.6	Come, ओ इडा!
4.2.5.7	Come, सुनृता!
4.2.5.8	You are the mind.
4.2.5.9	You are the will.
4.2.5.10	You are wisdom, prosperity, joy, good-will.
4.2.5.11	May all beings breathe after you, O सुनरी.
4.2.5.12	You are the breath of all beings.
4.2.5.13	You are more than life.
4.2.5.14	You are the sacrifice.
4.2.5.15	Come, O Sarūpavarṣā!
4.2.5.16	She follows this (earth). The two good, firm ones are above.
4.2.5.17	The firm heads are below.
4.2.5.18	She is our good protector, our dear friend, our dear companion, our benefactor, our benefactor, come!
4.2.5.19	Come, O Juṣṭā!
4.2.5.20	Come, Ida!
4.2.5.21	Come, Aditi.
4.2.5.22	Come, O invoked one, I have invoked you.
4.2.5.23	O Suhava, come, with prosperity.
4.2.5.24	O goddesses, goddesses, turn to me.
4.2.5.25	With the softest, with the softest ghee, may you anoint me.
4.2.5.26	That gift of the Brahman, the Rishi, did not deceive me.
4.2.5.27	Like water drawn from the ocean.
4.2.5.28	The cow stands before the Brahman, giving with her ten horns.
4.2.6.1	"Come, O most excellent one!"
4.2.6.2	Brahman is the most excellent one.
4.2.6.3	He thus calls out to Brahman.
4.2.6.4	"Come O most excellent one."
4.2.6.5	Kshatra is the most excellent.
4.2.6.6	He thus invokes Kshatra.
4.2.6.7	"Come! O most abundant one!"
4.2.6.8	Vid is the most abundant.
4.2.6.9-19	He calls the Vishvas, saying, "Come, O mind!" Mind is the mind. He calls the mind, saying, "O mind, come!" He calls the Dadhrish, saying, "come." Dadhrish is speech. He calls speech, saying, "Speech, come!" "Come, O Ida!" Ida is cattle. He calls cattle, saying, "Cattle, come!" Come, O truth!"
4.2.6.20	Food is indeed truth.
4.2.6.21	One invites food here.
4.2.6.22	These are the seven divine cows.
4.2.6.23	They were known by Kritavāman.
4.2.6.24	With them, he invited the cattle of the Kurus and the Kounteyas.
4.2.6.25	The Kurus searched for them among the Brahmanas.
4.2.6.26	They found them in Kumāravati, with horses as the fee.
4.2.6.27	He said, "Do not be afraid."
4.2.6.28	"I will call these with these, and those with those."
4.2.6.29	"Those who know the dear abodes of these, they know that they are bought."
4.2.6.30	In the battle that was joined, he saw the sun.
4.2.6.31	He called these with these, those with those.
4.2.6.32	Wherever these are called out, the cattle approach there.
4.2.6.33	Where the cattle are, there the gods are.
4.2.6.34	Where the gods are, there Indra is.
4.2.6.35	Those whom they approach, they conquer.
4.2.6.36	He conquers in battle.
4.2.7.1	She, having been created, surpassed both gods and men.
4.2.7.2	The gods spread it out with the Darsha-Pūrnamāsa sacrifices.
4.2.7.3	They obtained that (goddess) which is Ida.
4.2.7.4	Having obtained that (goddess), they think that they are taking it away when they invoke Ida.
4.2.7.5	When one invokes silently, then one should recite these seven (verses).
4.2.7.6	When one invokes loudly, then the next seven.
4.2.7.7	He approaches each of them in their respective forms.
4.2.7.8	He who knows this goes to him without being obstructed.
4.2.7.9	Where one approaches plants with roots or animals, one should recite these seven.
4.2.7.10	He approaches each of them with their respective forms. 
4.2.7.11	He who knows thus goes to him without obstruction.
4.2.7.12	One should perform the sacrifice with the Sthavirya (mantra).
4.2.7.13	whose seven elders are the last ones.
4.2.7.14	"He calls him by saying, 'Come, O best one! Come, O best one!' He calls him by this and that."
4.2.7.15	If a Vaishya or a Shudra is very prosperous, one should offer a calf of a cow to him.
4.2.7.16	"O cattle, be at ease!"
4.2.7.17	Cattle are at ease.
4.2.7.18	"The constellation of Pūṣan is the nourisher."
4.2.7.19	He moves in the constellations, the constellation of Pūshan is the nourisher.
4.2.7.20	He causes it to be removed.
4.2.7.21	He should remove it.
4.2.7.22	"He says, 'Give me life, give me radiance, give me wealth, give me prosperity.' He takes away his wealth and prosperity.
4.2.7.23	Having invoked him from here, he should invoke him from there.
4.2.7.24	"He invokes him from here and from there, saying, "Come, O better one! Come, O best one!"
4.2.7.25	He does not desire anything from him.
4.2.7.26	One who desires a village should offer a sacrifice to Sarasvati with two verses.
4.2.7.27	Sarasvati is indeed the year.
4.2.7.28	By means of the year, he wins a village for him.
4.2.7.29	"Come, O better one!" "Come, O best one!" thus he invites him to come.
4.2.7.30	One who desires cattle should be initiated with the Sarasvati verses.
4.2.7.31	Sarasvati is indeed the year.
4.2.7.32	By means of the year he bestows cattle on him.
4.2.7.33	"Come, O better!" "Come, best!" thus he invites.
4.2.7.34	One who desires cattle should cook rice in four measures of milk for Brahmins.
4.2.7.35	He obtains cattle from the directions by means of the four measures, and from the Brahmins by means of the Brahmins.
4.2.7.36	One should not give what is cut off.
4.2.7.37	For it is like one who desires cattle.
4.2.7.38	One should give a garment or gold.
4.2.7.39	The animals of the sacrificer become more numerous.
4.2.8.1	Prajapati did not speak.
4.2.8.2	He placed the merit in himself.
4.2.8.3	He did not proclaim the merit of himself.
4.2.8.4	This is the mantra that was spoken, one should not say otherwise.
4.2.8.5	One should say, 'merit, praiseworthy.'
4.2.8.6	He gives merit to himself alone, and does not give merit to others.
4.2.8.7	The cattle follow him who gives to one who is not entitled to receive.
4.2.8.8	If he thinks that he is giving to one who is entitled to receive, he should recite this very formula.
4.2.8.9	The sage Upadambhi said, "He who gives, that is Brahman." He fills it with this.
4.2.8.10	It nourishes him.
4.2.8.11	He who knows this, like the ocean, is not exhausted when being drained.
4.2.8.12	One should recite the mantra "May the heroic ones increase, those who made us heroic" over a male child born, and "May the greater ones increase, those that made us greater" over a female child born.
4.2.8.13	"May those who have given us food be more numerous." He should recite this mantra while offering oblations to those who have given him food. "May those who are more numerous than us be more numerous." One should recite this mantra when sitting in an assembly.
4.2.8.14	One should offer one's feet.
4.2.8.15	These indeed are the animals.
4.2.8.16	Animals approach him and do not leave him, if one knows this.
4.2.8.17	"The auspicious one has given birth to the auspicious one."
4.2.8.18	"The variegated one has given birth the variegated one."
4.2.8.19	O Blessed One, I was born from Aidi, the Maitrāvaruṇa.
4.2.8.20	O Blessed One, I have been born with Urja.
4.2.8.21	One should recite this mantra over a newly born male child, "May I find agreement with him."
4.2.8.22	He is born with Urja and goes to find agreement with the animals.
4.2.8.23	The auspicious one gave birth to the auspicious one.
4.2.8.24	The variegated one gave birth to a variegated one.
4.2.8.25	O Blessed Goddess, I was born to Aidi, the daughter of Maitrāvaruṇa.
4.2.8.26	May I be born with the prosperity of wealth, O Blessed One.
4.2.8.27	"He says, "May I find a wife." He means, "May I be born with a wife."
4.2.8.28	He is born with the prosperity and wealth of cattle.
4.2.8.29	Those who are born before the Ekastaka (the eighth day of the bright fortnight) are the best of the previous crop.
4.2.8.30	Those who come after are the first of the next crop.
4.2.8.31	He should recite both of them together.
4.2.8.32	He binds both of them together with the same.
4.2.9.1	He who knows the power, he is able to do what he learns.
4.2.9.2	This is the power.
4.2.9.3	He who has the largest share of it, he is able, he is able.
4.2.9.4	He who thus knows, he has the largest share.
4.2.9.5	Cattle are the power.
4.2.9.6	He who has the greatest share of cattle is able to teach that.
4.2.9.7	He who knows this becomes one who has the greatest and most cattle.
4.2.9.8	This is its vow:
4.2.9.9	One should not say "killed."
4.2.9.10	One should say "done."
4.2.9.11	One should not speak of a pregnant woman.
4.2.9.12	One should say, "The one who is born."
4.2.9.13	You are the universe, a thousand.
4.2.9.14	"To Indra thee, Sṛma hath given."
4.2.9.15	Sṛma was the name of a demon.
4.2.9.16	His earth was full of cattle.
4.2.9.17	Indra took them away.
4.2.9.18	Therefore they say, "Cattle are Indra's."
4.2.9.19	"As many as I do this for, may they be more than the former, may they be equal to the latter," he should make the mark of cows.
4.2.9.20	He makes the greater ones equal to the lesser ones.
4.2.9.21	The animals, having been created, approached each of the stars.
4.2.9.22	They did not procreate.
4.2.9.23	They did no reach the ground.
4.2.9.24	They approached Revati.
4.2.9.25	They procreated in Revati.
4.2.9.26	In Revati they reached the ground.
4.2.9.27	Therefore whatever one does for the animals, one should do it in Revati.
4.2.9.28	For the animals stand near him.
4.2.9.29	Those who know this will have animals.
4.2.9.30	If one's right side is injured, one should perform the rite on the right side. That is Tvashtri's sign, the sign of the gods. One who desires sacrifice should perform it.
4.2.9.31	For the sacrifice bows to him.
4.2.9.32	One who has been attacked on both sides should perform the Gayatri rite, which is auspicious for cattle, if he desires cattle.
4.2.9.33	He becomes possessed of cattle.
4.2.9.34	One who has been attacked from both sides should perform a rite with the Tristubh metre, which is the form of purity, if he desires stability.
4.2.9.35	He attains stability.
4.2.9.36	Vasishtha's Stauna-Karnya.
4.2.9.37	Vasishtha saw prosperity.
4.2.9.38	He placed it in himself.
4.2.9.39	When one makes a post with a hole, one places prosperity in the cattle.
4.2.9.40	Jamadagni's post with a hole.
4.2.9.41	Jamadagnis saw prosperity.
4.2.9.42	It placed it in himself
4.2.9.43	When one makes the post with a hole one places prosperity in cattle.
4.2.9.44	The ears of the Asuras are like tassels.
4.2.9.45	They quickly become many and quickly perish.
4.2.9.46	The ears are impure.
4.2.9.47	They quickly grow many, but the sacrifice does not follow them.
4.2.9.48	The ears of the Niritis are like holes.
4.2.9.49	If one makes ears like holes, the Niritis would seize his cattle.
4.2.9.50-56	One should not cut off the ears of a cow without listening to it. One should not cut the ears of a bull without listening to it.
4.2.9.57	He obtains the highest position among his equals.
4.2.9.58	Prajapati created the animals.
4.2.9.59	He did not create the blood.
4.2.9.60	This is what was not created.
4.2.9.61	This is the reason why it is called blood.
4.2.9.62	He did create the blood, because it is the cause of the animals' death.
4.2.9.63	He who kills an animal causes the animals to die.
4.2.9.64	Those who are not killed are killed by that.
4.2.9.65	And those who are heard to be not killed,
4.2.9.66	they are killed by that
4.2.9.67	They say, "Those who are not killed do not go to the other world."
4.2.9.68	Therefore one should kill.
4.2.9.69	One should not kill with a spear.
4.2.9.70	A spear is a thunderbolt.
4.2.9.71	If one were to kill with a spear, one would offer one's cattle to the thunderbolt.
4.2.10.2	Let them be released with milk and ghee, entering the fire, their home.
4.2.10.3	One should recite this mantra over the cows returning in the evening.
4.2.10.4	Fire is their womb, fire is their home.
4.2.10.5	He places them in their own womb, in their own home.
4.2.10.6	The cattle of one who knows this do not suffer any harm at night.
4.2.10.7	May Aryaman, Pusan, Brihaspati, Indra, the conqueror of wealth, may they all unite you. The cows that have come of their own accord, the ones that are here, the ones that belong to this place, may they all be united. Thus one should unite the cows that were here before and those that one may have obtained from elsewhere.
4.2.10.8	Cattle indeed is ghee.
4.2.10.9	Agni is Rudra.
4.2.10.10-18	If one were to offer to Rudra, one would destroy one's cattle. One should mix them together. Both groups become larger. May Aryaman mix you together. Aryaman is the sacrifice. He mixes them together with the sacrifice. May Pusan mix you together. Pusan is nourishment. He mixes together with nourishment.
4.2.10.19	"May Brihaspati unite us."
4.2.10.20	Brahma is Brihaspati.
4.2.10.21	He unites them with Brahma.
4.2.10.22	"May Indra, the conqueror of wealth, unite us."
4.2.10.23	Indra is power.
4.2.10.24	He unites with power.
4.2.10.25	The flowing Reva, the mother earth,
4.2.10.26	The Reva-waters, the plants,
4.2.10.27	May they impel us for prosperity, for the willing one. One should spread the rope with the verse, "May they impel us."
4.2.10.28	One should wipe it with the verse,
4.2.10.29	"I wipe you with prosperity and nourishment."
4.2.10.30	One wipes it with prosperity and nourishment.
4.2.10.31	Its vow is this:
4.2.10.32	One should not be empty.
4.2.10.33	One should not move above and below.
4.2.10.34	One should neither rain nor heat.
4.2.10.35-38	This is what Bastor Ramakayana knew, the spreading of the string. He attained a thousand cattle. He who knows this attains a thousand cattle. The father of the calves, the lord of the cows, and this father of the great Garga cattle,
4.2.10.39	"He who is releasing the bull should say, 'I release thee, O thou who art the source of seed, O thou who are the source of fame, for the increase of wealth.'
4.2.10.40	He releases him indeed as the source of seed and fame for the increase of prosperity.
4.2.10.41	If a Vaishya or a Shudra is very prosperous, he should take twenty-one cows from the cowpen and offer twenty-one oblations.
4.2.10.42	There are twenty-one human worlds.
4.2.10.43	He wins cattle for him from the human worlds.
4.2.10.44	One who desires cattle should offer these oblations with the names of cows, the first and the last, the ashes of a cow.
4.2.10.45	This is the face of cattle.
4.2.10.46	He leads cattle to him from the face.
4.2.11.1	To those whose name is Vasu, Indra has assigned, seeing the abode of dawn, the form of cattle, this is their birthplace, this is their pen, here is wealth, prosperity, svāhā, one should offer.
4.2.11.2	To those whose name is Ida, Brihaspati has assigned, seeing their abode, the form of animals, this is their birth-place, this is their stable, here is wealth and prosperity, svāha, one should offer.
4.2.11.3	To those Maruts who have risen up, whose name is Light, whose form is that of animals, who see the midday as their abode, to them this is the womb, this is the stable, here is wealth, here is prosperity. Thus one should offer oblations.
4.2.11.4	To those whose life, name, and form Prajapati saw in the evening, when he saw the abode of the animals, this is their birthplace, this is their pasture, here is wealth, here is prosperity, svāhā.
4.2.11.5	These are the forms of the day.
4.2.11.6	In these forms of the day, the gods obtained the forms of the animals.
4.2.11.7	In these very forms of the day, the sacrificer wins the cattle of his enemy.
4.2.11.8	He offers with ghee.
4.2.11.9	Cattle are ghee.
4.2.11.10	He wins cattle with cattle.
4.2.11.11	This should not be guarded.
4.2.11.12	One should offer in the morning in the cattle-sheds among the cattle.
4.2.11.13	He wins all of them together.
4.2.11.14	One should offer with these (verses) when cows have been brought.
4.2.11.15	He has taken animals from the womb.
4.2.11.16	Even the inferior ones make a complete circle.
4.2.11.17	One should offer with these when there is a battle.
4.2.11.18	Then one should recite these verses over horses:
4.2.11.19	"O Mitra-born, O Ksatra-born,
4.2.11.20	O strength-born, O power-born,"
4.2.11.21	We conquer, we endure, we are, we prosper. We conquer in battle.
4.2.11.22	I invoke the reddish ones for you with the Gayatri metre.
4.2.11.23	I invoke for you the reddish-brown ones with the Tristubh metre.
4.2.11.24	I invite the pale ones for you with Jagati metre.
4.2.11.25	I summon the tawny ones for you with Anushtubh metre.
4.2.11.26	With the Paṅkti metre I summon your embryos.
4.2.11.27	I bind you with the Shakra metre.
4.2.11.28	I bind all of you with the Anapta metre.
4.2.11.29	That is seven.
4.2.11.30	The Shakra metre has seven feet.
4.2.11.31	Shakra is cattle.
4.2.11.32	One indeed obtains cattle.
4.2.11.33	The Gayatri is the first.
4.2.11.34	The Gayatry is the last.
4.2.11.35	The Gayatra is indeed splendour, brahminical lustre.
4.2.11.36	And by his brilliance and by his Brahmanic lustre he encloses the cattle on both sides.
4.2.12.1	Prajapati created three kinds of greatness, Agni, Vayu and Surya.
4.2.12.2	They, the four, father and sons, performed a sacrifice.
4.2.12.3	They sweated together.
4.2.12.4	That became (the Soma).
4.2.12.5	That was his name.
4.2.12.6-13	Everything was. These are his names, cruel and restless. Therefore, they should not be taken. For they are cruel and restless. Prajapati desired his own daughter, Osha. She became Rohini. He pursued her, having become a lion. He made a vow to her.
4.2.12.14	He turned around, following him.
4.2.12.15	From him he was afraid.
4.2.12.16	He said, "I will make you the lord of cattle."
4.2.12.17	Then do not stand against me."
4.2.12.18	That is his name, "Lord of cattle."
4.2.12.19	He approached him and struck him.
4.2.12.20	He wept.
4.2.12.21	That is his other name, "Rudra."
4.2.12.22	These are his two names, "Auspicious" and "Peaceful".
4.2.12.23	Therefore, they should be taken as one wishes.
4.2.12.24	For they are in the peaceful Shiva.
4.2.12.25	Then what semen fell down first, that Agni surrounded.
4.2.12.26	That is their Agnicya-ness.
4.2.12.27	Then what flowed over, that Brihaspati took.
4.2.12.28	That is the Usriya-ness of them.
4.2.12.29	"That is their Shakvari-ness."
4.2.12.30	The reason why they are called cows is that they do not know how to go.
4.2.12.31	These are their names.
4.2.12.32	He who knows this enjoys all his desires with all their names.
4.2.12.33	The animals, having been created, followed these constellations: the full moon, the eighth day, the new moon, the asterism Citra, and the ashvattha tree.
4.2.12.34	Therefore, a cow is not to be driven away from them.
4.2.12.35	If he were to perform it, his cattle would follow it.
4.2.13.1	All the gods were born together.
4.2.13.2	They were all born together.
4.2.13.3	It lay there, covered.
4.2.13.4	The gods moved around it in this way and that way.
4.2.13.5	Mitra and Varuna understood it.
4.2.13.6	"He who would make it (the Soma) to be offered, he should offer it to the cow." They made the cow two-footed.
4.2.13.7	She did not stand up.
4.2.13.8	They put her together from one side.
4.2.13.9	Therefore these (cows) stand bound.
4.2.13.10	She stood up having become four-footed.
4.2.13.11	He who knows this stands up with offspring and cattle.
4.2.13.12	They saw milk in her.
4.2.13.13	The gods milked it with a golden vessel, the sacrifice and immortality.
4.2.13.14	He who knows this milks the sacrifice and immortality!
4.2.13.15	Then the fathers milked it with silver vessel, strength and prosperity.
4.2.13.16	He who thus knows milks strength and prosperity!
4.2.13.17	Then men milked it with wooden vessel, food and offspring.
4.2.13.18	He who knows thus, he milks food and offspring.
4.2.13.19	Then the sages milked the metres and cattle with a cup.
4.2.13.20	He who knows thus, milks the metres and cattle.
4.2.13.21	Then the Gandharvas and Apsarases milked fragrant merit with a lotus leaf.
4.2.13.22	He who thus knows, milks fragrant merit.
4.2.13.23	Then the serpents milked poison.
4.2.13.24	He who knows this milks poison for his enemy.
4.2.13.25	Then the Asuras milked with a flowing iron vessel, prosperity and adversity.
4.2.13.26	He who thus knows this milks prosperity and adversity for his enemy. He who knows this milked prosperity and adversity for himself.
4.2.13.27	Indra approached her with this alone.
4.2.13.28	She milked all this, whatever there is.
4.2.13.29	Having milked her, he returned.
4.2.13.30	She, being milked, stood reflecting with a bad mind.
4.2.13.31	Prajapati understood her, "She is reflecting."
4.2.13.32	He said, "What are you reflecting on?"
4.2.13.33	She said, "Those who milked me did not return to me."
4.2.13.34	He said "Do not be afraid.
4.2.13.35	"So I shall draw you, that you may be dear to both, to the gods and to men."
4.2.13.36	From her feet ghee flowed.
4.2.13.37	Taking that ghee, he anointed her mouth.
4.2.13.38	"I make you dear to both, the gods and the men."
4.2.13.39	Therefore, she is dear to both, gods and men.
4.2.13.40	With this (water) he should wipe the mouth of the learned Brāhmaṇa.
4.2.13.41	Both gods and men know this.
4.2.13.42	With this (water) of the unmarried girl.
4.2.13.43	With this of the one who desires a husband.
4.2.13.44	This is indeed the lustre of cows.
4.2.13.45	One should not do it to everyone.
4.2.13.46	But to whomsoever one does it, he becomes lustrous.
4.2.14.1	The bull who has a white tail, white buttocks, white thighs, white hips, white flanks, and white sides, and who is the leader of eight herds of cattle,
4.2.14.2	he who has eight herds of cattle is the bull who has such a form.
4.2.14.3	He who has a white tuft of hair on his tail is the one who is established.
4.2.14.4	He who is established in offspring and cattle is the bull that has such a form.
4.2.14.5	The one with white arms is Samanta.
4.2.14.6	One who has such a bull becomes prosperous in offspring and cattle.
4.2.14.7	The one with a white back is Tantri.
4.2.14.8	One who possesses such a bull becomes wealthy in cattle.
4.2.14.9	Now, the one who has a single form but has a mark is Dadarasrit.
4.2.14.10	No enemy can run away with his cattle, whose bull is like this.
4.2.14.11	The one with the hair of a sheep is the one who nourishes.
4.2.14.12	They are born like goats, whose bull is thus.
4.2.14.13	The one who is dark is the one who nurishes.
4.2.14.14	They quickly become many, but they are not to be kept together.
4.2.14.15	The one that is tawny is the one who nurses.
4.2.14.16-22	The Himālayas quickly become many. The one that is white is the one that nourishes. The ones that are difficult to tame quickly become many. The ones that are difficult to tame quickly become many One should not do the Anji or the Prsni. That is not a pair. And the Prsni is the form of a tiger. Animals are afraid of it.
4.2.14.23	The animals of one whose bull is like this are the younger ones.
4.2.14.24	They say, "One should let go the seed."
4.2.14.25	This is their seed, namely, the reddish color.
4.2.14.26	One becomes possessed of cattle whose bull is like that.
4.2.14.27	The one who is smoky and reddish-smoky is Prajapati.
4.2.14.28-31	He who has such a bull becomes endowed with offspring and cattle. He who has a bull with curly hair becomes endowed with offspring. He who possesses such a bull becomes blessed with offspring and cattle, and he who has a bull whose tail is upright becomes endowed with offspring.
4.2.14.32	The animals of him whose bull is like this, grow upwards.
4.2.14.33	If the bull has a depression on its right side, it is sinful and oozing.
4.2.14.34	If it has a protrusion on its left side, it is auspicious and nourishing.
4.2.14.35	The animals of him whose protrusion is like this, grows upwards.
4.2.14.36	The animals grow upwards of him whose bull has a protrusion like this.
4.2.14.37	That which is sloping to the left is sinful, that which flows.
4.2.14.38	That which is sloping to right is meritorious, that which brings.
4.2.14.39	That which has a left-hand bow is meritorious, that brings.
4.2.14.40	That having a ridge is a cow-pen.
4.2.14.41	One should not cut it.
4.2.14.42	If there are cows in the vicinity,
4.2.14.43	These are the undiminished oblations of animals.
4.2.14.44	His oblation is not spilled, for whom there is a share in the cows.
4.2.14.45	His cows should be both Uksā and Vehac.
4.2.14.46	These two indeed support the strength of cattle.
4.2.14.47	His cattle are not to be driven away, for whom there are Uksā and Vechac cows.
4.3.1.1	Some cattle belong to a man, others do not.
4.3.1.2	Those who are hostile to them is Nirriti.
4.3.1.3	Those who are not hostile to them is Anumati.
4.3.1.4	They offer to both of them together.
4.3.1.5	They make both of them cooked together.
4.3.1.6	They proceed with the former Nirriti.
4.3.1.7	Having gone to the south, they perform in the self-made pit.
4.3.1.8	This is the Nirriti-seized part of the earth.
4.3.1.9	He himself, seized by Nirriti, appeases Nirriti.
4.3.1.10	Placing the single-pronged stake, he offers with the two ends of the sacrificial grass.
4.3.1.11	Nirriti, pleased, may she take it, svāhā.
4.3.1.12	The garment is black, torn at the end, and given to the right.
4.3.1.13	For this is the form of Nirriti.
4.3.1.14	Half of a man is seized by Nirriti and half is not seized by Nirriti.
4.3.1.15-22	Whatever is seized by Nirriti, he releases it from that by that. Having returned, they proceed with the eight-vessel offering to Anumati. Having released Nirriti. Anumati is indeed this (earth), or speech. He indeed enters the sacrifice with Anumati. It is eight-vessel. This is indeed Gāyatrī, or speech is Gāyatrī. A cow is the dakṣiṇā.
4.3.1.23	For this is the form of Anu-mati.
4.3.1.24	Now those who throw the dice beyond the line, having gone to the north, having dug up the anthill, he should offer, saying, "I have dug up the field of so-and-so, son of so-andso."
4.3.1.25	He then puts it back, saying, "Here I am putting back the field of soand-so, the son of so- and-so."
4.3.1.26	He takes possession of the field.
4.3.1.27	And the wife of the field follows him.
4.3.1.28	He offers it on this very field, and then he enters the Savana. The next day, for the Adityas who are in heaven, a cake on eight potsherds to Bhuvad, and ghee.
4.3.1.29	The Adityas indeed went to heaven from here.
4.3.1.30	He goes to heaven, having announced to them.
4.3.1.31	The Aditvas are prosperous in this world, the Adityas in the other world.
4.3.1.32	He prospers in both worlds.
4.3.1.33	The gift is the best.
4.3.1.34	By means of the best one ascends to heaven.
4.3.1.35	The Ekadashakapaala (oblation) to Agni-Vishnu is performed on the next day.
4.3.1.36	Agni is all the deities.
4.3.1.37	Vishnu is the sacrifice.
4.3.1.38	He has obtained the deities and the sacrifice.
4.3.1.39	Agni, indeed, is the end of the sacrifice.
4.3.1.40	Vishnu, indeed, is beyond.
4.3.1.41	He took up the ends of the sacrifice from both sides.
4.3.1.42	Having taken up the ends of sacrifice from both sides, he should pour it into the lap.
4.3.1.43	Thus indeed, he pours the sacrifice.
4.3.1.44	He goes to perform it as he wishes.
4.3.1.45	A bull and a dwarf are the Dakṣiṇās.
4.3.1.46	By the bull, it is Agniya.
4.3.1.47	By the dwarf, it is Vaishnavya.
4.3.1.48-53	He makes him prosper by means of form. On the next day, the Agniṣomīya (animal-sacrifice) with eleven potsherds. Indra killed Vṛtra by means of the strength of Agni and Soma. He who is consecrated with the Rājasūya, indeed, kills Vṛtra. This is indeed the killing of Vṛtra. The fee is gold.
4.3.1.54	Truth is indeed gold.
4.3.1.55	One destroys with truth alone.
4.3.1.56	The Ekadashakapa (eleven-vessel) oblation to Indra-Agni is for the next day.
4.3.1.57	Indra killed Vritra with the strength of Agni and Soma.
4.3.1.58	He became exhausted by his strength and energy.
4.3.1.59	He saw this Indra-Agni.
4.3.1.60	With that, he placed strength and energy in himself.
4.3.1.61-67	He who is consecrated with the Rajasuya sacrifice is deprived of his strength and vigour. Indra and Agni are strength and vigour. They are the two deities of the Rajasuya. They make him prosperous with strength and vigour. The bull is the sacrificial fee. The bull is Agni. The bull-calf is Indra. He makes him prosperous with form.
4.3.1.68-75	The Śvo bhūta (rite) is the Agniya rite with eight potsherds. The cake to Indra is on eight potsherds." The Agniya rite is indeed for prosperity. Indra indeed slew Vritra. He surpassed other gods. He became Mahendra. He brought forth this Uddhara (rite) after slaying Vritra. This is his Uddhara rite. This is his share.
4.3.1.76	Therefore the king, having won the battle, conquered the enemy.
4.3.1.77	He who is consecrated with the Rajasuya sacrifice is deprived of his strength and vigour.
4.3.1.78	What is milk?
4.3.1.79	He makes him prosper with milk itself.
4.3.1.80	He who consecrates himself with the Rajasuye sacrifice is deprived of power and vigour.
4.3.1.81	If it is Indra's,
4.3.2.2	He knew that Agni would be the first to release them.
4.3.2.3	He said, "Whoever of us two releases first, let him do so with us."
4.3.2.4	Agni released them.
4.3.2.5	Indra released them after.
4.3.2.6	Therefore (the sacrifice) is for Indra and Agni.
4.3.2.7	But they say it should be performed for Agni and Indra.
4.3.2.8	For Agni released them first.
4.3.2.9	It is indeed by means of this that he conquers.
4.3.2.10	The Āgrayana is offered on twelve potsherds.
4.3.2.11	There are twelve months in a year.
4.3.2.12	It is from the year that it comes forth.
4.3.2.13	Seventeen kindling verses should be employed.
4.3.2.14	There are five seasons and twelve months.
4.3.2.15	This is the year.
4.3.2.16	It comes forth from the year.
4.3.2.17	Now there was one handful of barley, one of wheat, one of peas, and one of sesamum.
4.3.2.18	The All-gods said, "We shall extend this."
4.3.2.19	"Let us have a share."
4.3.2.20	The All-Gods extended it.
4.3.2.21	This is the share of the All-Gods.
4.3.2.22	And he extends it.
4.3.2.23	By this (verse) the Vaiśvadeva (oblation) would be in milk.
4.3.2.24	For milk is Vaiśvadeva.
4.3.2.25	Or this (verse) was spoken by her: "He cooks in me with rain."
4.3.2.26	"You will not take it away from here."
4.3.2.27	"Let there be no share."
4.3.2.28	This share is indeed made by them for the purpose of taking it away.
4.3.2.29	And also for the sake of stability.
4.3.2.30	What belongs to heaven and earth.
4.3.2.31	The plants are Soma's.
4.3.2.32	Soma is the king of plants.
4.3.2.33	This is his share, namely, what grows without being sown.
4.3.2.34	This is indeed his share.
4.3.2.35	This is the share of the king.
4.3.2.36	Therefore, having won a battle, the king goes to the village and celebrates.
4.3.2.37	Some plants are cultivated, others are wild.
4.3.2.38	These are the two kinds of grains.
4.3.2.39	He performs the Āgrayaṇa rite for those that are sown with a plough and the other rite for those that grow in the forest.
4.3.2.40	The one who has established the sacred fires is brought to the gods.
4.3.2.41	If one were to eat the new grain without performing the Āgrayaṇeṣṭi, one would eat the share of the gods that has been set aside.
4.3.2.42	One would incur misfortune.
4.3.2.43	He is consecrated for all of them, except for the Rajasuya and the Agnaraya, for the securing of food.
4.3.2.44	The calf is the firstborn, the fee.
4.3.2.45	For he is like semen, not yet born, for the sake of being born.
4.3.3.1	Then these four monthly sacrifices.
4.3.3.2	The four monthly sacrifices are performed for a year.
4.3.3.3-9	He obtains them after a year. This is the sacrifice that has been suspended. The suspended sacrifice is obtained after a year. He obtains it after a year. The animals that are left over from the Cāturmāsya sacrifices are the Śunāsīrīya. He obtains them.
4.3.3.10	One should offer in the rainy season.
4.3.3.11	This is indeed the most desirable for cattle.
4.3.3.12	Then these five oblations are offered for continuity.
4.3.3.13	One who desires a village should offer.
4.3.3.14	Vayu indeed leads these creatures, thus and thus.
4.3.3.15	If one offers to Vayu,
4.3.3.16	Vayu indeed makes him lead his own creatures.
4.3.3.17	One who wishes for food should offer.
4.3.3.18	Indra is the year, the Sunasir.
4.3.3.19	The year is the giver of food.
4.3.3.20	He approaches him with his share.
4.3.3.21	He gives him food.
4.3.3.22	One should sacrifice in rainy water.
4.3.3.23	This is the nearest to food.
4.3.3.24	One who desires rain should sacrifice.
4.3.3.25	Vayu blows these.
4.3.3.26	He nourishes.
4.3.3.27	Then it rains.
4.3.3.28	The year is Indra, the Sunasir.
4.3.3.29	He rains according to the year.
4.3.4.1	The gods and the Asuras were contending.
4.3.4.2	Vritra said to Indra, "You are the best of the gods, I am of the Asuras.
4.3.4.3	Let us both be victorious.
4.3.4.4	Let neither of us kill the other."
4.3.4.5	They both agreed to this peace for mutual non-injury.
4.3.4.6	Those gods thought, "This one will be that one."
4.3.4.7	They desired Indra, "Let us kill him."
4.3.4.8	He said, "You are attacking me in a group."
4.3.4.9	Agni said to him, "I alone will protect you from the earth," "I from the sky," said Varuna, "I from the heaven," said Rudra.
4.3.4.10-15	Then indeed the gods slew Vritra. He who is consecrated with the Rajasuya sacrifice, indeed, slays Vritra. This is indeed the slaying of Vritra. The gods and the Asuras were contending. Agni, having made himself threefold, contended with them. Agni became Agni in this world, Varuna in the atmosphere, Rudra in heaven.
4.3.4.16	He thought, "This will be mine."
4.3.4.17	He said, "I am from both directions."
4.3.4.18	Then he conquered.
4.3.4.19	This is the conquest.
4.3.4.20	One should sacrifice with this in a battle.
4.3.4.21	One conquers the battle.
4.3.4.22	One should offer sacrifice with this to one who has an enemy, if he is dear to him.
4.3.4.23	One becomes one's own.
4.3.4.24	His enemy is destroyed.
4.3.4.25	When Indra attained the fourth (stage), then it became Indra-turyā.
4.3.4.26	The gift is a cow and a bull.
4.3.4.27	Because it is a cow, it is Agniya.
4.3.4.28	Because it has been tamed, it is Varuni.
4.3.4.29	Because it was a cow, it was Rudra.
4.3.4.30	Because it had milk, it was Indra.
4.3.4.31	He makes it complete with its own forms.
4.3.4.32	Indra could not conquer Namuci.
4.3.4.33	He made a rope of rays and climbed up the sun.
4.3.4.34	He then addressed him, saying, "You are my friend."
4.3.4.35	He said, "I will not kill you."
4.3.4.36	He said (to Indra), "I will make peace with you so that you do not kill me by day, by night, by the dry (sun) or by the wet (moon)."
4.3.4.37	At the rising of the sun, he cut off his head with a stream of water and foam.
4.3.4.38	It followed him, saying, "You are an enemy of Mitra."
4.3.4.39	The head of Namuchi was sin.
4.3.4.40	Sin followed him.
4.3.4.41	He drove away sin by that.
4.3.4.42	He drives away sin by that.
4.3.4.43	Because of the removal of water, they bring Apāmārga plants.
4.3.4.44	Water is indeed the destroyer of demons.
4.3.4.45	Demons do not cross water. For the removal of demons.
4.3.4.46	The fee is a boon.
4.3.4.47	One obtains a boon with a boon.
4.3.4.48	The boon is the self.
4.3.4.49	For the self indeed followed him.
4.3.4.50	Those gods who are the foremost, with Agni as their eye, the destroyers of the Rakshas, may they protect us, may they guard us. To them svāhā.
4.3.4.51	These directions are indeed connected with these gods.
4.3.4.52	He thus removes the Rakshas from these directions according to the deity.
4.3.4.53	He offers while moving around.
4.3.4.54	He thus indeed removes the Rakshasas from all directions.
4.3.4.55	I bind this with the Rakshas.
4.3.4.56	O Agni, burn the Rakshas!
4.3.4.57	He says, "Burned the Rakshas!" for the destruction of the Rakshas, for the separation of the Rakshasa.
4.3.4.58	And when he again binds and offers,
4.3.4.59	he makes those directions whose Rakshas he has destroyed to be sharers, for non-injury.
4.3.4.60	The chariot with five horses is the Dakshina.
4.3.4.61	The five directions and the five deities are for prosperity.
4.3.5.1	One should perform the Soma sacrifice for one who is going to be a king.
4.3.5.2	For one who performs the Soma sacrifice, the metres are exhausted in a year.
4.3.5.3	The metres are the divine ones.
4.3.5.4	He makes the metres for him again, without being exhausted.
4.3.5.5	One should offer the Rajasuya sacrifice for one who wants to be consecrated.
4.3.5.6-17	The Dakshina is a cow with a calf. One anoints him with the hope of obtaining. The hope is a cow with calf. He makes him obtain the hope. One should perform this sacrifice for one who desires cattle. The Devakas are the metres. Cattle are the metres. The Gâyatrî is Anumati. The Tristup is Râka. The Jagatî is Sinivâlî. Kuhu is the Anushtup. Dhatr is the Vashat-kâra.
4.3.5.18	The full moon that comes first is Anumati.
4.3.5.19	The full moon that comes later is Raka.
4.3.5.20	The new moon that comes first, that is Sinivali.
4.3.5.21	The new moom that comes later, that is Kuhū.
4.3.5.22	The moon itself is Dhātā.
4.3.5.23	That two are below and two are above, that is the pair.
4.3.5.24	That one is filled and the other is not, that is the couple.
4.3.5.25	That one sees and the other does not, that is a couple.
4.3.5.26	Whatever is the new moon, when the moon is born, that is the union.
4.3.5.27	From that very union he begets cattle.
4.3.5.28	One should sacrifice for one who desires offspring.
4.3.5.29	One should make Dhatr the last.
4.3.5.30	Women are indeed Devaki.
4.3.5.31	Man is Dhatr.
4.3.5.32	Offspring deposit semen in the opposite direction.
4.3.5.33	He deposits semen in the opposite directions.
4.3.5.34	They say, "He does not give it to the other one, for it is given in between."
4.3.5.35	He should place the Hotar in the middle.
4.3.5.36	He makes all of them to be with the bull.
4.3.5.37	They say, "It is born."
4.3.5.38	It is like a cow grazing behind.
4.3.5.39	Because they lead him to the women from behind.
4.3.5.40	When it is born, he should offer to the Hotar in front.
4.3.5.41	Dhātar is the foremost.
4.3.5.42	He makes him attain the foremost.
4.3.6.1	One who is afflicted by disease should offer a sacrifice.
4.3.6.2	One should make Dhātar the middle one.
4.3.6.3	Dhātar is indeed the year.
4.3.6.4	For the year is indeed afflicted by this (disease).
4.3.6.5	And then he is afflicted by this (affliction).
4.3.6.6	The year indeed has been afflicted by this (person).
4.3.6.7	Then he generates him from this pair.
4.3.6.8	The gods, indeed, are the metres; the animal sacrifice is the peace, the removal of the blemish.
4.3.6.9	The animal sacrifice should be offered for peace and the removal of blemish.
4.3.6.10	These are the animals, namely, the barley and the rice.
4.3.6.11	When the cake is made of rice,
4.3.6.12	the animal sacrifice is offered for peace and removal of blemish.
4.3.6.13	The animals that are in front are the heroic ones, and the others are the non-heroic ones.
4.3.6.14	The oblations that are in front of the fire are the heroic ones.
4.3.6.15	The ones that are behind are the non- heroic ones.
4.3.6.16	Those who eat the oblations that are before the fire approach them.
4.3.6.17	Because they have approached Prajapati, the support.
4.3.6.18	Those who are behind the oblations are the ones who are defeated.
4.3.6.19	Those in which there are Soma-offerings, they are the cows.
4.3.6.20	Soma indeed is the seed-giver for procreation.
4.3.6.21	One should perform the sacrifice for one who has all the Vedas.
4.3.6.22	One who gives everything is indeed deprived of cattle.
4.3.6.23	Here he sees the inferior cattle, where he divides them.
4.3.6.24	Where he divides them, there he again obtains them.
4.3.6.25	He who performs the Soma sacrifice should be the one to be sacrificed to.
4.3.6.26	For him whose Soma sacrifice is performed, the metres are exhausted for a year.
4.3.6.27	The metres are the Devīkas.
4.3.6.28	He makes the metres for him again to be inexhaustible.
4.3.7.1	Now this is the three-fold union.
4.3.7.2	Whatever is joined together in the east, by that he supports these worlds above.
4.3.7.3	Whatever is joined together in west, by that he upholds these worlds below.
4.3.7.4	This is for the support of these worlds.
4.3.7.5	Whatever is connected together in the east is for the generation of men.
4.3.7.6	Whatever is conjoined together in the west is for the generation (of cattle).
4.3.7.7	Whatever is joined together in three parts, by that he generates the heroes for him. Whatever is joined together above, by that he creates the cattle.
4.3.7.8	Whatever is joined together in the beginning, by that he places the semen. Whatever is joined above, by that it is generated.
4.3.7.9	Whatever is connected in three parts in the beginning, one who desires sacrifice should offer with that.
4.3.7.10	Agni is all the deities.
4.3.7.11	Vishnu is the sacrifice.
4.3.7.12	The deities and the sacrifice were obtained.
4.3.7.13	The sacrifice is Indra's.
4.3.7.14	The sacrifice is Vishnu's.
4.3.7.15	This is the beginning of the sacrifice.
4.3.7.16	And why is it Vaishnavam?
4.3.7.17	The sacrifice is indeed Vishnu.
4.3.7.18	One indeed stands firm in the sacrifice.
4.3.7.19	If one offers the sacrifice with the three-fold formula, one should do so for the sake of cattle.
4.3.7.20	Soma indeed is the bestower of semen.
4.3.7.21	Pusha is the progenitor of cattle.
4.3.7.22	Indeed Soma bestows semen on him.
4.3.7.23	Pusan generates cattle.
4.3.7.24	Cattle are born through the senses.
4.3.7.25	Pusan generates.
4.3.7.26	Pusan, through the senses, generates cattle for him.
4.3.7.27	And why it is Pauṣṇam.
4.3.7.28	Pusan is cattle.
4.3.7.29	He indeed stands firm in cattle.
4.3.7.30	And this is the Vaiśvānara-Varuṇa.
4.3.7.31	The year is Agni Vaiśvānaran.
4.3.7.32	His own are these seasons.
4.3.7.33	He is the anointed king of these.
4.3.7.34	Varuna is the anointed king among the gods.
4.3.7.35	These two are the charioteers of the gods.
4.3.7.36	They are the lords of the sacrifice.
4.3.7.37	They are lords of the sacrifice,
4.3.7.38	They make him prosper.
4.3.7.39	As many as his own are, so many are his followers.
4.3.7.40	The gods follow Varuna.
4.3.7.41	He makes them all his own, without dispute.
4.3.7.42	This is the size of the oblation.
4.3.7.43	This is how big the Self is.
4.3.7.44	He frees him from Varuna, as big as his Self is.
4.3.7.45	The year is Agni Vaiśvānara.
4.3.7.46	He establishes him in the year itself.
4.3.7.47	He makes him live for a year.
4.3.7.48	Therefore, the teeth of one consecrated in the Rajasuya sacrifice fall out due to old age.
4.3.7.49	He establishes him in a year.
4.3.7.50	He makes him live for a year.
4.3.7.51	If one is afflicted by a chronic disease, one should perform this sacrifice for him.
4.3.7.52	For he is indeed afflicted by the sin of Varuna.
4.3.7.53	And then he is afflicted by a disease.
4.3.7.54	Because it is related to Varuna.
4.3.7.55	He thus releases him from Varuna.
4.3.7.56	The oblation is of this size.
4.3.7.57	This much is the size of the self.
4.3.7.58	He releases him from Varunā, as much as his self is.
4.3.7.59	The year is Agni Vaiśvānara.
4.3.7.60	He establishes him in the year itself.
4.3.7.61	He makes him live for a year.
4.3.8.1	Now these are the gems.
4.3.8.2	These are the limbs of the kingdom.
4.3.8.3	The kingdom of him whose (limbs) are strong becomes strong.
4.3.8.4	He makes them strong for him.
4.3.8.5	These are the limbs of a kingdom.
4.3.8.6	The (kingdom) of him whose (parts) are brilliant becomes brilliant.
4.3.8.7	He makes these brilliant for him by means of the Brahman.
4.3.8.8	The oblation to Brhaspati is for the house of Brahman.
4.3.8.9	Brhaspati is Brahman.
4.3.8.10	The kingdom which has Brhaspati as its priest prospers.
4.3.8.11	This (oblation) indeed is Brahman in front of the kingdom.
4.3.8.12	And he makes the kingdom follow Brahman.
4.3.8.13	The oblation to Indra on eleven potsherds is for the house (of the king).
4.3.8.14	Indra is power.
4.3.8.15	The senses alone remain firm.
4.3.8.16	The oblation to Aditi is the house of the female goat.
4.3.8.17	This indeed is Aditi.
4.3.8.18	He makes him attain her measure.
4.3.8.19	He makes this very one to be enjoyed by offspring.
4.3.8.20	The cow is the fee.
4.3.8.21	This indeed, is the form of Aditi.
4.3.8.22	The oblations to the Nirriti are the house of the nails that have been purified by the turning around.
4.3.8.23	For indeed, this is seized by Nirriti.
4.3.8.24	Then they sprinkle her, having removed Nirriti.
4.3.8.25	This is indeed Anumati.
4.3.8.26	He makes him attain her measure.
4.3.8.27	He makes her a means of livelihood for his offspring.
4.3.8.28	The Dakshina is a hawk, a vulture, and a sparrow.
4.3.8.29	For this is the form of Nirriti.
4.3.8.30	The Agniya-sastra with eight potsherds is for the commander of the army.
4.3.8.31	Agni is all the deities.
4.3.8.32	He wins the army of the enemy by means of the deities.
4.3.8.33	The fee is gold.
4.3.8.34	Gold is truth.
4.3.8.35	He wins by means of truth.
4.3.8.36	The Asvin-sastra with two potsherds is to be offered to the collector.
4.3.8.37	He makes him utter it with the chariot-halter.
4.3.8.38	"The Savitry verses are on the right (side of the altar).
4.3.8.39	"For the charioteer, standing on the left, drives the chariot as if by the Savitry verses.
4.3.8.40	"The Asvitra (oblation) on eight potsherds in the house of a Kshatriya (is offered) for propagation.
4.3.8.41	"For he propagates like Savitr.
4.3.8.42	"The Varuna (oblation) of barley on ten potsherds in a house of a Sūta (is offered).
4.3.8.43	The wind is the seven-headed one, the house of the village-chief of the Vaishya.
4.3.8.44	The Sūta-faced ones attend on the Kshatra.
4.3.8.45	He places this clan of his in the mouth of the Sūta-faces for food.
4.3.8.46	The Pūshni cake is the house of the one who milks the share.
4.3.8.47	Pūshā is nourishment.
4.3.8.48	He places nourishment in his share.
4.3.8.49	The Vaisnava (oblation) is for the three-headed (Rudra). It is to be kept in the house of a carpenter and a chariot-maker.
4.3.8.50	Vishnu is indeed the sacrifice.
4.3.8.51	One indeed stands firm in the sacrifice.
4.3.8.52	The Raudra (oblation) and the Gavadhuka oblation are to be kept in a house of a gambler and a cow-butcher.
4.3.8.53	At the very end, he propitiates Rudra with it.
4.3.8.54	And indeed, these two (gambler and cow-butcher) are like Rudra in their desire to harm cattle.
4.3.8.55	There are eleven oblations.
4.3.8.56	The Tristubh metre has eleven syllables.
4.3.8.57	The Tristup is vigour.
4.3.8.58	One stands firm in vigour.
4.3.8.59	They obtain different blessings.
4.3.8.60	If they were to offer together, they would be without wealth.
4.3.8.61	The king's house is the Indra-offering with eleven potsherds.
4.3.8.62	Indra is power.
4.3.8.63	In one way only does the blessing of the sacrifice rest on the sacrificer.
4.3.8.64	For the sacrificer is Indra.
4.3.9.1	One should offer a cake on eleven potshards to Indra, the remover of sins.
4.3.9.2	Whatever sin one commits after birth, he is freed from it by Indra, the remover.
4.3.9.3	One should make an offering to Indra, the binder, on eleven potshers.
4.3.9.4	He who accuses and he who is accused, both are saved by Sutrāmaṇā.
4.3.9.5	Now this is the Mitra-Brhaspati (rite).
4.3.9.6	Truth indeed is Mitra.
4.3.9.7	Brahma is Brhaspati.
4.3.9.8	One is initiated after having obtained truth and Brahma.
4.3.9.9	Mitra indeed is the Kshatra.
4.3.9.10	Brhaspati is Brahma.
4.3.9.11	One is iniated after having obtained Kshatra and Brahma.
4.3.9.12	One whose kingdom is weak should be sacrificed to with the Maitra-Bṛhaspati (rite).
4.3.9.13	Mitra is the nobility.
4.3.9.14	Brhaspati is the Brahman.
4.3.9.15	He establishes the nobility in the Brahman.
4.3.9.16	For firmness, for non-weakness.
4.3.9.17	Now these are the divine songs.
4.3.9.18	These are the bards of the gods.
4.3.9.19	These are lords of the sacrifice.
4.3.9.20	These (priests) are the lords of the Soma-pressing.
4.3.9.21	They press it for him.
4.3.9.22	Therefore they say of him,
4.3.9.23	"He presses it on the previous day, and the Soma is pressed around him."
4.3.9.24	Now this is the Marut (offering) with twenty-one potsherds.
4.3.9.25	The Maruts are three times seven.
4.3.9.26	The Marut (offering).
4.3.9.27	He presses it in the middle of the Vis.
4.3.9.28	Therefore he is dear to the Vis.
4.3.9.29	The Visas indeed are born in the middle.
4.3.9.30	When Varuna was being consecrated, his power and strength departed.
4.3.9.31	It became threefold.
4.3.9.32	Bhrigu became one-third.
4.3.9.33	The Sraiyantiya became one-third,
4.3.9.34	and Sarasvati entered the third.
4.3.9.35	When the Bhargava becomes the Hotri,
4.3.9.36	the Sraiyantiya is the Brahma-saman, and the Sarasvati waters.
4.3.9.37	That very organ, energy, and brilliance he obtains.
4.3.9.38	They consecrate him with speech, whom they consecrate.
4.3.9.39	Speech is Sarasvati.
4.3.9.40	The waters are Sarasvati.
4.3.9.41	When one consecrates with Sarasvati waters.
4.3.9.42	One consecrates with as much speech as there is.
4.3.10.1	These are the variegated things of the waters.
4.3.10.2	These are variegated things of the water which they collect.
4.3.10.3	They sprinkle him with the variegated waters.
4.3.10.4	They bestow variegatedness on him.
4.3.10.5	Therefore it is heard that he who is consecrated is a variegated king.
4.3.10.6	They sprinkle him with the varied waters.
4.3.10.7	They confer variegatedness on him.
4.3.10.8	Just as the bees collect honey, so they collect the sap of the waters and plants.
4.3.10.9	They sprinkle him with the sap of the plants and waters.
4.3.10.10	They place sap in him.
4.3.10.11	Therefore they say of him:
4.3.10.12	"You are the king of the good."
4.3.10.13	For they sprinkle him with the juice of the plants and water.
4.3.10.14	They place the juice in it.
4.3.10.15	This is indeed a consecration by Varuna.
4.3.10.16	The waters are Varuna's.
4.3.10.17	When one consecrates with water, one makes him Varuna.
4.3.10.18	Sarasvati is indeed the equalizer.
4.3.10.19	The waters belong to Sarasvati.
4.3.10.20	When one conquers with the waters of Sarasvati,
4.3.10.21	one becomes equalized.
4.3.10.22	Sixteen cups are taken, sixteen oblations are offered.
4.3.10.23	That is thirty-two.
4.3.10.24	Anustup has thirty-two syllables.
4.3.10.25	Speech is Anustup.
4.3.10.26	As much as speech, so much it generates.
4.4.1.1	One wave fights against the other, the other in favor, for the sake of a couple.
4.4.1.2	He who fights against the other takes that, he fights against the other with strength and vigor.
4.4.1.3	By means of strength and vigour he places strength and vigour in the kingdom.
4.4.1.4	And when he takes that (cup) which is taken by him who recites the Anviṣa hymn, it is by means of that (cup) that he generates offspring.
4.4.1.5	And when (he takes) the cup of the lord of rivers, it is the union of the waters.
4.4.1.6	By means of the union of the water he places union in the kingdom.
4.4.1.7	Then, with the middle one of the waters that are not to be abandoned, he obtains (the waters).
4.4.1.8	Then, with the last one of the waters which flow around, he generates offspring.
4.4.1.9	Then, those waters which are in the form of rays.
4.4.1.10	These waters in the form of beams are indeed strength and vigour.
4.4.1.11	He places strength and vigour in the kingdom.
4.4.1.12	Now, the water of the wells is both kinds. By that he obtains the water.
4.4.1.13	The waters of the ocean and those not of the ocean, the waters of the rivers, which are not controlled, are not purified.
4.4.1.14	When he takes (water) from the standing (waters), it is for peace and non-destruction.
4.4.1.15	Those waters which shine, rain, and are seen all around, they are the waters of Brahmic glory.
4.4.1.16	By them he bestows radiance on the country.
4.4.1.17	By the wild plants he wins strength.
4.4.1.18	By the flowers he wins the forest.
4.4.1.19	By the bulbs he wins cattle. The thunderbolt is cattle.
4.4.1.20	The thunderbolt is the bulbs.
4.4.1.21	By this he places the thunderbolt in the country.
4.4.1.22	Now when he pours milk into milk, he pours the milk into the kingdom.
4.4.1.23	Now when he pours ghee, these are the waters, the unassailable.
4.4.1.24	He makes the kingdom unassailable by them.
4.4.1.25	Now when honey, this is the sap of the waters and plants.
4.4.1.26	He pours the sap into the kingdom with the sap of the water and plants.
4.4.1.27	These are the sixteen Grahas of Prajapati.
4.4.1.28	The seventeenth (verse) has been brought together.
4.4.1.29	Prajapati is the seventeenth.
4.4.1.30	He indeed attains Prajapati.
4.4.2.1	"The goddesses, the waters, flowing with honey, unite, bestowing great power on the king, seeking the king."
4.4.2.2	These indeed are the bestowers of the king.
4.4.2.3	"The unassailable ones, the nourishing ones, the powerful ones, bestowing great radiance on the king."
4.4.2.4-12	These are the mothers of the kingdom. "You are not a destroyer." For you did not destroy the kingdom. The kingdom is born of austerity. This is the giver of Soma. For this is the giver of soma. "I purify you with brightness, I purify you with the moon." Gold is life.
4.4.2.13	He has made them long-lived.
4.4.2.14	Gold is indeed splendour.
4.4.2.15	He has made them resplendent.
4.4.2.16	"May the god Savitr purify you with the stainless filter."
4.4.2.17	This is the stainless filter, namely the rays of the sun.
4.4.2.18	He purifies them with the stainless filter.
4.4.2.19	"Svāhā to the Rajasūyas."
4.4.2.20	These are indeed the Rajasūya.
4.4.2.21	"With the Dhyumnā (verse) and the Urja (verse) together with the Dhāmanā (verse), he offers with the Vāruṇī (verse).
4.4.2.22	For the waters are indeed Vāruṇīs.
4.4.2.23	With its own deity.
4.4.2.24	"O Rudra, that highest name of yours on the mountain,"
4.4.2.25	He thus appeases Rudra with that.
4.4.2.26	"In that (verse) you have been offered, in that (verse) have been worshipped, svāhā."
4.4.2.27	Yama is indeed Death.
4.4.2.28	He thus averts death from him.
4.4.2.29	"May Soma, Indra, Varuna, Mitra, Agni, the gods who uphold the law, uphold the law."
4.4.2.30	These are the gods who uphold law, namely, these vital airs.
4.4.2.31	If they were to consecrate him without telling him this, they would be his enemies.
4.4.2.32	Now when they anoint him after having told him about them, then he becomes free from injury.
4.4.2.33	At the beginning and end of the Parna, the Brahmins spoke together.
4.4.2.34	That indeed was Suśravas, what he heard.
4.4.2.35	He anoints with a leaf-made (vessel).
4.4.2.36	Brahma anoints.
4.4.2.37	He anoint him with Brahmic lustre.
4.4.2.38	Then indeed Brahman is Brahman.
4.4.2.39	He consecrates him with Brahman itself. With an ashvattha (tree) a vaishya.
4.4.2.40	The strength of the people had departed.
4.4.2.41	It entered the ashvattha.
4.4.2.42	With that strength he became Bharbhara.
4.4.2.43	With that very strength the people obtained it. With an audumbara (tree) one's enemy.
4.4.2.44	The audumbara (trees) are strength.
4.4.2.45	The sacrificer seizes the food and nourishment of his enemy.
4.4.2.46	The one who is born is the friend, the one who is born from the Nyagrodha tree.
4.4.2.47	The Kshatriya class was spread out by the friend, the Nyagrodhas by the barriers.
4.4.2.48	He spreads out the Kshatriya class by the friend for firmness and stability.
4.4.3.1	You are the womb of the Kshatriya, you are the bulb of the Kshatriyas, you are the navel of the Kshatryas.
4.4.3.2	Indra, when he was born, this was his womb, the white wool.
4.4.3.3	The navel was the turban.
4.4.3.4	He was born from the womb of a cowherd.
4.4.3.5	The cowherd's four-footed udder was the womb.
4.4.3.6	The wool was the milk.
4.4.3.7	From that the cake of nīvara rice.
4.4.3.8	Fifty in the other, and fifty-one in the other.
4.4.3.9	Man has a hundred years of life, a hundred years of strength.
4.4.3.10	He obtains life and strength.
4.4.3.11	He touches the water.
4.4.3.12	Water is immortal.
4.4.3.13	He pacifies him with the immortal.
4.4.3.14	"Agni, the householder, has been won."
4.4.3.15	He makes him approach the Garhapatya.
4.4.3.16	"He makes him approach the Indra who is Vritra-slayer."
4.4.3.17	Indra is the power.
4.4.3.18	He makes him approach power.
4.4.3.19	"He (makes him) approach Mitra and Varuna who have firm vows."
4.4.3.20	Day and night are Mitra and Varuna.
4.4.3.21	He makes Mitra and Varuna approach him.
4.4.3.22	"The heaven and earth have been won, the increasers of truth."
4.4.3.23	He makes him known to the heaven and earth.
4.4.3.24	"Pusha has been won, the knower of all."
4.4.3.25	Pusha is cattle.
4.4.3.26	He makes him know to cattle.
4.4.3.27	"Aditi, the goddess, has been won."
4.4.3.28	Aditi is these creatures.
4.4.3.29	He makes her known to them.
4.4.3.30-36	"This is the son of so-and-so, the grandson of so-andso, the great-grandson of so-and so." He makes him known to the community. Therefore he is dear to the community. For he makes him known to it. "This is your king for the people." He makes it known to the people. "Soma is our king for the Brahmanas."
4.4.3.37	Brahma (the Brahman) saves.
4.4.3.38	He makes it known to all the other beings.
4.4.3.39	Brahma saves.
4.4.3.40	Therefore they say, "Brahma-saved."
4.4.3.41	For Brahma saves.
4.4.3.42	"You are Indra's weapon, the slayer of Vrtra. With you he will slay Vritra."
4.4.3.43	He gives the bow.
4.4.3.44	The bow is indeed the thunderbolt.
4.4.3.45	The Vajra is the king.
4.4.3.46	He consecrates the Vajra with the Vajra itself.
4.4.3.47	"The arrows are the ones who cause harm to the enemy."
4.4.3.48	The arrows are the end.
4.4.3.49	The king is the end.
4.4.3.50	He consecbrates the end with the end itself.
4.4.3.51	He gives three (arrows).
4.4.3.52	There are three kinds of arrows: divine, earthly, and oceanic.
4.4.3.53	They are equal to him.
4.4.3.54	Let it fall towards the east.
4.4.3.55-63	Let him fall down. Let him fall sideways. Let him be deceived by the fall. Let him rise up. Let him descend from the directions. Let him protect from the directions. (He says:) "You are Mitra," he says to this one, for this is the form of Mitra. "You are Varuna," he says to that one, for this is the form of Varuna.
4.4.3.64	He should recite the verse, "The golden-hued dawn has risen" while holding the pot.
4.4.3.65	He sprinkles him while standing with arms raised.
4.4.3.66	The Brihat-sāman is used.
4.4.3.67	He connects him to the heavenly world.
4.4.4.1	He establishes him in the directions.
4.4.4.2	He conquers these directions with the thunderbolt.
4.4.4.3	Therefore, he has conquered all directions. He turns towards whichever direction he wishes.
4.4.4.4	The directions are the heavenly world.
4.4.4.5	These directions belong to these deities.
4.4.4.6	He goes to the heavenly world from these directions according to the deity.
4.4.4.7	He puts on the tiger skin with the verse, "Thou art the lustre of Soma. May my lustre be like thine."
4.4.4.8	One of Soma, one of the sun,
4.4.4.9	one of the tiger,
4.4.4.10	one of a snake.
4.4.4.11	He wins them back.
4.4.4.12	"He places the head of Namuci on the head of the Pāṇḍaga, saying, "The head of Namuci is turned back."
4.4.4.13	The head of Namuca is sin.
4.4.4.14	He places sin on him, ascending to heaven.
4.4.4.15	"The head of Namuchi is turned back, the head of the Pandaga is turned back, saying, "Namuchi's head is turned back, Namuchi's head." The head of Namuchi was sin."
4.4.4.16	He thus drives away the serpents from him.
4.4.4.17	Therefore there is no sorcery against him.
4.4.4.18	For as many deaths as there are, he drives them away from him.
4.4.4.19	He places silver and gold under (the victim), saying, 'Protect me from death.'
4.4.4.20	The form of death is the tiger.
4.4.4.21	Gold is immortality.
4.4.4.22	He makes death disappear with immortality.
4.4.4.23	He places the golden (pendant) above, saying, "Protect from heaven."
4.4.4.24	He makes him go to the heavenly thunderbolt.
4.4.4.25	This one is silver.
4.4.4.26	That one is golden.
4.4.4.27	They embrace him with these two.
4.4.4.28	Gold is indeed life.
4.4.4.29	They make him flow over with life.
4.4.4.30	Gold is brilliance.
4.4.4.31	They anoint him with brilliance.
4.4.4.32	When Varuna was consecrated, his power and strength were lost.
4.4.4.33	When he puts the gold inside, it is for the non-loss of power and strength.
4.4.4.34	He becomes one with a hundred (cows) and a hundred (verses).
4.4.4.35	Man has a hundred years of life and a hundred (cows).
4.4.4.36	He obtains life and strength.
4.4.5.1	Now these are the Parthani verses.
4.4.5.2	The Parthani verses are indeed the year.
4.4.5.3	One enters the middle of the year through them.
4.4.5.4	Therefore it is difficult to cross.
4.4.5.5	One enters in the middle of the Year.
4.4.5.6	These are the mountains of the Rajasuya.
4.4.5.7	The other verses are the last, the other verses are the first.
4.4.5.8	Brihaspati is indeed power.
4.4.5.9	Indra is the strength.
4.4.5.10	He indeed binds him with strength.
4.4.5.11	These are the names of the sun.
4.4.5.12	The sun is these creatures.
4.4.5.13	He indeed generates them.
4.4.5.14	"I consecrate you with the lustre of Soma, with the brilliance of Agni, with the power of Indra, with the resolve of all the gods."
4.4.5.15	He anoints him with these very same organs and with these very same deities.
4.4.5.16	"You are the womb of Indra, you are the womb of the offspring."
4.4.5.17	From here Indra was born.
4.4.5.18	He generates him from his own womb.
4.4.5.19	He says, "Protect me from the sky." For the attainment of the heavenly world.
4.4.5.20	He cleanses them together, saying, "The Vritra-slayer has come down, above and below."
4.4.5.21	The power of the senses of one being consecrated departs.
4.4.5.22	He cleanses it with that very (water).
4.4.5.23	He makes it prosper with that.
4.4.5.24	He approaches the Brahman with the Indra-verse in Tristubh metre.
4.4.5.25	The Rajanya is connected with Indra, and the Tristubh metre is his.
4.4.5.26	He approaches him with his own metre.
4.4.5.27	And Prajapati is the Brahman of the sacrifice.
4.4.5.28	Indra, the lord of creatures, was born from Prajapati.
4.4.5.29	He was born from Prajapatis himself.
4.4.5.30	You are the thunderbolt of Indra, the winner of wealth.
4.4.5.31	He takes up the chariot, saying, "With you, he may win the wealth." With his own deity.
4.4.5.32	He yokes, saying, "I yoke you with the command of Mitra-Varuna, the rulers." With his own divinity.
4.4.5.33	"You are the step of Vishnu, the destroyer of enemies." He stands on the chariot.
4.4.5.34	From here Vishnu conquered these worlds.
4.4.5.35	He conquers these worlds following Vishnu's conquest.
4.4.5.36	He drives away his enemies from these worlds.
4.4.5.37	"With the impulse of the Maruts, with victory."
4.4.5.38	Becoming the Marut group, he conquers.
4.4.5.39	He conquours the king.
4.4.5.40	He went to the very end.
4.4.5.41	No one could surpass him.
4.4.5.42	He shot that arrow at him.
4.4.5.43	It became the setting of his unfailing (arrow).
4.4.5.44	Having said, "The mind has been attained by the senses," he turns back.
4.4.5.45	Having gone to the very end, he turns back for the sake of not harming himself.
4.4.5.46	This is the thunderbolt, the most powerful. By it may our son win strength. He gives his wife a bow and arrow.
4.4.5.47	This is the wife's participation in the sacrifice.
4.4.5.48	They become together in the heavenly world.
4.4.6.1	You are this much, you are life. Bestow life on me. He bestows life on him.
4.4.6.2	"Thou art the yoke, thou art radiance; bestow radiance on me." He bestows radiance on him.
4.4.6.3	"Thou art strength; bestow strength on me."
4.4.6.4	This one is silver.
4.4.6.5	That one is tawny.
4.4.6.6	These two are the ones that are obtained.
4.4.6.7	The Udumbara is strength.
4.4.6.8	He places strength in the middle of himself and of his offspring.
4.4.6.9	"Thou are Mitra," he says, and takes this one.
4.4.6.10	This is the form of Mitra.
4.4.6.11	"You are Varuna." This is the form.
4.4.6.12	This is the form of Varuna.
4.4.6.13	"You have become true; I have become true with all the gods." He takes up the milk-rice with his hands.
4.4.6.14	Milk-rice is true.
4.4.6.15	He takes up what is true.
4.4.6.16	There he gives gold.
4.4.6.17	That is the fee.
4.4.6.18	He indeed injures the animals when he descends to the earth.
4.4.6.19	"He descends with the sandals, saying, 'Salutation to the mother, the earth.'
4.4.6.20	He descends upon the animals of the forest.
4.4.6.21	Only the boar is worthy of injuring him.
4.4.6.22	The boar alone injures him.
4.4.6.23	He placed his own body in the kingdom of Pratiti. Varuna has not suffered.
4.4.6.24	This is indeed a Soma-offering to Varuna.
4.4.6.25	He indeed speaks to Varuna. "
4.4.6.26	"He has brought down Jarimanta like a three-year-old calf," he yokes Jarimanta to him.
4.4.6.27	"You are the one who is firm and good."
4.4.6.28	This is indeed the one who is good and firm.
4.4.6.29	"He settles him on the auspicious, on the auspicious one." He settles him on the good.
4.4.6.30	"Varuna, of firm vow, has sat down among the people for sovereignty, of good counsel."
4.4.6.31	This is indeed a Soma-pressing for Varuna.
4.4.6.32	He makes him Varuna.
4.4.6.33	"To Agni svāhā, to Soma svāhā, svāhā to Indra's strength, svāhā for the strength of the Maruts." He offers the release of the chariot.
4.4.6.34	They are yoked with the Yajus, they are released with the Yajuh.
4.4.6.35	"The swan, the pure, the good, the one in the sky," he says; he thus turns the chariot around.
4.4.6.36	They place the chariot with the driver on the chariot-path for the sake of all-fulfillment.
4.4.6.37	"You are the Brahman, you are the Brahman."
4.4.6.38	"What was I? What was I?" he says.
4.4.6.39	"Thou art Savitar, the true drinker."
4.4.6.40	"This is thine, this is thine," thus he says to him whatever he has.
4.4.6.41	He gives him the spade, saying, "This is the thunderbolt, with it I shall conquer."
4.4.6.42	The spade is indeed the thunderbolt.
4.4.6.43	With the thunderbolt he conquers the kingdom.
4.4.6.44	He gives it to him in turn.
4.4.6.45	With it he conquers the realm in turn.
4.4.6.46-53	Therefore, they are bound together in this way. They take away the oblation. With that wooden stick, they perform the consecration. There, they play with the sheep. He consecrates himself with the sheep. Sheep is the goal. The sheep is the goal. He makes it the goal for him. Then, having brought four hundred dice, he says,
4.4.6.54	The king has made it known.
4.4.6.55	There are four kinds of men:
4.4.6.56	Brahmin, Kshatriya, Vaishya, and Shudra.
4.4.6.57	He makes it known to them.
4.4.6.58	Then, giving five kinds of grains, he says:
4.4.6.59	"This has spread in all directions." He gives him these five directions for food.
4.4.6.60	He gives the field.
4.4.6.61	By that he is held in the field.
4.4.6.62	He asks for a boon.
4.4.6.63	His desire is fulfilled, whatever desire he may have.
4.4.6.64	He calls by the auspicious name.
4.4.6.65	Whatever I have spoken before, may that not be in vain.
4.4.6.66	He interchanges the names of the son of so-and-so and the son of soand-so for the sake of the union of heaven.
4.4.7.1	This sacrifice is equal to the sacrifice of the year.
4.4.7.2	The Dashapeya sacrifice is indeed interrupted when they perform the Avabhrtha rite.
4.4.7.3	When they offer with the formulas, "To the grandson of waters, svāhā! To the grandson of strength, svāhā!" and "To Agni, the householder, svāhā," they come to offer for the continuity of the sacrifice without interruption.
4.4.7.4	The sacrifice had disappeared from the gods.
4.4.7.5	The gods sought him in the Savitr (rite).
4.4.7.6	Because it is Savitr.
4.4.7.7	They sought him in the one born of Savitr.
4.4.7.8	Because it is Sarasvata.
4.4.7.9	Sarasvati is speech.
4.4.7.10	They sought in speech.
4.4.7.11	Because it was Pousna.
4.4.7.12	Pusha is cattle.
4.4.7.13	They sought among cattle.
4.4.7.14	Because it belonged to Brihaspati.
4.4.7.15	Brihaspati is Brahman.
4.4.7.16	He desires to be united with Brahman.
4.4.7.17	If it is Indra,
4.4.7.18	Indra is the senses.
4.4.7.19	He desires to be united to the senses.
4.4.7.20	If it belongs to Varuna,
4.4.7.21	He desires to unite with Varuna.
4.4.7.22	If it pertains to Tvashtra,
4.4.7.23	Tvashtra is the year.
4.4.7.24	He desires union with the year.
4.4.7.25	If it be Agni,
4.4.7.26	Agni is all the deities.
4.4.7.27	desiring to be united with the deities.
4.4.7.28	Because it is Somiya.
4.4.7.29	The plants are Somiya.
4.4.7.30	Desiring to be united with plants.
4.4.7.31	Because it belongs to Vishnu.
4.4.7.32	Vishnu is the sacrifice.
4.4.7.33	Desiring union with the sacrifice.
4.4.7.34	They found him in the tenth (day).
4.4.7.35	Therefore this is the tenth.
4.4.7.36	For they found him in the 10th.
4.4.7.37	There are ten cups.
4.4.7.38	Ten Adhvaryus of the cups.
4.4.7.39	Ten cups are mentioned in succession from the tenth person for prosperity.
4.4.7.40	For this sacrifice is prosperous by ten.
4.4.7.41	They desired that sacrifice.
4.4.7.42	They succeeded.
4.4.7.43	He who performs this sacrifice succeeds.
4.4.7.44	All (the sacrifices) are of seventeen kinds.
4.4.7.45	Prajapati is the seventeenth.
4.4.7.46	He indeed attains Prajapati.
4.4.7.47	This is a sacrifice that has been discontinued.
4.4.7.48	A sacrifice that has been discontinud is obstructed from the year.
4.4.7.49	Having attained it from the year, he releases it.
4.4.7.50	Indra indeed killed Vritra.
4.4.7.51	His forms came to this (world).
4.4.7.52	These are the variegated stars, this is the sun.
4.4.8.4	He thus makes him smell it.
4.4.8.5	A garland for the Udgātṛ.
4.4.8.6	The Udgātṛ is connected with the sun.
4.4.8.7	And he thus leads him to the sun.
4.4.8.8	A garment for the Adhvaryu.
4.4.8.9	For the Adhvaryus are like Yama.
4.4.8.10	A horse for the Prastôtṛ.
4.4.8.11	The horse is connected with Prajāpati.
4.4.8.12	The Prastôtṛ is connected with Prajapati.
4.4.8.13	Then indeed he (the Hotri) is like a running (horse).
4.4.8.14	The Prastotar is like a running horse.
4.4.8.15	The Dhenu is like the Pratihartar.
4.4.8.16	For indeed she (the Dhenu) takes (the Soma) like a running (river).
4.4.8.17	The Pratihartar is like a running river.
4.4.8.18	The Vasa is like the Maitravaruna.
4.4.8.19	(He gives it) lest he should lead me astray.
4.4.8.20	The bull is like the Brahmanachasins, for the sake of having control.
4.4.8.21	The garment is like the Potar, for the sake (of being) pure.
4.4.8.22	The bull is the sacrificer's, the Agnidh is another.
4.4.8.23	The barley-meal of the Acchāvāka is coarse.
4.4.8.24	For the office of the Acchäväka is like coarse barley, for it leads to heaven.
4.4.8.25	And barley is for release from Varuna.
4.4.8.26	No fee is given to her by the fellow-sacrificers.
4.4.8.27	They are pleased with her by that.
4.4.8.28	Twelve pregnant cows are the womb of Brahman.
4.4.8.29	Speech is the cow.
4.4.8.30	The embryo is the mantra.
4.4.8.31	He places the mantra in speech.
4.4.8.32	He becomes one who is to be addressed.
4.4.8.33	They become the ones who are to be addressed. The ones who are to receive.
4.4.8.34	There are twelve kinds of milk.
4.4.8.35	He places them in him.
4.4.8.36	Therefore they say of him, "The king is wealthy and virtuous."
4.4.8.37	As long as milk is poured into it.
4.4.9.1	The Brahma-sāman is sung in the Śrāyanta-īya metre.
4.4.9.2	They sing the Yajñāyajñiya in the Anushtup metre.
4.4.9.3	The Vāravanta-īya is the Agniṣṭoma-sāman.
4.4.9.4	Indra indeed slew Vritra.
4.4.9.5	He was exhausted by his strength and valour.
4.4.9.6	He saw this Sama.
4.4.9.7	With it he restored himself.
4.4.9.8	He who is consecrated with the Rajasuya sacrifice is deprived of his strength and vigour.
4.4.9.9	He thus makes himself secure by means of this (sacrifice).
4.4.9.10	Brahma indeed was the first to appear, the Rik, the Saman, the Yajus.
4.4.9.11	Its essence is the Yajnayajniya.
4.4.9.12	When he sings the Yajnayajnlya,
4.4.9.13	he places the essence in Brahma.
4.4.9.14	He who is consecrated with the Rajasūya rite is deprived of speech.
4.4.9.15	Speech is the Anushtubh metre.
4.4.9.16	If the Yajñāyajñiya hymn is in the Anushtubb metre,
4.4.9.17	he places the essence in speech.
4.4.9.18	He who is consecrated with a Rajasūya is deprived of the power of Indra.
4.4.9.19	The Varavantiya hymn is the power of Indra.
4.4.9.20	The Vāravantīya is the Agniṣṭoma Sāman, for the securing of Indra's power.
4.4.9.21	The Śrāyanta is the one that supports.
4.4.9.22	The Vāravantya is the one that protects.
4.4.9.23	These are for the securing of the very power of Indra.
4.4.9.24	Where he establishes him in the directions, there he ascends to heaven.
4.4.9.25	so that he does not descend again into this world, or go to the other world, or become intoxicated.
4.4.9.26	In that he encircles these directions, he descends again into this world.
4.4.9.27	One who desires food should offer this sacrifice.
4.4.9.28	These directions are indeed deities.
4.4.9.29	He thus obtains food from these directions according to the deity.
4.4.9.30	If a brahmin were to perform the sacrifice, he should offer oblations in the middle of the Barhaspatya (oblation) and then pour it out. If a vaishya were to perform the Vishvadev (oblation), if a rajanya were to perform the Indra (oblation).
4.4.9.31	He establishes food in one place.
4.4.9.32	This is the same sacrificial rite as the year.
4.4.9.33	The sacrifice is indeed interrupted when it is completed.
4.4.9.34	Those which he uses in the evening, others in the morning.
4.4.9.35	There are two seasons, day and night.
4.4.9.36	He uses them both.
4.4.9.37	Six others, six others.
4.4.9.38	There are six seasons.
4.4.9.39	He uses the seasons.
4.4.9.40	They are twelve altogether.
4.4.9.41	Twelve months are a year.
4.4.9.42	He uses it for a year.
4.4.9.43	The sacrificial fee is a yoked pair of oxen.
4.4.9.44	"The text says, "A pregnant heifer belonging to Maruts, a spotted one."
4.4.9.45	The Maruts are the people.
4.4.9.46	It is the people who make this embryo.
4.4.9.47	Therefore he is dear to the people.
4.4.9.48	For the embryo is dear.
4.4.9.49	"The verse says, "A barren cow belonging to the Adityas."
4.4.9.50	This is Aditi.
4.4.9.51	This is the embryo of her.
4.4.9.52	Therefore he is difficult to cross.
4.4.9.53	For this is her embryo.
4.4.9.54	Now these are the messengers of truth.
4.4.9.55	Savitr is for delivery.
4.4.9.56	The gods, striving for victory over the Asuras, placed truth in the Ashvins and Pusha.
4.4.9.57	Sarasvati is speech.
4.4.9.58	One sends forth truth with speech.
4.4.9.59	The king who has been consecrated, and who is offering the Soma-sacrifice, gives to him who believes in him.
4.4.9.60	One offers the Agnihotra for a year, for continuity.
4.4.10.1	One offers first the Agniṣṭoma, then the Jyotiṣṭoma.
4.4.10.2	The Agniṣṭoma is the mouth of the sacrifice.
4.4.10.3	Having attained the mouth of the sacrific, one enters the Savan.
4.4.10.4	Now this is the Trisṭoma.
4.4.10.5	His morning pressing is of three stomas, the midday pressing of fifteen stomas,
4.4.10.6	The three-stoma is indeed brilliance,
4.4.10.7	The fifteen-stoma is the nobility,
4.4.10.8	He places his nobility in brilliance.
4.4.10.9	Here also the seventeen-stoma does not shine forth,
4.4.10.10	The seventeen-stoma is indeed Prajapati,
4.4.10.11	Prajapati is the sacrifice,
4.4.10.12	When the sacrifice shines forth, then it is the seventeen-stoma which is uninterrupted.
4.4.10.13	The Madhyandina Sâman is the fifteenth.
4.4.10.14	The Tṛtīyasavana is the twenty-first.
4.4.10.15	The Vid is the twenty-one.
4.4.10.16	The Kshatra is the fifteen.
4.4.10.17	He has thus established the Kshatra for her.
4.4.10.18	All the Pavamâna Sâmans are thirty-four in number, for the consecration.
4.4.10.19	The thirty-three are the deities.
4.4.10.20	Those very ones, by this, become pleased with him.
4.4.10.21	Now, that which is the thirty-four (stotra),
4.4.10.22	Prajapati is the thirty- four.
4.4.10.23	He attains Prajapati.
4.4.10.24	This (stotra) is uneven, the stomas are uneven, it is not as before.
4.4.10.25	Since the Pavamana stotras are even, by that it is not uneven, by that it becomes as before.
4.4.10.26	One prospers by oneself through the Agniṣṭoma, one becomes meritorious by oneself.
4.4.10.27	The Ukthas are the offspring.
4.4.10.28	The Ukthya is the cattle.
4.4.10.29	The Ukthyas are connected with each other for continuity.
4.4.10.30	He who goes to the Savas, the Savas do not approach him.
4.4.10.31	He who approaches the Sāmans, the one who presses becomes more sinful.
4.4.10.32	The Sāmans of the divine kings, if one does not go to them,
4.4.10.33	He does not go to the Sāmans by that very (chant).
4.4.10.34	These are the Sāmans, namely the Prsthas.
4.4.10.35	When they perform the Prsthas, he does not go to Sāmans by them.
4.4.10.36	The Sāmans of the divine kings, by those he prospers in this world; the Sāmans of human kings, by those in the other world.
4.4.10.37	He prospers by these in both worlds, in this and the other.
4.4.10.38	The Sruva is used in the Udvati (verses).
4.4.10.39	The Anushtubh is the form of the Udvati.
4.4.10.40	The Rajanya is Anushtubh.
4.4.10.41	Therefore the Sruva is employed in the Udvata (verses).
4.4.10.42	Anushtubh becomes the first and Anushtubh the last.
4.4.10.43	Anushtubb is speech.
4.4.10.44	By speech they depart and by speech they rise.
4.4.10.45	Anushtubh becomes the last, for the completion of the heavenly world.
4.4.10.46	The Ekavimsa is the Bahispavamana of the Keshava. The Ekavimsha is the highest Abhisecaniya.
4.4.10.47	The Ekavimsa belongs to the Vid.
4.4.10.48	The Saptadasa belongs to the Kshatra.
4.4.10.49	The Visas indeed are born in the middle.
4.4.10.50	Therefore he is dear to the Visas.
4.4.10.51	For the Visas are born in the midst.
4.4.10.52	Where he establishes him in the directions, he ascends to heaven.
4.4.10.53	If he were to descend again to this world, or go beyond the people, or become intoxicated,
4.4.10.54	If this is the Stoma for the west, then he descends again to this world.
4.5.1.1	Vritra lay down in the waters.
4.5.1.2	From that those who were released became the living, the sacrificial ones.
4.5.1.3	The mountain is Vritra.
4.5.1.4	Those who run away from the sacrifice are the living ones.
4.5.1.5	He takes them from those who are flowing, from those who are living and fit for sacrifice.
4.5.1.6	He places them in the opposite direction for the sake of the Aksamala.
4.5.1.7	He takes it in the space of the sun.
4.5.1.8	He takes (it) with Indra.
4.5.1.9	These are the waters that are full of oblations. He takes them as full of oblations only.
4.5.1.10	They are to be taken in the light of the sun.
4.5.1.11	He takes the northern (part) of the sacrificial rite.
4.5.1.12	He takes it with the Anushtubh (metre).
4.5.1.13	The Anushtubh is all the metres.
4.5.1.14	He takes them with all the metres. The Anushtubh
4.5.1.15	is the most firm of the metres.
4.5.1.16	He sends him to the world of the equal ones.
4.5.1.17	He takes it with four (verses), he settles it with three.
4.5.1.18	That makes seven.
4.5.1.19	The Sakvari has seven steps.
4.5.1.20	The animals are Sakvara.
4.5.1.21	He indeed wins animals.
4.5.1.22	The night enters the day when the waters are present.
4.5.1.23	Therefore the waters are dark during the day.
4.5.1.24	The waters are day and night.
4.5.1.25	Therefore, the water is white at night.
4.5.1.26	If one takes it during the day, one takes both day and night.
4.5.1.27	During the day, humans perform sacrifices, and at night, the gods.
4.5.1.28	Therefore, one prospers by nights.
4.5.1.29	Having established the sacrifice, humans proceed.
4.5.1.30	Indeed, the water is the All-gods.
4.5.1.31	Whatever water they remove, they give the sacrifice to the water.
4.5.1.32	Another one performs his sacrifice.
4.5.1.33	Whatever is within the sacrifice, that is a hole.
4.5.1.34	The demons then enter the sacrifice.
4.5.1.35	Water is indeed the destroyer of demons.
4.5.1.36	Demons do not cross water.
4.5.1.37	When they remove water, it is for the non-crossing of demons.
4.5.1.38	Those who take by day, and those who take by night, those who are born in the day, and those born at night, these are their wombs.
4.5.1.39	They are born from them.
4.5.1.40	Those who take by night and those who are born at night, those are their wombs,
4.5.1.41	They are born therefrom.
4.5.1.42	She begets both kinds of offspring, those born by day and those born by night.
4.5.1.43	She places them in the Agnidhra chamber.
4.5.1.44	This is the unconquered.
4.5.1.45	Then indeed the deities fast here on that night.
4.5.1.46	The gods did not see the morning portion of the sacrifice.
4.5.1.47	They saw this very morning portion of the sacrificial session, namely the Vasatīvarī waters.
4.5.1.48	Having taken the Vasatīvari waters, they fasted.
4.5.1.49	They fasted, having obtained the morning portion of sacrifice.
4.5.1.50	Then indeed the waters are the All-gods.
4.5.1.51	All the deities are present at the sacrifice.
4.5.1.52	If the sun rises while the Soma is not taken up, then one should take it from the pot of one who has performed the Soma sacrifice and has laid down the fire.
4.5.1.53	For him the Soma has been taken up. They should place the fire above it.
4.5.1.54	Then one should take it.
4.5.1.55	One takes it from the shining ones.
4.5.1.56	Gold is in the hand.
4.5.1.57	Then he takes it.
4.5.1.58	Gold is indeed truth.
4.5.1.59	He takes it with truth.
4.5.1.60	The gift is a boon.
4.5.1.61	He takes with a boon.
4.5.1.62	If there is any wealth that is to be given there, it should be given.
4.5.2.1	He takes first on the Pracarani (the first furrow).
4.5.2.2	For this one moves first.
4.5.2.3	The Soma's juice has entered the waters.
4.5.2.4	Agni is all the deities.
4.5.2.5	The waters are all-divine.
4.5.2.6	The stones are the mouth of the sacrifice.
4.5.2.7	He draws out the Soma's juice with the waters, impelled by Savitr, with all the deities. "
4.5.2.8	"May Agni hear the call with the kindling sticks." He says this to the Agni in whom he offers.
4.5.2.9	Let the waters listen. He says this to those waters which flow.
4.5.2.10	"The goddess of wisdom."
4.5.2.11	Speech is the goddess of wisdom.
4.5.2.12	He says this to speech.
4.5.2.13	"Let the stones listen, let the wise know the sacrifice."
4.5.2.14	Stones are the mouth of the sacrifice.
4.5.2.15	"Let god Savitr listen to my call." He says this.
4.5.2.16	By means of the impulse.
4.5.2.17	"O Hotṛ, do thou send forth the sacrifice." Thus he says.
4.5.2.18	"Do thou send forth with Brahman."
4.5.2.19	He sends forth the sacrifice with Brahman.
4.5.2.20	He sends forth with the Maitrāvaruṇa's goblet.
4.5.2.21	This one indeed moves forward first.
4.5.2.22	And Mitra-Varuna indeed are the lords of waters.
4.5.2.23	Mitra-Varuna are indeed the mouth of the sacrifice.
4.5.2.24	The waters are the mouth of the sacrificer.
4.5.2.25	He goes from one sacrifice to another.
4.5.2.26	The Adhvaryu should take the water when he hears the Hotri reciting the morning Prastara.
4.5.2.27	If he does not hear, he becomes deaf.
4.5.2.28	For the speech is cut off.
4.5.2.29	When he offers, he takes them as having become oblations.
4.5.2.30	And they are indeed anointed.
4.5.2.31	He offers with grass.
4.5.2.32	He offers in Agni, in the abode.
4.5.2.33	If he were to offer in a place without an abode, the Adhvaryu would be blind.
4.5.2.34	The gods, having made ghee into a thunderbolt, struck Soma.
4.5.2.35	They indeed pour over it.
4.5.2.36	Therefore he pours over the oblation.
4.5.2.37	And also so that the oblation does not fall down.
4.5.2.38	He offers the oblation with the words, "May the waters be yours."
4.5.2.39	He offers the oblation, saying, "May the ocean be yours, the inexhaustible."
4.5.2.40	The waters have entered the Soma juice.
4.5.2.41	Soma is the juice of the waters.
4.5.2.42	Indeed, the waters and the Soma juice are the lords of the waters.
4.5.2.43	They both sought the Soma juice of the waters by means of the oblation and the share.
4.5.2.44	They say that the two days and nights should be taken at the Vasatīvarī (waters).
4.5.2.45	One takes them on the previous day, before the sun rises, the other.
4.5.2.46	Thus for him both days and nights are taken at the Vasativari (waters).
4.5.2.47	The other (priests) take them the day before, before the sun rises.
4.5.2.48	He takes them both together.
4.5.2.49	These are taken as the enemies of the Maitrāvaruṇa and Nigrābha cups.
4.5.2.50	He anoints them both above the sacrificial post.
4.5.2.51	He makes them known to them.
4.5.2.52	He gives them friendship.
4.5.2.53	The Cātvāla is taken out.
4.5.2.54	This is indeed the source of water.
4.5.2.55	They are taken out from their own source, for non-loss.
4.5.2.56	"The Adhvaryu says, "Water, O waters!"
4.5.2.57	He says, "They have seen him, they see him, he is mine."
4.5.2.58	If one offers at the Agniṣṭoma, then one does not go beyond the Agniṣṭomah with the Stotra or the Sastra.
4.5.2.59	One continues the sacrificial rite of the Agniṣṭom.
4.5.2.60	If one anoints the periphery of the Ukthya,
4.5.2.61	the Agniṣṭoma is beyond the periphery.
4.5.2.62	The Ukthas are beyond the periphery. The Ukthas are beyond that.
4.5.2.63	One continues with the sacrificial rite of Ukthas.
4.5.2.64	If one were to enter the Havirdhāna-shed reciting this very Yajus,
4.5.2.65	the Havirdhāna is indeed beyond the Paridhi.
4.5.2.66	The night is beyond the verses.
4.5.2.67	He continues the sacrificial rite of the night.
4.5.2.68	The mind is deceitful.
4.5.2.69	Speech is false.
4.5.2.70	If one were to ask, "By whom are the Soma-grasses taken up and by whom are they offered?"
4.5.2.71	Truth and reality are gold.
4.5.2.72	They are grasped by truth and reality, they are offered by truth and reality.
4.5.3.1	The sacrifice is brought for the gods, for men, for the heavenly world.
4.5.3.2	When it is said, "For the heart," it is for the gods; when it is said, “For the mind,” it is for men.
4.5.3.3	When he says, "For the heaven, for the sun," he thereby makes him ascend to the heaven of sacrifice.
4.5.3.4	The sacrifice is indeed broken when it is offered to someone.
4.5.3.5	For that makes him ascend to heaven.
4.5.3.6	When he says, "In heaven, among the gods, may the Hotr be present,"
4.5.3.7	the sacrifice is indeed continuous through the Hotras.
4.5.3.8	He indeed makes the sacrifice continuous by means of the Hotr-priests.
4.5.3.9	"He says, "Recite the morning prayer to the gods."
4.5.3.10	The gods are the morning prayers.
4.5.3.11	He recites the morning prayer after the Chandas.
4.5.3.12	He recitesthe morning prayer before the speech is uttered.
4.5.3.13	He takes the speech for the sacrificer.
4.5.3.14	Or the sacrificer does not now have his hands tied.
4.5.3.15	When he recites the first verse containing the word 'water',
4.5.3.16	it is the morning Avnegi (rite) of the sacrificer.
4.5.3.17	Where they remove water, from water he has given the sacrifice.
4.5.3.18	When he chants the first verse containing 'water',
4.5.3.19	he again takes the sacrifice from water.
4.5.3.20	The Prātaranuvāka is for all the gods.
4.5.3.21	The waters are indeed all the gods. 
4.5.3.22	When one recites the first verse containing the word 'water',
4.5.3.23	one obtains all the deities and enjoys all.
4.5.3.24	The Prātaranuvākā is like the Sāmidhenī verses.
4.5.3.25	Having approached the oblation, one recites the Sāmidhēnī verses.
4.5.3.26	This indeed is the oblation now, namely Soma.
4.5.3.27	Therefore, having brought Soma, one recites.
4.5.3.28	He accomplishes the Gāyatrī and the Jagatī.
4.5.3.29	Those are two metres.
4.5.3.30	He accomplies one metre, the Brihatī.
4.5.3.31	The Tristubh and the Kakubha.
4.5.3.32	Those are the two metres.
4.5.3.33	One metre is accomplished, the Brihatî.
4.5.3.34	The Anushtubh and the Pankti.
4.5.3.35	These are the six metres.
4.5.3.36	One metre is accomplished, the Brihatī.
4.5.3.37	One should make the metres Anushtubh, Pratipa, and Kanistha for one whose sacrifice has been scattered.
4.5.3.38	The Anushtubh is speech.
4.5.3.39	He heals him with speech.
4.5.3.40	One should recite the Tristubh and the Jagatī together for one who desires cattle.
4.5.3.41	The Jagatī is the animals.
4.5.3.42	One becomes an animal-owner.
4.5.3.43	One should recite all the metres.
4.5.3.44	Prajapati is the metres.
4.5.3.45	One attains Prajapati.
4.5.3.46	This is the praise of Prajapati, namely the morning recitation.
4.5.3.47	One should repeat it before the sun rises.
4.5.3.48	This is Prajapati's world.
4.5.3.49	The morning recitation is indeed purifying.
4.5.3.50	He purifies the sacrificer by this.
4.5.3.51	One should recite it a hundred times for one who desires longevity.
4.5.3.52	Man has a hundred years of life, a hundred years of vigour.
4.5.3.53	One obtains longevity and vigour.
4.5.3.54	One should repeat it seven hundred and twenty times for one who wishes for cattle.
4.5.3.55	There are so many days and nights in a year.
4.5.3.56	He thus wins cattle in a year.
4.5.3.57	One should recite a thousand times for one who desires heaven.
4.5.3.58	As much as a thousand, so much is this world from here. For the completion of the heavenly world.
4.5.3.59	One recites an unlimited number of times for the winning of the unlimited.
4.5.3.60	One encloses with a row.
4.5.3.61	He thus takes up the northern sacrificial rite.
4.5.4.1	These are the sacrificial implements of the sacrifice.
4.5.4.2	The Agnidh is a male.
4.5.4.3	The Neshtri is a female.
4.5.4.4	When the Agnidh approaches the Neshtri, they become a couple.
4.5.4.5	When he then causes the water to flow, he places the seed in that couple.
4.5.4.6	The wife causes it to flow.
4.5.4.7	For it is from the wife that offspring are born.
4.5.4.8-14	He makes it flow along the thigh. For along the thigh offspring are born. He makes it flow along his right thigh. For it is along the right thigh that offspring are born. He makes it flow between (the thighs). For between (the thighs) offspring are born. If he were to make it flow along the right (thigh), he would lead them to the world of the fathers.
4.5.4.15	Now when he makes the Udici (chant) flow forth,
4.5.4.16	he makes the human world flow forth.
4.5.4.17	The Udgata is Prajapati.
4.5.4.18	When the Udgata is cursed by his wife, he takes the seed.
4.5.4.19	When he says, "I take your seed, O Vami, for the sake of the whole world," then he does not take it.
4.5.4.20	He makes the Udicī (chant) flow at the twelfth Stotra.
4.5.4.21	The year has twelve months.
4.5.4.22	The twelve Stotras are in the Agniṣṭoma.
4.5.4.23	Water is peace.
4.5.4.24	When he pours water, he pacifies.
4.5.4.25	"With the impulse of the divine Savitr," he says, taking it with the impulse of Savitr.
4.5.4.26	"With arms of the Asvins," he says.
4.5.4.27	The Asvins are the Adhvaryus of the gods.
4.5.4.28	"With hands of Pusan," he says, with the deities.
4.5.4.29-35	"The Soma-presser." For he presses Soma for the gods. "The performer of sacrifices for the gods." For he performs sacrifices for the gods. "For thee, O Indra, the most excellent, the sweet, the milky." For the sacrifice is connected with Indra. For now indeed other deities follow Indra.
4.5.4.36	"For Indra thee, for Indra who is rich in wealth, for Indra who has the Rudras."
4.5.4.37	For now the Vasus and the Rudras follow him.
4.5.4.38	"For Indra thee, who has the Adityas."
4.5.4.39	For now indeed the Adityas follow him.
4.5.4.40	For Agni thee, for Agni who is the bestower of wealth and prosperity.
4.5.4.41	For Agni indeed is all the deities.
4.5.4.42	For now indeed these deities follow him.
4.5.4.43	To Vishnu thee.
4.5.4.44	Vishnu is indeed the sacrifice.
4.5.4.45	Vyana is indeed the Upamshu-savan.
4.5.4.46	The offspring are the shares.
4.5.4.47	He indeed places Vyana in the offspring.
4.5.4.48	"You are the black ones, the destroyers of Vritra."
4.5.4.49	This indeed is the drinking of Soma of the waters.
4.5.4.50	Visvamitra indeed knew this drinking of Soma of waters.
4.5.4.51	The rivers bowed to him.
4.5.4.52	This indeed is Soma-drinking of waters.
4.5.4.53-60	He makes the waters prosper with the Soma-drink. He who knows the Soma-drink of the waters, does not suffer any harm from them. He makes his own strength in them. "He says, 'The light of thee, O Soma, in heaven.' Soma is the strength. Of that, the moon is the third. This one who blows is the third. The one by which they worship is the third.
4.5.4.61	With this he sustains the foetus, with this he bestows life, this which blows.
4.5.4.62	With this he sustains food, with which they sacrifice.
4.5.4.63	The truth of that strength is the strong one.
4.5.4.64	Food is the strong one,
4.5.4.65	The Dakshina is the strong one
4.5.4.66	They, having gathered together his body, make it all of one body and full.
4.5.4.67	The stone is indeed the thunderbolt.
4.5.4.68	The Adhvaryu and the Pratiprasthātṛ pour out (Soma) at the Adhiṣavaṇa.
4.5.4.69	Indeed, what is done at the sacrifice is as if cruel.
4.5.4.70	When he says, "Do you sing to the Adhishṭhānas that are invoked," he pacifies (the Soma).
4.5.5.1	They make Soma grow with the Vasatīvarī verses.
4.5.5.2	Soma does not make Soma grow.
4.5.5.3	Soma grows with water.
4.5.5.4	With the Nigrābha verses, the Upāṁshu.
4.5.5.5	From here the other Somas are taken.
4.5.5.6	Prāṇa is indeed Upāṃśu.
4.5.5.7	The other Grahas are the limbs.
4.5.5.8	If they were to increase it from another (Graha), they would cut off the sacrifice from Prāṇa.
4.5.5.9	He collects eight times in the morning.
4.5.5.10	The Gāyatrī has eight syllables.
4.5.5.11	They indeed extend the Gāyatrī at the morning pressing.
4.5.5.12	The gods and the Asuras competed.
4.5.5.13	Those gods saw that the sacrifice was to be established by Upamsu.
4.5.5.14	They established it by Upamsu
4.5.5.15	That is the sacrifice to be established by the Upamsu. The sacrifice is to be established by those who know the truth.
4.5.5.16	He sprinkles eight times in the morning.
4.5.5.17	The Gayatri has eight syllables.
4.5.5.18	He attains the Gayatri.
4.5.5.19	By eleven, the Tristubh.
4.5.5.20	By twelve, the Jagati.
4.5.5.21	He recites three times.
4.5.5.22	There are three pressing-times.
4.5.5.23	He obtains the pressing-times. This is the Upamshus.
4.5.5.24	They established the sacrifice with it.
4.5.5.25	They proceed with it, established, without injury, and with the existence.
4.5.5.26	He recites three times
4.5.5.27	For these three are the breaths: the out-breath, the in-breath, and the through-breath.
4.5.5.28	And these three are the worlds:
4.5.5.29-36	He obtains these worlds. Upāṃśu is this (world). Antaryāma is the atmosphere. Upāyama is this (earth). When they are taken with Upāyama, they are taken with this (earth). This is not lost. For it is taken with this (world). When they are taken with a vessel, they are taken by this (earth).
4.5.5.37	This is the one that is used for this.
4.5.5.38	These are the ones that are not cut off.
4.5.5.39	For they are taken with this.
4.5.5.40	If they are taken with a wooden one, they are taken with that.
4.5.5.41	This is the womb of the trees.
4.5.5.42	These are not cut off,
4.5.5.43	For they are seized with this.
4.5.5.44	He places it saying, "This is your womb."
4.5.5.45	This is indeed the womb of Soma.
4.5.5.46	Soma is born from this.
4.5.5.47	He places him in his own womb.
4.5.5.48	This is indeed the vessel of the gods.
4.5.5.49	He who knows this attains the vessel of the most prosperous.
4.5.5.50	One should not doubt the vessel of a brahmin, for he is like a vessel.
4.5.5.51	The vessel is taken up without being taken up.
4.5.5.52	The breath of life which is taken in with the Anuyāma is indeed what the creatures subsist on.
4.5.5.53	It is taken in with Apāvītra and Pūta.
4.5.5.54	It is indeed what the beings subsist on.
4.5.5.55	The Soma is offered in a vessel.
4.5.5.56	It is what the beings subsist upon.
4.5.5.57	Other Somas are taken in with Apāvitra and Pūta,
4.5.5.58	Or this Upāṃśu is indeed the Soma taken in with Vakpūta.
4.5.5.59-67	Therefore he says, "Flow for the lord of speech." For this is purified by speech. He purifies with rays. The rays are the vital airs. He puricfies him with the vital airs. He purifies with two by two. For these vital airs are two by two. He purifles with two by two, "You are the divine purifier of the gods." When he purifies Soma with Soma,
4.5.5.68	"You are taken by me."
4.5.5.69	He takes the breath as his own.
4.5.5.70	"He says, 'The mind has taken you.'
4.5.5.71	He obtains the breath by means of the mind.
4.5.5.72	"He offers with, 'Svāhā to you, O well-born, for the sun.'
4.5.5.73	All Soma offerings are dedicated to the sun-god.
4.5.5.74	And here indeed are the dear forms of the gods.
4.5.5.75	He obtains them.
4.5.5.76	"He dedicates (the Soma) with, 'For the rays of the gods.'
4.5.5.77	The rays are the gods, the sons of Aditi.
4.5.5.78	The rays are the boundaries.
4.5.5.79	The sun is the Ahavaniya.
4.5.5.80	He pleases them.
4.5.5.81	Standing upright, he offers.
4.5.5.82	For standing upright, one is more vigorous.
4.5.5.83	One should offer to him whom one hates, standing crooked.
4.5.5.84	He weakens his vital breaths.
4.5.5.85	He becomes confused.
4.5.5.86	If he wants to make it rain, he should stand facing the direction from which the rain is coming.
4.5.5.87	Agni follows the offering quickly.
4.5.5.88	If one wants it to rain, one should rub the water upwards and downwards.
4.5.5.89	It rains from the plants here.
4.5.5.90	He makes the plants here rain.
4.5.5.91	If he desires, "Let it rain", he should rub the lower part of the fire-pan.
4.5.5.92	He also averts rain by means of Vaisvânara.
4.5.5.93	One should not cover it.
4.5.5.94	If one were to cover it, one would cover his life-breath. One would become a deceiver.
4.5.5.95	If one desires to harm someone, one should cover it.
4.5.5.96	He covers his life-breath.
4.5.5.97	If he were to perform this rite, he should say, "I am obstructing the life of so-and-so, the son of so-and so." He should obstruct.
4.5.5.98	He obstructs his life.
4.5.5.99	If he were to perform the rite while saying, "I am placing so-and- so, the son of such-and-so on his life," he would be performing it for the purpose of harming.
4.5.5.100	He places him on his life.
4.5.5.101	He becomes short-lived.
4.5.5.102	"He should place it with the formula, 'To Prāṇa thee!' without transgressing."
4.5.6.1	They spread the Pavitra for the purpose of holding the Prāṇa and Apāna.
4.5.6.2	The offering is taken up with the formula, "Thou art taken up with the Upāṁsu-graha."
4.5.6.3	Prāṇa is held by Apāna; for the purpose of supporting Prāṇa.
4.5.6.4	The Antaryāma is the atmosphere.
4.5.6.5	The atmosphere is these beings.
4.5.6.6	When he places the vessel like a pot, he places the essence in the offspring.
4.5.6.7	The gods and the Asuras were in competition.
4.5.6.8	The gods saw Upāṃshu.
4.5.6.9	They took it.
4.5.6.10	Before the praise, before the chant, they stood up to offer it.
4.5.6.11	The Asuras thought, "They are offering."
4.5.6.12	They took up the thunderbolt and attacked.
4.5.6.13	Those gods saw Antaryama.
4.5.6.14	They seized it.
4.5.6.15	With it they banished the Asuras from these worlds.
4.5.6.16	Then the gods became victorious, the Asuras defeated.
4.5.6.17	He who, knowing this, takes up Antaryama, with Antaryama alone he banishes his enemy from these worlds.
4.5.6.18	He becomes his own self, and his enemy becomes his brother.
4.5.6.19	The Prāṇāpāna (breath) are the Upāṃśu and Antar-yāma (offerings).
4.5.6.20	Vyāna is the Upāṃsusavana (offering).
4.5.6.21	When this (Soma) is pressed in the Grava-vessel, it is for the maintenance of Prāṇā and Apāna.
4.5.6.22	He who offers these (sacrifices) and by whom these are maintained, he indeed is the Upāmsusavana Grava.
4.5.6.23	The Prānāpāna (breaths) are the Upāmśu and Antaryama (offerings).
4.5.6.24	Vyana is the Upāṃśusavana.
4.5.6.25	If these two had not been present in the vessel from the third pressing,
4.5.6.26	then all the other organs of hearing would have left him while he was asleep.
4.5.6.27	But the Prāṇa and Apāna do not leave him.
4.5.6.28	And when he wakes up again, it is because he is struck again.
4.5.6.29	Prāṇāpāna are the Upāṃśu and Antaryāma.
4.5.6.30	Vyāna is the Upāṃsusavana.
4.5.6.31	If these two had not been removed from the third pressing,
4.5.6.32	then the birds would not have fallen down while stretching their wings in the sky.
4.5.6.33	And because they are again struck, they again grow.
4.5.6.34	Prāṇāpānas are the Upāśu and Antaryaṃsa.
4.5.6.35	Vyana is the Upamshu-sutra.
4.5.6.36	Since these two are again employed in the vessel, therefore these two are the two Prāṇas below.
4.5.6.37	They indeed kill Soma when they press it.
4.5.6.38	The Adhvaryu first presses.
4.5.6.39	He becomes a Vyādhṛṅka.
4.5.6.40	Where there is the root, there is the pressing.
4.5.6.41	This is indeed his most divine.
4.5.6.42-46	So one should not give away the sacrificial grass. One who gives away the sacrificial grass to a learned person incurs misfortune. The sacrificial grass is indeed the field of the gods. Where the Adhvaryu first offers Soma, the deities gather there, thinking, "May it not be lost to us here."
4.5.6.47-52	If he were to offer elsewhere, he would give his own to others. He would become without his own. This is the Adhvaryu's own, when he invites. If, having invited, he were to depart without offering, he would depart from his own. He would be without his own. This is the Adhvaryu's own, the Vāyavya.
4.5.6.53	If one were to summon without having offered to Vayu, then his own would be cut off from him.
4.5.6.54	One becomes without one's own.
4.5.6.55	If one who knows this summons and offers, or offers after having offered, then one's own becomes abundant and one's own is not cut off.
4.5.6.56	One summons after having offered to Vāyu.
4.5.6.57	One becomes with one's own.
4.5.7.1	The Brahmanas say, "Why is it that the animals are divided into two classes, those that are taken by the hand and those that are taken from the mouth?"
4.5.7.2	Because the animals are taken by the mouth and the hand, therefore the monkey, the elephant, and the horse are taken by the hands.
4.5.7.3	The mouth is indeed the wind.
4.5.7.4	Because the wind is taken by the mouth, therefore the other animals are taken by mouth.
4.5.7.5	The Brahmanas say: What is it that is done at the sacrifice, whereby the animals born that day stand firm in a year?
4.5.7.6	The Upamsu and Antaryama are the other animals.
4.5.7.7	The man is indeed measured by the sacrifice.
4.5.7.8	The breath and out-breath are the Upamsu and the Antaryama.
4.5.7.9	When these two Grahas are offered,
4.5.7.10	Therefore, the newly born animals stand firm.
4.5.7.11	The Agniṣṭoma is indeed a year.
4.5.7.12	The year has twelve months.
4.5.7.13	When these other Grahas are completed, therefore, a person born in a year stands firm.
4.5.7.14	"When he says, "O Soma, your name is Jagrūvi,"
4.5.7.15	This indeed is Soma's Soma-drinking."
4.5.7.16	He thus makes Soma prosper with the Soma-drink.
4.5.7.17	He who knows the Soma-drink of Soma, does not fall away from the Soma-drink
4.5.7.18	Soma desired these directions.
4.5.7.19	He unites him with these directions, he makes him prosper with these directions.
4.5.7.20	It leads him to his desire.
4.5.7.21	He goes to his desire.
4.5.7.22	Women are attracted to him.
4.5.7.23	One should then mentally contemplate the woman one desires.
4.5.7.24	She is attracted to him. "
4.5.7.25	"O mother, I remember." This means "I remember."
4.5.7.26	"He knows." This means "He knows with this."
4.5.7.27	There were four breasts of Prsni.
4.5.7.28	From that, she milked three times for the gods.
4.5.7.29	He was bound by one of his fetters.
4.5.7.30	Indra alone saw him.
4.5.7.31	He took him away for Indra alone.
4.5.7.32	That was his Kauśika-ness.
4.5.7.33	When he says, "Like the Brahmanas of Kauśika," he approaches four times.
4.5.7.34	There are four kinds of milk.
4.5.7.35	He obtains as much milk as there is.
4.5.7.36	He collects three times.
4.5.7.37-45	Therefore, there are three parts of this (day) - morning, midday and evening. One goes to four Nigrahas, and collects three times. That makes seven. The Sakvari has seven steps. The animals are Sakvaras. One obtains animals. One goes four times to Nigrahas, collects three times. That makes twelve. Twelve months are a year.
4.5.7.46	The twelve Stotras are in the Agniṣṭoma.
4.5.7.47	This is the measure of the sacrifice.
4.5.7.48	Svābhānu, the Asura, covered the sun with darkness.
4.5.7.49	The gods removed that darkness from him.
4.5.7.50	When they removed the first darkness, it became black.
4.5.7.51	When they took away the second, it became red.
4.5.7.52	When they got rid of the third, it became pale.
4.5.7.53	He was freed by his own form.
4.5.7.54	The Pavitra is taken from the place where the Balaksa is placed.
4.5.7.55	This Pavitra belongs to the sacrificer.
4.5.7.56	He purifies the sacrificer by means of this.
4.5.7.57	If it is not cut,
4.5.7.58	he has not done it for himself.
4.5.7.59	If it were cut elsewhere, it would be impure.
4.5.8.1	The Indra-Vayu is speech.
4.5.8.2	That speech spoke in one voice as long as it was not interrupted.
4.5.8.3	Indra said, "They should also take Soma for me here."
4.5.8.4	"I will turn back this speech."
4.5.8.5	He turned back speech with speech.
4.5.8.6	When the Indra-Vayu Soma is taken, it is for turning back speech.
4.5.8.7	He takes the first for Vayu, the last for Indra, and the middle one for Vayu.
4.5.8.8	This speech is held in the middle by the sense-organ.
4.5.8.9	He who knows this speaks with a sense-organ-endowed speech.
4.5.8.10	The gods desired to kill Soma.
4.5.8.11	They were not able to kill him.
4.5.8.12	For Vayu was between him and the breath of life.
4.5.8.13	The gods sought him.
4.5.8.14	"Come back to us."
4.5.8.15	He said, "Let there be a share for me."
4.5.8.16	"Choose," they said.
4.5.8.17	He said, "The vessels were dedicated to my deity."
4.5.8.18	Therefore Vayu's vessel is the most excellent.
4.5.8.19	Now the offerings to Vayu are mentioned.
4.5.8.20	Then the gods killed Soma.
4.5.8.21	He, being killed, became impure.
4.5.8.22	Therefore the gods became disgusted.
4.5.8.23	The wind said, "I will make this Soma sweet."
4.5.8.24	"Let me have a share."
4.5.8.25	They said, "Choose."
4.5.8.26	He said, "Grahas should be taken with me at the beginning and at the end."
4.5.8.27	The wind placed him in the middle.
4.5.8.28	He did not become sweet.
4.5.8.29	Therefore, Grahas are taken with the wind at the beginning.
4.5.8.30-36	Therefore, they are indeed afraid of the wind. The gods were unable to raise the morning pressing. Then the wind was at the third pressing. The gods then took the wind to the morning pressing. With it they raised the morning pressing. When the Indra-Vayu cup is taken at the morning pressing, the wind is indeed the breath.
4.5.8.37	They indeed offer the sacrifice with the breath from the mouth.
4.5.8.38	The gods indeed desired to kill Vritra.
4.5.8.39	He said, "I am Mitra."
4.5.8.40	"I shall not kill."
4.5.8.41	They said, "Let go."
4.5.8.42	He said, "Let there be a share for me."
4.5.8.43	They said, "Choose."
4.5.8.44	He said, "Pour Soma for me with milk."
4.5.8.45	From that the cattle fled.
4.5.8.46	"Being a friend, not a deceiver,"
4.5.8.47	For the cattle are milk.
4.5.8.48	When one pours Soma for Maitrāvaruṇa with milk, he makes him firm with cattle.
4.5.8.49	When one offers Soma for Maitrāvaruna with milk, it is for the sake of being a deity of two gods.
4.5.8.50	What is cool, that is Mitra.
4.5.8.51	What is hot, that is Varuna.
4.5.8.52	Brahma is Mitra.
4.5.8.53	Varuna is Ksatra.
4.5.8.54	He places the milk in Brahma and Ksatra.
4.5.8.55	Therefore Brahma and Ksatra are the most milky.
4.5.8.56	There are five deities of the Brahman: Agni, Soma, Savitar, Brihaspati, and Sarasvati.
4.5.8.57	Therefore other men run to the Brahman.
4.5.8.58	For this (Brahman) has the most deities.
4.5.8.59	Of these, three are the subordinate deities of the learned Brāhmaṇa: Agni, Brihaspati and Sarasvati.
4.5.8.60	Therefore the unlearned run to the learned.
4.5.8.61	For this one has the most subordinate deities.
4.5.8.62	They approach the Maitrāvaruṇa.
4.5.8.63	In which he offers the Soma-juice to Mitra-Varuna.
4.5.8.64	He puts the Soma-juice in them.
4.5.8.65	Formerly the Soma-offerings were taken up separately from Mitra-Varuna,
4.5.8.66	and the offspring of one (Soma-offering) took up the offspring of another.
4.5.8.67	Then they took up the Soma-offering together with Mitra-Varuna;
4.5.8.68	then it became fixed.
4.5.8.69	In which he offers the Somo-juice to Mitra and Varuna;
4.5.8.70	He makes an alliance with either a friend or Varuna.
4.5.8.71	Varuna seized Mitra who had slain Vritra.
4.5.8.72	He was helpless among the gods.
4.5.8.73	They said, "Be helpless with Varuna."
4.5.8.74	He was helpless with Varuna.
4.5.8.75	He said, "Let there be a share for me."
4.5.8.76	"Choose," they said.
4.5.8.77	He said, "Let us drink Soma together with milk."
4.5.8.78	When one offers Soma with milk to Mitra-Varuna, it is for the sacrificer to be free from Varuna.
4.5.8.79	If one's enemy is too strong, one should grasp the thumb with the index finger.
4.5.8.80	If one is weaker than the enemy, one should grasp an index finger with the thumb.
4.5.8.81	He who, O Mitra-Varuna, has been hostile to us, our enemy, our foe, may he be destroyed. O Brihaspati, I am placing him below, so that I may be the superior.
4.5.8.82	The superior one indeed thinks.
4.5.9.1	The gods were performing a sacrifice in Kurukshetra. Agni was the sacrifice, Vayu was Indra.
4.5.9.2	They said, "He who among us shall be the first to prosper, let him share it with us."
4.5.9.3	Among them Makha prospered.
4.5.9.4	He desired it.
4.5.9.5	He did not give it up.
4.5.9.6	It was taken from him by force.
4.5.9.7	He then generated three from himself, and the bow from that.
4.5.9.8	That is the origin of the three and the bow.
4.5.9.9	He fled after concealing it.
4.5.9.10	They did not succeed in bending it.
4.5.9.11	He stood firm against the bow-string.
4.5.9.12	Indra said to the Vamris:
4.5.9.13	"Bend this bow-string."
4.5.9.14	They said: "When she is touched, we will not be able to live.
4.5.9.15	Let there be a share for us."
4.5.9.16	He said: "You may live by her juice alone."
4.5.9.17	Therefore they smear the dry one with the moist one.
4.5.9.18	For they live on its sap.
4.5.9.19	They eat even the string.
4.5.9.20	The bow-string, having been cut, rose up and cut off his head.
4.5.9.21	He became the king.
4.5.9.22	Then the others divided it into three parts: Agni took the front part, Indra the middle part, and Vayu the rear part.
4.5.9.23	Therefore the morning pressing is connected with Agni.
4.5.9.24	The midday pressing is connected with Indra.
4.5.9.25	The third pressing is connected with the All-gods.
4.5.9.26	For Vayu is the All-gods,
4.5.9.27	The Prāṇa and Apāna are the Upāṁśu and Antaryāma,
4.5.9.28	Vyāna is the Upāṁshu-savaṇa,
4.5.9.29	Speech is the Indra-Vayu,
4.5.9.30	Dakṣa-kratu is the Maitrāvaruṇa,
4.5.9.31	The ears are the Āśvin,
4.5.9.32	The eyes are the Sukra and Māṃsthina.
4.5.9.33	The Self is the sacrificial post.
4.5.9.34	The limbs are the Ukthyas.
4.5.9.35	Life is Dhruva.
4.5.9.36	The breasts are the Ritupaatra.
4.5.9.37	The head is the Drona Kalasha.
4.5.9.38	The belly is the Kalasha.
4.5.9.39	Jaws are the Adhi-savana.
4.5.9.40	The tongue is the Adhi-savana.
4.5.9.41	The teeth are the stones.
4.5.9.42	The bones are the Paridhis.
4.5.9.43	The nose is the Uttara Vedi.
4.5.9.44	The hair is the sacrificial post.
4.5.9.45	The head is the Havirdhāna.
4.5.9.46	The back is the Agnidhra.
4.5.9.47	The belly is the Sadas.
4.5.9.48	The hands are the Dhiṣṇyas, which are within the belly.
4.5.9.49	The Agnidhra and the Marjālīya are the heels.
4.5.9.50	The Garhapatya is the foundation, the altar.
4.5.9.51	This indeed is Prajapati, the vessel.
4.5.9.52	He who knows this indeed knows him.
4.6.1.1	These nine Grahas are taken in the morning.
4.6.1.2	These nine breaths are indeed taken up.
4.6.1.3	The tenth is taken up in the month of Asvina.
4.6.1.4	This is indeed the Vyana breath that is taken up.
4.6.1.5	It is indeed the navel that is taken up as the tenth.
4.6.1.6	The third is offered.
4.6.1.7	For this breath is indeed the third among the breaths, for continuity of the breaths.
4.6.1.8	All these Grahas are accompanied by praise, accompanied by the Sastra, accompanied by the Nidana.
4.6.1.9	He who knows this becomes the bestower of gifts.
4.6.1.10	The Hotṛ today at dawn performed the Upāṃśu sacrifice.
4.6.1.11	By that they are endowed with praise.
4.6.1.12	And when the Hotṛ chants the silent praise, by that they are endowed.
4.6.1.13	The nine Grahas are taken at dawn, and they praise the Bahispavamāna with nine (verses).
4.6.1.14	By them they are endowed with Sāman.
4.6.1.15	The Aśvina-s are connected with the hymn of Hiṃkāra.
4.6.1.16	The Indra-Vayu-s are connected to the Indra-Vayu.
4.6.1.17	The Mitra-Varuna-s are connected by the Mitra-Varuna.
4.6.1.18	The Sukra-Manthin-s are connected through the Indra.
4.6.1.19	The Viśva-deva-s are connected in the Agrāyaṇa.
4.6.1.20	The Ukthya is taken for the Ukthya, the Dhruva for the continuity, the Indra-Agni for continuity, the Marutvatīya-s.
4.6.1.21-27	The Adhvaryu offers, the Hotri pronounces the Vasat-call. This is the giving of the vital airs. By the mantra by which the Adhvaryu gives, by that the Hotri receives, for the protection of the vital airs.
4.6.1.28	When the Adhvaryu, having offered to the two-deity deities, quickly runs towards the Hotṛ,
4.6.1.29	he thereby strikes the Hotṛ with his vital breaths.
4.6.1.30	At every Vasat-call, the Hotṛ goes to the end of the vital breath.
4.6.1.31	The two-deity (offerings) are the vital breaths.
4.6.1.32	When the Adhvaryus, having offered to two-deity offerings, quickly runs towards Hotṛ,
4.6.1.33-37	He offers to the Hotr with his own life. The two-deity offerings are the life-breath. The Ida is the cattle. If one were to offer the Ida after eating the two-deity oblations, one would obstruct the life-breath with cattle. But when one offers the Ida after eating two-deity oblations,
4.6.1.38	Having given up his own life, he then invokes the animals.
4.6.1.39	Soma is indeed the sense-organ.
4.6.1.40	Animals are the sense-organ
4.6.1.41	When one consumes Soma, one bestows the sense-organ on oneself.
4.6.1.42	One consumes the entire Aśvina parihara.
4.6.1.43	Therefore one hears in all directions.
4.6.2.1	The sacrifice is obstructed by the demons, if the vessel is empty and not released.
4.6.2.2	When he places the cake for Indra-Vayu, the milk-rice for Mitra-Varuna, and the cooked barley-grains for the Asvins, it is for the sake of non-emptiness.
4.6.2.3	The sacrifice is indeed interrupted when the pressing ceremonies are concluded.
4.6.2.4	If these vessels were to be left over from the third pressing, it would be for the continuity of the sacrifice without interruption.
4.6.2.5	When the Vāyuya (vessel) is being filled, one releases the vessels.
4.6.2.6	Vayu is indeed the breath.
4.6.2.7	The sacrifice is continuous with breath.
4.6.2.8	He makes the sacrifice continuous with breath itself.
4.6.2.9	With one and ten, in one's own nature, with two for the sake of offering, and with twenty.
4.6.2.10	And with three hundred and thirty, O Wind, do thou here release them, he says; indeed, he releases them by means of the release.
4.6.2.11	The Adhvaryu's vessel is known.
4.6.2.12	The Pratiprasthātr's vessel is stopped.
4.6.2.13	If he wishes, "I will make him who is outside the village, inside the village; and he who is inside the village, outside the village," then having placed the Adhvaryu's vessel, he should say, "I am placing him who is outside, the son of so-and-so, the descendant of so-andso, in the village of so-and so." Having placed the Pratiprasthātṛ's vessel, one should say, "He who is inside the so-and- so village, the son of such-and-such, the descendant of such-and such, I am placing him in the so-and so village."
4.6.2.14-17	He who is outside, he makes inside; he who is inside, he makes outside. The Adhvaryu's vessel is the sacrificer's vessel. The Pratiprasthātr's vessel is one's enemy's vessel. If one desires, "May I make my enemy equal in strength with me," one should take it with the right hand, place it with the right, and offer with the right.
4.6.2.18	He makes his own brotherly clan superior to his enemy.
4.6.2.19	The Adhvaryu's vessel is the vessel.
4.6.2.20	The Pratiprasthātṛ's vessel is inferior.
4.6.2.21	If one wishes, "May it be inferior to sin," one should take it first, place it first, and offer it first.
4.6.2.22	By this, Vipujan Sauraki made it inferior to sin.
4.6.2.23	He thus makes it (the sacrifice) more sinful.
4.6.2.24	When the sacrifice was created, its head was cut off.
4.6.2.25	The gods desired to make atonement for it.
4.6.2.26	Then indeed those two were the physicians of the gods, the Asvins, who were not drinkers of Soma.
4.6.2.27	They ran up to them.
4.6.2.28	"Just as one runs up to a physician, so do you restore this head of the sacrifice."
4.6.2.29	They said, "Let there be no share."
4.6.2.30	They said, "You may choose."
4.6.2.31	They said (to the Adhvaryu), "Let them take our cup."
4.6.2.32	"Let us eat the Soma-drink," thus the Asvins gave it to him.
4.6.2.33	Therefore they praise with the Asvinis,
4.6.2.34	for the Asvins gave (the Soma) to him.
4.6.2.35	Having purified them by the Bahispavamāna, they took up the cup with the purified and fit oblations.
4.6.2.36	Therefore the Aśvin cups are taken up after the Bahispavamaņa has been praised.
4.6.2.37	Therefore the Bahispavana should be approached by a Brāhmaṇa.
4.6.2.38	For it is a purifying (rite).
4.6.2.39	Therefore one should obstruct him whom one hates.
4.6.2.40	They placed that medicine in three ways: one part in the fire, one part in the Brahman, and one part in the water.
4.6.2.41	He who, knowing this, tells the Brahman at the end of the fire and performs the medicine in the water, becomes successful.
4.6.2.42	Until the medicine is performed.
4.6.2.43	These vessels are indeed the loss of the sacrifice, when, having taken the Grahas, they move out for the Bahispavamāna.
4.6.2.44	Returning, he touches them with a verse to Vishnu.
4.6.2.45	Vishnu is the sacrifice.
4.6.2.46	By means of the sacrifice, he makes them ascend to the heavenly world.
4.6.3.1	The Sukra and Manthin are indeed the eyes of Prajapati.
4.6.3.2	The sun is Sukra.
4.6.3.3	The Moon is the Soma.
4.6.3.4	The left eye of that Prajapati fell down.
4.6.3.5	From that, the drops that fell down, from them it rains.
4.6.3.6	They fell down twenty-one times.
4.6.3.7	From there Vayu releases them for the sake of the creation of beings.
4.6.3.8	The pupil that fell down became barley.
4.6.3.9	When he mixes the Soma with flour, he makes his eye grow.
4.6.3.10	Soma and flour are a pair.
4.6.3.11	When he mixes the Soma and flour, it is for the sake of a pair.
4.6.3.12	The vessel for the Soma is a vessel of distress.
4.6.3.13	One should give it to the priest whom one hates.
4.6.3.14	He will meet with distress.
4.6.3.15	The two, Saṇḍa and Marka, were the priests of the Asuras.
4.6.3.16	The gods were not able to kill them.
4.6.3.17	Because they had Brahmanas.
4.6.3.18	The gods threatened them, saying, "You must turn back."
4.6.3.19	They said, "Let there be a share."
4.6.3.20	They said (to them), "You may choose."
4.6.3.21	They chose these two, Shukra and Manthi.
4.6.3.22-25	The gods thought: "If we were to offer these two Soma-pressings, the Asuras would follow us." "If we were not to offer, they would follow us." They offered them to Indra after having driven them away. Therefore they are taken up as belonging to other deities, and then they are offered to Indra.
4.6.3.26	He removes the Sandamarka together with him, saying, "We remove him whom we hate." He removes him together with the Sandamarka.
4.6.3.27	He should place it, saying, "Protect life, protect progeny, protect the valour of this one." He should place it for one whom he loves.
4.6.3.28	"The semen is the kingdom, the churned-out is the kingdom." For the kingdom is what is churned out.
4.6.3.29	If he wishes, he should make the one outside the village inside the village, and the one inside the village outside the village. He should say, "I am placing this one, the son of so-and-so, the son of such-and-such, in the village of such-and such." Having placed the vessel of semen, he should say, "This one, the son so-and- so, the son of sucha-and-such is being placed in the village of so-and such." He should place the vessel of churning.
4.6.3.30	He who makes the one outside the village, makes the one inside the village.
4.6.3.31	The vessel of the moon is indeed a vessel of distress.
4.6.3.32	The vessel for the bright (moon) is used again.
4.6.3.33	Therefore these two are of equal strength.
4.6.3.34	Therefore one sees with both of them.
4.6.3.35	The bright one is indeed the sun.
4.6.3.36	The moon is the one that is distressed.
4.6.3.37	The two who, having covered their faces, go away from here, do not see the two who are going towards them.
4.6.3.38	But the two who, having uncovered their faces, stand and offer oblations,
4.6.3.39	see the two who are coming towards them.
4.6.3.40	The two who, having turned their faces, go from here, go away from the breath.
4.6.3.41	But the ones who, having uncovered them, stand and offer,
4.6.3.42	go back to the breath.
4.6.3.43	When they are placed with their faces turned away from this (earth), the foetus is placed with its face turned away from that (earth).
4.6.3.44	When they offer with their faces turned towards (the earth), not covering it up,
4.6.3.45	therefore they are born with their faces turned to (the earth).
4.6.3.46	The eyes are the Shukra and Manthin.
4.6.3.47	The nose is the Uttaravedi.
4.6.3.48	When they step on with the thumbs, they place the eyes there.
4.6.3.49	Now because he steps over above, therefore the eyes are above.
4.6.3.50	"Thou art the Tutha of the people."
4.6.3.51	"The gods, the drinkers of Soma, may lead thee."
4.6.3.52	These are the female creatures; this is their womb.
4.6.3.53	They are born after him.
4.6.3.54	"Thou are the Tutha of people. The gods, the drinkers, may lead thee.
4.6.3.55	These are the first beings, this is their source.
4.6.3.56	They are born from him.
4.6.3.57	Here he generates both kinds of beings, the later and the first.
4.6.3.58	They follow the bright (sun).
4.6.3.59	The bright one is indeed brilliance, the brilliance of the Brahman.
4.6.3.60	They follow brilliance, the brilliance (of the Brahman).
4.6.3.61	They follow with the bright one, saying, "I yoke with Indra and anger."
4.6.3.62	Indra, by anger, subdued the Asuras.
4.6.3.63	By anger, indeed, the Sacrificer, by this (rite), subdues his foe.
4.6.3.64	"The two, having come together, on the day and the earth," (with these words) he joins the two straps.
4.6.3.65	This (rite) indeed joins them.
4.6.3.66	If they were to join them in a vessel, it would be between them.
4.6.3.67	Now, because he binds the two ends together, therefore this is between the eyes for support.
4.6.3.68	"He places the male embryo in the two cows, "thus the wives of the sacrificer become cows, the wife gives birth to a hero."
4.6.3.69	"He places down the two pieces, saying, "Thou art the foundation of the bright one, thou art the foundation of Manthin."
4.6.3.70	This is the kindling wood of these two.
4.6.3.71	Then they say, for the establishment of the oblations.
4.6.3.72	The thorn is removed, the mark is removed, with him whom we hate. They remove the two pieces.
4.6.3.73	This is the extent of the world, as far as it is raised up.
4.6.3.74	The sacrificer separates his enemy from the extent of the entire world.
4.6.3.75	Others honour the Soma, not others.
4.6.3.76	That is the union of the Somas.
4.6.3.77	Those whom he pleases, he rains upon.
4.6.3.78	Those whom he does not please, he withholds.
4.6.3.79	Some vessels are made of wood, others of clay.
4.6.3.80	That is the pair of vessels.
4.6.3.81	He who knows the pair of Soma and vessels, his cattle stand by him in pairs.
4.6.4.1	Prajapati is the Aggrayan.
4.6.4.2	Those gods who are in heaven, the eleven.
4.6.4.3	There are just so many gods.
4.6.4.4	From them one takes (the Soma).
4.6.4.5	Having taken the Aggrayaṇa, the gods went to heaven.
4.6.4.6	The Asuras fell away.
4.6.4.7	Then the gods became superior to the Asuras.
4.6.4.8	He who, knowing this, takes the Āgrayana (graha), becomes superior to his foe.
4.6.4.9	He who is the younger brother should take the Āgrayana and the Āgrayaṇa grahas.
4.6.4.10	For the Āgrayana is the foremost.
4.6.4.11	If he knows, if Saramā, the injured, the great path of the mountain, the ancient, the same, who leads the foremost of the moving ones, the cry, the striking, the knowing, the going, the shining, one should say "Puroruc."
4.6.4.12	It indeed injures.
4.6.4.13	Saramā is indeed speech.
4.6.4.14	He indeed seizes their speech.
4.6.4.15	This is indeed the swiftness of the sacrifice.
4.6.4.16	Therefore whatever is done before the Āgrayana, they perform in a low voice.
4.6.4.17	Or else they release speech at the Āgrayana.
4.6.4.18	Having attained the sacrifice, they release speech.
4.6.4.19	Speech indeed departed from the gods.
4.6.4.20	The gods performed the sacrifice silently.
4.6.4.21	Speech thought, "They are going to exclude me from the sacrifice."
4.6.4.22	He runs towards Agnayan.
4.6.4.23	Therefore, they release speech towards Agnayan
4.6.4.24	They release speech with the sound "Hi".
4.6.4.25	Breath is the sound "Hi"
4.6.4.26	Speech is breath.
4.6.4.27	This is the proper way of speech.
4.6.4.28	He makes the sound "Hi", three times.
4.6.4.29	This speech speaks in three ways: slowly, loudly, and very loudly.
4.6.4.30	As much as his speech is capable of.
4.6.4.31	There are three priests of Prajapati: the Udgata, the Prastotar and the Pratiharta.
4.6.4.32	They are not yet in order and are not yet united.
4.6.4.33	By what he does, they become in order and united.
4.6.4.34	Speech and mind debated: "I am better", "I am better".
4.6.4.35	They approached Prajapati with a question.
4.6.4.36	She, the speech, said, "Nothing should be done without my being uttered."
4.6.4.37	Then the mind said, "Nothing is done without my being directed."
4.6.4.38	It followed the mind.
4.6.4.39	She, speech, said, “I am your wife, who is not to be abandoned.
4.6.4.40-46	Therefore, this is offered to Prajapati. Therefore, whatever is done in a low voice, they say, "This is done, let it be done." For it is done for Prajapati. The Adhvaryu takes up the Soma from two streams at the morning pressing, from three at the midday pressing, from four at the third pressing. That makes nine.
4.6.4.47	Nine are the vital airs.
4.6.4.48	The Self is the Agnirayana.
4.6.4.49	He places the vital airs in himself.
4.6.4.50	Indeed, the sacrifice is broken when the pressing ceremonies are concluded.
4.6.4.51	"Those gods who are eleven in heaven, who are eleven on earth, who are eleven in the sky, who are eleven among the waters, who are eleven at the abode of the gods, who are eleven with the Gandharvas, who are eleven as the Maruts, who are eleven for the Apsarases, who are eleven to be worshipped, who are eleven who are to be worshipped, those gods who are eleven at heaven, who are the eleven who are to come, who are eleven of the gods, those gods who have come, who are the gods who are to come."
4.6.4.52	Indeed, the Yajna is continuous with the deities.
4.6.4.53	He makes the Yajna continuous with the deities.
4.6.4.54	Prajapati is the Aggrayan.
4.6.4.55	When he sprinkles at all the Savanas, Prajapati thus smells at his creatures.
4.6.4.56	Prajapati is the Aggra-yan.
4.6.4.57	When one takes it at all the Savana-s, one nourishes the sacrifice with oneself.
4.6.4.58	Prajapate is the Aggrayan.
4.6.4.59	Because he exceeds this, therefore the man goes to the most distant of the animals.
4.6.4.60	The calf of the Gāyatrī is the Āgrayana.
4.6.4.61	He indeed runs towards it from the third pressing.
4.6.4.62	All the Soma-pressings are indeed taken in the Gāyatrīs.
4.6.4.63	All the pressings run towards it.
4.6.4.64	Now, when a foetus is taken out of a pot, it is known that it is in the pot.
4.6.4.65	"One is going to offer it with a wooden pot."
4.6.4.66	Therefore, one who kills a foetus is unknown.
4.6.4.67	And when they throw away the pot, it is not wooden. Therefore, a man is an heir and a woman is not an heir.
4.6.4.68	Now when they throw away the pot, it is not made of wood. Therefore they throw away a woman, not a man.
4.6.4.69	Now women alone are thrown away.
4.6.5.1	Indra hurled the thunderbolt at Vritra.
4.6.5.2	Seeing the thunderbolt hurled, he was frightened.
4.6.5.3	He said, "Is there any power in this?
4.6.5.4	I shall give it to you.
4.6.5.5	Do not kill me!'
4.6.5.6	He gave it to him.
4.6.5.7	He gave him the sacrifice, and the animals, and the Ukthya.
4.6.5.8	When the Ukthya is taken, it is for the inclusion of the sacrifice and the animals.
4.6.5.9	The sacrifice is as big as the Ukthya,
4.6.5.10	The other cups are within the Ukthya;
4.6.5.11	The Ukthya is a floating part of the sacrifice;
4.6.5.12-18	Just as one would bathe after binding a raft, so does he bathe after performing the Ukthya. He carries it across to the goal of the sacrifice. The Ukthya is the limbs. It is taken for the continuity of the sacrifice. To you, O Vishnu, to you. Vishnu is the sacrifice. Vishnu has continuity with the sacrifice.
4.6.5.19	By means of the sacrifice of Vishnu, he continues the sacrifice.
4.6.5.20	By means of this, these hymns are continued.
4.6.5.21	Therefore man is continued with the sinews.
4.6.5.22	He offers the Sadala.
4.6.5.23	He offers having reached the sacrifice which is continued.
4.6.5.24	Sukra is the eye.
4.6.5.25	Ukthya is the eye. The eye is indeed Sukra.
4.6.5.26	The eye is indeed Ukthya. The eye is offered in front.
4.6.5.27	Then, as one sees and follows what is in front and behind, so it is.
4.6.5.28	And why the one is divided into three.
4.6.5.29	Therefore, the one is the best. One should sit in the eastern part.
4.6.5.30	Because these two Grahas are offered most often, Soma is offered for the removal of sin.
4.6.5.31	The Soma-juice flows into this vessel in the greatest quantity; therefore, when one goes ahead, many follow him.
4.6.5.32	The Adhvaryu's vessel is placed in front.
4.6.5.33	The Ukthya-vessel is placed behind.
4.6.5.34	He attends to the Agnidhra with the Indra-vessel, to the Havirdhana with the Agni-vessel, and to the Soma-vessel with the Vishnu-vessel.
4.6.5.35	He attends them according to their respective deities.
4.6.5.36	So they did not deceive him.
4.6.5.37	The Adhvaryu's world is between the Ahavaniya and the Havirdhana.
4.6.5.38	The sacrificer's world is betwen the Havirdhana and the Sada.
4.6.5.39	The Sada is for the Sada-sits.
4.6.5.40	If he should desire, "May the Adhvaryu attain fame," he should move between the Ahavani ya and the Havirdhāna.
4.6.5.41	Soma is fame.
4.6.5.42	This is the Adhvaryus world.
4.6.5.43	He makes the Adhvaryu attain fame.
4.6.5.44	If one desires, "May the sacrificer attain fame," one should offer between the Havirdhana and the Sadas.
4.6.5.45	Soma is fame.
4.6.5.46	This is the world of the sacrificer.
4.6.5.47	He makes the sacrificer attain the fame.
4.6.5.48	If he desires, "May those who sit attain fame," he should offer within the Sadas. The Sadas is the world of those who sit.
4.6.5.49	Soma is the fame.
4.6.5.50	This is the world of the members.
4.6.5.51	It bestows fame on the members alone.
4.6.5.52	He leads them to the assembly.
4.6.5.53	The assembly is indeed Indra's.
4.6.5.54	The praises are Indra's. The praises are continuous, for the continuity of the praises.
4.6.5.55	"Thou art taken with a formula; for Mitra-Varuna thee." He takes it for the Maitrāvaruṇa at the morning pressing. "For Indra thee" he takes it for the Brāhmaṇācchamsin. "For Indra-Agni thee" he takes for the Acchavaka.
4.6.5.56	"Thou art taken with the formula; for Indra thee; for Indra thee" he says at the midday pressing.
4.6.5.57	He takes it with the formula, "Thou art taken with a formula for Indra-Varuna; for thee for Indra-Varuṇa." At the third pressing he takes it for the Maitrāvaruṇa with the formula, “For thee for Indra-Brhaspati." For the Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin he takes it with the verse, "For thee for Indra and Vishnu." For the Acchavaka he takes it with, "For thee to Indra and Vishnu."
4.6.5.58	Thus they are taken as prescribed and according to the deity.
4.6.6.1	Dhruva is life.
4.6.6.2	He takes it from the best (part of the fire).
4.6.6.3	For the best is life.
4.6.6.4	He takes it from the pot for the sake of the stability of life.
4.6.6.5	He (the Adhvaryu) takes it full.
4.6.6.6	One attains all life.
4.6.6.7	The Gayatri is indeed the vital breath.
4.6.6.8	Dhruva is life.
4.6.6.9	If this (vital breath) were to cease after the third pressing,
4.6.6.10	then the life would be as long as the vital breath.
4.6.6.11	Dhruva is indeed life.
4.6.6.12	When one stays at the Agniṣṭoma,
4.6.6.13	one departs after obtaining life.
4.6.6.14	Dhruva is indeed life
4.6.6.15	If one were to offer only that, one would destroy the life of beings.
4.6.6.16	One pours down when the Paridhānīya is being recited.
4.6.6.17	It is indeed inside.
4.6.6.18	One pours it down in the Hotr's goblet.
4.6.6.19	The Hotr is indeed Vaiśvadev.
4.6.6.20	These creatures are of Visvavasu.
4.6.6.21	He places life in all these creatures.
4.6.6.22	They say, "Of the people."
4.6.6.23	He takes life from all creatures, from all creatures.
4.6.6.24	The Vaiśvānara is taken on both sides.
4.6.6.25	This breath is Vaiśvānaran on both sides.
4.6.6.26	This very one is Vaiśvānara, this downward-moving breath.
4.6.6.27	That he is sacrificed alone on the northern Havirdhāna (shed)
4.6.6.28	is because he is the sharer of half of the breaths, the others are sharers of half.
4.6.6.29	One should sacrifice on gold for one who desires life.
4.6.6.30	Gold is immortality.
4.6.6.31	Dhruva is life.
4.6.6.32	He places immortality in his life.
4.6.6.33	The other Grahas are offered to the Upasads, and Dhruva to the non-Upasads.
4.6.6.34	Therefore the other animals stand on bones, and man on flesh.
4.6.6.35	The Upasads are the vital airs.
4.6.6.36	When these Grahas are offered at the Upasads they are offered in their own place.
4.6.6.37	The vital airs are in the front part of the face.
4.6.6.38-46	This is the eastern half of the Havirdhāna shed. Therefore, on the right side of the Havirdhana shed. The other Grahas are the vital airs. Dhruva is life. There are nine vital airs. Life is the tenth. Therefore, this is taken as the tenth. For life is the tenth. The prince protects Dhruva.
4.6.6.47-51	This is the life of all creatures that he protects. Therefore the prince is the most vigorous. If he were to perform a rite, he should say, "I am directing the life of so-and-so, the son of so-andso." He should direct the life of the one who is firm. He directs the life of the other. If he directs the life of one, he directs the life of all creatures.
4.6.6.52	The sacrificer should be one who has not lost his offspring.
4.6.6.53	The oblation should be taken by one who has not set up the fire.
4.6.6.54	The Adhvaryu should be one who is not a glutton.
4.6.6.55	That is the only exception.
4.6.6.56	"One should say, "I am displacing you from your firm position, from your firm abode."
4.6.6.57	He displaces him from his firm position.
4.6.6.58	He becomes one who has a short life.
4.6.6.59	When the Dhruva (vessel) falls down, all beings fall down with it.
4.6.6.60	The sacrificer falls down from his seat.
4.6.6.61	It should be touched.
4.6.6.62	"He says, "In heaven the heavenly ones, in the atmosphere the atmospheric ones, on earth the earthly ones." He thus establishes the creatures in their respective places and the sacrificer in his own place."
4.6.6.63	One whose Dhruva vessel falls down is deprived of his life and strength.
4.6.6.64	Life, power, Dhruva.
4.6.6.65	It is to be touched.
4.6.6.66	"One says, "You are the life-giver, Dhruva, give me life," thus he bestows life upon him."
4.6.6.67	The fee is a boon.
4.6.6.68	One wins a boon with a boon.
4.6.6.69	For a boon is the self.
4.6.6.70	Bhimasena gave Dhruva to Putra-sena.
4.6.6.71	Hearing it, he made the world grow by means of the firm Brahman, except for these worlds.
4.6.6.72	"Oṃ svāhā! May you grow from heaven."
4.6.6.73	He became the third.
4.6.6.74	"Oṁ svāhā! Grow from the atmosphere."
4.6.6.75	He became two parts.
4.6.6.76	"Oṅ svāhā! You grow from the earth."
4.6.6.77	He filled up.
4.6.6.78	Except for that, Dhruva should be nourished from these worlds.
4.6.6.79	In the twelfth praise, he offers down.
4.6.6.80	Twelve months are a year.
4.6.6.81	The year is a sacrifice.
4.6.6.82	The sacrifice is Prajapati.
4.6.6.83	The person is Prajapati-like.
4.6.6.84	As much as the person is, he places life in it.
4.6.6.85	If one were to bow down when being praised, the foetuses would be aborted.
4.6.6.86	If one were to fall down when being praised by the young, they would die.
4.6.6.87	If one gives up one's life when being praised, one would be outside.
4.6.6.88	One should bow down in the middle when being praised.
4.6.6.89	One places life in the middle of beings.
4.6.6.90	You are self-existent, the best, the beloved ray of the gods, the one to be praised together.
4.6.6.91	May the gods enter you, O good one.
4.6.6.92	You are the life-giver, the firm one. Give me life. He places life in him.
4.6.6.93	You are a giver of radiance, the firm one, give me radiance. He places radiance in him.
4.6.6.94-95	"Thou art the power, thou art the splendour, thou art the strength, thou art the vow, thou art the power, of that power, splendour, strength, vow, power, of the power, splendour, strength, vow, power of the power, of the splendour, of the strength, of the vow, of the power of the power of thine own and of the Śūdra, of the power and of the Ārya. As thou art the sun, all-seeing, so may I be all-seeing." He becomes all-seeing.
4.6.6.96	This very Sun is the Self-existent, the best, the ray.
4.6.6.97	Just as he became self-existent, so does one become self-existent who knows this.
4.6.7.1	Now these are the Grahas of the seasons.
4.6.7.2	They are taken for the maintenance of the year.
4.6.7.3	The year has twelve months.
4.6.7.4	Therefore there are twelve Grahas of the season.
4.6.7.5	Madhu and Madhava are the spring seasons.
4.6.7.6	The seasons are not present.
4.6.7.7	The seasons are not present here.
4.6.7.8	They do not approach each other.
4.6.7.9	If they approached each other, the seasons would approach the seasons.
4.6.7.10	But because they approach each other, therefore these seasons approach each other and move around.
4.6.7.11	The season vessel is with two mouths.
4.6.7.12	The seasons have two faces.
4.6.7.13	We do not know which is the face of the seasons.
4.6.7.14	They grasp together the first and the last.
4.6.7.15	They are yoked together and released together.
4.6.7.16	They make it fourteen.
4.6.7.17	They indeed exceed it.
4.6.7.18	There is a thirteenth month.
4.6.7.19	He attains it and wins it.
4.6.7.20	From the seasons are born the creatures.
4.6.7.21	From the six seasons and from the four seasons.
4.6.7.22	From the seasons he begets on him the four-footed animals.
4.6.7.23	And when from the four seasons and twice from the one season,
4.6.7.24	From the seasons, he begets on them the two-footed animals. When twice from the one
4.6.7.25	season,
4.6.7.26	There are two seasons.
4.6.7.27	And why there are two seasonal vessels.
4.6.7.28	There are two seasons each.
4.6.7.29	One does not offer an Anuyāja.
4.6.7.30	Vaisvānara is the Vasat-call.
4.6.7.31	If one were to offer an Anuyaja, one would let loose Vaisvānara in the seasons.
4.6.7.32	This was darkness, without distinction.
4.6.7.33	There was day, but no night.
4.6.8.2-6	They are indeed the same as those mentioned before. The year is indeed the heavenly world. The Adhvaryu and Pratiprasthātṛ are capable of creating the year. When he takes up the Indra-Agni cup in the Rtu-vessel, he thus begins the year for the heavenly world. And also he places the light above for the completion of the heavenly world.
4.6.8.7	This is the bright sun.
4.6.8.8	The Purusha is the Visva-deva.
4.6.8.9	When one takes the Visva-devas with the bright vessel,
4.6.8.10	it is for this reason that the Purusha alone faces him.
4.6.8.11	All other animals are inferior.
4.6.8.12	The gods and the Asuras were in competition.
4.6.8.13	The gods saw the sacrifice to be established at the morning pressing in the Visva-dev.
4.6.8.14-18	They established it at the morning pressing. When the Vaishvadeva is taken at the morning pressing, then he establishes the sacrifice at the morning pressing in the Vaishvadev. They proceed with it established, without injury, and with what is present. All the gods indeed desired the morning pressing. They did not stand over the two later pressings.
4.6.8.19-25	The Vaishvadev is offered at the morning pressing. At the morning pressing the gods are gratified with the Vaishvadev. They go to the subsequent pressing being gratified. The Marutvatya is the thunderbolt. The first one is the thunderbolt. The second one is the thunderbolt with a handle. The last one is the thunderbolt without a handle. The thunderbolt is the bow.
4.6.8.26	The bow is the first.
4.6.8.27	The counter-strike is the second.
4.6.8.28	The release is the third.
4.6.8.29	Indeed, the Marutvatiya (verses) are the two wheels of the sacrifice.
4.6.8.30	The axle is the middle one.
4.6.8.31	The spokes are on both sides.
4.6.8.32	Indeed, Indra killed Vritra with the strength of the Maruts.
4.6.8.33	He was not able to perform the strength without the Maruts.
4.6.8.34	The Marutvatīya cup is taken, the Marutvatīyas are praised.
4.6.8.35	By that the midday pressing becomes powerful.
4.6.8.36	"How do you know that the pressings are in accordance with the seasons?"
4.6.8.37	The morning pressing is in accordance with the season by the seasonal cups, the midday pressing by the Marutvatīs, and the third pressing by the Savitrī.
4.6.8.38	At the two Marutvatīya (sacrifices) the Dakṣiṇās are given.
4.6.8.39	The Dakṣiṇā is given in its own place.
4.6.8.40	The Marutvatīyas are the boundaries of the sacrifice.
4.6.8.41	Therefore, the Dakṣiņās are not given in excess at the Marutvatīyās.
4.6.8.42	If one were to give in excess, it would be as if the boundary were to be spilled outside.
4.6.8.43	If one desires, "May the people be stronger, the nobility weaker," one should make the verse of the Marutvatīya (sāman) the Puroruc (verse).
4.6.8.44	He makes the people stronger, the nobility less strong.
4.6.8.45	If one desires, "The nobility may be stronger, the people weaker," one should then make the verse of Indra the Puroruc.
4.6.8.46	The Kshatriya caste is more powerful than the other castes.
4.6.8.47	The Marutvatīya libation is performed at the sacrifice, and the Marutvatīyas are praised.
4.6.8.48	Maruts are cattle.
4.6.8.49	Cattle are not born.
4.6.8.50	He takes it in the vessel of the seasons, which is not born.
4.6.8.51	The Maruts are the seasons.
4.6.8.52	The seasons are the year.
4.6.8.53	The year is life.
4.6.8.54	The Adhvaryu indeed takes his stand in life.
4.6.8.55	He who takes up the Marutvatīya cups, indeed slays Vritra.
4.6.8.56	All desires are in the Māhendra (cup).
4.6.8.57	One indeed obtains all desires, one enjoys all.
4.6.8.58	Indra indeed slew Vritra.
4.6.8.59-67	He surpassed the other gods. He became Indra. Having slain Vritra, he extracted this Uddhara. This is his Uddhara. This is his share. Therefore, having won a battle, the king celebrates the Uddhara. He celebrates the Uddara. He takes the Mahadendra in a vessel of Sukra. The stones cry out. The pestles cry out.
4.6.8.68	They churn the water.
4.6.8.69	At the beginning of Indra's coming they made a sound.
4.6.8.70	And they bestow splendor on the sacrificer.
4.6.9.1	This is what is said here:
4.6.9.2	"Eight sons of Aditi, born around her body,
4.6.9.3	Approached the god with seven (verses). He went beyond the sun."
4.6.9.4	This indeed is the Upaṁshusavana pressing stone.
4.6.9.5-11	Now, the Soma-drink of him (Agni) is that which they offer to the sun. "This is thy Soma-drink, O Vivasvat, O Aditya," thus he makes him prosper by means of the Soma-drink. Vyan (the wind) is the Upamshu-savan. The progeny is the Aditya. He places the wind in the progeny. The cattle is the Aditya. When he offers with curds in the middle,
4.6.9.12	In the middle he places the milk of the animals.
4.6.9.13	And why it is heated and churned,
4.6.9.14	Therefore, when raw, it yields cooked milk.
4.6.9.15	If one desires, "May it rain," then one should sprinkle the sun with curd on top, saying, "With the heavenly rain I sprinkle you."
4.6.9.16	The sun is the animals.
4.6.9.17	From the animals it rains here.
4.6.9.18	He indeed desires cattle by means of rain.
4.6.9.19	If one desires that the foetuses should be born, one should take up and look at the sun.
4.6.9.20	The foetuses are born well.
4.6.9.21	The first two Savanas are endowed with semen.
4.6.9.22	The third Savana is without semen.
4.6.9.23	When one pours down the remnants of the two-deity offerings, one causes the Aggrayan to overflow.
4.6.9.24	Therefore the third pressing is like Soma.
4.6.9.25	The gods, having slain the Asuras, were afraid of death.
4.6.9.26	They, seeking a protector, seeking a refuge, entered these most prominent deities.
4.6.9.27	Because they are deities of two kinds, therefore the sun is taken out from those of two kinds.
4.6.9.28	He takes (Soma) with two verses in the Brihatī metre.
4.6.9.29	The Brihatī verses are the cattle.
4.6.9.30	The Āditya is offspring.
4.6.9.31	This world is as much as it is raised up.
4.6.9.32	When he takes it after spreading it out, he thus seizes the world and food of his enemy.
4.6.9.33	And he also secures these offspring for food.
4.6.9.34	If his enemy were to sacrifice, he should stand outside the altar.
4.6.9.35	So he does not bind him.
4.6.9.36	The animals are the sun.
4.6.9.37	Agni is Rudra.
4.6.9.38	The forms of Agni are the Dhishnyas.
4.6.9.39	When he takes them after having spread them out, he hides the animals from Rudra.
4.6.9.40	Having covered them, he goes out for the protection of the animals.
4.6.9.41	The sun is the Anuyaja of the two-deity offerings.
4.6.9.42	Therefore he does not offer them.
4.6.9.43	The two deities of the sun are the Prajās.
4.6.9.44	Therefore he does not offer to them.
4.6.9.45	The sun is the cattle.
4.6.9.46	Agni is Rudra.
4.6.9.47	The Brahman is the observer.
4.6.9.48	If one were to offer while looking at them, he would be the observer of those who are being offered.
4.6.9.49	One should offer looking elsewhere.
4.6.9.50	He is not their witness.
4.7.1.1	Savitar is the Gayatri of the gods.
4.7.1.2	Soma is taken in the world of the Gayatri.
4.7.1.3	Because it is the Aggrayan, therefore the Savitar is taken out from the Aggrayan.
4.7.1.4	He should lie down after the third pressing.
4.7.1.5	For the accomplishment of what is being done and what is not being done.
4.7.1.6	The Antaryama is the atmosphere.
4.7.1.7-13	These creatures are in the sky. When one takes Savitr with the Antaryama vessel, Savitr indeed generates creatures for reproduction. It is offered without being placed. Because these creatures do not move without being placed. One does not offer after. If one were to offer after, one would cut off the creation of creatures.
4.7.1.14	Now, indeed, these two Soma-pressings are taken up in the same vessel.
4.7.1.15	Therefore one does not offer a subsequent offering.
4.7.1.16	The gods were unable to raise the third pressing.
4.7.1.17	Then Savitr was at the morning pressing.
4.7.1.18	The gods then surrounded him at the third pressing. 
4.7.1.19	With him they raised the third pressing.
4.7.1.20	The Savitrī verse is taken up at the third pressing. The third pressing is indeed presided over by Savitr.
4.7.1.21	He takes up the Savitrī verse at the third pressing, and then takes up the Vaisvadevī verse.
4.7.1.22	These creatures are indeed presided over by Visve Dev.
4.7.1.23	The creatures are indeed born under the supervision of Savitr.
4.7.1.24	Savitr is indeed the mind.
4.7.1.25	These creatures indeed are presided over by Visvedevas.
4.7.1.26	He places the mind in all the creatures.
4.7.1.27	He takes up the Soma for the Savana-pressing with the formula, "For the sake of blessings" for the sake of being connected with all gods.
4.7.1.28	"Thou art well-protected, well-established."
4.7.1.29	When the Soma is well-established in the Soma.
4.7.1.30	"Salutations to the great-milked one."
4.7.1.31	By saying "great" he means the gods.
4.7.1.32	By saying "salutations" he means the fathers.
4.7.1.33	The Pitrs are the Utkhas, the Stomas.
4.7.1.34	This is taken for the Utkha, not for the Stoma.
4.7.1.35	Where it is taken, that is praised.
4.7.1.36	In its own place.
4.7.2.1	He offers with ghee.
4.7.2.2	This indeed is the first of the Dhishnyas, namely the Ahavanīya.
4.7.2.3	He pours it out first.
4.7.2.4	He pours out the Agnisvatan.
4.7.2.5	The sacrifice is indeed far away now.
4.7.2.6	Agni is all the deities.
4.7.2.7	Vishnu is the sacrifice.
4.7.2.8	The deities and the sacrifice have been obtained.
4.7.2.9	They indeed kill Soma when they press it.
4.7.2.10	When they press Soma, they indeed make Soma grow, they make Soma swell.
4.7.2.11	They indeed pressed Soma when they pressed it.
4.7.2.12-19	The Soma-offering is the covering of the Fathers. The Fathers' covering is the Soma-offering. Therefore one offers to the Fathers. One offers standing towards the south. The Fathers are towards the south. The Fathers' covering is towards the south. Therefore one offers standing towards the north. The Fathers have the north as their direction. The Fathers belong to the north. These are the supplementary offerings to the Upasads. One offers ghee to Agni-Visnu, Soma to Soma. The deities to whom one has made offerings at the Upasads, to them he makes this offering.
4.7.2.20	Or this is done for the departed soul.
4.7.2.21	Whatever of his has been injured or destroyed, that goes to this world.
4.7.2.22	Then he is purified and is sent forth.
4.7.2.23	O gentle one, this is the purifying (rite).
4.7.2.24	By this he purifies the sacrificer.
4.7.2.25	Soma is connected with the Sama Veda.
4.7.2.26	Soma is indeed connected with the Sama.
4.7.2.27	This is carried for the Sama.
4.7.2.28	He sees them as they are here.
4.7.2.29	He who has not gone to Yama sees them.
4.7.2.30	He who is dead does not see them.
4.7.2.31	If he does not see, then he says:
4.7.2.32	"Whatever mind of mine has gone to Yama or not gone to Yama,
4.7.2.33	We have that with us, O King Soma."
4.7.2.34	"Thou art the bestower of radiance, bestow radiance on me." He prays for a blessing.
4.7.3.1	Now these are the extra portions.
4.7.3.2	The gods took Soma.
4.7.3.3	Then Indra took them.
4.7.3.4	He thought, "I cannot enjoy these without Brahma."
4.7.3.5	He ran to Brahma.
4.7.3.6	He (the Adhvaryu) releases them with the Brahmanical formula.
4.7.3.7	Brahman indeed is the Gâyatrî.
4.7.3.8	Therefore they are taken up with Gâyatrî verses.
4.7.3.9	Whatever food there is beyond this, which is not yet secured, for the securing of that they are taken up.
4.7.3.10	Those who are the extra Stobhas of the Vairâga (Sâman) are those who have the Sâman.
4.7.3.11	All these are connected with Indra.
4.7.3.12	He who is connected with Indra, he is connected with Indra.
4.7.3.13	This is the Aditya Indra.
4.7.3.14	This Agni and this Aditya are the same.
4.7.3.15	The Viraj is the Agni, the Shakvari is the Indra, the Revati is the Surya.
4.7.3.16	Where the Prastara hymns are to be joined, one should offer these (oblations) for the sake of the brilliance of the Saman hymns.
4.7.3.17	Here the sacrifice is completed by the Stotra and the Sastra.
4.7.3.18	The Atigrahya (cup) is to be held over (the other cups) because it is the most important.
4.7.3.19	The Prsthya (cups) are the two wheels of the sacrifice.
4.7.3.20	The Atigrahya is the support.
4.7.3.21	Therefore, they should be taken at the morning pressing to be held over.
4.7.3.22	By the Agniya (cup) he obtains brilliance, by the Indraya (cup) power, by the Surya (cup) lustre.
4.7.3.23	This makes him attain the three-fold prosperity and Brahmic glory.
4.7.3.24	Agni is brilliance, Indra is power, and the sun is Brahmic glory. Thus,
4.7.3.25	he takes hold of power from both sides, through brilliance and Brahmic glory,
4.7.3.26	"I offer you with the brilliance of Agni and Brahma, the giver of brilliance."
4.7.3.27	"May my brilliance not be lost."
4.7.3.28	I do not wish to lose my energy.
4.7.3.29	Svāhā.
4.7.3.30	I offer you with the energy of Indra and the energy of the nobility, the giver of energy.
4.7.3.31	May energy not leave me.
4.7.3.32	I do not wish to let go of energy.
4.7.3.33	Svāhāk.
4.7.3.34	I offer with the radiance of the sun and the radiance of the plants, the giver of radiance.
4.7.3.35	May radiance not leave me. I do not wish
4.7.3.36	to let go of radiance.
4.7.3.37	Svāha.
4.7.3.38	O Agni, the bestower of life, may you be long-lived and radiant among the gods.
4.7.3.39	Make me long-lived and shining among humans.
4.7.3.40	O Indra, the bestower strength, may you be strong and powerful among the gods. 
4.7.3.41	Make me strong and powerful among humans.
4.7.3.42	Sun, the bestower radiance, may you be radiant and luminous among the gods. 
4.7.3.43-47	Make me shining, make me radiant among men. These are the offerings and the oblations. By the power of these, Bambavisa, the one of all ages, brought these worlds, both the lower and the upper, to light. He brought them to light. Indeed, these worlds, both lower and upper, shine for him who knows this.
4.7.3.48	Or the worlds are thus known to the wise.
4.7.3.49	From there, the worlds are known to the ignorant.
4.7.3.50	He who offers these (oblations) knows these worlds from there.
4.7.4.1	He takes the Patnīvata with the Upāṁshu vessel.
4.7.4.2	Upāṁshu is the breath.
4.7.4.3	They go by breath, they rise by breath.
4.7.4.4-7	Then, for the recognition of the vital airs. Then, the first vessel that is joined is released last, for the protection of the vital airs.
4.7.4.8-15	Therefore the Agnid does the Vasat-call. For the Agnid is in front. The Upaṁshu is the breath. From the breath are born the creatures. When he takes the Patnīvata with the Upaṁshu vessel, it is for the purpose of reproduction. It is offered without being placed. For creatures are born without being placed. He does not offer after.
4.7.4.16	If he were to offer it, he would destroy the offspring.
4.7.4.17	For these two Soma-offerings are taken in the same vessel.
4.7.4.18	Therefore one does not offer it.
4.7.4.19	Ghee and Soma are a pair.
4.7.4.20	When one offers the Pātnīvata offering with ghee, it is for the sake of being a pair.
4.7.4.21	"Those are the daughters of Brihaspati."
4.7.4.22	Brihaspati is indeed Brahman.
4.7.4.23	From the womb of Brahman, Prajapati created the creatures.
4.7.4.24	From the womb of Brahman the sacrificer is born.
4.7.4.25	"He says, "Indra, with the Indra-like."
4.7.4.26	For the embryo is Indra-like."
4.7.4.27	"He says "Agni and his wife."
4.7.4.28	For Agni and his wife are a pair."
4.7.4.29	"He drinks Soma with Tvashtra."
4.7.4.30	For Tvashtra fashions forms."
4.7.4.31	The gods, having made ghee into a thunderbolt, struck Soma.
4.7.4.32	They indeed pour it over him.
4.7.4.33	When one anoints the Pātnīvata (cake) with ghee, the wife becomes deprived of the power of Indra.
4.7.4.34	Therefore a woman is without power, and a man is endowed with power.
4.7.4.35	Therefore men go to the assembly, not women.
4.7.4.36	The Soma which the others have pressed, not the Pātnīvata.
4.7.4.37	Women have gone to the assembly, not men.
4.7.4.38	Indra indeed slew Vritra.
4.7.4.39	His head that was cut off became the Dronakalaśa.
4.7.4.40	From it the Soma that flowed down became the Hāriyojana.
4.7.4.41	Therefore he offers it with the Dronakalaša.
4.7.4.42	This is his womb.
4.7.4.43	Indra, having killed Vritra, poured Soma from the heart of his skin. It became the Soma of the Harivamsa.
4.7.4.44	Indra thought, "If I offer this Soma of the Asuras, the Asuras will follow.
4.7.4.45	If I do not offer it, they will follow."
4.7.4.46	He offered it when the rites were completed and the Paridhis were struck.
4.7.4.47	When the sacrificial stakes are set up, he offers.
4.7.4.48	He does both.
4.7.4.49	He offers.
4.7.4.50	He offers when the stakes are set up.
4.7.4.51	The Unnetr is the one who is in excess among the priests.
4.7.4.52	Therefore they do not choose him and do not say "Svadha".
4.7.4.53	The Soma has indeed exceeded.
4.7.4.54	They exceed the Unnetr.
4.7.4.55	The Adhvaryu offers the Soma of the former part.
4.7.4.56	If the Adhvaryu were to offer it, he would mix the oblations.
4.7.4.57	He would make them equal.
4.7.4.58	Therefore the Unnetr offers it.
4.7.4.59	Prajapati, about to offer the Soma, thought:
4.7.4.60	Agni said to him, "You will not offer this non-divine Soma to me, uncooked and without a second."
4.7.4.61	"Let there be a second," he said.
4.7.4.62	When he cooks with the Dhana grasses, it is for the sake of cooking.
4.7.4.63	And also for the sake of a second.
4.7.4.64	Now these Dhana grasses.
4.7.4.65	Where the divine cows milked at will, they milked there.
4.7.4.66	He thus obtains their prosperity.
4.7.4.67	Agni is Prajapati.
4.7.4.68	Since he exceeds (the others), therefore he is the excess, the unlimited, and he moves over these creatures.
4.7.4.69	The Rk and the Sama are Indra's horses.
4.7.4.70	Their enclosing sticks are the offering.
4.7.4.71	For the horse that has no fodder, one puts down fodder. If one offers when the Paridhi-sticks have been placed and struck,
4.7.4.72	If one offers when the Pariidhi-sticks have not been placed and struck.
4.7.4.73	One puts down fodder for the two that have no fodder.
4.7.4.74	The Dhānas are indeed animals.
4.7.4.75	If one were to eat them, one would injure animals.
4.7.4.76	If he does not eat, they will be uneven.
4.7.4.77	Looking at it,
4.7.4.78	he pours it down, saying, "For the wealth, for the nourishment."
4.7.4.79	This is indeed both for the animals and for the sacrificer.
4.7.4.80	The animals approach him while eating.
4.7.5.1	By means of the sacrifice, the gods went to heaven.
4.7.5.2	They thought, "By this, others will not ascend to our world."
4.7.5.3	They saw the metres.
4.7.5.4	They arranged them in reverse order for the attainment of the heavenly world.
4.7.5.5	When one arranges the metres in reverse order, the metres are the world.
4.7.5.6	The sacrificer deludes his enemy. For the attainment of the heaven world.
4.7.5.7	The metres were different among the gods, different among the Asuras.
4.7.5.8	The gods were the younger, the Asuras the elder.
4.7.5.9	The gods, with the younger metres, conquered the elder metres of the Asuras.
4.7.5.10	He who conquers the elder metres with the younger metres
4.7.5.11	The sacrificer conquers the world of the metres of his enemy.
4.7.5.12	He made this world bright.
4.7.5.13	The Anushtubh verse includes all the metres.
4.7.5.14	Speech is the Anushtubh.
4.7.5.15	Man is Anushtubh;
4.7.5.16	therefore man speaks all speech.
4.7.5.17	The metres are cattle.
4.7.5.18	Speech is Anushtubha.
4.7.5.19	Man is the Anusthubh;
4.7.5.20	Because he recites the Anushtubh verse after reciting all the metres, therefore man eats animals above the voice.
4.7.5.21	He recites all the metres.
4.7.5.22	Prajapati is the metres.
4.7.5.23	He indeed attains Prajapati.
4.7.5.24	Six syllables are in excess of the Stotra.
4.7.5.25	There are six seasons.
4.7.5.26	He stands firm in the seasons.
4.7.5.27	And then four weapons again return.
4.7.5.28	By that he wins cattle.
4.7.5.29	Then two alone remain over.
4.7.5.30	Two are Viraj, truth and untruth.
4.7.5.31	He attains Viraj.
4.7.6.1	Prajapati indeed distributed the sacrifices among the gods.
4.7.6.2	He thought, "I have gone within myself."
4.7.6.3	Again, his senses and energies increased.
4.7.6.4	He became sixteen.
4.7.6.5	Then indeed Indra became the least among the gods, the most relaxed.
4.7.6.6	To him they gave this sixteen-fold (verse).
4.7.6.7	By that he became Indra.
4.7.6.8	Then the gods became victorious over the Asuras.
4.7.6.9	He who, knowing this, takes up the Sodashin, becomes himself, and his foe is destroyed.
4.7.6.10	Prajapati, indeed, divided the body among the gods.
4.7.6.11	Of them, he anointed the one which was Harivati on himself with fat.
4.7.6.12	If the Harivati is the fore-part of the cup,
4.7.6.13	The one who is his beloved, the one who is his body, he obtains that.
4.7.6.14	They say that there is no sacrifice named Sodashi. But why is it called Sodashi?
4.7.6.15	Because it is accomplished by the Stotra and the Sastra, therefore it is Sodashi.
4.7.6.16	By means of the sacrifice, the gods went to heaven.
4.7.6.17	That did not succeed for them.
4.7.6.18	In that (sacrifice) they fastened this Sodashi.
4.7.6.19	It pervades this world.
4.7.6.20	It is taken for the pervasion of that world. For the prosperity of that world.
4.7.6.21	At the Agniṣṭoma, one should take it for a king.
4.7.6.22	The thunderbolt is not appeased, it burns him for prosperity.
4.7.6.23	At the Atiratra, one should take (it) for a Brahman.
4.7.6.24	The Sodasi is indeed the thunderbolt.
4.7.6.25	The lord is not appeased. It injures the sacrificer.
4.7.6.26	Night alone pacifies the thunderbolt.
4.7.6.27	At the morning pressing, one should take it.
4.7.6.28	The morning pressing is indeed brilliance.
4.7.6.29	One fashions the thunderbolt out of brilliance.
4.7.6.30	At the midday pressing, one should do it.
4.7.6.31	The midday pressing is indeed strength.
4.7.6.32	One fashions a thunderbolt out of strength.
4.7.6.33	At the third pressing, one should perform it.
4.7.6.34	The third pressing is indeed cattle.
4.7.6.35	He makes the thunderbolt out of the animals themselves.
4.7.6.36	If he were to take it at the morning pressing, the thunderbolt would exceed the later pressings.
4.7.6.37	If at the midday pressing,
4.7.6.38	the thunderbolt would strike in the middle.
4.7.6.39	It should be taken at the third pressing.
4.7.6.40	He takes it at all the pressings. He is not led to misfortune in the earlier pressings.
4.7.6.41	The fifteenth should be performed.
4.7.6.42-51	The fifteen-fold (brick) is the thunderbolt. He places the thunderbolt on him. By it he goes to victory and prosperity. The sixteen-fold (brick should be placed). The sacrificer is the fifteen-fold. The sixteen is the thunderbolt. He places the thunderbolt on it. It makes him prosper for prosperity. The seventeen-fold (brick is to be placed). Prajapati is the seventeen-fold.
4.7.6.52	The Prajapati-rite is the sixteenth.
4.7.6.53	He places him in his own womb.
4.7.6.54	The twenty-first should be performed.
4.7.6.55	The Anushtubh has twenty-one feet.
4.7.6.56	The sixteen-fold Anushtubh.
4.7.6.57	This is the most stable of her (Anushtubh's) abodes.
4.7.6.58	Therefore the twenty-first should he performed.
4.7.6.59	The middle day of the three-day rite is to be performed.
4.7.6.60-63	The fourth day of the four-day sacrifice is the one to be taken up. The fourth day of the sacrifice is the one that is loose, for the sake of strengthening the loose day. The fourth and fourth days of the sacrifice are the ones to be taken up.
4.7.6.64	And the fourth day of the fourth day of Ahina, for the firmness of the day, for firmness.
4.7.6.65	It is not suitable for the two-day sacrifice.
4.7.6.66	These two are the metres, the Gāyatrī and the Tristubh.
4.7.6.67	One takes up the metreless, the unestablished, the sacrificer becomes unestablished.
4.7.6.68	The two-day sacrifice is taken up on the northern day.
4.7.7.8	They indeed kill Soma when they press it.
4.7.7.9	This is the last form of Soma, when they take out these shoots.
4.7.7.10	Thus indeed the Sacrificer crosses over this world.
4.7.7.11	The sacrifice is indeed broken when the pressing days are concluded.
4.7.7.12	He again pours these drops for the continuity of the sacrifice.
4.7.7.13	This is taken for rain.
4.7.7.14	For the names of Maruts are (mentioned).
4.7.7.15	When it rains, this is taken.
4.7.7.16	"May Agni protect us from the morning pressing."
4.7.7.17	By this the gods won the pressings from the Asuras.
4.7.7.18-22	By this (rite) the sacrificer conquers his enemy's oblations. "He says, "I offer thee to Agni, to the metre Gāyatrī." By this (rite) gods conquered the Asuras, and the metres and the deities. By this ( rite) the sacrificer now conquers his enemy, and the metres, and the deities. He offers four times.
4.7.7.23	The gods, by means of this, conquered the quarters from the Asuras.
4.7.7.24	By means of this, the sacrificer conquers his enemy.
4.7.7.25	This is a living capture of Soma.
4.7.7.26	For it is taken when not offered and not consecrated.
4.7.7.27	The sacrifice is continuous by means of the Yajus and the oblation.
4.7.7.28	When one offers an oblation while reciting the Yajus,
4.7.7.29	And with the Yajus and the oblation, he continues the sacrifice.
4.7.7.30	The gods took Soma.
4.7.7.31	Prajapati knew that he who would take Soma first here, he would be this.
4.7.7.32	He took it.
4.7.7.33	He became.
4.7.7.34	He who desires prosperity, he should take it.
4.7.7.35	He becomes.
4.7.7.36	If he is able to take both, then both are yours.
4.7.7.37	If he is not able to take both then neither are yours.
4.7.7.38	The breath of life should be taken from the one who is dying.
4.7.7.39	For he has gone to the end of his life.
4.7.7.40	The breath should be taken from one who is dying out.
4.7.7.41	For he is taking it away.
4.7.7.42	The breath that is both in and out should be taken.
4.7.7.43	For he would have taken the one who is not a man.
4.7.7.44	If he were to take the one who is a man, he would cut off the life-breath.
4.7.7.45	If he would take the one who has been taken, he should cover it with gold.
4.7.7.46	Gold is indeed immortality.
4.7.7.47	He joins the life-breaths with immortality.
4.7.7.48	He sprinkles once and takes once.
4.7.7.49	Prajapati is indeed one.
4.7.7.50	He attains Prajapati.
4.7.7.51-55	It should be taken with four corners. Prajapati took it with four corners. He prospered in all directions. He who, knowing this, takes it with four corners prospers in all directions. The juice of the Soma has entered the waters, the juice of the waters is Soma.
4.7.7.56	Or, as when two bulls fight, each striking the other, so do these two fight, striking each other's strength and power.
4.7.7.57	This is the essence of them, namely, curd.
4.7.7.58	When he offers with curd, he appeases them with their own essence.
4.7.8.1	The black-headed one is Agni's.
4.7.8.2	The ewe is Sarasvati's.
4.7.8.3	A dun-coloured one is Soma's.
4.7.8.4	The black one is for Pusan.
4.7.8.5	The one with a white back is for Brihaspati.
4.7.8.6	The reddish one is for the Visve Devas.
4.7.8.7	The bull is for Indra.
4.7.8.8	The mottled one is for the Maruts.
4.7.8.9	The one that is joined is for Indra and Agni.
4.7.8.10	The one below is for Savitar.
4.7.8.11	The one for drinking is for Varuna.
4.7.8.12	Prajapati, having created the creatures, thought, "I am alone."
4.7.8.13	He saw this eleven-fold (verse).
4.7.8.14	He thus delights himself.
4.7.8.15	Sacrifice is Prajapati.
4.7.8.16	He who, knowing this, binds this eleven-fold (thread), delights himself with whatever is deficient in his self.
4.7.8.17	Prajapati, having created beings, thought, "I am alone."
4.7.8.18	He saw these senses and powers.
4.7.8.19	He bound them together to form his self.
4.7.8.20	The Self is Agni.
4.7.8.21	Speech is Sarasvati.
4.7.8.22	The sense-organ is Soma.
4.7.8.23	He united speech, the sense-organ, and the Self.
4.7.8.24	Nourishment is Pusan.
4.7.8.25	Brahma is Brihaspati.
4.7.8.26	He united nourishment and Brahma with the Self.
4.7.8.27	Strength is the All-Gods.
4.7.8.28	Valour is Indra.
4.7.8.29	and he bound himself with strength and energy.
4.7.8.30	The Maruts are strength.
4.7.8.31	Indra and Agni are together.
4.7.8.32	He bound himself with strength, and with energy.
4.7.8.33	Savitr is for prosperity.
4.7.8.34	Varuna is for freedom from Varuna.
4.7.8.35	All are bound for Agni.
4.7.8.36	Agni is all the deities.
4.7.8.37	They are bound to all the deities.
4.7.8.38	For the sake of union, the Sarasvati.
4.7.8.39	Now, why is it Soma?
4.7.8.40	Soma indeed is the seed-giver.
4.7.8.41	He places the seed in it.
4.7.8.42	Now, what is Pusan?
4.7.8.43	Pusan is indeed generation; for generation.
4.7.8.44	Brihaspati is Brahman.
4.7.8.45	These creatures are of all the gods.
4.7.8.46-53	Brahma indeed went beyond these creatures. And he makes these creatures follow Brahma. Indra is the Kshatriya. The Maruts are the Vis. He yokes the Vis to the Kshatriya And he makes the Vis follow the Kshatriya.
4.7.8.54	The Agni-offering is obtained.
4.7.8.55	The Indra-offering is obtained
4.7.8.56	Now this Indra-Agni offering is obtained.
4.7.8.57	Brahma and Kshatra have been yoked together.
4.7.8.58	Because Agni and Indra are the most favored deities,
4.7.8.59	Therefore the Brahman and the king are the most favored among men.
4.7.8.60	Savitar is for prosperity.
4.7.8.61	For the purpose of being free from Varuna, the Varuna animal is offered.
4.7.8.62	The ocean is Varuna.
4.7.8.63	The ocean lies to the south.
4.7.8.64	When the Varuna animal to be offered to the south is offered, it is for the purpose of the sacrificer being free from Varun.
4.7.8.65	This is what is said in this regard:
4.7.8.66	"You are a good god, O Varuna, whose seven rivers flow,
4.7.8.67	They flow down the ocean, the dark one, like a sieve."
4.7.9.1	The gods who are the lords of strength, to them the right half is offered.
4.7.9.2	Therefore offspring go to the right.
4.7.9.3	The Agniya, Saumya and Barhaspatya are offered together.
4.7.9.4	Strength is indeed united.
4.7.9.5	The Agni and Barhaspatyas are on either side of the Saumya;
4.7.9.6	And by his splendour and his lustre he thus encloses on both sides the power of the gods.
4.7.9.7	These are the eleven deities of these animals.
4.7.9.8	The sheep is the twelfth deity of the gods. The sheep is Sarasvati.
4.7.9.9	Because it exceeds, therefore women exceed men.
4.7.9.10	Two for one rope, two for one.
4.7.9.11-18	Therefore, women are born to be abandoned, not men. Now, it is women alone who are in excess. The Indra who struck the thunderbolt at Vritra, that became threefold. What was the foremost brilliance, that became the sacrificial post. What was in the middle, that became the chariot. What was at the rear, that became the Yupa. One draws with the sacrificial post. One measures with the chariot axle.
4.7.9.19-27	The sacrificial post is (erected). This is indeed the thunderbolt which is raised. This earth is as large as the altar. The thunderbolt is eleven-fold. He lays it down sloping towards the south. He conquers this (earth) with the thunderbolt. It should be raised towards the south. It is the form of the divine sacrifice. Or, indeed, the sacrificer places the thunderbolt on his brother.
4.7.9.28	The three in the middle should be equal in length, for the sake of equality.
4.7.9.29	For animals stand up evenly.
4.7.9.30	He makes him even with the animals.
4.7.9.31	If one desires, "May he prosper in the world of the fathers," one should lay down the one that is equal to the upper one.
4.7.9.32	He prospers in the world of fathers.
4.7.9.33	Now, if one wishes, 'May he prosper in the world of men', one should draw it to the size of a middle cup.
4.7.9.34	He prospers in the world of man.
4.7.9.35	If one wishes, 'He may prosper in the world gods', one should draw to the size of the cup.
4.7.9.36	He indeed prospers in the divine world.
4.7.9.37	Of these, the one that is drawn to the size of cup is the most prosperous.
4.7.9.38	Therefore, the cup should be filled to the brim for prosperity.
4.7.9.39	One should pour out the one whose back is raised and front is lowered.
4.7.9.40	If one desires, 'May I make my brother's world and obstruct the sacrificer,' one makes the brother's world alone and obstructs the sacrificer.
4.7.9.41	Now he who has a mound in front and sloping towards the back, one should build it for him, whom he desires to make the world of the sacrificer and to obstruct his foe.
4.7.9.42	He makes the world of the Sacrificer and obstructs his foe.
4.7.9.43	All should be built as Agni-sthala.
4.7.9.44	Those which are Agni-sthala and are not built, they should be built as such.
4.7.9.45	By that all are Agni-sthalas.
4.7.9.46	Now, if the reins are let loose from the Agniṣṭha (animal),
4.7.9.47	then all the animals belonging to the Agniṣṭhas are let loose.
4.7.9.48	The animals of these (animals) are different and their deities are different.
4.7.9.49	Now, this twelfth animal belongs to the sacrificer himself.
4.7.9.50	If he does not indicate an animal to him, then the sacrificer would be one who has lost his life.
4.7.9.51	He should say, "This is your animal."
4.7.9.52	He points out to him the animal.
4.7.9.53	He becomes a long-lived person.
4.7.9.54	If he were to practice sorcery, he should say, "I am striking him, the son of so-and-so, the son of such-and-such, with Indra's thunderbolt." He should strike him.
4.7.9.55	He strikes him with Indra's vajra.
4.7.9.56	He becomes short-lived.
4.7.9.57	Now this month of the twelfth is for the purpose of securing (the desired object).
4.8.1.1	The vessels of Manu were (used).
4.8.1.2	When they were being struck, as many Asuras as listened to them, they did not become that day.
4.8.1.3	Then indeed these two were the Brahmanas of the Asuras, Trista and Varatri.
4.8.1.4	They said, "Cure us!"
4.8.1.5	They said, "You are the one who worships with the mind, you are the god of faith."
4.8.1.6	"Give us these vessels!"
4.8.1.7	He gave them to them.
4.8.1.8	They heated them with fire.
4.8.1.9	The bull let loose those flames.
4.8.1.10	The female bull followed him.
4.8.1.11	As many Asuras as heard him roar, they became non-existent on that day.
4.8.1.12	They said to him, "You are the one who sacrifices with mind, you are the god of faith."
4.8.1.13	"We will sacrifice you with this bull." They sacrificed him with that.
4.8.1.14	He broke his hip. Suparna (the eagle) struck it.
4.8.1.15	It fell on the ground of Manasa.
4.8.1.16	She became his wife.
4.8.1.17	Those Asuras who listened to her while she was speaking, they did not exist on that day.
4.8.1.18	They said, "You are a devotee of mind, you are a god of faith.
4.8.1.19	We shall sacrifice you with this wife of yours."
4.8.1.20	Having sprinkled her, having made her go around the fire, having spread the sacrificial grass and wood,
4.8.1.21	He (Indra) knew that these were the Asuras who had obstructed Manu and his wife.
4.8.1.22	Indra approached him, saying, "I am a Brahmana."
4.8.1.23	He said, "O Manu, you are a worshipper of the gods through faith.
4.8.1.24	I shall worship you.
4.8.1.25	Which one are you among the Brahmanas?
4.8.1.26	What is the father of a Brahmana? What do you ask about the mother?"
4.8.1.27	If the knowable is heard in this, he is the father, he is the grandfather.
4.8.1.28	Who by?
4.8.1.29	By these two Brahmanas.
4.8.1.30	I am the lord of the two Brahmanas. I am the lord of Brahmanas.
4.8.1.31	He said, "You are the lord."
4.8.1.32	The host is the most desired of the guests.
4.8.1.33	He approached to dig up the second altar.
4.8.1.34	They came bearing the kindling and the sacrificial grass.
4.8.1.35	They said, "What are you doing?"
4.8.1.36	"I am going to perform this sacrifice."
4.8.1.37	"With what?"
4.8.1.38	"With you two."
4.8.1.39	They knew that Indra was coming.
4.8.1.40	They placed the kindling and sacrificial grass and went away.
4.8.1.41	When they ran away, Indra followed them.
4.8.1.42	They became Vrishas and Ashas.
4.8.1.43	This is the birth of Vrishas and of Ashas.
4.8.1.44	Manu said to Indra, "Establish my sacrifice."
4.8.1.45	"Let my sacrifice not be scattered."
4.8.1.46	He said, "Whatever desire you have obtained, may that desire be fulfilled for you."
4.8.1.47	"Then let it go."
4.8.1.48	He let it go.
4.8.1.49	It was fulfilled.
4.8.1.50	The Patnīvata should be of Tvashtri.
4.8.1.51	For Tvashtri is the lord of cattle.
4.8.1.52	It should be below the navel.
4.8.1.53	For below the navel is the womb of a woman, and it is productive.
4.8.1.54	The Ekadasini (oblation) is excluded from the sacrifice.
4.8.1.55	If one were to take up the Patnīvata again,
4.8.2.1	In this world the sacrificer desires to shine.
4.8.2.2	Now this world is the world of the sun.
4.8.2.3	When one offers with the two Sūrya verses, the sacrificer becomes in that world.
4.8.2.4	One offers with two verses.
4.8.2.5	The sacrificer has two feet for stability.
4.8.2.6	One offers having placed gold.
4.8.2.7	He sends him to the heaven world with the light of gold.
4.8.2.8	One offers while bound.
4.8.2.9	This is the continuation of the Dakṣiṇās.
4.8.2.10	He lifts it up with the words, "Go to heaven, go to heaven," for the attainment of the heavenly world.
4.8.2.11	"I approach you with form, with form."
4.8.2.12	Form is gold.
4.8.2.13	Form is cattle.
4.8.2.14	"May Tutha, the knower of all, divide you."
4.8.2.15	Tutha, the know-er of all, is indeed Agni.
4.8.2.16	He alone knows who is worthy of receiving and who is not.
4.8.2.17	"This is your gift, O Agni, that has fallen from Soma." This is given to the Agnidhra.
4.8.2.18	Soma makes it fall.
4.8.2.19	"It is said, "Lead it along the path of Mitra."
4.8.2.20	The sacrifice is indeed the path of Mitra.
4.8.2.21	One offers on the Agnidhra fire with an offering to Agni.
4.8.2.22	The Agnidhra fire belongs to Agni.
4.8.2.23	If a horse or a chariot is given with the second Varuna, then it is Varuna's.
4.8.2.24	For that is Varuna'
4.8.2.25	Going by the path of truth.
4.8.2.26	This is the path of truth, namely, the sacrifice.
4.8.2.27	With the moon as the fee.
4.8.2.28	For the moon is given.
4.8.2.29	May I prosper today with the Brahmanas, with the fathers, with the paternal.
4.8.2.30	This indeed is the Brahman, the son of the father, the son of his father, who is a student of the Veda.
4.8.2.31	"The Dakshina is the Sudha-metal."
4.8.2.32	He makes his sacrifice in the Sudha- metal.
4.8.2.33	"He says, "Look up, look down."
4.8.2.34	Having reached the sky, he speaks.
4.8.2.35	"He (the Adhvaryu) says, "Try to be with the participants."
4.8.2.36	They give him what is intended for the enemy.
4.8.2.37	The Brahmanas are the lords, the Soma-drinkers, the destroyers of the eye.
4.8.2.38	He appeases them thus:
4.8.2.39	"May they go to the gods, may they be sweet to us, may they enter the giver."
4.8.2.40	Thus indeed they go to him in the other world.
4.8.2.41	"The Yajna-kunapi is of many rules."
4.8.2.42	Thus indeed did Yajnavaka Rajastambayana say,
4.8.2.43	The men here, indeed, are sending away the Dakṣiṇās (cows) saying, "They do not go to the other world."
4.8.2.44	"May we be seated in the world of the good, in the path of the gods, which is not to be traversed by the non-gods." Thus they come here and there.
4.8.3.1	They indeed kill Soma when they press it.
4.8.3.2	They indeed slay the sacrifice.
4.8.3.3	The reason why Dakṣiṇās are given is that they make the sacrifice prosper.
4.8.3.4	That is why Dakṣiṇa is called Dakṣiṇā because it makes one prosper.
4.8.3.5	The midday pressing is indeed the world of heaven.
4.8.3.6	When Dakṣiṇas are given at the midday pressing, it is for the attainment of the world of heaven
4.8.3.7	Much should be given.
4.8.3.8	He builds a bridge for the attainment of heaven.
4.8.3.9	Gold is in his hand, then he leads (the sacrificer).
4.8.3.10	Gold is indeed truth.
4.8.3.11	He leads them with truth, in front of the Garhapatya, behind the Sadas.
4.8.3.12	They release them towards the north, between the sacrificial post and the Agnidhra.
4.8.3.13	By this path the Angiras went to heaven.
4.8.3.14	He leads the sacrificer along that very path.
4.8.3.15	He offers on the Garhapatya with two (verses).
4.8.3.16	He conquers this world by that.
4.8.3.17	On the Agnidhra-fire with the Agniya (verse).
4.8.3.18	The atmosphere by that.
4.8.3.19	Then when gifts are given to the south,
4.8.3.20	He conquers heaven by that.
4.8.3.21	He gives first to the Agnidhra,
4.8.3.22	For the Agnidhra is the mouth of the sacrifice.
4.8.3.23	He does not go beyond the mouth of the sacrificie.
4.8.3.24	And Agni is all the deities,
4.8.3.25	The deities are pleased with him by that.
4.8.3.26	He gives to Brahma.
4.8.3.27	Brahma is the lord of creation.
4.8.3.28	He pleases Prajapati by that.
4.8.3.29	Gives to the priests.
4.8.3.30	He pleases the Hotr by that.
4.8.3.31	What he gives to the members, he redeems the Soma drink by that.
4.8.3.32	The one he gives to the one who is learned in the Vedas, that one pleases the metres.
4.8.3.33	For none are worthy of drinking Soma except him.
4.8.3.34	The one he gives to one who is learned, that one prospers in the world of the gods. The one he gives one who is not learned, that one (prospers) in the world of men.
4.8.3.35	The one that is given to one who does not approach, by that one prospers.
4.8.3.36	The one that is given when asked for, by that one conquers one's enemies.
4.8.3.37	The one given out of fear to the Kṣatriya, by that one eats Brahma.
4.8.3.38	The one rejected, that is the Dakṣiṇā of the tigress.
4.8.3.39	If one were to accept it again, the tigress would devour him.
4.8.3.40	Accepting it with another.
4.8.3.41	Thus he does not fall away.
4.8.3.42	If one gives a goat,
4.8.3.43	the goat belongs to Agni.
4.8.3.44	By that one attains Agni's dear abode.
4.8.3.45	If one offers a sheep, one conquers by it.
4.8.3.46	If one makes a gift of a cow,
4.8.3.47	the cow belongs to all the gods.
4.8.3.48	By that, one attains the dear abode of all the gods. If one makes a gift
4.8.3.49	of clothing,
4.8.3.50	The garment is dedicated to all the deities.
4.8.3.51	By that, the deities are pleased with him and grant him his desires.
4.8.3.52	When he gives cooked food, he redeems it with meat; when he gives a chariot or a body, he redeems them with that.
4.8.3.53	When he offers gold, he makes his life longer with that.
4.8.3.54	If he gives a horse,
4.8.3.55	The horse is Prajapati.
4.8.3.56	By that he attains the dear abode of Prajapati.
4.8.3.57	And he conquers the world of this Aditya.
4.8.3.58	At the end, the gift should be given to the receiver.
4.8.3.59	The receiver is indeed Rudra.
4.8.3.60	If one were to give to the receiver in the middle, one would invite Rudra to the middle.
4.8.3.61	Therefore, the gift should only be given at the end.
4.8.3.62	The Asura Svarbhanu covered the sun with darkness.
4.8.3.63	Atri saw him here.
4.8.3.64	When he gives gold to Atreya,
4.8.3.65	he indeed removes him.
4.8.3.66	Then he places the light above, for the attainment of the heavenly world.
4.8.4.1	The Tvashtri in the form of the universe thought that the sacrifice was incomplete,
4.8.4.2	when the Rk and Sama were separated.
4.8.4.3	He saw these for the completion of the sacrifice.
4.8.4.4	The oblations are offered for the atonement of whatever is defective in the sacrifice.
4.8.4.5	There are six Rg verses.
4.8.4.6	There are indeed six seasons.
4.8.4.7	One finds support in the seasons.
4.8.4.8	There are three Yajus verses.
4.8.4.9	There indeed are three pressing sessions.
4.8.4.10	One attains the pressing sessions.
4.8.4.11	He offers nine Samishtayajus oblations.
4.8.4.12	He recites nine verses in the Bahispavamāna.
4.8.4.13	That is nine.
4.8.4.14	Nine are the vital airs.
4.8.4.15	He places the vital airs in himself.
4.8.4.16	He offers standing upwards.
4.8.4.17	For he who stands upwards is more vigorous.
4.8.4.18	He should offer silently to him whom he hates.
4.8.4.19	The vital airs enter into him.
4.8.4.20	He offers continuously for the continuity of the vital airs.
4.8.4.21-28	He offers without interruption, for the uninterruptedness of the vital airs. If he were to interrupt, he would interrupt the vital airs. He should offer to him whom he hates. He cuts off the vital airs of him. He offers the separation with the same (vital air). For these vital airs are the same. These are the limits of the sacrifice. These are indeed the limits of the sacrifices which Viśvāmitra saw.
4.8.4.29	These are the parts of the sacrifice.
4.8.4.30	They should be deposited again from where the sacrifice is taken.
4.8.4.31	Bharadvaja said:
4.8.4.32	From where the sacrifice is being taken, it is deposited again.
4.8.5.1	The sacrifice has five Savanas.
4.8.5.2	There are three Savanas.
4.8.5.3	The Avabhrtha and Anubandhya are the fifth Savana.
4.8.5.4	The sacrifice is fivefold.
4.8.5.5	As much as the sacrifice is, that he has obtained.
4.8.5.6	Whatever exceeds the sacrifice, that Varuna seizes.
4.8.5.7	What exceeds the sacrifice is the rice-gruel.
4.8.5.8	The Adhiṣavaṇa (cup) is at the Adhiṣavaṇas.
4.8.5.9	Therefore they sprinkle with it.
4.8.5.10	They sprinkle water.
4.8.5.11	For water is Varuna.
4.8.5.12	They sprinkle the firm (earth).
4.8.5.13	For they are Varuna himself.
4.8.5.14	If they were to go down the flowing rivers, they would carry away the cattle.
4.8.5.15	But when they go down the standing rivers, it is for the non-carrying away of the cattle.
4.8.5.16	The waters are Varuna.
4.8.5.17	Varuna is the wind.
4.8.5.18	If they went down the river from the east, Varuna would seize the offspring from the west.
4.8.5.19	Now when they enter the water with the right shoulder, it is for the sacrificer's release from Varuna.
4.8.5.20	"They say while going from the sacrificial post, "The king Varuna has made a wide (noose)."
4.8.5.21	This is the path of the unprotected, by which the sun moves.
4.8.5.22	This is the way of the sun.
4.8.5.23	"O king, a hundred physicians, a thousand physicians, they say, when they see the water, "We have crossed."
4.8.5.24	They are indeed purifying themselves with water.
4.8.5.25	They move about purified by these (waters).
4.8.5.26	They become one-headed.
4.8.5.27	A man is not purified by skulls.
4.8.5.28	He is purified by one (thing) only.
4.8.5.29	And this (earth) is one.
4.8.5.30	He stands firm on this (earth) alone.
4.8.5.31	He offers the grass.
4.8.5.32	He offers in Agni, in the abode.
4.8.5.33	If he were to offer in a place without an abode, the Adhvaryu would be blind.
4.8.5.34	He offers the Prajās at the end of the sacrifice.
4.8.5.35	The sacrificial grass is offspring.
4.8.5.36	He releases offspring from death.
4.8.5.37	He offers two portions of clarified butter for the sake of the sacrifice.
4.8.5.38	He offers to Varuna for being freed from Varuna.
4.8.5.39	He offers to Agni and Varuna.
4.8.5.40	Thus he is freed from both Varunas.
4.8.5.41	He does not offer the Anuyājas, nor does he establish them.
4.8.5.42	They think that it is excessive.
4.8.5.43	"He offers with the verse, "Thy heart is in the ocean, in the waters."
4.8.5.44	Whatever is done here that is cruel, that he appeases.
4.8.5.45	"He says, "Avabhrtha, Nicukuna!"
4.8.5.46	This is indeed his Avabhrtha.
4.8.5.47	Then they eat the rice-gruel that floats up.
4.8.5.48	They think it is like drinking Soma.
4.8.5.49	Varuna is rice-gruel.
4.8.5.50	If one were to eat it, one would be afflicted by Varuna.
4.8.5.51	They say, it should be eaten.
4.8.5.52	The Rijiṣa is the animals.
4.8.5.53	It is the animals that are attached to oneself.
4.8.5.54	"The noose of Varuna is released." He releases the noose of Varun.
4.8.5.55	"The Varuna noose is released." He binds the noose of varuna.
4.8.5.56	"Salutation to the noose of Varuṇa." He salutes the noose of vārūna.
4.8.5.57	The Angirases, rising up, were followed by the Rakshas.
4.8.5.58	With this (verse) Brihaspati followed them.
4.8.5.59	With this he drove away the Rakshas from them.
4.8.5.60	In that he follows with this (verse), it is for the driving away of the Rakshas;
4.8.5.61	in that it is recited with a high tone, therefore it is connected with Brihaspati;
4.8.5.62	and in that it is recited three times,
4.8.5.63	there are these three worlds.
4.8.5.64-69	From these worlds he drives away the demons from the sacrifice. When (he recites) with the Atichandas metre, all metres are Atichandas. With all metres he drives away the Rakshas from the sacrifice. When (he recites with) the Agniyeya (metre), Agni is all the deities.
4.8.5.70	He thus wards off the Rākṣasas from the sacrifice with all the deities.
4.8.5.71	They sprinkle water.
4.8.5.72	Water is indeed the destroyer of Rākṣasas.
4.8.5.73	The Rākṣasas do not cross water. (This is done) for the destruction of Rākṣasa.
4.8.5.74	They come without looking back, for the non-obstruction of Varuna.
4.8.5.75	They sprinkle the outer cow-pen.
4.8.5.76	They thus appease Varuna in the outer cow-shed.
4.8.5.77	"May we be prosperous."
4.8.5.78	They offer to become prosperous, having become free from Varuna.
4.8.5.79	"You are the kindling-wood, may we be prosperous." They offer to become prosperous by kindling.
4.8.6.1	If one desires, "May my sacrifice be complete and prosperous," one should offer these three kinds of animals: for the completeness of the sacrifice.
4.8.6.2	And for prosperity.
4.8.6.3	One should offer the Vaiśvadevī animal in the middle.
4.8.6.4	He places the semen in the middle.
4.8.6.5	For semen is placed in the middle. They proceed with an undefined (verse).
4.8.6.6	For semen is undefined.
4.8.6.7	The deities and Brahman are exhausted for him.
4.8.6.8	For the Vashe is both Vaishvadevi and Barhspatyani.
4.8.6.9	For the exhaustion of the deities and Brahman.
4.8.6.10	The milk of the animals is the metres of the sacrifice, which are being used up.
4.8.6.11	He places the essence of the metres.
4.8.6.12	One should offer the oblation to Brhaspati at the end.
4.8.6.13	Brhaspati is indeed Brahman.
4.8.6.14	At the end of the sacrifice, the sacrificer stands firm in Brahman.
4.8.6.15	When the sacrifice is completed, Mitra protects the well-performed, Varuna the ill-performed.
4.8.6.16	The Maitrāvaruṇa-priest is the one who follows.
4.8.6.17	He releases the well-performed sacrifice from Mitra and the ill-performed from Varuna.
4.8.6.18	Having released him from both, he gives him to the sacrificer.
4.8.6.19	Just as they break the ground with a plough, so the Utkhamantrins break the sacrifice.
4.8.6.20	As one follows the advice, so this (verse) follows the sacrifice.
4.8.6.21	Whatever is ill-sung, ill-praised, or contrary, that he makes right by this (verse).
4.8.6.22	The one who worships without the gods,
4.8.6.23	the one who worships with the gods,
4.8.6.24	for the gods praise the one who worships.
4.8.6.25-32	Just as a bull, when released, goes away, so do the deities go away from the sacrificer. If the Upavasatha is dedicated to Agni, Agni is indeed all the deities. He again wins the deities. It is with eight potsherds. Agni is in the Gayatri metre. It should be with five potsherds. The sacrifice is fivefold.
4.8.6.33	As much as the sacrifice, that he has attained.
4.8.6.34	Wherever they place a dead man in the fire, there he goes to truth.
4.8.6.35	All other deities forsake him.
4.8.6.36	Agni does not forsake him among the deities.
4.8.7.1	He gives him through the Rc, he bestows through the Yajus.
4.8.7.2	He sends him through the Graha.
4.8.7.3	The Rc is for the Stotra, the Yajus is for the Sastra.
4.8.7.4	The Stotra and the Sastra are connected.
4.8.7.5	The Rik and the Yajus are connected.
4.8.7.6	It is done loudly with the Rik, loudly with the Saman, softly with the Yajus.
4.8.7.7	Those gods thought, "This is the loose part of the sacrifice."
4.8.7.8	They placed the Puroruchi for the sake of firmness.
4.8.7.9	All the deities aspire when a Graha is being taken.
4.8.7.10	"He takes for me, he takes for me."
4.8.7.11	What is the foremost of the deities for the purpose of exclusion.
4.8.7.12	"The names of the living ones are 'life', they revive this one. The names of the living are 'life-giver', they revive this. The names of those who are living are 'reviver', they revive this." Having placed twenty-one barley grains and a bundle of darbha grass, one should recite this.
4.8.7.13	Then one should recite this:
4.8.7.14	May the Prāṇāpāna (winds) protect thee; may the Upāṁśu and Antar-yāma (winds) protect thy speech; may the Vāyu (wind) protect thy speech, may the Upāmsusavana (wind) protect the speech; may the Indra-Vayu (wind) protect thee; the Dakṣa-kratu (wind) may the Maitrāvaruṇa (wind) protect thine ear; may the Āśvin (wind) protect both thine eyes; may the Sukra and Amāntin (winds) protect thine eyes; may thy body be protected by the Āgrayaṇa (wind); may thy limbs be protected by the Ukthya (wind); may the Dhruva (wind) protect life; may the Rtūpatra (wind) protect; may the Drona-kalasa (wind) protect head; may the Kalasa (wind) and the Pushtpati (wind) protect belly; may the eye be protected by the eye, the mind by the mind, the speech by the speech, the breath by the breath. May it be given back to him. Svāhā.
4.8.7.15	This is what Vasishtha Satyayajna said.
4.8.7.16	"In the vessels, I know that Brahman."
4.8.7.17	"Just as a person is brought once, he is brought again."
4.8.7.18	"One should do it only once, not before that."
4.8.7.19	If one does it again, one perishes.
4.8.7.20	If one were to perform an abhicara rite, one should recite this mantra and then perform the abhicara rite. Otherwise, one perishes.
4.8.8.1	Other vessels are used again, but not others.
4.8.8.2	Those that are used again are for this world.
4.8.8.3	Those that aren't used again are for the other world.
4.8.8.4	Then this Uthyas vessel is used again.
4.8.8.5	It is for the wild animals.
4.8.8.6	He thus supports the wild animals.
4.8.8.7	Because it is used again, therefore they see and strike him who is lying down.
4.8.8.8	Then this Ritu-vessel is used again.
4.8.8.9	It is for the horse.
4.8.8.10	He indeed supports the horse by this.
4.8.8.11	Because it is used again therefore the hair of this horse is like that of a horse.
4.8.8.12	Then this Aditya-vessel is used over again.
4.8.8.13	This is indeed for the cow.
4.8.8.14	He indeed supports the cow by this.
4.8.8.15	Since Soma is taken with the most numerous verses, therefore the cow, being killed and eaten, is the most numerous of animals.
4.8.8.16	Then this Soma-vessel is again employed.
4.8.8.17	This is indeed for the man.
4.8.8.18	He indeed sustains the man by this.
4.8.8.19	This (Soma) is the bright (Soma) indeed.
4.8.8.20	The rays are the seasons.
4.8.8.21	The space is the season-vessel.
4.8.8.22	The bright vessel is again employed.
4.8.8.23	For the rays of the sun are in space.
4.8.8.24	Then this Upāṁshu-vessel is again employed. Here it is.
4.8.8.25	It is indeed the cow.
4.8.8.26	By this he indeed supports the cow.
4.8.8.27	Then this Antaryama vessel is again used.
4.8.8.28	This is indeed for the female goat.
4.8.8.29	He indeed supports the female goat by this.
4.8.8.30	Prajapati is the Aggrayan.
4.8.8.31	When this is again used,
4.8.8.32	therefore Prajapati knows the creatures.
4.8.8.33	This is the vessel of Prajapati, namely the Dronakalaśa.
4.8.8.34	Since it is used again, there is this loss.
4.8.8.35	Seven vessels are fit for reuse.
4.8.8.36	Because they are related.
4.8.8.37	There are seven kinds of poetry.
4.8.8.38	Poetry is speech.
4.8.8.39	One attains as much as there is speech.
4.8.8.40	There are the seven kinds of poetry,
4.8.8.41	There are the Seven Hotras,
4.8.8.42	There are seven domestic animals,
4.8.8.43	One obtains them.
4.8.8.44	The three vessels are directly related to the kinsmen.
4.8.8.45	All others are indirectly related to the kinsman.
4.8.8.46	The Gayatri is related to Indra-Vayu.
4.8.8.47	The Tristubh is related to Shukra.
4.8.8.48	The Jagati is related to Aggrayanas.
4.8.8.49	It should be poured without interruption.
4.8.8.50	One's desire becomes fulfilled.
4.8.8.51	And the rain god becomes free from hail.
4.8.8.52	One should not accept a bowl.
4.8.8.53	If one were to use a vessel that is not consecrated, the offspring would die.
4.8.8.54	One should go back the way one came.
4.8.8.55	If one were to go back another way, the offspring would be bound.
4.8.8.56	The oblations go to heaven by means of the sacrificial post, and the Dakṣiṇās by means of the Adhvaryu.
4.8.8.57	The sacrificial post is raised up, and he who stands above it responds. For the attainment of the heavenly world.
4.8.9.1	He who is the eldest kinsman should take the cups beginning with Indra-Vayu.
4.8.9.2	For Indra-Vayu is the foremost.
4.8.9.3	He who has a disease should take the cups starting with Mitra-Varuna.
4.8.9.4	For Mitra-Varuna are the vital airs and out-breaths.
4.8.9.5	The one who desires Soma-drinking should begin with the Aśvinī.
4.8.9.6	For they (the Aśvins) obtained Soma-drinking at the end.
4.8.9.7	The one who desires Brahmic glory should begin with the Śukra.
4.8.9.8	Śukra is splendour, Brahmic glory.
4.8.9.9	The one practising sorcery should begin with the Manthin.
4.8.9.10	The Manthin vessel is a distressed vessel.
4.8.9.11	The one who is the youngest of the two should take the Agrāyaṇa-graha.
4.8.9.12	For the Agrāyaṇagrāha is the foremost.
4.8.9.13	One who takes the other grahas before the grahas of Indra and Vayu, goes away from the mouth of the sacrifice.
4.8.9.14	One should take it for the purpose for which one desires.
4.8.9.15	Then one should place the Indra-Vayu graha.
4.8.9.16	It is done as before, so that it does not go away from the beginning of the sacrifice.
4.8.9.17	If the Āgrayana Soma were to be spilled or stolen, one should take Soma from the other cups.
4.8.9.18	Just as a father runs to his sons when they fall down, so does this.
4.8.9.19	If the other cups were to be spilled, or stolen, one would take Soma from the Āgrayana cups.
4.8.9.20	Just as sons run to their father, so do they to that.
4.8.9.21	They are taken out from the Drona-pots.
4.8.9.22	This is indeed their source.
4.8.9.23	They are indeed taken out from their own source, for non-leakage.
4.8.9.24	Soma will leak.
4.8.9.25	I shall take it from here.'
4.8.9.26	This is indeed his (Soma's) source, when he pours it down.
4.8.9.27	Now this is the Soma which is bright on both sides, and also bright on all sides.
4.8.9.28	When the Soma drips away, the sacrifice of him who has Soma dripping away is cut off.
4.8.9.29	The clarified butter is the animals.
4.8.9.30	When he offers clarified butter, he makes him whole with animals.
4.8.9.31	Let the mind, the light, enjoy the ghee. Let it join this interrupted sacrifice. Thus he joins the sacrifice.
4.8.9.32	May prosperity grow with curds and ghee. May it release the sacrificer and the lord of sacrifice from sin.
4.8.9.33	One should offer with 'Svāhā'.
4.8.9.34	This (earth) indeed takes in the sacrifice when it is offered.
4.8.9.35	This is prosperity.
4.8.9.36	He releases it on this very (earth).
4.8.9.37	He touches it with the verse, "The drop has fallen along the earth and heaven."
4.8.9.38	He establishes it in the Hotr's place.
4.8.9.39	He sprinkles it with thirty-three waters.
4.8.9.40	For the waters are the sacrifice.
4.8.9.41	The sacrifice of him whose animal is destroyed is destroyed, it is cut off.
4.8.9.42	If he does not find a suitable offering, he should offer it in the ghee.
4.8.9.43	All other deities are exhausted.
4.8.9.44	Prajapati alone is not exhausted.
4.8.9.45	The ghee belongs to Prajapati.
4.8.9.46	The gods belong to Prajapati
4.8.9.47	It becomes offered to Prajapati.
4.8.9.48	If one wishes that those who have injured the animal should be afflicted, one should offer a verse beginning with "O Agni, the one who knows, the one who has barley" at the Agnidhra fire.
4.8.9.49	One afflicts them with the verses of homage.
4.8.9.50	They are afflicted by the affliction.
4.8.9.51	Now this is the eight-footed one.
4.8.9.52	If one were to cut the embryo, one would exceed the cutting.
4.8.9.53	He should not offer the oblation of the consecrated (rice) without offering the Avadāna.
4.8.9.54	He offers with the Rasa.
4.8.9.55	He offers the Avadānas of the consecrated oblation.
4.8.10.1	The year is like a house.
4.8.10.2	Its sides are like the sides of that house.
4.8.10.3	The Divākirti is like the central pillar.
4.8.10.4	Just as the rafters of a house are attached to the central beam, so are the two halves of the year attached to the middle month.
4.8.10.5	He joins the Divākirti.
4.8.10.6	Just as the central beam is the middle, so is the Divākirty.
4.8.10.7	If it were loose, it would fall down.
4.8.10.8	The Grahas are taken on this day for the sake of firmness and stability.
4.8.10.9	The Grahas are taken with Sukra at the head on this day.
4.8.10.10	Sukra is Trishtubh.
4.8.10.11	This day is Trishtubha. It is taken for the sake of stability and strength.
4.8.10.12	The Graha is taken for Surya, the animal is offered to Surya.
4.8.10.13	This is the Aditya day.
4.8.10.14	He prospers directly.
4.8.10.15	Six Grahas are taken, a beast is offered as the seventh.
4.8.10.16	There are seven vital airs in the head.
4.8.10.17	The Aditya is the head.
4.8.10.18	He places the vital airs in the (proper) head.
4.8.10.19	Indra indeed slew Vritra.
4.8.10.20	He conquered this world.
4.8.10.21	But he did not conquer the other world.
4.8.10.22	He (Vishvakarman) became the Vishvakarman and conquered.
4.8.10.23	When the Vishvakarmana cup is taken, it is for the conquest of this world.
4.8.10.24	Those who take the Vishvakarmann cup go away from this world.
4.8.10.25	They go away, indeed.
4.8.10.26	They are masters of the measure.
4.8.10.27	They should take the Aditya cup on the next day.
4.8.10.28	This is Aditi, this is the foundation.
4.8.10.29	Whatever is the sun.
4.8.10.30	They stand on this (earth).
4.8.10.31	They should take the other one from the other half of the month.
4.8.10.32	They go performing their duties with the other one.
4.8.10.33	This is Aditi.
4.8.10.34	They stand with the other one on this (earth)
4.8.10.35	They should take both together at sunset, having gone to the end.
4.8.10.36	Having gone to the end of both worlds, they stand in the sun in this world and in Vaiśvānara in the other world.
