4.1.1	The cows (once upon a time) held that sacrificial session. In the course of ten months they obtained horns. They said: 'We have been successful, let us arise, horns have come to us'. They arose.
4.1.2	Some of them  said: 'Let us continue the session during these two (remaining: the eleventh and the) twelfth months, let us complete the year. Their horns in the course of the twelve months got curved, they obtained, however, all food. These are the hornless ones, these start forth all the twelve months, for they had obtained all food.
4.1.3	All food obtains he who knows this.
4.1.4	Prajāpati (at the beginning) was here alone, he desired; "May I multiply, may I beget progeny." He saw this overnight-rite, he practised it, by means of it he begat day and night.
4.1.5	In that this (day) in an overnight-rite, they procreate day and night, they get a firm support in day and night. The year comprises the day and the night only; by the day and the night they thereby reach the year.
4.1.6	In that it is a jyotiṣṭoma, they thereby complete the beginning of the sacrifice; that it is an ukthya, is for preventing discontinuity of the Soma-feast; that it is a night (-rite), is for obtaining the whole.
4.1.7	He saw these stomas: the light, cow- and life-stomas; these stomas are the worlds, the "light" is this world, the "cow" is the middle one, the "life" is the highest.
4.1.8	In that there are (in the year's sattra) these stomas, they generate these worlds, they get firm support in these worlds.
4.1.9	He (Prajāpati) applied again this three-day-period; by this six-day-period he procreated the seasons.
4.1.10	In that there is this six-day-period, they generate the seasons, they get firm support in the seasons.
4.1.11	He applied again this six-day-period; by means of these two six-day-periods he procreated the twelve months.
4.1.12	In that there are these two six-day-periods, they generate the months. they get firm support in the months.
4.1.13	He applied again these two six-day-periods; by means of these four six-day-periods he procreated the twenty-four half-months.
4.1.14	In that there are these four six-day-periods, they generate the half-months, they get firm support in the half months.
4.1.15	Having procreated this world, he brought strength into himself by means of the six-day-period with the pṛṣṭhasāmans.
4.1.16	In that there is this six-day-period with the pṛṣṭhasāmans, they finally establish themselves firmly in strength.
4.1.17	By means of this (month) he procreated the (other) months, the year. In that there is this month, they generate the year, they get firm support in the year.
4.2.1	There is this proceeding day (the opening day of the year's sacrifice, the second of the whole sattra).
4.2.2	By means of the proceeding day the gods proceeded to the world of heaven: because they proceeded, therefore it is called the proceeding day.
4.2.3	Therefore one must become an officiating priest of the proceeding day; for this (day) is nearest to the world of heaven; he who is not an officiating priest of this (day), is left out of the world of heaven (i.e. does not reach it).
4.2.4	It is (a) twenty-four-versed (day).
4.2.5	The gāyatrī consists of twenty-four syllables; the gāyatrī is gleaming splendour and spiritual lustre. Having laid hands on gleaming splendour and spiritual lustre, they proceed.
4.2.6	It is (a) twenty-four-versed (day); twenty-four-fold is the year: manifestly they lay hold on the year.
4.2.7	As many stotriya-verses as are contained in the twenty-four-versed day with uktha lauds, so many days there are in the year: by means of the stotriya-verses they thus reach the year.
4.2.8	There are fifteen lauds, the half-month has fifteen days, half-month by half-month they thus reach the year.
4.2.9	There are fifteen lauds and fifteen recitations; that makes a month, month by month they reach the year.
4.2.10	Regarding this they say: 'A wound as it were, is the hotra of the Achāvāka; if it (the sacrifice, the Soma-feast) closes after the (laud of the Chanters and the corresponding recitation of the) Acchāvāka they are likely to become wounds. If it is to be an ukthya, the traikākubha and the udvaṃśīya are to be fixed at the end; these two sāmans are strength: in strength they finally are firmly supported.'
4.2.11	Now, however, they say: 'it must be made an agniṣṭoma; the agniṣṭoma, indeed, is a sacrifice conducting to the world of heaven; for it rises upward after the (laud of the Chanters and the corresponding recitation of the) Hotr.
4.2.12	The agniṣṭoma is (contains) twelve lauds and the year is (contains) twelve months, thereby it (the sacrifice) is of equal measure with the year. There are twelve lauds and twelve recitations, that makes twenty-four: the year is (contains) twenty-four half-months, thereby it (the sacrifice) is of equal measure with the year.
4.2.13	Now, however, they say: it must be made an ukthya: for the obtainment of the day.
4.2.14	All the characteriṣṭics are brought about, for all is reached
4.2.15	(The verse beginning): 'The Soma (draughts) possessing a thousandfold vigour are being strained for the obtainment of booty' in which occurs the word 'a thousand', is to be taken as opening (verse for the out-of-doors-laud).
4.2.16	It (this verse) is the characteriṣṭic of the year; he (viz. the Chanter) purifies them all (i.e. all the paṛtakers of the sattra), by means of this (opening-verse), he addresses them all.
4.2.17	Now, however, they say: '(the verse beginning) 'be strained as the first of speech' should rather be taken (as opening verse of the out-of-doors-laud). The beginning of speech verily is the opening of the year: at the opening they thereby lay hold on the year'.
4.2.18	A copulation, as it were, is this utterance: the words: 'be strained' represent the male, and 'of speech', the female; 'of Soma' the male and 'with bright' the female. A copulation he produces on their behalf at the opening of the sacrifice for the purpose of progeneration.
4.2.19	The jārabodhīya-melody (sung on the triṣṭich beginning:) 'O'Agni, harness those steeds of thine' is to be taken as agniṣṭoma-chant. With the harnessed year they proceed (or begin). It is (composed) on (verses) of twenty-four syllables: the characteriṣṭic of the twenty-four-versed (chant).
4.2.20	Now, however, they say: 'the yajñāyajñīya-chant only is to be taken' (as agniṣṭomasāman).
4.2.21	The yajñāyajñīya is the way: in this manner they do not leave the way.
4.3.1	The chant (saman) of the Brahman (i.e. the pṛṣṭha-laud corresponding with the śastra of the Brahman or the Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin, the third laud (stotra) at the mid-day service, of all the abhiplava-six-day-periods and the three svarasāman days during the first half of the year) is the abhīvaṛta (saman).
4.3.2	By means of the abhīvaṛta the Gods turned themselves to the world of heaven. (The reason) why the Brahman's chant is the abhīvaṛta, is, that they may turn themselves to the world of heaven.
4.3.3	It has a finale (nidhana) of one syllable; of one syllable consists (the word) 'speech'; by means of speech thereby having taken hold of the world of heaven they reach it.
4.3.4	By means of a saman they go hence, by means of a Ṛc (or 'with a verse ') they return.
4.3.5	Yonder world (the sky) is the sāman, this world (the earth) is the verse; in that they go hence with a saman, they go, after taking hold of the world of heaven; in that they return with a verse, they get a firm support on this world.
4.3.6	If they were to abandon the sāman (i.e. if during the first half of the year they did not use continually the saman, the abhīvaṛta), they would fall from the world of heaven; if they were to quit their hold of the verse (during the second half of the year), they would vanish from this world (i.e. they would not reach again the earth).
4.3.7	The saman is the same, the pragātha (on which it is chanted) is varied: to various bright (things) surely comes he who undeṛtakes a journey.
4.3.8	The abhīvaṛta, forsooth, is a male, a seed-placer; he places the seed continually into the pragāthas; in that from here (i.e. in the first half of the year) the saman is the same, but the pragātha different, they thereby place the seed. In that afterwards (i.e. in the second half of the year) the pragātha is the same, but the saman different, they thereby cause the placed seed to spring.
4.3.9	By means of the saman he milks from here (in the first half of the year) the pragāthas (i.e. he gets the good out of them), by means of the pragātha he afterwards (in the second half) milks the sāmans; for the sake of congruency.
4.3.10	They who undeṛtake a journey, each time returning, these do not perform their journey; they who undeṛtake a journey without returning, these arrive.
4.3.11	If they repeat a chant, it would be as if one would seat himself near a cow (in order to milk it), that has (already) been milked.
4.3.12	If they (do) not (repeat) a chant, they reach the fulfilment of all the desires they wish to see fulfilled.
4.3.13	The theologues aṛgue: 'is the year used up, or is it not used up'? In this way it is not used up', it should be answered: the other lauds return again, but the Brahman's saman (alone) goes upward.
4.4.1	In the (first) five months (of the year) the barhata pragāthas are used up (for the brahmasāmans).
4.4.2	These having been used up, they should proceed (during the remaining days) uniting two metres.
4.4.3	They should be three uṣṇihs (and) one gāyatrī: these make three bṛhatis.
4.4.4	Regarding this they say (however): 'this uniting of the two metres, forsooth, is, as it were, a splitting up of the metres'.
4.4.5	They should (rather) apply the metres, which increase by four (syllables).
4.4.6	The metres, which increase by four (syllables), are the (four-footed) cattle; thus by means of the cattle they afford a (means of) approaching the world of heaven.
4.4.7	They should apply one gāyatrī during one day (viz. the caturviṃśa-prāyaṇīya-day), one uṣṇih during one day, one anuṣṭubh during one day; with the bṛhati they should proceed during five months; the paṅkti they should apply during one day; with the triṣṭubh they should proceed during the sixth month, and on the day immediately before the viṣuvat-day (i.e. on the third svarasāman-day) they should apply the jagatī.
4.4.8	Regarding this they say (however): 'unsuitable for the midday-service are these metres; they should apply the bṛhati and the triṣṭubh (only)'.
4.4.9	These two metres, forsooth, are powerful, they are plainly the characteriṣṭic mark of the midday-service.
4.4.10	On a rathantara-day the bṛhati is to be taken (for the brahmasaman); the bṛhati, forsooth, is the special place of the rathantara (saman); he thereby gives firm support to the rathantara in its own place. On a bṛhat-day the triṣṭubh is to be taken; the triṣṭubh, forsooth, is the special place of the bṛhat (saman); thereby the rathantara and the bṛhat find continually firm support in their own place.
4.4.11	They should apply (for the brahmasaman at the pṛṣṭhalauds) thirty-three pragāthas; thirty-three in number are the deities; in the deities even they have (in this manner) continually a firm support. They should apply twenty-four: the year consists of twenty-four half-months; in the year even they have continually a firm support. They should apply twelve: the year consists of twelve months; in the year even they have continually a firm support. They should apply six: six in number are the seasons; in the seasons they have continually a firm support. They should apply four: four-footed is cattle; in the cattle they have continually a firm support. They should apply three: three are these worlds; in these worlds they have continually a firm support. They should apply two: two-footed is the Sacrificer, for treading on the world of heaven; for, in walking, man stands firmly now on this, now on that foot.
6.1.1	Prajāpati desired: 'may I be more (than one), may I be reproduced.' He saw that agniṣṭoma and practised it; by it he created the creatures.
6.1.2	It was by means of the eleventh laud (stotra) of the agniṣṭoma that he created them and by means of the eleventh month of the year; then he laid hold of (seized) them by means of the twelfth laud and the twelfth month of the year.
6.1.3	Therefore the creatures (the women), having borne their young ones during ten months, bring them forth in the eleventh month and do not bear them beyond the twelfth (month); for by means of the twelfth (stotra and month) they were seized. He, then, who knows this, gets the (born) children and brings forth the unborn ones .
6.1.4	From these (creatures) being seized (by Prajāpati) the mule went forth; he went after it and took away its seed 2; this he wiped off on (transferred to) the mare 3; therefore the mare has double seed, therefore the mule is barren, for its seed had been taken away.
6.1.5	Therefore it is not fit to be given as a sacrificial fee, for it exceeded (i.e. went beyond) the sacrifice, it could (however,) be the sacrificial fee for an excessive (or redundant) (sacrifice) 2, for congruence's sake: it must be given at the laud of a ṣoḍaśin; the ṣoḍaśin, forsooth, is an excessive (or 'redundant') sacrifice; he (then) gives at an excessive (sacrifice) an excessive (sacrificial fee).
6.1.6	He (Prajāpati) wished: 'may I create the sacrifice.' Out of his mouth he created (let forth) the ninefold (nineversed) stoma; along with it of the metres the gāyatrī came into existence, of the deities Agni, of the men the Brahmin, of the seasons the spring. Therefore, of the stomas the ninefold one is the mouth (or the beginning or 'the chief one'), of the metres the gāyatrī, of the deities Agni, of the men the Brāhmin, of the seasons the spring. Therefore, of the stomas the ninefold one is the mouth (or the beginning, or 'the chief one'), of the metres the gāyatrī, of the deities Agni, of the men the Brāhmin, of the seasons the spring. Therefore the Brahmin by his mouth (his word) is strongest, for he is created from the mouth (of Prajāpati).
6.1.7	Strong with his mouth (his word) is he who knows this.
6.1.8	Out of his breast, his arms, he created the fifteenfold (or fifteen-versed) (stoma); along with it of the metres the triṣṭubh came into existence, of the deities Indra, of the men the Noble, of the seasons the summer. Therefore the stoma for a noble is the fifteenfold one, his metre is the triṣṭubh, his season the summer. Therefore his strength lies in his arms, for he is created from the arms (of Prajāpati).
6.1.9	Strong with his arms is he who knows this.
6.1.10	Out of his middle, his membrum virile, he created the seventeen-fold (stoma), along with it of the metres the jagatī came into existence, of the deities the All-gods, of the men the Peasants, of the seasons the raining season 2. Therefore the Peasant, although he is lived upon, does not decrease, for he is created from the membrum virile. Therefore he is rich in cattle, for the All gods are his deity and the jagatī is his metre and the rainy season is his season 5. Therefore the Brahmin and the Noble must live upon him, for he is created (from the part) below (them).
6.1.11	Out of his feet, his firm support, he created the twenty-one-fold (stoma); along with it of the metres the anuṣṭubh came into existence, of the deities none, of the men the Śūdra. Therefore the Sudra is, it is true, rich in cattle, but excluded from the sacrifice, for he has no deity, as no deity had come into existence after him. Therefore he does not bring it farther than to the washing of the feet, for he is created out of the feet (of Prajāpati). Therefore the twenty-one-fold of the stomas is the firm support 2; for it is created out of his firm footing (the feet of Prajāpati). Therefore they do not transpose the anuṣṭubh along with the metres.
6.1.12	For the sake of separating good and bad (prosperity and adveṛṣity).
6.1.13	Separation of good and bad comes (unto him) who knows this.
6.2.1	He, forsooth, who knows the stomas to be provided with an explanation, comes into the possession of the explanation.
6.2.2	The ninefold (stoma) is the breath; the fifteenfold one is the half month 2; the seventeenfold one is the year 3; the twenty-onefold one is the sun. These are the stomas provided with an explanation; in the possession of the explanation is he who knows this.
6.2.3	The thrice nine-fold (i.e. twenty-seven-versed) (stoma) is (equal to) these worlds; through the Brāhmaṇa of the thrice-nine-fold (stoma) these worlds are thrice renewed.
6.2.4	He who knows this, gets firm support in these worlds.
6.2.5	The thirty-threefold (stoma), forsooth, is (equal to) the deities: the eight Vasus, the eleven Rudras, the twelve Ādityas, Prajāpati and the Vaṣaṭkāra are the thirty-second and thirty-third.
6.2.6	A sacrifice at which the Gods are present is performed by him who knows this.
6.2.7	He who knows the ruler, becomes a ruler; the thirty-three-fold is the ruler of the stomas, man is the ruler of animals.
6.2.8	Therefore the other animals eat (with their head) bent down, but man (eats in) erect (position), for he is the lord.
6.2.9	Ruler over his equals becomes he who knows this.
6.3.1	The agniṣṭoma, forsooth, is the sacrifice.
6.3.2	The other sacrifices are performed for (the obtainment of) one (special) desire, (but) the agniṣṭoma for (the obtainment of) all.
6.3.3	The agniṣṭoma (comprises) twelve lauds, the year twelve months; in the course of the year the domestic animals bring forth, thereby it is conducive to cattle (and) successful.
6.3.4	There are twelve lauds (and) twelve recitations, that makes twenty-four; the year has twenty-four half-months; in the course of the year the animals bring forth, thereby it is conducive to cattle (and) successful.
6.3.5	On Agni the laud as well as the recitation reposes ; thereby it provides spiritual lustre.
6.3.6	'Why is the jyotiṣṭoma called thus' they (the theologians) ask. When it is chanted through to the end, it becomes (equal to) the virāj  (and) the virāj is the light (jyotis) of the metres.
6.3.7	A light among his equals becomes he who knows this.
6.3.8	The agniṣṭoma, indeed, is the chief sacrifice.
6.3.9	Prajāpati created the beings; these did not yield him the supremacy; he saw that agniṣṭoma and practised it. Thereupon the beings yielded him the supremacy.
6.3.10	Him his equals yield the supremacy, who knows this.
6.3.11	Now, as regards the saying: 'to the gāyatrī belongs the morning-service, to the triṣṭubh the midday-service, to the jagatī the afternoon-service, where, then, (does) the fourth metre, the anuṣṭubh, (come in)?'
6.3.12	Along with the suppression of the metres the Sacrificer is suppressed.
6.3.13	The gāyatrī has eight syllables, the him-sound is the ninth; the triṣṭubh has eleven syllables, and the jagatī twelve: by means of the metres he reaches the anuṣṭubh, in order that the Sacrificer may not be suppressed.
6.3.14	He forsooth, who knows the anuṣṭubh, coming along with the services, to reach everywhere (to share in all), reaches everywhere (shares in all); the anuṣṭubh, indeed, coming along with the services, reaches everywhere; so he who knows this reaches everywhere (shares in all).
6.3.15	When the nobles undeṛtake a journey, they yoke the strongest of their horses. The ninefold, fifteen-fold, seventeen-fold and twenty-one-fold, these are the strongest of the stomas, these he (the Chanter) yokes (i.e. applies), in order to reach the world of heaven.
6.3.16	It (viz. the agniṣṭoma-jyotiṣṭoma) is a catuṣṭoma ; the catustoma, forsooth, is a support 2: in order to gain a support (it is practised).
6.4.1	Prajāpati distributed the strength (life-sap, or food) to the Gods; therefrom the udumbara came into existence. Related to Prajāpati, forsooth, is the udumbara, related to Prajāpati is the Udgātṛ. In that through his first act the Udgātṛ takes hold of the pillar of udumbara (wood), he chooses by means of his own deity himself for the function of officiating priest.
6.4.2	He raises it (with the formula): 'Let Dyutâna, the son of the Maruts, raise thee; prop the sky! fill the air! make the earth firm'.
6.4.3	He takes hold of it with (the formula): 'I set thee in the seat of Āyu, in the shadow of the Favouring one; in the heart of the ocean'.
6.4.4	Āyu, forsooth, is the sacrifice; for it this seat is prepared.
6.4.5	The sacrifice, forsooth, is the one that favours; for it this shadow is prepared.
6.4.6	In the middle of the trunk is the heart, therefore in the middle of the sadas the pillar of udumbara-wood is erected.
6.4.7	'Salutation to the ocean! Salutation to the eye of the occan!' he says; the ocean, forsooth, is the Voice, the eye of the ocean is the Mind; to these two he thereby brings salutation.
6.4.8	'May not Yunarvan leave me' he says; Yunarvan, forsooth, is the saman; being about to exeṚcise his priestly function, he thereby brings salutation to the saman.
6.4.9	He, who, having saluted the saman in this manner, exeṚcises with the saman his priestly function, is not deprived of the saman, nor does the saman repel him.
6.4.10	And he who curses him, comes to distress.
6.4.11	'Strength art thou, the giver of strength; give me strength, put into me strength, give me food, put into me food' (he says); the sadas, forsooth, is the belly of Prajāpati, the udumbara is strength; in that the (pillar) of udumbara-wood is created in the middle of the sadas, he hings to his children (and young ones) strength: food in the middle.
6.4.12	Therefore, where this (pillar) becomes worn out, then the progeny becomes hungry.
6.4.13	The food of the Gods is the saman; in the saman (i.e.), in the food he thereby puts strength for the Gods and he himself, resting on strength, thereby distributes strength to his progeny.
6.4.14	Sitting with his face directed to the north chants the Udgātṛ; he thereby endows the northern quarter with strength. Sitting with his face directed to west chants the Prastotṛ; he thereby endows the western quarter with strength. Sitting with his face directed to the south chants the Pratihartṛ; he thereby endows the southern quarter with strength. Directed to the east the other priests exeṚcise their priestly functions; therefore this one is the strongest of the quarters, for this (quarter) is favoured by the most (i.e. the plurality of the priests).
6.4.15	The theologians say: 'for which cause do the other officiating priests exeṚcise their functions directed to the east but the chanters after they have turned round (to the) different (quarters)?' 'For the seeking of the quarters, for the pleasing of the quarters' he should answer. Therefore food is found in all the quarters, for all the quarters are sought and pleased.
6.5.1	Prajāpati desired: 'may I be more (than one), may I be reproduced'. He languished and out of the head of him who languished the sun was created (or 'came forth', 'came into existence'). This (sun) slew off his head; that became the droṇakalasa, therein the Gods took their soma-draughts. This woe, forsooth, he overlived by his life-time.
6.5.2	The woe he overlives by his life-time, who knows thus.
6.5.3	This (dronakalasa) he (the Udgātṛ) should push forward (muttering the formula): 'of the Lord of the forest (i.e. of wood) art thou; of Bṛhaspati art thou; of Prajāpati art thou; the head of Prajāpati art thou, the overliving vessel art thou, here I push myself forward in order to obtain glory and spiritual lustre'.
6.5.4	As to why he says: 'of the Lord of the forest art thou', he thereby pushes it forward in accordance with truth.
6.5.5	As to why he says: 'of Bṛhaspati art thou', he thereby appoints Bṛhaspati (as Udgātṛ), this God being the Udgātṛ of the Gods.
6.5.6	As to why he says: 'of Prajāpati art thou', the dronakalasa belongs indeed to Prajāpati by its deity. - As to why he says: 'the head of Prajāpati art thou', it is indeed the head of Prajāpati that was slain off.
6.5.7	As to why he says: 'the overliving vessel art thou', the dronakalasa surpasses indeed the other vessels, the dronakalaśa that is the vessel of the Gods.
6.5.8	Provided with the vessel of the Gods is he who knows this.
6.5.9	Regarding a Brahmin whom he holds truly to be a Brahmin, he should not make any consideration about the vessel : he obtains the vessel of the Gods and is not deprived of that of men.
6.5.10	The Voice passed away from the Gods, it entered the Waters; the Gods claimed her back. They (the Waters) said: 'if we restore her, what would then be our share?' 'What you wish', they answered. They said: 'what unclean substance man may throw into us, with may we not be mixed up.'
6.5.11	Pure (and) clean is water for him who knows this.
6.5.12	She, being restored (by the Waters to the Gods), passed beyond and entered into the trees; the Gods claimed her back, but they did not restore her; they cursed them: 'by means of your own handle (as) a thunderbolt they will hew you.' Therefore they bew the trees by means of their own handle (as) a thunderbolt. For they had been cursed by the Gods.
6.5.13	The trees distributed her, (i.e.) the Voice, over four different objects: the drum, the lute, the axle, the reed-pipe. Therefore this Voice of the trees (in the wooden instruments) is the loudest and most lovely; for it was the Voice of the Gods 2.
6.5.14	Beneath the axle (of the Soma-cart) they push the dronakalaśa forward for the obtainment of this Voice (that is in the axle); above the axle they hand over the filtering cloth: from both sides they (thus) lay hold of the Voice.
6.5.15	(At the sacrifice of one) of whom he wishes 'may I make his sacrifice demoniac (i.e., destined for the Asuras), may I possess myself of his (power of) speech' he should, whilst pushing the dronakalasa forward, touch the axle with his arms. Thus he make his sacrifice demoniac and possesses himself of his (power of) speech. (At a sacrifice of one) who is dear to him, he should push it forward without touching the axle. The dronakalasa is the breath; thus he brings his breathings in good order.
6.5.16	As to what they (the theologians) say: 'the other officiating priests being elected by the Voice (by the Word), for which reason are the Chanters not elected before they exeṚcise their priestly function?'
6.5.17	In that they seat themselves near the dronakalaśa, thereby the Chanters are elected.
6.5.18	To Prajāpati belong the Chanters, to Prajāpati belongs the dronakalasa; it is the dronakalasa that elects them for their priestly function.
6.5.19	Turned to the east they seat themselves near it, (thinking): 'we will, at the beginning of the sacrifice, undeṛtake our function turned toward the east'.
6.5.20	The easterly region, forsooth, is the unconquerable one of the Chanters; that they push the dronakalaśa in easterly direction, is for conquering (this) region.
6.5.21	As to what they (the theologians) say: 'between the traces the horse is, yoked, between the hames the bullock; what is the yoking of the Chanters?' The fact that they seat themselves near the dronakalasa is their yoking. Therefore they (who are about to undeṛtake a journey) should have their draught-animals) yoked near them, for an unyoked (chariot) cannot convey.
6.6.1	Having laid together the pressing stones, they shove on them the droņakalaśa. The pressing stones are the peasantry, soma is the food, the dronakalaśa is the nobility. By shoving the dronakalasa on the pressing stones, they raise the nobility over the peasantry (i.e. they make the peasantry, the people, the Vaiśyas, subject to the Baron, the Kṣatriya).
6.6.2	For whom he hates he should put down the pressing stones with their faces averted and then shove (the droṇakalaśa) away with (the formula): 'Here I shove away (i.e. I separate), from the clan so and so, from the food thus and thus, so and so, the member of the Gotra so and so, the son of the mother so and so.' He thereby shoves him asunder (separates him) from the clan, from food.
6.6.3	For him who is dear to him, he should put down the pressing stones with their `faces' towards each other and then shove (the dronakalasa) on (them) with (the formula): 'Here I put on the clan so and so, on food thus and thus, so and so, the member of the Gotra so and so, the son of (the mother) so and so.' He thereby puts him over the clan and in food.
6.6.4	But he may also disregard both (these practices) and shove (the dronakalasa) on (the pressing stones, whose 'faces' are turned to each other) with (the formula): 'Here I put myself in glory and spiritual lustre.' He thereby puts himself in glory and spiritual lustre.
6.6.5	For a noble whom he wishes to be alain by his clan, he should shove asunder the pressing stones, put the dronakalasa below and lay on it the upāṃśusavana with (the formula): 'Here I slay by the clan so and so the noble so and so.' He thereby slays the noble by the clan.
6.6.6	He, forsooth, who knows the divine purifiers, becomes purified (and) able to sacrifice. The divine purifiers, now, are the metres, by means of them they purify the droņakalaśa.
6.6.7	Let the Vasus purify thee with the gāyatrī-metre, let the Rudras purify thee with the triṣṭubh-metre, let the Ādityas purify thee with the jagatī-metre.' These (formulas) are the divine purifiers; purified (and) able to sacrifice is he who knows this.
6.6.8	The daemoniac Svarbhānu struck the sun with darkness; the Gods did not discern it (the sun, hidden as it was by darkness); they resorted to Atri; Atri repelled its darkness by the bhasa. The part of the darkness he first repelled became a black sheep, what (he repelled) the second time (became) a silvery (sheep), what (he repelled) the third time (became) a reddish one, and with what (arrow) he set free its original appearance (colour), that was a white sheep.
6.6.9	Therefore the strainer is white (sukla), the soma is clear (Śukra): for clear (soma's) congruity's sake.
6.6.10	(At a sacrifice) of one whom he (the Chanter) hates, he should make the two strainers (pavitra) (partly) of those colours; with a bad lot, with darkness he smites him, for darkness is black. (At a sacrifice) of one who is dear to him, he should make it purely white: gold, forsooth, is light, he (thereby) brings light unto him.
6.6.11	Therefore they seek the Ātreya by means of gold; for Atri had set free its (the sun's) light.
6.6.12	They spread out the strainer; hereby a manual performance of the sacrifice is brought about; the spreading of the strainer, now, is the manual performance (that falls to the share) of the Chanters.
6.6.13	Not deprived of handicraft is he who knows this.
6.6.14	Him who does not spread out (the strainer), they cut off from breath.
6.6.15	He should say to him: ‘shivering (by fever) will thou die'; he will die shivering.
6.6.16	With (the formula): 'Let the clear Goddess Prayer go forward from us, as a chariot well carpentered and swift' the Udgātṛ addresses the stream (of Soma running through the strainer into the droņakalaśa).
6.6.17	For my long life become thou strained, for my glory become thou strained; of earth and sky the origin they know; let hear the Waters that flow down. 'Sing thou, o Soma, here as Chanter,' he says, on my behalf, for glory and spiritual lustre.
6.6.18	This, forsooth, is the Udgātṛ's chanting of the Soma, that he (Soma) is cleared (i.e. flows being cleared through the strainer); he (thus) chants a saman at which Soma officiates as Udgātṛ.
6.6.19	They clear (it whilst it flows) continuously; they (thus) make the sacrifice as well as the breaths continuous. Uninterruptedly they clear it, for the continuity of the sacrifice.
6.7.1	Bṛhaspati exeṚcised the function of Udgātṛ (at the sacrifices) of the Gods; him the ogres sought to slay, but he had recourse, with a share (i.e offering a share), to the rulers of these worlds.
6.7.2	He sacrifices with (the formula): 'Let the sun protect me from the side of heaven, the Wind from those from the intermediate region, the Fire from those from the side of the earth, svaḥa!'
6.7.3	These are the rulers of these worlds, to them he had recourse with a share.
6.7.4	Strong by his voice is he, no injury in the assembly suffers he, who knows thus.
6.7.5	The Voice went away from the Gods; the Gods addressed her; she answered: 'I am shareless; let me have a share.' 'Who could make a share for thee?' The Chanters' she said. It are the Chanters who make a share for the Voice.
6.7.6	He should sacrifice to her (muttering): 'Bekura by name art thou; acceptable to the Gods; homage to the Voice! Homage to the Lord of the Voice! O Goddess Voice, what from thine (voice) is most sweet, therein place me. To Sarasvatī svāhā!'
6.7.7	Sarasvatī, forsooth, is the Voice, of her even he thereby lays hold by means of a share.
6.7.8	(At the sacrifice) of one whom he hates, he should, whilst offering this oblation, think in his mind of the Voice; he thereby possesses himself of his (viz. the enemy's) Voice (power of speech).
6.7.9	They move towards (the place where) the out-of-doors-laud (is going to be performed). They thereby move towards the world of heaven.
6.7.10	Somewhat stooping they move, for up-stream from here (from the earth), as it were, is the world of heaven, stealing along, as it were, they move; the sacrifice, indeed, is of the same nature as the deer - in order to soothe, to not terrify the sacrifice.
6.7.11	They restrain their speech; the sacrifice they thereby restrain; did they break the silence, they would reveal the sacrifice; therefore the silence is not to be broken.
6.7.12	Five officiating priests move (towards the out-of-doors-laud), holding on to each other; five-fold is the sacrifice; as much as is the sacrifice, that they (thereby) connect together.
6.7.13	If the Prastotṛ is severed (if he lets go his hold of his foreman), the head of the sacrifice is severed. Having granted to the Brahman a boon, he himself is to be chosen again. He thereby restores the severed head.
6.7.14	If the Udgātṛ is severed, the Sacrificer is deprived of the sacrifice. This sacrificial rite is to be finished without sacrificial fees, and then it is to be performed anew; at this (new sacrifice) is to be given what he intended to give (at the original one).
6.7.15	If the Pratihartr is severed, the Sacrificer is deprived of his cattle; the Pratihartr, forsooth, is the cattle; (in this case) his (viz. the Sacrificer's) entire property is to be given; if he does not give his entire property, he is deprived of his all.
6.7.16	The Adhvaryu bears the prastara (bunch of grass).
6.7.17	The bunch of grass is the Sacrificer; he thereby bears the Sacrificer to the world of heaven.
6.7.18	The sacrifice, having taken the form of a horse, went away from the Gods; the Gods brought it to a standstill by a bunch of grass; therefore a horse being wiped with a bunch of grass, is pleased. That the Adhvaryu bears the bunch of grass, is for soothing, for not terrifying the sacrifice.
6.7.19	Prajāpati created the domestic animals; these, after being created, being hungry, went away from him. He presented them a bunch of grass as food; they turned toward him.Therefore the Adhvaryu must wave slightly the bunch of grass, for the animals turn to a (stalk of) grass that is being waved (before them).
6.7.20	Cattle will turn to him who knows this.
6.7.21	He should chant after putting down the bunch of grass (on the ground), to prevent the sacrificial substance from being spilt.
6.7.22	But (in doing so) he holds the Sacrificer away from the world of heaven.
6.7.23	He (the Udgātṛ) should chant whilst touching (it) with his knee; thereby the sacrificial substance is not spilt by him nor the Sacrificer held away from the world of heaven.
6.7.24	They chant the out-of-doors-laud having looked towards the catvala. Here, forsooth, yonder sun was (once) (placed); by means of the out-of-doors-laud the Gods bore it to the world of heaven. In that they chant, having looked towards the cātvāla, they bear the Sacrificer to the world of heaven.
6.8.1	'He, in truth, can only be said to offer the sacrifice,' it is said, 'at the beginning of whose sacrifice they put the virāj in.'
6.8.2	They chant nine (verses), the him-sound is the tenth, of ten syllables is the virāj; they (thereby) put in the virāj at the beginning of his sacrifice.
6.8.3	They chant nine (verses); nine are the vital airs; they make thrive his vital airs; the him-sound is the tenth; therefore the navel, being unpieṚced, is the tenth of the vital airs.
6.8.4	They chant ning (verses): the Adhvaryu at the morning service draws nine (soma) draughts; these they thereby strain, the vital airs of these they let loose.
6.8.5	The him-sound is Prajāpati, the (verses) of the out-of-doors-laud are women. By holding, after the sound him has been made, the prāstāva, he effectuates a copulation even at the beginning of his (the Sacrificer's) sacrifice, in order that he (the Sacrificer) may procreate.
6.8.6	The him-sound is the 'yoking' of the stoma; by holding, after the sound 'him' has been made, the prastāva, he begins the chant with a 'yoked' stoma.
6.8.7	The him-sound is the sap of the sāmans; by holding, after the sound 'him' has been made, the prastāva, he begins the chant after moistening these (viz., the verses of the out-of-doors-laud) with sap.
6.8.8	With regard to the wild animals they chant this out-of-doors-laud; they chant verses of one form; therefore the wild animals are of one colour.
6.8.9	They chant them thitherward (right off, i.e. without any returning, without any repetition). Therefore (the cattle) begets thitherward and disperses thitherward.
6.8.10	On the open they chant; therefore the wild animals live on the open.
6.8.11	Out of doors they perform the laud, in-doors they perform the subsequent recitation; therefore they consume the (wild animals, the game) that have been brought to the village.
6.8.12	In view of the domestic animals, forsooth, they chant the ājyas; they chant verses of various forms; therefore the domestic animals are of various forms (colours).
6.8.13	They chant (them, viz. the ājyalauds) constantly returning; therefore the cows, having gone forth to freely roam about (on the meadows), do return.
6.8.14	On an enclosed (space) they chant (them i.e. the ājyas); therefore the domestic animals live on an enclosed space.
6.8.15	In view of yonder world they chant the (verses of the) out-of-doors laud; once only for these is made the him-sound and they are thitherward directed (not repeated), for yonder world is once and for all away from here.
6.8.16	In view of this world (the earth, earthly existence) they chant the ājya(laud)s; they chant them constantly returning; therefore this world is again and again returning.
6.8.17	'Thitherward directed are the vital airs of those', it is said, 'who chant the (verses) of the out-of-doors-laud thither directed' (i.e. without repetition, straight off). He should (therefore) chant as last (verse) one containing (the word) 'hither', for the retainment of his vital airs.
6.8.18	'They, forsooth, vanish from this world,' it is said, 'who chant the (verses) of the out-of-doors-laud thither directed'; he should chant the last (verse) with the sounds (i.e. after the manner) of the rathantara: the rathantara is the earth; he thereby retains a firm support on the earth.
6.9.1	(The triṣṭich beginning) 'Sing ye, o men, unto (upa) him ' he should take as opening one for one who is desirous of a village.
6.9.2	The men are the village belonging to the Gods, he (thereby) drives unto (upa) him a village.
6.9.3	The food is 'unto' (upa); food he drives unto him.
6.9.4	(The triṣṭich beginning :) 'Unto (upa) the born active' he should take as opening one for one who is desirous of offspring.
6.9.5	The offspring is 'unto' (upa); this by the word born' he produces.
6.9.6-7	(The triṣṭich beginning) 'Be thou clarified for the weal of our cow' he should take as opening one in a year in which the Great God slays his cattle. By (the words): 'be thou clarified for the weal of our cow' he heals his quadruped(s).
6.9.8	By (the words), 'for the weal of our people' (he heals) his biped(s), for the weal of our runner' (he heals) his one-hoofed animal(s).
6.9.9	Smeared with poison, forsooth are the herbs in that year, in which the Great God slays the cattle. By saying: 'for the weal, o King, of our herbs' he makes the herbs palatable for him; both kind of herbs ripen and become palatable for him: the kind that ripens uncultivated as well as the kind that ripens cultivated.
6.9.10	(The triṣṭich beginning) 'Be clarified as the foremost of speech' he should take as opening one for one whom he wishes to become excellent among his equals.
6.9.11	By (the words): 'be clarified as the foremost of speech' he brings him round to the foremost point.
6.9.12	The foremost point is excellency; he brings him to excellency.
6.9.13	(The triṣṭich beginning), 'these Soma-drops have effused' he should take as opening one for a plurality (of Sacrificers).
6.9.14	By (the word) 'these' he addresses them all; for (their) welfare, (their) prosperity.
6.9.15	By (the word) 'these' Prajāpati created the Gods; by (the words) 'have effused' (asṛgram) he created (asrjata) men, by (the word) 'Soma-drops', the Fathers; by (the words) 'through the strainer', the Soma-draughts; by (the word) 'swift', the laud; by (the word) 'all' the recitation; by (the words) 'unto riches', the other creatures.
6.9.16	In that (he said): 'these', therefore all the Gods that (were) in the beginning, (exist) even now.
6.9.17	And they enjoyed all possible prosperity; for stationary is this word.
6.9.18	In that (he said): 'have effused', therefore men are created day by day.
6.9.19	In that (he said): 'Soma-drops', the Fathers namely are, as it were, the Soma-drops.
6.9.20	(For they are) 'mind' (only), as it were.
6.9.21	The prosperity enjoyed by those creatures after they were created, falls to the share of those for whom he (the Udgātṛ), thus knowing, takes this (triṣṭich) as opening one.
6.9.22	The metres, forsooth, fetched the Soma; the Gandharva Viśvāvasu stole it (from them) and with it entered the water; the Gods sought after it, Viṣṇu spied it in the water; he doubted: 'Is it he (the Soma) or not?' He poked it with his foot and from it (from the Soma thus poked) drops effused; he announced to the Deities who stood near: 'These Soma-drops have effused.' Through the out-of-doors-laud, verily, the Sacrificer comes into existence; in that he chants (as prāstāva) the words: 'These Soma-drops have effused', he announces to the Deities the sacrifice that has come into existence.
6.9.23	Deprived of prosperity and not conducive to cattle, verily, is the morning service, for it is devoid of iḍā; by saying: 'the iḍā for
6.9.24	(The triṣṭich beginning): 'By fieṚcely brilliant lustre' he should take as opening one for a joined group (of Sacrificers).
6.9.25	(The words): 'by fieṚcely briliant lustre' represent the gāyatrī; (the words): by loudly sounding' (represent) the triṣṭubh; (the word) 'voice' (represents) the anuṣṭubh; (the words) 'the Soma-(draughts) (are) bright, mixed with the milk' (represent) the jagatī. This (verse) represents all the metres; the metres, forsooth, are a joined group as it were; by taking this (triṣṭich) as opening one, he makes them prosper by their own feature.
6.9.26	A joined group, verily, is devoid of courage and strength: the metres are courage and strength; he makes them possessed of courage and strength.
6.10.1	(The triṣṭich beginning) 'Agni, thou purifyest the lives'  he should take as opening one for those dīkṣitas amongst whom one dies.
6.10.2	Unclean, as it were, are the dīkṣitas amongst whom one dies; in that the opening (triṣṭich) is addressed to Agni pavamāna, Agni drives away from them the heat (the defilement) and the wind (or Soma pavamāna) purifies them.
6.10.3	In saying 'the lives' he puts life into them who are living.
6.10.4	(The triṣṭich beginning): 'For us, o Mitra and Varuṇa' he should take as opening one for one suffering from a lingering disease.
6.10.5	Gone away are the out- and inbreathing of him, who suffers from a lingering disease; Mitra and Varuṇa are the out- and inbreathing; out- and inbreathing he (thereby) puts into him.
6.10.6	(The triṣṭich beginning): 'Driving away the enemies thou art strained, away, o Soma, the envious' he should take as opening one for one who is calumniated falsely.
6.10.7	Envious verily are they, who calumniate falsely; these he drives away from him.
6.10.8	By (the words): 'going to Indra's agreed place' he causes him to go, cleaned (of the false imputation) and fit for (taking part at) the sacrifice, to Indra's agreed place.
6.10.9	(The triṣṭich beginning): 'Be thou, a bull, strained by the stream' he should take as opening one for a noble. The noble, forsooth, is a bull; he (thereby) makes him a bull.
6.10.10	By (the words): ‘and jovial to (Indra) accompanied by the Maruts', the Maruts being the peasantry of the Gods, he attaches the peasantry to him; the peasantry does not desert him.
6.10.11	By (the words) 'possessing thyself of all thine might' he by might, by courage afterwards encompasses for him the peasantry; the peasantry does not desert him.
6.10.12	(The triṣṭich beginning): 'Be thou, a bull, o Soma, strained after being pressed' he should take as opening one for one who desires: 'may I fare well in the foreign country'.
6.10.13	By (the words), 'make us honoured among men' he will fare well in the foreign country.
6.10.14	(The triṣṭich beginning): 'You both are Lords of light' he should take as opening one for two (Sacrificers); he (thereby) causes them to participate equally in the sacrifice: he bestows upon both of them the glory of the sacrifice.
6.10.15	(The triṣṭich beginning): 'The streams have flowed forward ' he should take as opening one for one who is desirous of rain.
6.10.16	By (the words): 'the streams have flowed forward' he causes the rain to fall from heaven; by (the words): 'of the bull that with vigour has been pressed' (he causes it to fall) from the intermediate region.
6.10.17	By (the words): 'that presents itself to the Gods' he brings it down on the earth.
6.10.18	By means of vigour, of strength, is given forth what (after being promised or due) is held back; by (saying): 'of the bull that with vigour has been pressed' he procures to him by means of vigour, of strength, the rain from heaven.
6.10.19	(The triṣṭich beginning): 'Become thou strained by this stream, by which the cows may come hither, the alien ones, to our dwelling' he should take as opening one for one who desires that alien cows may fall to his lot, that his dominion may obtain alien cows; by the fact that this (triṣṭich) is the opening one, the alien cows fall to his lot, his dominion obtains alien cows.
7.1.1	The gāyatra is (equal to) these (three) worlds (earth, intermediate region, sky); the chant belonging to it is to be performed in three sections; for three in number are these worlds; by chanting (the gāyatra) in three sections, he makes him equal to these three worlds.
7.1.2	Twice he should stretch the tone, the third (time) he should make him.
7.1.3	In that he stretches thrice, he thereby makes the gāyatra redundant.
7.1.4	He who chants an unresponded gāyatra, has no firm support; the response of the gāyatra is the him-sound.
7.1.5	It is to be thought mentally; he thus chants a responded gāyatra and gains a firm support.
7.1.6	'He who chants the gāyatra in view of these worlds, is not severed from these worlds; for his sake these worlds clothe themselves with strength (or 'food).
7.1.7	He should begin softly, then (chant) louder, and then still more loudly; thereby he chants in view of these worlds.
7.1.8	The chant (of the gāyatra) must be performed 'unexpressedly'. That which is expressed of the gāyatra is terrible; by chanting ‘unexpressedly' he avoids what is terrible in it.
7.1.9	The gāyatra is breath; he should not take breath (whilst chanting the udgitha), to prevent the breath from being cut off. If he takes breath, he will die before (his time), if he does not take breath, he lives his whole life.
7.1.10	If (however) he should take breath, he should take breath in the middle of the verse: the gāyatra, verily, is breath, the tone is breath; he thereby puts breath in the midst, into his body: he lives his whole life.
7.1.11	As nidhana he should take (the word) iḍā for one who desires cattle; svaḥ for one who desires (to reach) heaven; yaśaḥ, for one who desires spiritual lustre; āyuḥ, for one who suffers from disease; hamsi, for one who exeṚcises magic (spell for malevolent purpose).
7.1.12	These, forsooth, are the milkings of the gāyatra.
7.1.13	Into the possession of spiritual lustre, of cattle comes he, who knows this.
7.2.1	Prajāpati, having changed himself into the sacrifice gave himself over to the Gods. These did not agree together as to the precedence. He said to them: 'Run ye a race for it'. They ran a race (ajim ayan). Because they ran a race, therefore the ājya (-lauds) are called ājyas (aj-yā).
7.2.2	Indra understood: "Agni, forsooth, will win in the first place." He said (to Agni): 'Whichever of us both shall win in the first place, shall share with the other'. Agni was the first to win, thereon Mitra and Varuṇa, thereon Indra. Now, there was this one Hotṛ-function (still) to be won. Indra said to Agni: 'According to our agreement this one must be shared by us two'. This is the Hotṛ-function consecrated to Indra-agni: one and a half (of the) laud belongs to Agni, one and a half to Indra.
7.2.3	Four in number are they (the ājya-lauds) with six deities.
7.2.4	In six ways disposed is the sacrifice; the whole of the sacrifice he thereby lays hold off.
7.2.5	All the ājya-(lauds) are svāra; this is a sameness; they chant (verses) addressed to different deities: for the sake of taking away the sameness.
7.2.6	In view of the domestic animals they chant the ājya(-lauds) . They chant (them) constantly returning; therefore they (the animals, the cattle) beget thitherward and are born hitherward; therefore also they (the cows), having started to the (meadows), return.
7.3.1	The midday-service is purified by the following:
7.3.2	by three metres and five sāmans.
7.3.3	By chanting the midday-pavamāna(-laud) they strain the midday-pressing.
7.3.4	The (sāmans used) at the midday-pavamāna (-laud) are (equal to) all the sāmans (of the whole midday-service).
7.3.5	(They are) the gāyatra (saman), the sāman with finale, the one devoid of finale, the one with iḍā as finale.
7.3.6	In chanting the midday-pavamāna-(laud) they chant all the sāmans (of the midday-service).
7.3.7	The pavamāna(-laud) is the trunk of the service, the gāyatrī (metre) is its mouth; the gāyatra (sāman) is the breath; in chanting the gāyatra on the gāyatrī (metre) they put the breath into the mouth (of the sacrifice).
7.3.8	These metres are the out- and in-breathing: the gāyatrī is the out-breathing, the bṛhatī is the through-breathing, the triṣṭubh is the in-breathing; that they chant with these metres is for the continuity of the out- and in-breathing.
7.3.9	These metres are (equal to) these worlds: the gāyatrī is this world (the earth), the bṛhatī is this middle (world), the triṣṭubh is yonder highest (world). That they chant with these united metres is for the continuity of these worlds.
7.3.10	If another metre were to come in between them, he would disjoin these worlds.
7.3.11	Having chanted a gāyatra, they chant a saman with finale. The gāyatra is the earth; thereby an abode is made on the earth (for the Sacrificer).
7.3.12	Were they to chant at the beginning a (sāman) without finale, the Sacrificer would be deprived of abode.
7.3.13	They chant a (saman) with finale; the gāyatrī is strength, the finale is strength; by strength bhe (thereby) augments his strength.
7.3.14	With a (saman) having (the word) iḍā (as finale) they commence the bṛhatī (part) (of the laud).
7.3.15	Iḍā is cattle, the bṛhati is cattle; in the cattle he thereby puts cattle.
7.3.16	(Moreover,) on the bṛhatī most of the sāmans are (chanted).
7.3.17	On it (is) also (chanted) a (saman) with three finales.
7.3.18	The middle world, forsooth, is the least strong (of the three), as it were; to it thereby an abode is procured.
7.3.19	There is a (saman) with three finales; three rents there are in the services, these are covered by it.
7.3.20	There is a (saman) with three finales; three are these worlds; in these he (thereby) obtains a firm support.
7.3.21	There is a (saman) with three finales; by means of the (saman) with three finales the midday-service becomes firmly established; if there were no (saman) with three finales, the midday-service would not be firmly established.
7.3.22	The finales are of two syllables, the Sacrificer is a biped; he (thereby) instals the Sacrificer in the sacrifice, in cattle.
7.3.23	A (saman) devoid of finale is at the end (i.e. is the last of the midday-pavamāna-laud), to prevent (him) from falling across the world of heaven.
7.3.24	If it were one with finale, he would expel the Sacrificer from the world of heaven.
7.3.25	It is 'ciṚcumflected'.
7.3.26	By means of the tone (svara) food is offered to the Gods towards the end; he thereby offers, by means of the tone, food to the Gods towards the end.
7.3.27	The gāyatra (sāman) is at the beginning, the ciṚcumflected one at the end.
7.3.28	The gāyatra is breath, the tone is breath; he thereby puts breath in at both sides; therefore animals have breath at both sides.
7.3.29	Because the gāyatra is at the beginning, the ciṚcumflected (sāman) at the end, therefore he starts by means of out-breathing and gains firm support through in-breathing.
7.4.1	The midday-service is that part of the sacrifice, which is conducive to heaven, the pavamāna (-laud) (is that part) of the midday-(service), (which is conducive to heaven), the bṛhati (part) is that part of the pavamāna (-laud) (which is conducive to heaven); the sacrificial fees, being given at the chant of the bṛhati (-part), are thereby given on the place of the world of heaven.
7.4.2	The Gods said to the metres: 'Through you, let us reach the world of heaven'. They employed the gāyatrī, through it they did not reach it. They employed the triṣṭubh, through it they did not reach it. They employed the jagatī, through it they did not reach it. They employed the anuṣṭubh, through it they nearly reached it. They now squeezed out the essences of the quarters and added (these essences as) four syllables to the anuṣṭubh; that became the bṛhati, by means of it they reached these worlds.
7.4.3	'Verily, it is the bṛhatī through which we have reached these worlds' (they said) and so the bṛhatī ('great one') has its name.
7.4.4	What they had added to it (i.e. to the anuṣṭubh, from which resulted the bṛhati) was the cattle; the bṛhatī, forsooth, is cattle; in that the sacrificial fees (the cows) are given at the chant of the bṛhati (part), they are thereby given on their own place.
7.4.5	As to what they (the theologians) say: 'There are other metres which are laṛger, why is it called bṛhatī (the great one')'? (one could answer): This one, indeed, and none of the other metres, reached these worlds. The seven metres, which increase by four (syllables), each pass over into the bṛhatr; therefore it is called bṛhati'.
7.4.6	As to what they say: The morning-service is gāyatrī-like, the midday-service is triṣṭubh-like, the afternoon-service is jagatī-like, for what cause do they chant at midday the bṛhati (part)'?
7.4.7	By means of the out-of-doors-laud, forsooth, the Gods carried the sun to the world of heaven; but it (the sun) could not hold itself (there); they then fixed it at midday by means of the bṛhati; therefore they chant at the midday (-service) the bṛhati (part), for it is this (metre) that props up the sun at midday.
7.4.8	With whichever of the metres they chant at the midday-service, these all amount to the triṣṭubh (or: 'pass into the triṣṭubh', become equal to the triṣṭubh'); therefore they do not depart from the triṣṭubh: the midday-service.
7.5.1	Prajāpati desired: 'May I be more (than one), may I be reproduced'. He was in a languishing and unhappy (amahīyamānaḥ) state; he saw this āmahiyava (melody); by means of it he created these creatures; these, being created, were happy (amahiyanta); because they were happy, therefore it is the amahiyava.
7.5.2	These (creatures), being created (by him, or 'emanating from him ') went away from him; (through the words): 'the earth took (it) that was in heaven' he took their vital airs and, their vital airs having been taken (by him), they returned to him; (through the words): 'a formiḍāble protection, a great glory' he rendered them their vital airs. They struggled against him, but he broke their anger (through the words): 'I will laud'; thereupon they yielded him the supremacy.
7.5.3	The equals yield the supremacy to him who knows this.
7.5.4	The amahiyava is not only a creation of creatures but also a separation of good and bad (prosperity and adveṛṣity).
7.5.5	Separation of good and bad comes unto him who knows this.
7.5.6	The Gods Agni, Indra, Vāyu and Makha, desirous of glory, performed a sacrificial session. They said: 'The glory that will come to (one of) us, must be in common to (all of) us'. Of them it was Makha to whom the glory came. He took it anu stepped forth. They tried to take it from him by foṚce and hemmed him in. He stood there, leaning on his bow, but the end of the bow, springing upwards, cut off his head. This (head) became the pravaṛgya; Makha, forsooth, is the sacrifice; by holding the pravaṛgya (ceremony), they put the head on the sacrifice.
7.5.7	The Gods divided that glory among themselves; of it Agni seized upon the raurava (saman).
7.5.8	By doing so he seized upon the strength of the cattle.
7.5.9	Rich in cattle becomes he who knows this.
7.5.10	Agni, forsooth, is burning (rura), to him belongs this rauravai (saman).
7.5.11	The Asuras hemmed the Gods in; thereupon Agni saw these two burning, all-diveṛgent stobhas; through these he scoṚched them and, being scoṚched, they howled (aravanta), therefore (there is) the raurava.
7.5.12	Then Indra seized upon the yaudhājaya; by doing so he seized upon the thunderbolt; the yaudhājaya, forsooth, is the thunderbolt.
7.5.13	A thunderbolt at his rival he hurls who knows this.
7.5.14	Indra, forsooth, is the winner of battle; to him belongs that yaudhājaya.
7.5.15	'In battle (yudha) verily, we have won (ajaisma)' (thus Indra thought); therefore (there is) the yaudhājaya.
7.5.16	But Vāyu seized upon the auśana.
7.5.17	By doing so he seized upon the vital airs; the auśana, forsooth, is (equal to) the vital airs.
7.5.18	He who knows this, lives his whole (normal lease of) life.
7.5.19	Vāyu is the willing one, to him belongs that auśana.
7.5.20	Usanas Kavya, forsooth, was the chaplain of the Asuras; him by means of the wish-cows the Gods invited to come over to their side; they gave over to him those auśana(saman); the auśana(sāman)s, forsooth, are the wish-cows.
7.6.1	Prajāpati desired: 'May I be more (than one), may I be reproduced': He meditated silently in his mind; what was in his mind that became the bṛhat (saman).
7.6.2	He bethought himself: 'This embryo of me is hidden; through the Voice I will bring it forth'.
7.6.3	He released his voice ('speech') and this voice (i.e. this speech, the words uttered by him) became the rathantara.
7.6.4	'The chariot (ratham), verily, it has swiftly reached' (atarit) (said Prajāpati) and for this cause it is called 'ratham-tara'.
7.6.5	Then, after it (after the rathantara) the bṛhat came into existence. This, verily, is the great (bṛhat) (thing): 'long time has it been concealed' (said Prajāpati) and for this cause it is called bṛhat.
7.6.6	As an eldest son (to a human father) thus is the bṛhat to Prajāpati.
7.6.7	Indeed, it has a prior brāhmaṇa .
7.6.8	To priority (amongst his equals) comes he who knows this.
7.6.9	As to what they say: 'The bṛhat arose first in Prajāpati, why is it, that the rathantara has come to be yoked (applied') first' ?
7.6.10	It is true that the bṛhat arose first, but the rathantara had been created actually prior to it; therefore it comes to be yoked (‘ applied') first.
7.6.11	These two (bṛhat and rathantara) (originally) had the same finale; they did not agree to this and ran a race (to decide the question as to which of them it should belong). Of them the bṛhat by its finale has won the out-breathing, the rathantara by its finale as envelopped the in-breathing.
7.6.12	The bṛhat and rathantara, forsooth, are out- and in-breathing; for one who is suffering from a lingering disease, both should be applied; gone forth, verily, are the out- and in-breathing of him, who suffers from a lingering disease; he (thereby) puts into him out-and in-breathing.
7.6.13	As to what they say: 'Both the bṛhat and the rathantara have their finale outside the (verse), how is it that the bṛhat paṛtakes of (chants) that have their finale outside, (but) the rathantara of
7.6.14	The bṛhat is the out-breathing, therefore it paṛtakes of the (chants) that have their finale outside, for outside is the out-breathing. The rathantara is the in-breathing, therefore it paṛtakes of the (chants) that have their finale inside, for inside is the in-breathing.
7.6.15	Two big trees, forsooth, are the bṛhat and the rathantara; (their) nidhanas must not be put together.
7.6.16	If two big trees come into collision, then there lies (on the ground) a great shattering, a great breaking down (of branches).
7.6.17	The bṛhat is ira-like, the rathantara iḍā-like; the bṛhat is mind, the rathantara voice; the bṛhat is the melody, the rathantara the verse; the bṛhat is the out-breathing, the rathantara the in-breathing; the bṛhat is yonder world ('heaven, sky'), the rathantara this world (' earth'). Having meditated on these (equations) he should chant (either the bṛhat or the rathantara); then he chants them well equipped.
7.7.1	The bṛhat and rathantara are cattle; the (first) eight syllables of the first verse he (the Prastotṛ) takes as prāstāva; he thereby gains the eight-hoofed cattle.
7.7.2	The (first) two syllables of the last two verses he takes as prastāva; the Sacrificer is a biped, he (thereby) firmly establishes the Sacrificer in the sacrifice, in the (possession of) cattle.
7.7.3	Five syllables of the rathantara he (the Pratihartṛ) takes for his respond (pratihāra); he thereby gains the fivefold cattle.
7.7.4	Four syllables of the bṛhat he takes for his respond; he thereby gains the quadruped cattle.
7.7.5	Neither the bṛhat nor the rathantara was sustained by one single metre; so they put two kakubhs after it; therefore the first (verse) is a bṛhati and the last two are kakubhs; therefore they perform the bṛhat and the rathantara on one verse, for they were not sustained by one metre.
7.7.6	He makes nine risings in the bṛhat; nine in number are the vital airs; he thereby retains the vital airs.
7.7.7	Three risings he makes in the first (verse); the past, the present, and the future he retains by these; three in the middle (verse); (the life of) himself, his progeny and cattle he retains by these; three in the last (verse); three are these worlds; in these worlds he gains a firm support.
7.7.8	All wishes are fulfilled for him, who, knowing this, makes the risings in the bṛhat.
7.7.9	In chanting the prāstāva of the rathantara the Prastotṛ hurls a thunderbolt against the Udgātṛ; he (the Udgātṛ) should chant his part of the chant (the udgitha), after putting an ocean between; (the word) 'voice' (vak) is to be made the beginning of the part chanted by him; an ocean, forsooth, is the voice; he puts an ocean between, for security's sake.
7.7.10	The chant must be performed (by the Udgātṛ) strongly; he (thereby) throws back the hurled thunderbolt.
7.7.11	The chant must be performed stammeringly (and) confoundedly, as it were; he (thereby) confounds the thunderbolt.
7.7.12	The chanting should be performed swiftly, for the attainment of the world of heaven.
7.7.13	The rathantara is the God-chariot; its chanting should be performed whilst he (the Udgātṛ) causes it to stand firmly on each syllable, for a chariot stands firmly on each wheelspoke (successively).
7.7.14	He, forsooth, who mounts the God-chariot without taking hold (of it), falls down from it: the God-chariot (viz. the rathantara) is the earth; he should perform the udgitha whilst taking hold of the earth, then he does not fall down from it.
7.7.15	The rathantara, forsooth, is liable to destroy the eye-sight of the Udgātṛ; whilst its prāstāva is being chanted, he should shut his eyes and open them at (the words): seeing the light': (in this manner) he is not deprived of his eye-sight.
7.7.16	The rathantara, forsooth, is the procreative foṚce; if he says: 'of the still-standing', the voice of the Udgātṛ becomes standing still ('restrained'), and it (the rathantara) destroys his procreative foṚce; (instead of it) 'of the not standing still' is to be said, or, 'of the well-standing'; (then) the voice of the Udgātṛ becomes not still-standing (i.e. will not be restrained during the chanting) and it (the rathantara) does not destroy his procreative foṚce.
7.7.17	The pṛṣṭhas were created; by means of them the Gods went to the world of heaven; of these (pṛṣṭhas) the rathantara on account of its greatness could not fly upwards.
7.7.18	Vasiṣṭha having distributed its greatnesses, chanted it and went to the world of heaven. He (the Udgātṛ) should chant (the rathantara) after putting together these ('greatnesses').
7.7.19	'With thy greatness that is in the cows, that is in the water, or that is in the chariot, in the thunder, with thy greatness that is in the fire, therewith be thou united, o Rathantara; be full of riches for us'!
7.8.1	Unto the Waters came the seasonal period (the period favourable for conception). Vāyu (the Wind) moved over their back ('surface'). Therefrom came into existence a beautiful (thing). This was espied by Mitra and Varuṇa; they said: 'A beautiful (vāmam) (thing), verily, has here been born in the Gods' (devesu). Therefore there is the vāmadevya (chant).
7.8.2	Laying hold of it they said: 'We two have found this; do ye not dispute us it'. About it Prajāpati said: 'Out of me, forsooth, it has been born, to me it belongs'. About it Agni said: 'After me, forsooth, it has been born, to me it belongs'. About it Indra said: 'Belonging to the most excellent is this, I am the most excellent of you all, to me it belongs'. About it the All-gods said: 'Us for deity has that which has come into existence out of the Waters, to us it belongs'. Then Prajāpati said about it: 'Let it belong to all of us, let us all live upon it'. They deposited it in the pṛṣṭhas. Peṛtaining to all the deities, forsooth, in the vāmadevya.
7.8.3	In that it is (chanted) on verses containing (the word) ka, thereby it belongs to Prajāpati, for Prajāpati is Ka; in that it is (chanted) on unexpressed' verses, thereby it belongs to Prajāpati, for Prajāpati is 'unexpressed'.
7.8.4	In that it is (chanted) on verses in gāyatrī metre, thereby it belongs to Agni; for Agni has the gāyatrī as his metre. 
7.8.5	In that they deposited it in the pṛṣṭhas, thereby it belongs to Indra, for all the pṛṣṭhas belong exclusively to Indra.
7.8.6	In that the Maitravaruna recites his śastra after (the vāmadevya-stotra), thereby it belongs to Mitra-Varuṇa.
7.8.7	In that the last quarter (of the last verse) has a plurality of deities, thereby it belongs to the All-gods. In all forms he (thereby) gains a firm support.
7.8.8	Prajāpati forsooth, saw this womb, the gāyatrī (metre). He thought 'Out of this womb I will create the pṛṣṭhas'.
7.8.9	He created the rathantara; after it the chariot's noise was created.
7.8.10	He created the bṛhat; after it the noise of the thunder was created. He created the vairūpa; after it the noise of the wind was created.
7.8.11	He created the vairāja; after it the noise of fire was created.
7.8.12	He created the śakvarī-verses; after it the noise of the waters was created.
7.8.13	He created the revatī-verses; after it the noise of the cows was created.
7.8.14	Together with these noises, forsooth, these (the pṛṣṭhas) were created.
7.8.15	In him forsooth, who knows this, all noises, all auspicious voices sound.
7.9.1	The vāmadevya, forsooth, is the father, the pṛṣṭhas are the sons.
7.9.2	Out of this womb, verily, they were created.
7.9.3	Therefore, they chant the vāmadevya after the laud of the pṛṣṭhas, for appeasement.
7.9.4	For the unauspicious (or 'unappeased') (deeds) achieved by the sons are appeased by the father.
7.9.5	The vāmadevya, forsooth, is this middle world (the antarikṣa), out of it these two worlds, viz. the bṛhat and the rathantara, were created apart.
7.9.6	By the chanting of the rathantara those domestic animals, which belong to the rathantara, lean on the intermediate region; by the chanting of the bṛhat those animals, which belong to the bṛhat, lean on the intermediate region. These animals are gained by the chanting of the vāmadevya.
7.9.7	He should sit without moving whilst chanting the vāmadevya, in order that the domestic animals may turn to him.
7.9.8	To him turn the domestic animals, who knows this.
7.9.9	The vāmadevya is the intermediate region, he must chant (it) without shaking (his limbs), for unshaken is the intermediate region. The vāmadevya is cattle; he must chant (it) without hurting, in order not to hurt the cattle.
7.9.10	'How (then) is the vāmadevya to be chanted' they ask.
7.9.11	In the same manner as a she-cat takes her young ones between her teeth without hurting them by biting, (or) in the same manner as the wind blows gently over the water.
7.9.12	Independently the vāmadevya must be chanted.
7.9.13	He who chants the vāmadevya independently, becomes independent.
7.9.14	Another goes his way, but he does not go another's way.
7.9.15	It must not be chanted conformably to the bṛhat and the rathantara; on its own support it must be chanted; he (thereby) comes into the possession of a support.
7.9.16	The Gods divided the domestic animals among themselves; they excluded Rudra; he fixed his looks on them during the laud of the vāmadevya.
7.9.17	It must be chanted unexpressedly'.
7.9.18	By 'uttering' he delivers the cattle to Rudra. Rudra during this year is apt to slay the cattle.
7.9.19	One who is desirous of (obtaining) cattle should chant the vāmadevya on the verses containing (the words) 'ye prosperous ones'.
7.9.20	The prosperous ones are the Waters; the vāmadevya is cattle; out of the Waters he (thereby) produces cattle for him.
7.9.21	The contrary of ruin in cattle (it is true, thereby) falls to his share, but his young ones shrink, as it were.
7.9.22	For he deviates from the verses containing (the word) ka (i.e.) from Prajāpati.
7.10.1	These two worlds (sky and earth) (once upon a time) were together (i.e. not separated by the intermediate region); when they went asunder they said: 'Let us contract a marriage on equal terms'.
7.10.2	Of these (worlds) this (world) (i.e. the earth) gave the śyaita to yonder (world) (i.e. to heaven), yonder (world) to this (world) the naudhasa.
7.10.3	Thereupon the finales of both of them changed places; the naudhasa and śyaita, forsooth, are a God-marriage.
7.10.4	He who knows this, lights on a better marriage.
7.10.5	These worlds keep arranging themselves from hence upwards and (on the other side) from above downwards.
7.10.6	In that they chant the rathantara (earth), he yokes by means of it this world (the earth); by means of the vāmadevya, the intermediate region; by means of the naudhasa, yonder world (heaven). In that they chant the bṛhat, he yokes by means of it yonder world; by means of the vāmadevya, the intermediate region; by means of the śyaita, this (world).
7.10.7	He sits by (well-)arranged worlds, who knows this.
7.10.8	The naudhasa and the śyaita are (the same as) the rathantara and the bṛhat. In that they use the naudhasa correspondingly to the rathantara, they thereby use the bṛhat correspondingly to it, for the bṛhat cryptically is the naudhasa. In that they use the śyaita correspondingly to the bṛhat, they thereby use the rathantara correspondingly to it, for the śyaita cryptically is the rathantara.
7.10.9	He who knows this, chants both: the rathantara and the bṛhat.
7.10.10	The Gods divided amongst themselves the sacred lore (the bráhman); unto them came Nodhas, the son of Kakṣīvat; they said: 'A seer has come unto us; let us give him the sacred lore.' They granted him this saman; in that they granted (it) to Nodhas, therefore it is called the naudhasa ('the saman of Nodhas').
7.10.11	The naudhasa is sacred lore. One who is desirous of spiritual lustre should in chanting use this (saman): he comes in the possession of spiritual lustre.
7.10.12	Now (as to) the śyaita.
7.10.13	Prajāpati created the domestic animals; these, being created, went forth from him; he uttered over them this saman, they gave way to him and submitted; because they submitted, therefore it is the śyaita.
7.10.14	The śyaita is cattle; one who is desirous of (obtaining) cattle should in chanting use this (saman); he comes into the possession of cattle.
7.10.15	Prajāpati created the the creatures; these, being created, languished; he sniffed at them by means of the śyaita with hummā; thereupon they throve. The young ones thrive during that year, in which he chants, knowing this, the śyaita.
7.10.16	The Udgātṛ, forsooth, is the Sacrificer's creator (Prajāpati). In that he makes him (i.e. hum) by means of the śyaita, he becomes Prajāpati and sniffs at the young ones (thus causing them to thrive).
7.10.17	It has (the word) 'good' (vasu) for its finale; cattle is a good (thing); he finds a firm support amongst cattle.
8.1.1	At (a sacrifice) fit for charming (or 'bewitching') he should apply as the Brahman's chant the (saman) with (the word) vaṣaṭ as finale and at the midday-pavamāna (-laud) the (saman) with (the word) abhi ('on to') as finale.
8.1.2	The word vaṣaṭ, forsooth, is the God-arrow, and with (the word) 'on' (i.e. 'on to him': abhi) Indra hurled his thunderbolt towards Vṛtra; having hurled with (the word) 'on' a thunderbolt (i.e. a deadly weapon) towards him (towards his enemy whom he wishes to damage by charm), he shoots him with the God-arrow: the word vaṣaṭ.
8.1.3	For one who is desirous of (obtaining) cattle he should perform on the verses: 'Verily thou shalt extol' the traikākubha as Brahman's chant.
8.1.4	Indra gave the Yatis over to the hyaenas. Three of them were left over: Rāyovāja, Bṛhadgiri and Pṛthuraśmi. These said: 'Who will support us (as his) sons?' 'I' answered Indra and he, the three-humped, having put (them) on (his back), went along. He saw this chant. Because the three-humped (trikakubh), had seen it, therefore it is the traikākubha.
8.1.5	He again resorted to himself with (the verse): 'Verily thou, a God, shalt extol the moṛtal, o most mighty! Than thee there is no other giver of joy, o Lord! Unto three, o Indra, do I speak this word.' By this pragītha and this saman he created a thousand head of cattle and gave them over to them. They got a firm support.
8.1.6	He who is desirous of (obtaining) cattle; and he who is desirous of (finding) a firm support, should chant this saman on this pragātha; he gains a thousand head of cattle and gets a firm support.
8.1.7	Of triple strength and triple courage, verily, is this chant: to Indra are addressed the verses, to Indra is addressed the saman, and (the word) 'indra' is its finale; he gets a firm support in strength and courage.
8.1.8	He should take the traiśoka as the Brahman's saman for one who is suffering from a lingering disease.
8.1.9	These worlds (earth, intermediate region, sky) were (once) joined; they languished. Indra by means of this chant removed their languor; in that he removed (it) from the three (tri) languishing (socatam) (worlds), therefore it is the traiśoka.
8.1.10	The (languor) he removed from this world (from the earth), entered the harlot; that which (he removed) from the intermediate region, (entered) the impotent (the eunuch); that which (he removed) from yonder (world), (entered) the wicked (or 'sinful') man.
8.1.11	Therefore no thought of these ought to be cherished; to him who cherishes a thought of these he assigns a part of the languor.
8.1.12	Hurt by languor, verily, is he, who suffers from a lingering disease; in that the Brahman's chant is the traiśoka, he removes from him the languor.
8.1.13	They undeṛtake ('they chant') as finale (the word) divā; divā (by day'), forsooth, is the dawning; he makes it dawn upon him.
8.2.1	The kāṇva (saman) of which (the syllable) as is the finale, he should take as the Brahman's chant for one who desires firm support.
8.2.2	Kaṇva saw this saman (as it was) without (any) finale; he did not get (by its chanting) a firm support; he heard a cat sneezing (and making the noise) ās; he saw this as finale and thereupon (by chanting the chant with this finale) he got a firm support; (the reason) why this is the saman, is for getting a firm support.
8.2.3	The janitra of Vasiṣṭha he should take as the Brahman's chant for one who desires to obtain offspring.
8.2.4	Vasiṣṭha, whose son had been slain, saw this sāman; he got (by chanting it) children and his cattle was multiplied; (the reason) why it is this sāman, is for procreation.
8.2.5	The ātharvaṇa (sāman) he should take as the Brahman's chant for one who desires (to reach) the world.
8.2.6	The Atharvans, forsooth, desiring to reach the world, saw this saman; they by means of it saw the world of immoṛtality. (The reason) why it is this saman, is for getting to know (the way to) the world of heaven.
8.2.7	The abhīvaṛta he should take as the Brahman's chant for one who has a rival.
8.2.8	By means of the abhīvaṛta the Gods turned themselves against (abhyavartunta) the Asuras. (The reason) why the Brahman's chant is the abhīvaṛta, is for turning against the rival.
8.2.9	The śrayantīya he should take as the Brahman's chant for one who goes amiss in a sacrifice.
8.2.10	Prajāpati longed to possess his own daughter Uṣas. He lost his seed; this was poured down on the earth; he strengthened it, (thinking): 'may this of me not be spoiled '; he set it right and made the cattle out of it.
8.2.11	(The reason) why the Brahman's chant is the śrayantīya, is that it (this saman) strengthens him and sets him right .
8.3.1	The Gods and the Asuras contended for (the possession of) these worlds. The Gods resorted to Prajāpati; he gave them this saman, (saying): 'By means of this saman ye will be able to drive them away'. By it they drove them away from these worlds. Because they drove them away (akalayanta), therefore it is (called) the kāleya.
8.3.2	He who knows this, drives away his rival from these worlds.
8.3.3	The stoma, 'strength' (tara) by name, was with the Gods; the sacrifice, 'finding treasure' by name, was with the Asuras. The Gods by means of this stoma: 'by strength your treasure finding one' took away the sacrifice of the Asuras.
8.3.4	He who knows this takes, by means of the stoma, the sacrifice of his rival away.
8.3.5	There were (once) (ceṛtain) Gods called Sādhya. These, having cut off the afternoon-service, went together with the midday-service to the world of heaven. This (cut off afternoon-service) the Gods connected by means of the kāleya. That there is the kāleya, is for connecting the afternoon-service (with the midday-service).
8.3.6	The afternoon-service, forsooth, is 'finding treasure' (viḍādvasu); by taking as prāstāva (the verse quarter) 'by strength your treasure-finding one' he passes, in chanting, across to the afternoon-service.
8.3.7	The kāleya is (equal to) all the characteriṣṭics: in that it has a (whole) verse-quarter as prastāva, thereby it is rathantara-like; in that it makes the same risings as the bṛhat, thereby it is bṛhat-like; in that its respond contains a stobha, thereby it is bṛhat-like; in that it has a 'running' iḍā, thereby it is rathantara-like. In all characteriṣṭics he is firmly established.
8.4.1	There were (once) (ceṛtain) Gods called Sādhya. Together with the whole sacrifice they went to the world of heaven. The Gods said to the metres: 'Bring ye the soma hither.' They sent off the Jagatī; she returned leaving behind three syllables and having become monosyllabic; they sent off the Triṣṭubh; she returned leaving behind one syllable and having become trisyllabic; they sent off the Gāyatrī - at that time, forsooth, the metres consisted of four syllables - she returned bringing with her not only those syllables (that had been left behind by the two others), becoming thus octosyllabic, but also the three pressings, two in her hands, the third (in her mouth), biting it with her teeth. Therefore two pressings are provided with shoots, but the third is sucked out, because she had fetched it beween her teeth, sucking it out. The shoots of it (of the soma), that fell down as it was being fetched, became the pūtikas; the blossoms that fell out, became the arjunas; what she shook off (praprothat), that became the praprothas. Therefore, at the afternoon-service (or 'the third pressing') they pour out the sour milk: the soma which is eaten by the cows; thereof they pour out the sap, in order that there may be soma in it.
8.4.2	Triṣṭubh and Jagatī said to Gāyatrī: 'Let us join thee '. She answered: 'What will result therefrom for me?' 'What thou wishest' they said. She replied: 'To me must belong the whole morning-service, and I must have the lead of the last two services'. Therefore, the whole morning-service belongs to the Gāyatrī and the last two services are introduced by it.
8.4.3	Triṣṭubh joined her with (her) three syllables, so that she (Gāyatrī) became of eleven syllables; Jagatī joined her with (her) one syllable, so that she (Gāyatrī) became of twelve syllables.
8.4.4	Therefore, it is said that the gāyatrī is (equal to) all the metres, for the gāyatrī went making those increases.
8.4.5	Indra, loathing the afternoon-service, got away. The Gods by means of (the words): 'by the most sweet' made it sweet; by means of (the words): 'by the most intoxicating' they made it intoxicating ('strong'); by means of (the words): 'by the stream become thou, o Soma, clarified' they clarified it, and on (the words): 'pressed out for Indra to drink' Indra returned to it. (The reason) why he makes the prastāva with by the most sweet, most intoxicating is that Indra may take a share in the afternoon service.
8.4.6	'The most sweet' were the domestic animals among the Gods, 'the most intoxicating' amongst the Asuras; by (the words): 'by the most sweet, most intoxicating' the Gods took away the animals of the Asuras.
8.4.7	He who knows this takes away the cattle of his rival.
8.4.8	On these (verses is chanted) the saṃhita.
8.4.9	There were (once) (ceṛtain) Gods called Sādhya. These, having cut off the afternoon-service, went, together with the midday-service, to the world of heaven. The Gods (however) united it (samadadhuḥ) by means of the saṃhita (saman); because they united it, therefore it is the saṃhita ('united').
8.4.10	The kāleya goes before, the saṃhita comes afterwards; for by means of these two (sāmans) is the afternoon-service linked (with the midday-service).
8.4.11	The saṃhita is (equal to) all the characteriṣṭics: in that it has a (whole) verse-quarter as prastāva, thereby it is rathantara-like; in that it makes the same risings as the bṛhat, thereby it is bṛhat-like; in that is has after each verse-quarter a finale, thereby it is rathantara-like. In all characteriṣṭics he is firmly established.
8.5.1	There are the kakubh and the uṣṇih.
8.5.2	By means of the kakubh and the uṣṇih, Indra hurled his thunderbolt on Vṛtra; at the kakubh he made a stride onward, by means of the uṣṇih he hurled it. Therefore, the middle verse-quarter of the kakubh has the highest number of syllables, for it is a striding-on. Thereupon, he drew together; therefore, the last verse-quarter of the uṣṇih has the highest number of syllables, for in front the thunderbolt is, as it were, heavy.
8.5.3	A thunderbolt (i.e. a deadly weapon) he who knows this, hurls on his rival.
8.5.4	The kakubh and the uṣṇih are the nostrils (the nose) of the sacrifice. Therefore, although being the same metre, they both convey in different ways the sacrifice; therefore from each of the nostrils, although they are simiḍār, the two breaths issue in a different way.
8.5.5	The kakubh and the uṣṇih are the breaths (the vital airs); therefore they (the priests) do not make vaṣaṭ with them. If they made vaṣaṭ with them, they would put the vital airs into the fire.
8.5.6	On these (verses) the sapha (saman) is (chanted). Devoid of pha, forsooth, is the afternoon-service; (this saman is chanted) to make the afternoon-service provided with pha. As for the pauṣkala, by means of this (saman) Prajāpati created the domestic animals in abundance (puṣkala); to them he brought form (or 'beauty'); (the reason) why it is this saman, is that he (thereby) brings beauty to his beasts.
8.5.7	(The three verses, beginning): 'By fore-conquest from your plant' are a verse-quarter-virāj and syllabic virāj. By means of the verse-quarter-virāj, the Gods went to the world of heaven, by means of the syllabic virāj, the seers after (them) came to know the way to it. That there are those verse-quarter-virāj and syllabic virāj (verses), is for knowing the way to the world of heaven.
8.5.8	On these (verses) the śyāvāśva (is chanted).
8.5.9	Śyāvāśva, the son of AṚcanasas, who was taking part in a sacrificial session, was brought (by his fellow-sattrins who wished to kill him) to a desert. He saw this saman and by means of it created rain. Thereupon, he became all right and found salvation This saman, forsooth, is a means to get salvation.
8.5.10	He who has chanted this (saman) finds salvation and becomes all right.
8.5.11	Indra, loathing the afternoon-service, got away. The Gods by means of the śyāvāśva (and especially by its stobha): 'come, come' called him back. (Thereupon) he returned. The reason why there is this saman, is that Indra may have a share in the afternoon-service.
8.5.12	Then the āndhīgava. Andhīgu, desiring (to obtain) cattle, saw this saman; by means of it he created a thousand head of cattle. (The reason) why it is this saman, is that the cattle may flourish. It has a finale in the middle (and) has (the word) iḍā (as closing finale). Thereby the afternoon-service becomes all right. If it were not provided with a finale in the middle and if it had not iḍā (as closing finale), the afternoon-service would not be all right.
8.5.13	They make in the middle a finale of ten syllables; the virāj is of ten syllables; he (the Sacrificer) gets a firm support in the virāj.
8.5.14	(On the verses beginning:) 'Unto the dear ones he is clarified' is chanted the kāva(sāman); it is the chant of Prajāpati.
8.5.15	The 'dear ones' are the children, the 'dear ones' are the domestic animals; he gets a firm support in children and domestic animals.
8.5.16	The auśana and the kāva are the strings of the sacrifice: this God-case, forsooth, is closed up with regard to the sacrifice. (The reason) why these two (sāmans) are the last, is, that the sacrifice may be uninjured.
8.6.1	The Gods divided among themselves the sacred lore; what pith of it was left over, that became the yajñāyajñīya (saman).
8.6.2	The yajñāyajñīya, forsooth, is the pith of the sacred lore. By chanting the yajñāyajñīya they establish the sacrifice in the pith of the sacred lore.
8.6.3	The yajñāyajñīya is a womb: out of this womb Prajāpati created the sacrifice; in that he created sacrifice after sacrifice, therefore it is (called) yajñāyajñīya.
8.6.4	Therefore, formerly the Brahmins used to hold the out-of-doors-laud with this (saman), (thinking): 'Beginning at its womb let us go on to extend the sacrifice'. But, by chanting it at the end, they establish the sacrifice in its womb.
8.6.5	With the Asuras (once) was the whole sacrifice. The Gods saw the yajñāyajñīya. By means of (the words): 'by sacrifice on sacrifice in honour of Agni' they took from them the agnihotṛa; (by the words) 'and by hymn on hymn in honour of the skilful', the full- and new-noon sacrifices; by (the words): 'continually we (will extol) the immoṛtal Jātavedas', the seasonal sacrifices, and by (the words) 'as a dear friend I will extol', the sacrifice of soma.
8.6.6	At that time the metres (the verse-quarters of it) were: 'By sacrifice in honour of Agni; by hymn in honour of the skilful; we (will extol) the immoṛtal Jātavedas; as a dear friend I will extol'. Now, the Gods by means of the verses, repeating each time the beginning, (the first word of each verse quarter), took the sacrifice away from the Asuras.
8.6.7	He who knows this takes, through the verses, the sacrifice of his rival away.
8.6.8	A brahman, Kūśāmba, the son of Svāyu, a Lātavya (by gotra), used to say about this (chant): 'Who, forsooth, will today be swallowed by the dolphin that has been thrown on sacrifice's path?'
8.6.9	Now, the dolphin thrown on sacrifice's path is the yajñāyajñīya (sāman). By saying: 'by hymn on hymn' (girāgirā), thereby the Udgātṛ swallows himself.
8.6.10	He should (therefore) perform his part of the chant, making (the) ira (-sound); the Udgātṛ (thereby) establishes the sacrifice in food (irā) and will not die prematurely.
8.6.11	Unto (Agni) vaiśvānara the Udgātṛ surrenders himself by saying: prapra (forth! forth ') vayam; he should say prāprīm vayam. In this manner he will pass over Vaiśvānara.
8.6.12	He, forsooth, who recites a declining verse, will, after the performing of the chant, fare worse. Now, the (part of the yajñāyajñīya which contains the words) na samṣiṣam (I will not extol') is a declining verse; he should (rather) say nu samsisam or susamsisam (I will extol'; 'I will extol allright'). He then recites no declining verse, and after the chanting will fare better.
8.6.13	The sacrifices that have (the word) vāc (voice') at the end, leak through the cleft of the voice. Now, the sacrifices that end with the yajñāyajñīya, have (the word) vāc at the end. Untruth is the cleft of the voice; after the untruth that is spoken by one who performs the agniṣṭoma, the sacrifice leaks; on a syllable it must finally be established; by the syllable forsooth, he covers up the cleft of the sacrifice.
8.6.14	The syllable, forsooth, is Virāj's form : in Virāj he is finally established.
8.7.1	At the morning, verily, the metres are applied from hence upwards, from thence downwards they are applied at the laud of the yajñāyajñīya; yajñā vo agnaye girā ca dakṣase is (the metre) of twelve syllables; pra vayam amṛtam jātavedasam is (the one) of eleven syllables, priyam mitram na saṁsiṣam is (the one) of eight syllables.
8.7.2	He transforms the last (verse of the yajñāyajñīya-stotra) into an anuṣṭubh. The anuṣṭubh in the earth: on the earth he (the Sacrificer) (thereby) gains a firm support.
8.7.3	(Moreover) the anuṣṭubh is the voice; in the voice he is firmly established; the anuṣṭubh is pre-eminence; in pre-eminence he is firmly established.
8.7.4	How, now, must the yajñāyajñīya be chanted? they ask. 'Like an ox dischaṛging urine, thus indeed and thus indeed'.
8.7.5	'The Udgātṛ is continually nearing himself unto (Agni) vaiśvānara' they say, 'if he speaks the verse of the yajñāyajñīya manifestly'. It should be chanted by him while he passes over, as it were; he (thereby) passes over (Agni) vaiśvānara.
8.7.6	Unto (Agni) vaiśvānara the Adhivaryu gives over the persons seated in the sadas, by causing them to return to the laud of the yajñāyajñīya. It should be chanted whilst he covers himself completely up (with his garment), in order to prevent their being burned by (Agni) vaiśvānara.
8.7.7	The Fathers, however, do not know one who has completely covered himself (by his garment) and at the laud of the yajñāyajñīya the Fathers want to know (him) properly: up to the ears (only) the covering must be made. Thereby he is covered and (at the same time) not covered; so the Fathers know (him) and (Agni) vaiśvānara does
8.7.8	Behind (the gārhapatya) the wives pour down water; they thereby extinguish (Agni) vaiśvānara; for water is a means of extinguishing.
8.7.9	Besides, they (the paṛtakers of the sattra) thereby emit semen, for the semen is a fluid.
8.7.10	They (the wives) pour it (the water) along their right thighs; for from the right side the semen is emitted.
8.7.11	Rather a great (part of the garment) must be pushed back (by the wives); they thereby engender spirit for him.
8.7.12	They cause her to be looked at by the Udgātṛ, for impregnation's sake.
8.7.13	At the him-making they cause her to be looked at; for after the him-making the seed is implanted (the pregnancy follows).
8.7.14	Unto the third verse of the laud they cause her to be looked at, for threefold is the semen.
8.8.1	The Gods, forsooth, having acquired by conquest the agniṣṭoma, could not conquer the ukthas. They said to Agni: 'Let us gain the conquest by thee as leader'. He answered: 'What will therefrom result for me?' 'What thou wishest' they said. He replied: 'On verses addressed to me may they introduce the ukthas'.
8.8.2	Therefore, they introduce the ukthas on verses addressed to Agni.
8.8.3	And therefore, on gāyatrī-verses, for Agni has the gāyatrī as his metre.
8.8.4	Having made Agni their leader, they strode on, together with the horse; because together with the horse they strode on, therefore there is the sākamaśva (saman).
8.8.5	Therefore, they lead on the uktha (-laud)s with the sākamaśva; for by it at the beginning they conquered them.
8.8.6	Now, Indra said: 'Who is going to follow together with me?' 'I' said Varuṇa. Varuṇa stood behind him and Indra fetched (the uktha). Therefore a (hymn) addressed to Indra and Varuṇa is recited (by the Hotraka) after (the laud).
8.8.7	The same (God) said: 'Who is going to follow together with me ?' 'I' said Bṛhaspati. Bṛhaspati stood behind him and Indra fetched (the uktha). Therefore a (hymn) addressed to Indra and Bṛhaspati is recited after (the laud). The same (God) said: 'Who is going to follow together with me?' 'I' said Viṣṇu. Visna stood behind him and Indra fetched (the uktha). Therefore a (hymn) addressed to Indra and Viṣṇu is recited after (the laud).
8.8.8	What he had fetched for them was the cattle; the ukthas forsooth, are the cattle. He who desires (to obtain) cattle should perform an ukthya (sacrifice).
8.8.9	By means of the bṛhat, forsooth, Indra hurled his thunderbolt on Vṛtra; the sharpness of it fell down and became the saubhara(-saman).
8.8.10	'A sameness is brought about in the sacrifice' they say, 'if the pṛṣṭha(-laud) and the twilight(-laud) are both the rathantara(-siman) and no chant of the bṛhat comes between (these two)'. By chanting (however) the saubhara, the chant of the bṛhat is brought about between (these two), for the saubhara is the sharpness of the
8.8.11	If the over-night-rite (the atirātra) is chanted on the bṛhat(saman), then the saubhara must be taken as the Brahman's chant in the uktha (laud)s. He thereby furnishes the bṛhat fully with (its own) splendour.
8.8.12	(But) if it (the over-night rite) is (chanted) on the rathantara, he should take the saubhara (as the Brahman's chant), for avoiding sameness.
8.8.13	When the Gods went to the world of heaven, the quarters collapsed. By means of the saubhara (and more especially by its finale) ū, they propped them up. Thereupon, they (i.e. the quarters) became fixed and got a firm support. Then the Gods knew the (way to the) world of heaven. He who desires (to reach) the world of heaven and to get a firm support, should chant the saubhara; he gets knowledge of the way to the world of heaven and gets a firm support.
8.8.14	Prajāpati created the creatures; these, having come into existence, suffered from hunger; by means of the saubhara (and more especially by the finale) ūrj he gave them food. Thereupon they throve.
8.8.15	The creatures (i.e. children and young domestic animals) thrive in that year when he, knowing this, chants the saubhara.
8.8.16	They (i.e. the creatures nourished by Prajāpati) said: 'Well reared hast thou us'; hence (the name) saubhara.
8.8.17	The food, verily, that he gave them, was the rain.
8.8.18	He who wishes for rain, for food, and for the world of heaven, should chant the saubhara.
8.8.19	As finale for one who wishes for rain, he should take (the sound) hīs; for one who wishes to obtain food, (the word) ūrj; for one who wishes to reach the world of heaven, (the syllable) ū.
8.8.20	The saubhara (represents the fulfilment of) all wishes; in all that he wishes he comes to be established.
8.8.21	Now, as to the nārmedha(-saman).
8.8.22	As Nṛmedhas of the Aṅgiras-clan was taking part in a sacrificial session, they (i.e. his fellow-Sacrificers) set dogs on him. He resorted to Agni with (the verse): 'Protect us, o Agni, by one'. (Agni) vaiśvānara came and enciṚcled him. Thereupon he got a firm support and found a refuge.
8.8.23	This saman is a refuge procuring one; he who has used it in chanting finds a refuge and gets a firm support.
8.8.24	The verses (of the nārmedha) are of different metres: the characteriṣṭic of day and night.
8.8.25	For the characteriṣṭic of the ukthas is neither that of day nor that of night.
8.8.26	The first (verse) is a kakubh; then (comes) an uṣṇih, then a pura uṣṇih anuṣṭubh. They thereby do not deviate from the anuṣṭubh: (the metre of) the Acchāvāka's chant.
8.9.1	There is the hārivarṇa(-chant).
8.9.2	The Asuras were in these worlds. The Gods expelled them, by means of (the words): 'of golden splendour', from this world; by 'thou shinest' from the intermediate region; by 'for day and day' from yonder world.
8.9.3	So, he who knows this, expels his rival from these worlds and ascends (himself) these worlds.
8.9.4	Harivarṇa, who desired to possess cattle, saw this saman; by it he created a thousand head of cattle; that it is this saman, is for the thriving of the cattle.
8.9.5	When the Aṅgirases went to the world of heaven, they were pursued by the ogres; by means of this (sāman) Harivarṇa repelled them. That it is this sāman, is for repelling the ogres.
8.9.6	The pṛṣṭhas were created; their redundant lustre, their pith was collected by the Gods, and that became the udvaṃśīya(-chant).
8.9.7	The udvaṁsiya is the lustre of all the pṛṣṭhas; therefore they formerly did not apply it for a tribesman, in order to hold apart the good and the bad.
8.9.8	For he who chants the udvaṁsiya, has chanted the pṛṣṭhas.
8.9.9	The udvaṃśīya is (equal to) all the characteriṣṭic features.
8.9.10	The (syllable) ā (after the first verse-quarter of the udvaṃśīya): 'thee celebrate the seers' is the characteriṣṭic of the rathantara; for ā is the rathantara.
8.9.11	The beginning is (that) of the bṛhat, for the bṛhat is, as it were, upwards.
8.9.12	The presence of manifold stobhas is (that) of the vairūpa; for provided with manifold stobhas is the vairūpa.
8.9.13	The repeated push is (that) of the vairāja; for the vairāja is (chanted) with repeated push.
8.9.14	The ardheḍā (half-iḍā) is (that) of the śakvarī(-verses), the atisvāra (that) of the revatī(-verses).
8.9.15	The Gods, by means of the half-iḍā having repelled the Asuras, ascended, by means of the 'overtuning' (atisvāra) the world of heaven.
8.9.16	He who knows this, having by the half-iḍā repelled his rival, ascends the world of heaven by the 'overtuning'.
8.9.17	By the half-iḍā, forsooth, they finish the preceding sacrifice, by the 'overtuning' they begin the subsequent one.
8.9.18	A subsequent sacrifice falls to the share of him, who knows this.
8.9.19	Fivefold, verily, is this saman; the sacrifice is fivefold and cattle is fivefold; in sacrifice and cattle he becomes firmly established.
8.9.20	(One of) the two āṣṭādaṃṣṭra(saman)s he should take (for the uktha-laud of the Acchāvāka) for one who desires prosperity.
8.9.21	Aṣṭādaṃṣṭra, the son of Virūpa, grew old without 'sons, without progeny. He thought he had torn asunder these worlds . In his old age he saw these two sāmans, but feared lest they should not be taken into practice. He said: 'He shall thrive, who will chant these two sāmans of mine'.
8.9.22	This is the product of the seer's fervent wish. (The reason) why they are the aṣṭādamstra (sāmans, that are to be applied), is for thriving.
8.10.1	On gāyatrī (verses) they should lead on the uktha (laud)s for one who desires spiritual lustre; on gāyatrī (metre), the Brahman's saman; on anuṣṭubh (metre), the Acchāvāka's saman; this (last thereby) becomes gāyatrī.
8.10.2	Spiritual lustre is splendour; splendour also is the gāyatrī; he obtains (by chanting gāyatrīs) spiritual lustre.
8.10.3	On gāyatrīs they should lead on the uktha (laud)s for one who desires (to obtain) cattle; on uṣṇih (metre) the Brahman's saman, on anuṣṭubh (metre) the Acchāvāka's saman; this (last thereby) becomes uṣṇih.
8.10.4	The uṣṇih is cattle; he (thereby) obtains cattle .
8.10.5	On gāyatrīs they should lead on the uktha (-laud)s for one who desires men; on kakubh(-metre) the Brahman's saman; on anuṣṭubh (-metre) the Acchāvāka's saman; this (last thereby) becomes kakubh.
8.10.6	The kakubh is man; he (thereby) obtains men.
8.10.7	On virāj they should lead on the uktha (laud)s for one who is desirous of obtaining food; on uṣṇih (metre) the Brahman's sāman; on anuṣṭubh (-metre) the Acchāvāka's sãman; this (last thereby) becomes virāj.
8.10.8	The virāj is food; he (thereby) obtains food.
8.10.9	On akṣarapaṅktis they should lead on the uktha (laud)s for one who desires precedence; on uṣṇih(-metre) the Brahman's saman; on anuṣṭubh (-metre) the Acchāvāka's saman; this (last thereby) becomes anuṣṭubh.
8.10.10	The anuṣṭubh is precedence; he (thereby) obtains precedence.
9.1.1	The Gods, having conquered (from the Asuras) the uktha(laud)s, could not conquer the night, (for) they could not discern the Asuras, who had entered the night: the darkness. They saw that pragātha, which has an anuṣṭubh at the beginning: the virāj (i.e.) the light. By means of the shining one (the virāj): (i.e.) the light, they discerned them and by the anuṣṭubh, (i.e.) the thunderbolt, they drove them away out of the night.
9.1.2	In that it is that pragātha with an anuṣṭubh at the beginning, he first discerns his rival by means of the virāj (i.e.) the light, and then drives him away out of the night by means of the anuṣṭubh (i.e.) the thunderbolt.
9.1.3	EnciṚcling them on all sides, they drove them away; because they drove them away, enciṚcling them, therefrom the 'rounds' (the pāryayas) derive their name.
9.1.4	The first verse-quarters are repeated of the first round.
9.1.5	For, by repeating the first verse-quarters, they (the Gods) drove them (the Asuras) out of the first (part of the) night.
9.1.6	He begins the chants on (the verses beginning): 'him who drinks of the soma'.
9.1.7	The day, forsooth, is 'him who drinks', the night is the soma; by means of the day even they thus lay hold of the night.
9.1.8	On these (verses they chant) the vaitahavya (saman).
9.1.9	Vitahavya, the son of Śreyas, being a long time held off (from his dominions or his possessions, by his enemies), saw this saman. He (thereupon) returned and was firmly established. He who has applied this (chant) returns and is firmly established.
9.1.10	Into darkness do they enter who undeṛtake the night(-rite). That (the word) 'house' is the finale at the commencement of the night(-rite), is for finding the way.
9.1.11	When a man comes to his own house, then he recognises all, all is for him (as clear as) by day.
9.1.12	They (the Asuras after they were driven out of the first part of the night) retired into the middle (the second)-round; by means of the aurdhvasadmana (saman), they (the Gods) appropriated their voice.
9.1.13	The voice of his rival he appropriates who knows this.
9.1.14	It has a triple finale.
9.1.15	Just as of the day (rite) the midday-service has a triple finale as resting-place, so of the night (-rite) has the middle round a triple finale as resting place, for the sake of congruity.
9.1.16	The middle verse-quarters are repeated of the middle round; for by repeating the middle verse-quarters they (the Gods) drove them (the Asuras) out of midnight.
9.1.17	They (the Asuras) retired into the last round; by means of the (sāman), which has (the word) ‘fat-dripping' for finale, they took away their cattle; fat-dripping, forsooth, is the cattle.
9.1.18	He who knows this appropriates the cattle of his rival.
9.1.19	The last verse-quarters are repeated of the last round; for by repeating the last verse-quarters they (the Gods) drove them (the Asuras) forth out of the last (part of the) night.
9.1.20	By means of the junction, they then put them to flight.
9.1.21	By means of the āśvina (śastra)  they dispersed them.
9.1.22	He who knows this, finishes his rival finally.
9.1.23-24	The night rite, forsooth, is the match of the agniṣṭoma: the agniṣṭoma comprises twelve lauds and the night(-rite) comprises twelve lauds.
9.1.25-26	The night(-rite) is the match of the ukthya: there are uktha(-laud)s and the twilight(-laud) has three deities.
9.1.27	Just as of the day(-rite) the uktha(-laud)s are, so of the night(-rite) is the twilight(-laud): of different features are the ukthas, of different features are the triṣṭichs.
9.1.28	The rathantara (saman) he should take as twilight (-laud) for one who wishes firm support.
9.1.29	The rathantara is the earth; on the earth he gets a firm support.
9.1.30	The bṛhat(-saman) he should take as twilight-laud for one who wishes (to reach) the world of heaven.
9.1.31	The bṛhat is the world of heaven; in the world of heaven he gets a firm support.
9.1.32	The vāravantīya or the vāmadevya or the śrudhya, one of these he should take as twilight (-laud) for one who desires cattle.
9.1.33	These sāmans are the cattle; in the (possession of) cattle he is firmly established.
9.1.34	After (the laud) the Hotr recites the āśvina(-śastra).
9.1.35	Prajāpati, forsooth, created that thousand (head of cattle); this he gave to the Gods. They could not come to terms about it. Then they made the sun the goal, and ran a race (about it).
9.1.36	Of them the two Aśvins were foremost in the race. They (the other Gods) called after them: 'Let it be in common to us'. They answered: 'What would therefrom result for us both?' 'What ye wish' they (the Gods) said. They said: 'Let this recitation be called after us'. Therefore it is called 'the aśvin's (recitation)'.
9.1.37	All the deities, forsooth, are mentioned in the recitation .
9.1.38	It is to be recited swiftly; for they run a race, as it were. Before sunrise he should recite (it), for they had made the sun the goal.
9.2.1	On (the verses beginning): 'him who drinks of the soma vaitahavya (is chanted). Into the field of another they enter, who enter upon the night(-rite). That at the beginning of the night(-rite) there is the (chant) with (the word) 'house' as finale, is for the purpose of not going astray from his house.
9.2.2	On (the verses beginning): 'Unto Indra an intoxicating, the gaurivīta.
9.2.3	When the Gods divided the sacred lore, that which was left over from it became the gaurivīta.
9.2.4	Left over is the gaurivīta and excessive is the night(-laud); he brings the 'left-over' into the excessive.
9.2.5	On (the verses beginning): 'We herein intend thee', the kāṇva.
9.2.6	By means of this (saman), Kaṇva came into harmony with Indra. By means of it he comes into harmony with Indra.
9.2.7	On (the verses beginning): 'To Indra, who is given to joy, the pressed out (soma)' the śrautakakṣa. It is a might-chant, through it he becomes mighty.
9.2.8	On (the verses beginning): 'This soma, o Indra, for thee', the daivodāsa.
9.2.9	By means of the agniṣṭoma the Gods conquered this world; by means of the ukthya, the intermediate region; by means of the overnight (rite), yonder world. They longed again for this world; by the (word) 'here' they got a firm support on this world. (The reason) why it is this sãman, is for getting a firm support (on earth).
9.2.10	On the (verses) which accompany the night(-rite) they use, by way of modification, the aurdhvasadmana.
9.2.11	The Asuras, forsooth, were in these worlds; by means of the aurdhvasadmana the Gods drove them out of these worlds.
9.2.12	Therefore he, who knows this, performs, after driving his rival out of these worlds, a sacrificial session on his own abode.
9.2.13	On (the verses beginning): 'For us, o Indra, rich in food', the ākūpāra.
9.2.14	There was (once upon a time) a female Aṅgiras, named Akūpāra. As the skin of a lizard, so was her skin. Indra, having thrice cleansed her by means of this chant, made her sun-skinned; that, forsooth, she had wished. Whatever they desire as they chant this saman, that desire is fulfilled for them.
9.2.15	On (the verses beginning): 'Unto the soma thee, o Bull', the bull-chant (ārṣabha). It is a might-chant; by it he becomes mighty.
9.2.16	On (the verses beginning): 'Here, o Good one, is the pressed plant', the gāra. By means of this (saman) Gara pleased Indra. Pleased by him (by the Udgātṛ) is Indra through this (saman).
9.2.17	On (the verses beginning): 'For through this with might' the mādhucchandasa; hereby, forsooth, the not-worn-out form of Prajāpati is applied.
9.2.18	On (the verses beginning): 'Come ye hither and take place', the daivātitha.
9.2.19	Devātithi, who went about hungering together with his sons, found gourds in the wilderness; he approached them with this sāman; they appeared unto him, having become spotted cows. (The reason) why it is this saman, is for the thriving of the cattle.
9.2.20	On (the verses beginning): 'At every conjunction the very mighty', the saumedha. It is a night-chant, for the flourishing of the night(-rite).
9.2.21	On (the verses beginning): 'O Indra, at the pressed soma', the kautsa.
9.2.22	Kutsa and Luśa called in rivalry each upon Indra. Indra turned towards Kutsa. He bound him (Indra) with a hundred straps by the scrotum. Luśa said to him (to Indra): 'Free thyself, leave Kutsa and come hither. Why, pray, should one like thee remain bound by the scrotum?' Then, Indra broke these (straps) and ran forth. Thereupon, Kutsa saw this sāman; with it he called after him and he (Indra) turned back.
9.2.23	That it is this saman, is for securing Indra's attendance.
9.3.1	If they have undeṛgone the consecration for a sacrificial session and (one of them) rises in the middle, he should take a part his part of the soma and (therewith) perform a Viśvajit-overnight-rite, at which he gives all his possessions as sacrificial fee. In view of the whole they undeṛgo the consecration; the whole he (thereby) reaches.
9.3.2	By the sacrificial fees he gives, he even exceeds (the session).
9.3.3	If day-break falls in before the chant of the rounds has been completed, they should chant, on fifteen verses for the Hotr, on five for each of the others.
9.3.4	On (the verses beginning): 'O Agni, Uṣas forth-shining', they should perform the twilight(-laud). Among the stomas, the threefold one is (equal to) the (three) vital airs, of the sāmans the rathantara is the support. They (thereby) come into the possession of vital airs and of support.
9.3.5	Three hundred and sixty (verses) are recited by the Hotṛ.
9.3.6	So many days there are in the year; by a number of verses equal to that of the (days in the) year they thus reach the āśvina (recitation).
9.3.7	What is chanted too short, that is not-chanted; what is chanted exactly, that is chanted; what is chanted over (i.e. too much), that is well chanted.
9.3.8	If they chant too short, (i.e., if the number of stotra-verses or the required amount of syllables is too little) they should chant (in the next stotra, extra) as many stotra-verses as have been omitted, or they should increase (the next stotra) by as many syllables (as have been omitted).
9.3.9	If they chant too many, they should (in the next stotra) leave out as many (stotra-verses) as have been chanted too many, or they should shorten (the next stotra) by as many syllables (as have been chanted over).
9.3.10	If they chant too short, a saman with triple iḍā must be taken as agniṣṭoma-saman; one iḍā is the finale, by means of the two others the equilibrium is brought about.
9.3.11	If they chant too much, a ciṚcumflected saman must be taken as agniṣṭoma-saman; the ciṚcumflex, forsooth, is, as it were, the minus of the saman; by means of it the equilibrium is brought about.
9.4.1	If two sacrifices of soma are held simultaneously, he (the Adhvaryu) should, in the dead of night, make the summons for the morning-litany.
9.4.2	He (then) is the first to appropriate the Voice, the metres and the deities.
9.4.3	He should take as opening (triṣṭich of the out-of-doors-laud) one that contains (the word) 'bull'. Indra, forsooth, is a bull, he (thus) from their morning-service takes away Indra.
9.4.4	But they (the theologians) say (also): 'At the beginning of each service it (such a verse) is to be taken'; he (thereby) takes Indra away from the beginning of each service of theirs.
9.4.5	On well flaming fire is to be offered. All the deities, forsooth, are (equal to) Agni; (thus) he offers whilst seeing (by the flames of the fire) all the deities.
9.4.6	He sacrifices with (the formulas): 'For lying down, for sitting down! For the conquest of the gāyatrī-metre, svāhā! - For lying down, for sitting down! For the conquest of the triṣṭubh-metre, svāhā! - For lying down, for sitting down! For the conquest of the jagatī-metre, svāhā!'.
9.4.7	The conquests, forsooth, are the metres; by means of these he conquers them (his rivals). - Both sāmans, the rathantara and the bṛhat must be applied.
9.4.8	Where are, forsooth, the two bay (steeds) of Indra, there is Indra. Now the rathantara and the bṛhat are Indra's bay (steeds). In that both, the rathantara and the bṛhat, are applied, he is the first to lay hold of Indra's bay (steeds).
9.4.9	The two tauraśravasa(-sāmans) must be applied.
9.4.10	Turaśravas and the Pārāvatas (once upon a time) performed simultaneously sacrifices of soma. Thereupon, Turaśravas saw these two sāmans. For these, Indra carried off, unto him, by means of a cotton tree from the side of the Yamunā their (the rival's) offering substances. In that there are the two tauraśravasa (sāmans), he appropriates their (his rivals') offering substances.
9.4.11	They should be the first to press out the soma.
9.4.12	Those (ships), forsooth, that are the first to enter the water, are the first to reach the stairs of the landing place (on the opposite shore or bank); (in this way) they are the first to lay hold of Indra.
9.4.13	The vihavya (hymn) must be recited (by the Hotṛ).
9.4.14	Jamadagni and the seers performed (once upon a time) simultaneously sacrifices of soma. Thereupon, Jamadagni saw this vihavya(-hymn). To him Indra turned himself. In that the Hotr recites the vihavya, he takes away Indra from them (from the rivale).
9.4.15	If the other (sacrifice of soma) be an agniṣṭoma, then an ukthya must be performed; if an ukthya, then an atirātra. That sacrifice which is laṛger is welcome to Indra; by the laṛger sacrifice he takes away Indra from them.
9.4.16	But they say also: 'Difficult to reach, so to say, is the further path; from the sacrifice which he undeṛtakes in the beginning he should not depart'.
9.4.17	The sajanīya (hymn) must be recited, the kayāśubhīya (-hymn) of Agastya must be recited.
9.4.18	From this (world) and from yonder (world), from the today and the tomorrow, from the pair, from the day and the night he excludes them.
9.5.1	If they (i.e., some rivals) take away the soma before it has been bought, other soma must be bought.
9.5.2	If they take it away after it has been bought, other soma, which is to be found in the vicinity, must be obtained; but he should give something (some fee) to the soma-buyer.
9.5.3	If they cannot obtain any soma, they should press (instead of the soma) pūtīkaplants; if he cannot obtain these, then arjuna-plants.
9.5.4	The Gāyatrī fetched the soma; a soma-guard dischaṛged an arrow after her and cut off a feather of her (off Gāyatrī); that shoot of it (of the soma) which fell down, became the pūtika (-plant); in it the Gods found help; it verily is the pūtika; in that they press out the pūtikas, they find help for him.
9.5.5	Fresh milk and pūtīkas (are to be pressed instead of the soma) at (the) morning (-service); boiled milk and pūtīkas at (the) midday (-service); sour milk and pūtīkas at (the) afternoon(-service).
9.5.6	'The soma-draught, forsooth, goes away from him', they say, 'whose soma they take away'. It enters the plants and the cattle: (in substituting the pūtīkas and the different kinds of milk) he retains him (the soma) out of the plants and the cattle.
9.5.7	Indra slew Vṛtra. The soma which flowed out of his (Vṛtra's) nose, that became the brown-tufted arjunas; that which flowed out of his omentum, as it was cut out, became the red-tufted ones. The brown-tufted arjunas he should press (if no pūtikas are obtainable); this, forsooth, (viz., the brown colour) is the feature of the brāhmin; (in doing so) he actually presses the soma.
9.5.8	The śrayantīya (-sāman) must be taken as the Brāhman's chant; thereby he puts him (the soma) all right.
9.5.9	The yajñāyajñīya (-saman) he should shift on to the anuṣṭubh(-part) ; he (thereby) makes him thrive by the voice. The vāravantīya must be taken as agniṣṭomasāman, in order to encompass valour (and) strength.
9.5.10	Five sacrificial fees (cows) must be given.
9.5.11	Fivefold is the sacrifice; as much as is the sacrifice, that he (thereby) lays hold on.
9.5.12	Having come up from the lustral bath, he should undeṛgo anew the consecration.
9.5.13	On the occasion of this (sacrifice) he should give the sacrificial fees that he intended to give.
9.6.1	If the soma-trough bursts, he should take as the Brahman's chant the saman which has the word vaṣaṭ as finale.
9.6.2	The soma of him, whose trough bursts, is spilled, as it has not been consecrated by the word vasaț; in that the Brahman's chant is the one that has vaṣaṭ as finale, his soma becomes consecrated by the vaṣaṭ.
9.6.3	It is to be applied on the verses (beginning): 'Wandering alone in the midst of many.'
9.6.4	For this trough bursts in the midst of many.
9.6.5	Here (however) they say: 'A mishap should not be bespoken by a (word of) mishap: he, who, after the trough has burst, applies (the chant) on verses containing (the word) dadrāṇa, now bespeaks a mishap by a (word of) mishap.'
9.6.6	The śrayantīya only is to be taken (as the Brahman's chant, and not the vaṣaṭkāraṇidhana).
9.6.7	Prajāpati created the creatures; he thought himself milked out, emptied out. He saw this śrāyantlya (sāman); by means of it he braced himself fully by progeny, cattle (and) strength.
9.6.8	Milked out, as it were, emptied out is he, whose trough bursts; in that the śrāyantiya is the Brahman's chant, he braces himself again fully with progeny, cattle (and) strength.
9.6.9	If the śrayantīya is the Brahman's chant, he should apply the saman, which has the word vaṣaṭ as finale, on anuṣṭubh (-verses) addressed to Viṣṇu.
9.6.10	What (part) of the sacrifice trickles away (by the fissure in the trough), that part trickles away towards the Voice; the anuṣṭubh is the Voice, and Viṣṇu is the sacrifice. By means of the Voice, (i.e., the anuṣṭubh) he covers the fissure in the sacrifice.
9.6.11	What (part) of the sacrifice trickles away, that part trickles away at the end. The vāravantīya must be taken as agniṣṭomasaman. He (thereby) covers up the fissure in the sacrifice.
9.7.1	If there is left over (of the) soma from the morning service, they should chant the gāyatra (melody) on the verses in which the Maruts are invoked (which begin): 'This soma is pressed out'.
9.7.2	The soma which is left over from the morning-service, is left over coveting the midday-service. Therefore, they chant on verses, in which the Maruts are invoked, for at the midday-service the Maruts are invoked, and therefore also (they chant) gāyatrī-verses, for gāyatrī-like is the morning-service.
9.7.3	The same (kind of) stoma is to be taken as that after which it (the soma) is left over, for the sake of congruence.
9.7.4	The Hotr addresses, after (the laud), a (hymn) addressed to Indra and Viṣṇu.
9.7.5	Indra, forsooth, is valour, Viṣṇu is the sacrifice, in valour even and in the sacrifice he is firmly established.
9.7.6	If there is left over from the midday-service, they should chant the gaurivīta (melody) on the verses, in which the Sun is invoked, (beginning): 'Verily, thou art great, o Sun'.
9.7.7	The soma which is left over from the midday-service, is left over coveting the afternoon-service. Therefore, they chant verses in which the Sun is invoked, for at the afternoon-service the Sun is invoked, and therefore also (they chant) bṛhati (verses), for bṛhati-like is the midday-service.
9.7.8	The same (kind of) stoma is to be taken as that after which it (the soma) is left over, for the sake of congruence. The Hotr recites, after the (laud), a (hymn) addressed to Indra and Vișnu. Indra is strength, Viṣṇu is the sacrifice, in strength even and in the sacrifice he is firmly established.
9.7.9	If there is left over from the afternoon-service, they should chant the gaurivīta (melody) on verses addressed to Viṣṇu śipiviṣṭa.
9.7.10	Viṣṇu śipiviṣṭa is the sacrifice; in the sacrifice, in Viṣṇu he (thereby) is firmly established. - Redundant is the gaurivīta he (thus) puts the redundant (soma) into the redundant (gaurīvita).
9.7.11	They should, further, do the following: the uktha (laud)s should lead on further. This (soma), which is left over from the agniṣṭoma, is left over coveting the uktha (laud)s. If there is left over from the uktha (laud)s, an overnight-rite should be performed. This (soma) which is left over from the uktha(laud)s is left over coveting the night (-rite). If there is left over from the night (-rite), they should chant the verses addressed to Viṣṇu śipivista on the bṛhat (melody). 'That soma, however', they say, 'is left over, which is left over from the night (-rite)'.
9.7.12	That (soma) verily which is left over from the night (-rite), is left over coveting yonder world. They should chant the bṛhat (melody); the bṛhat is able to reach yonder world: that same (world) he reaches (by means of the bṛhat).
9.8.1	If one of those who have undeṛgone the consecration for a sacrifice of soma, comes to die, they should, having cremated him, tie up his bones; then they should consecrate (in his place) him who stands in relation nearest to him and perform the sacrifice with him.
9.8.2	They should, further, do the following: having pressed out further the soma, they (the Chanters) should, before taking the soma-draughts, perform a laud either at the southern corner or at the mārjalīya.
9.8.3	He forsooth, who dies, being consecrated, has a right to a share in the sacrifice; him they thereby appease.
9.8.4	They chant the yāma (melody); they (thereby) lead him to the world of Yama.
9.8.5	Three verses they chant; for in the third world (reckoned from here) are the Fathers.
9.8.6	They chant them right off (i.e., without repeating), for yonder world is (situated) thitherward from this (world).
9.8.7	They chant the verses of the Sārparājñī.
9.8.8	By means of these (verses) the Serpent Arbuda removed his dead skin; their dead skin even they remove by these (verses).
9.8.9	Reciting these verses after (the laud), they walk around the mārjālīya, beating their left thighs.
9.8.10	He (in doing thus) recites the (verses of the) śastra after the laud. In yonder world they fan him.
9.8.11	'They swerve from the path', they say, 'who officiate for a deceased.' They take the soma-draughts in this order, that the one destined for Indra and Vāyu comes first. In this way they return to the path.
9.8.12	(The triṣṭich beginning): 'O Agni, thou purifyest the lives', must be taken as the opening one. In those, who live, he (therby) puts life.
9.8.13	After a year, they should perform a sacrifice for the bones (of the deceased). The year is the allayment of all; were they to perform the sacrifice before the (end of the) year, the speech would become wounded (and) mangled.
9.8.14	The laud should be illimited, for illimited is yonder world; (or) the pavamāna-(laud)s (the out-of-doors laud, the midday-pavamāna-laud and the ārbhava-pavamāna-laud) should be threefold, all the rest seventeen-versed.
9.8.15	As to why the pavamāna(-laud)s are threefold: threefold are the vital airs; (by undeṛtaking the threefold stoma) they come unto the vital airs. As to why all the rest is seventeenfold: Prajāpati, forsooth, is seventeenfold; (by undeṛtaking the seventeenfold stoma) they come unto Prajāpati.
9.8.16	'Of out-breathing and in-breathing are those deprived', they say, 'who officiate for a deceased'. They take the soma-draughts in this order, that the one destined for Mitra and Varuṇa comes first; Mitra and Varuṇa are the out- and in-breathing, (in this manner) they are fully provided with out- and in-breathing.
9.9.1	Whose (soma in the) trough becomes exhausted, the breath of that one becomes exhausted along with the exhaustion of the (soma in the) trough, for soma is the breath.
9.9.2	About this (case) they say: 'He should pour milk into (the trough).
9.9.3	But they (other authorities) say: 'Concealed, as it were, is the milk; he should (rather) pour water out on (a piece of) gold and (the soma) out on the gold'.
9.9.4	Water, forsooth, is (equal to) the vital airs; gold is (equal to) immoṛtality; he (thus) puts his vital airs into immoṛtality; he (the Sacrificer) lives his whole life.
9.9.5	Whose nārāśaṃsa (cup) is dried up, the breath of that one becomes exhausted along with the drying up of the nārāśaṃsa cup, for soma is the breath.
9.9.6	Of the graha, which the Adhvaryu draws as the last, he should pour a small quantity  (in the nārāśaṃsa-cup).
9.9.7	For the sake of atonement the graha is drawn; by means of an atonement he makes atonement for him.
9.9.8	If soma of which has been drunk and soma of which not (yet) has been drunk, come to be mixed up, he should, having shifted some coals inside the enclosing pegs (of the āhavanīya-fire), make an offering (of it on these coals) with (the formula): 'From the offered and the not-offered, from the not-offered and the offered, from the drunk and from the not-drunk soma paṛtake ye both, o Indra and Agni, the pressed out, svāhā!'. This is the atonement therefore.
9.9.9	From the soma which is unfit for drinking, he should pour out an offering with (the words): To Prajāpati, svāhā!' in the north-eastern resounding-hole.
9.9.10	With (the formula): 'The drop has gone down on the drop' he should paṛtake of soma on which rain has fallen.
9.9.11	'Of thee, o Drop, (i.e., o Soma), that hast been drunk by Indra, of thee that containest vigour, that art accompanied by thy whole troop, that art invited, I paṛtake, accompanied by my whole troop and being invited'.
9.9.12	For one over whose soma-cup the summons has been made, he should perform, having gone to the āgnīdhra, an offering with clarified butter with (the verse): 'The golden embryo was evolved at the beginning; it was, when born, the sole Lord of beings; it maintained earth and heaven; thee, o Soma, (who art) that (Lord), we honour with offering, svaḥa!' This is the atonement therefore.
9.9.13	If (during the act of pressing the soma) one of the stones used for pressing breaks off, the Sacrificer is deprived of his cattle. The stones for pressing, forsooth, are the cattle. They should chant the saman of Dyutāna of the Maruts.
9.9.14	Of the Maruts, forsooth, are the stones for pressing; by their own feature they thereby make them thrive.
9.9.15	If the soma is burnt, the Adhvaryu should mark the grahas, the Udgātṛ the stotras, the Hotṛ the śastras, and, then, they should (on another, newly chosen place for worship) proceed with the sacrifice in due order. Five (cows) must be given (as) sacrificial fee. Fivefold is the sacrifice, as much as is the sacrifice, that he (thereby) lays hold on. Having come up from the lustral bath, he should undeṛgo the consecration anew and (at this new sacrifice of the same order as the former) should give what he intended to give (as sacrificial fee at the first sacrifice, at which the soma was burnt). He should undeṛgo the consecration before the twelfth (day); if he were to extend it beyond the twelfth (day), it would vanish.
9.10.1	If the mahāvīra breaks, he should touch, when it is broken (muttering the three verses): 'He, who, even without a clamp, before the pieṚcing of the neck-ropes, makes the combination, he, the bountiful, the one of much good, removes again what is spoiled. - Let us not fear as strangers, o Indra, as removed from thee! O God with the thunderbolt, we thought ourselves ill-famed, as trees that are devoid (of leaves). - We thought ourselves slow and weak, o Slayer of Vṛtra! May we once more, o Hero, through thy great liberality be gladdened after our praise',  (with these verses) he should touch the broken mahāvīra (pot). This is therefore the atonement.
9.10.2	Assuming an asuric character, the lustre, valour, strength, food, children and cattle recede from him, whose sacrificial post takes leaves; he is liable to come to worse fortune.
9.10.3	He should immolate to Tvaṣṭṛ a multi-colour animal. Tvaṣṭṛ, forsooth, is the fashioner of the colours (forms); to him he thereby resorts; he provides him with lustre, splendour, valour, strength, food, children and cattle. This is therefore the atonement.
10.1.1	Through fire, earth and plants, thereby this world is threefold; through wind, intermediate region and birds, thereby that world is threefold, which stands between; through sun, sky and stars, thereby yonder world is threefold. This is the base of the threefold (stoma, which consists of thrice three verses), this is its connection.
10.1.2	Provided with a firm base and connections is he, who knows this.
10.1.3	They call this (stoma) also 'the firm foundation', for the trivṛt is firmly founded on these worlds.
10.1.4	The base of the fifteen-versed (stoma) are the half-months, these are its connection.
10.1.5	Provided with a firm base and with connections is he who knows this.
10.1.6	They call this (stoma) also 'vigour (and) strength', for half-month-wise the children and (young) cattle foster vigour (and) strength.
10.1.7	The base of the seventeen-versed (stoma) is the year: (there are) twelve months (and) five seasons. This is the base of the seventeen-versed (stoma), this its connection.
10.1.8	Provided with a firm base and with connections is he who knows this.
10.1.9	They call this (stoma) also 'the production', for after a year (of pregnancy) the children and (young) cattle are produced (born).
10.1.10	The base of the twenty-one-versed (stoma) is the sun: (there are) twelve months, five seasons, the sun is (number) twenty-first. This is the base of the twenty-one-versed (stoma), this its connection.
10.1.11	Provided with a firm base and with connections is he who knows this.
10.1.12	They call this (stoma) also the bed of the Gods'; he who knows this, reaches the bed of the Gods.
10.1.13	The base of the thrice-ninefold (or twenty-seven-versed) (stoma) is the threefold (stoma), this is its connection.
10.1.14	Provided with a firm base and with connections is he who knows this.
10.1.15	They call this (stoma) als 'the increase', for it is an increased three-fold one.
10.1.16	The base of the thirty-three-versed (stoma) are the deities: (there are) thirty-three deities and Prajāpati is the thirty-fourth. This is the base of the thirty-three versed (stoma), this its connection.
10.1.17	Provided with a firm base and with connections is he who knows this.
10.1.18	They call this (stoma) also 'the firmament', for Prajāpati is pain to nobody.
10.1.19	The base of the chandoma (-days) are the metres, this is their connection.
10.1.20	Provided with a firm base and with connections is he who knows this.
10.1.21	They call these (stomas) also 'the thriving', for the chandomas are cattle.
10.2.1	Prajāpati had created the creatures; he was exhausted; for him the Voice raised up a light; he said: 'who is it, that has raised up a light for me?' 'Thine own Voice', she answered. He spoke to her: 'Let them sacrifice, having applied thee, the light among the metres, the Virāj'.
10.2.2	Therefore, they call that stoma, which amounts to the virāj, the jyotiṣṭoma-agniṣṭoma; for the virāj is the light of the metres.
10.2.3	A light among his equal becomes he who knows this.
10.2.4	The anuṣṭubh and the seventeen-versed (stoma) copulated; the anuṣṭubh brought forth the metres which increase by four syllables, the seventeen-versed (stoma) brought forth the stomas which increase by six (stotra-verses). These two generated her (the virāj) in the middle.
10.2.5	The thrice-threefold (stoma) and the thrice-ninefold (stoma) are connected with the rathantara; after these two, goat and horse were created; therefore, these two (goat and horse ?) push the rathantara-day in front of them.
10.2.6	The fifteenfold and the twenty-one-fold stomas are connected with the bṛhat; after these two, cow and sheep were created; therefore, these two (cow and sheep ?) illuminate the bṛhat-day in front of them.
10.2.7	About him who knows this, they say 'Even of the domestic animals he understands the language'.
10.3.1	Prajāpati desired: May I be more (than one), may I be reproduced'. He peṚceived in himself the seasonal period . Therefrom, he created the officiating priests; because he created them from the seasonal period, therefore they are called ṛtvij. By means of them he approached the twelve-day-rite, and prospered.
10.3.2	(Thinking) 'Our father has prospered', the months undertook (the twelve-day-rite). They prospered by means of the consecration; at the upasads they consecrated the thirteenth (month); this one came behind. Therefore, one who has undeṛgone the consecration on the upasad(-day)s, comes behind; for they (some theologians) teach a thirteenth month and (others do) not (teach it).
10.3.3	One (person) may undeṛtake the consecration, for Prajāpati, (being) one, prospered; twelve (persons) may undeṛtake the consecration, for the months, (being) twelve, prospered; twenty-four may undeṛtake the consecration, for the half-months, (being) twenty-four, prospered.
10.3.4	If a twenty-fifth undeṛtakes the consecration, they should point (them) out in the following manner: 'These are five, these are five, these are five, these are five, these are four, so and so is one'. Whom they wish ill-luck, him ill-luck reaches, all the others prosper .
10.3.5	He who knows the Gṛhapati of the Gods, arrives at the houselord's position, reaches the house-lord's position.
10.3.6	The house-lord of the Gods is the year; he is Prajāpati and the months are his fellow-dīkṣitas.
10.3.7	He who knows this finds fellow-dīkṣitas, arrives at the houselord's position, reaches the house-lord's position .
10.3.8	He, forsooth, who knows the ruler of the metres, arrives at rulership. The bṛhatī, now, is the ruler of the metres; he who knows this arrives at rulership, reaches ruleship.
10.3.9	It is this one (the bṛhati), forsooth, that, for the sake of food, they undeṛtake with this twelve-day sacrificial session, dividing it into several parts: the twelve days of consecration, the twelve upasads, the twelve pressing-days; these are (together) thirty-six-days and the bṛhatī has thirty-six syllables .
10.3.10	He is born, forsooth, by the consecration, he is purified by the upasads, he reaches the worlds of the Gods by the sacrifice of soma.
10.3.11	These days, forsooth, are the foṚce and strength in the year: the twelve full-moon-days, the twelve ekāṣṭakās, the twelve new-moon-days. The whole foṚce and strength that is in the year he reaches and obtains by this twelve-day-rite.
10.3.12	The virāj is of thirty syllables; six in number are the seasons; through the virāj he finds a support in the seasons, through the seasons in the virāj .
10.3.13	The anuṣṭubh is of thirty-two syllables, the anuṣṭubh is the voice; fourfooted is cattle; by means of the Voice, (i.e., the anuṣṭubh) he supports the cattle; therefore they (the cattle, the cows) approach when reached by the voice, when summoned by the voice; therefore also they know their name.
