1.1.1	"Oṃ, may your speech be great, may your speech bring me glory, may your speech give me fame, may your speech bestow a hymn, may your speech grant me enjoyment, may your speech tell me everything. May that protect me, may that enter me, may I enjoy that.
1.1.2	May the god Soma come to the god, may Soma come by the path of truth.
1.1.3	Having abandoned evil.
1.1.4	The path of the name is the Soma-path, may I go to Soma.
1.1.5	Fathers are the earth, fathers are the earth, Fathers are the earth.
1.1.6	The sky is the support of men, the sky is the support to be seen.
1.1.7	The altar is the unstable place of the gods, made of clay, do not harm me.
1.1.8	You are the head of Vishnu, you are the giver of fame, give fame to me.
1.1.9	For food, energy, life, and radiance.
1.2.1	I unite thee with the earth, with Agni; I unite thy speech with the sun. The wind is united with the atmosphere. The three purifiers of the sun are united with thee.
1.2.2	I sit in the abode of truth.
1.2.3	Thou art the vessel of truth.
1.2.4	You are of the forest, you are of Brhaspati, you are of Prajapati, you are the head of Prajapati. You are the vessel of long life. I am sending myself forward for brilliance and radiance.
1.2.5	O Maruts, the destroyers, the destroyers of the Apas, the mountains, the Kakubhas, the hawks, the Ajira, carry Indra with your strength, with your voice, and drive away the enemies. Being yoked, carry (him).
1.2.6	Here do I surpass that sacrificer in cattle and in cattle and in me there is the Brahmic glory.
1.2.7	May the Vasus anoint thee with the Gayatri metre, may the Rudras anoint thee with Triṣṭubh metre, may the Adityas anoint thee with Jagatī metre.
1.2.8	Thy purifying has been spread out, O Brahmanaspati, thou hast gone round all thy limbs. The untanned body does not reach it. The cooked ones are carrying it. Do ye all attain it.
1.2.9	May the Goddesses, the Waters, the Goddesses of the Sky, the Goddesses who are the Mothers, the Goddesses, who are the Daughters, the Goddesses whose abode is the Earth, the Goddesses in the sky, the Goddesses on the earth, the Goddesses that are the Waters, the Waters, who are the Goddesses, may they all be gracious to us. May the Goddesses, whose abode is the sky, the Waters, whose abode is in the sky, may they be gracious to us, may the Goddesses, that are the Waters be gracious to us.
1.3.1	The name of the goddess is Vāku. Obeisance to speech, obeisance to the lord of speech. O goddess, whatever is sweet in your speech, may that be in me. Svāhā to Sarasvatī.
1.3.2	May Surya protect me from the heavenly demons, Vayu from the demons of the atmosphere, Agni from the demons of earth. Svāhā.
1.3.3	May the auspicious death of the wicked be proclaimed today, may Varuna, with his bow, strike them down.
1.3.4	My self, my offspring, my cattle - with them may I unite my mind and speech.
1.3.5	May Brihaspati unite thee with the lustre of Agni, with the power of Indra, with the radiance of Surya, for the breath of the gods, may Agni unite thee with heat, may Indra give thee Soma to carry to the sacrifice, may the truth of the desires of the sacrificer be fulfilled.
1.3.6	I shall make food, I shall enter food, I shall generate food.
1.3.7	Food I have made, food I have become, food I have generated.
1.3.8	Thou art the hawk, the Gayatri metre, I follow thee. May I be saved. May I go to the praise of praise. May we enjoy Indra, may we enjoy the offspring, the food.
1.3.9	We have come together with radiance, with milk, with heat, with the mind, with auspiciousness, with knowledge, with the truth of the mind, as you speak the most beautiful. May Indra be seen by you, the sun for the eyes, the wind for the breath, Soma for smell, the Brahman for the nobility.
1.3.10	Salutations to the Gandharva who sings in all directions. You are the bestower of radiance; bestow radiance upon me.
1.4.1	May the Lord of Paths, the paths, grant me safety today on this divine path.
1.4.2	You are the Emperor, the Fire, the Shining One.
1.4.3	You are Tutha, the Provider of People, the Sky, the Bright One, the Purified One, the Fire-Licker.
1.4.4	You are Vibhu, the Carrier, the Fire,
1.4.5	the Fire-Bearer.
1.4.6	You are Shvatra, the Wise One.
1.4.7	Thou art the truth, the knower of all, the wise, the destroyer of enemies, the destroyer of the strong, the destroyer of foes, the destroyer of wealth.
1.4.8	Thou art the purifier, the Marjalyan.
1.4.9	Thou art Rtadhama, the light of heaven.
1.4.10	Thou art Samudra, the all-pervading.
1.4.11	Thou art Ahi, the firm.
1.4.12	Thou art Aja, the one-footed.
1.4.13	Thou art Sagara, the firm.
1.4.14	You are the food, the carrier of food.
1.4.15	Fall, O Agni, with the fierce army. Crush me. May there be salutations to you. Do not harm me.
1.5.1	You are the doors of truth. Do not burn me.
1.5.2	Salutations to the friends who sit in the east, salutations to those who sit in the west.
1.5.3	The hawk, with human eyes, I see you through Agni's eye.
1.5.4	O Indra, I partake of the Soma that has been drunk by Indra, of the one who is endowed with power, of the one having the Gayatri metre, of the one belonging to all classes, of the one invited, of the one invoked.
1.5.5	Stand above the seven sages, O Indra, the lord of speech, the one drunk by Indra, be praised by the seven priests, enjoy the world, come down, O Marut, to the cows.
1.5.6	O Soma, delight us in our hearts. You are our father. Do not harm me.
1.5.7	O Soma, we, knowing the speech, praise you with songs. Come to us, O most amiable one.
1.5.8	Flow forth, may all come to you. Be thou, O Soma, the strength of the Vrishnis at the meeting of the Vaja.
1.5.9	I eat of the Nara-sahmsas, of the whole class, of the one who has been eaten by the lower ones, by the higher ones, by the Kavya ones, by the Pitrs, of the one having honey, of the one of the whole class. I eat of the one who is invited, of the one invited.
1.5.10	May Prajapati unite you with the color of initiation, with the form of austerity, with the greatness of mind, with the splendor of speech, for the sake of offspring and for the sake of the breath.
1.5.11	May Vayu unite you with the mind, may Indra bestow the Stoma for the sake of carrying out the sacrifice. May the desires of the sacrificer be true.
1.5.12	You are the bull, the Tristubh metre, I have approached you. May you lead me to safety. May I go to the praise of praise. We may be possessed of Indra, may we enjoy offspring and food.
1.5.13	O Indra, I partake of the Indra-drinking, of the one with the power of Indra, of the Tristubh meter, of the one belonging to all groups, of the one invited, of the one who is invited.
1.5.14	May Surya unite with speech, the Stoma for the sacrifice to be borne. May Indra bestow power. May the desires of the sacrificer be true.
1.5.15	Thou art the voice, thou art the song, the Jagat metre. I follow thee. May I be protected by thee. May I go to the praise of praise. May we enjoy the company of Indra. May we eat the food of offspring.
1.5.16	Indra, the drinker of Soma, the one with power, the one with the Tristubh metre, the one with all the groups, the one who has been invoked, I eat the one who has eaten.
1.5.17	My life, my breath, my mind is yours. My mind has gone to Yama, or if it has not come back to me, with the king Soma, may we again place it in us.
1.5.18	Whatever thought of mine has gone far away to Yama, the son of Vivasvat, may it return to me again for life, for immortality, and for freedom from disease.
1.5.19	By whom he conquered the race, by whom the hawk, the bird, the golden-winged one, and what they call the endless eye of Aditi, may Soma, the eye of men, bestow that on me.
1.6.1-2	I have eaten the Indra-worthy, Indra-drunk, Indra-worthy, Anushtubh-verse, Hariva, all-clan, all-clan invoked, invoked of the Indra-worthy Indra-drunk Indra-worthy Anushtubh verse, all-clan all-clan invoked invoked of the Indra worthy Indra drunk Indra worthy Anushtubh
1.6.3	The praise of him who is praised, the praise of him who has praised, may I go to the praise of the praise. We may enjoy the food and offspring of Indra.
1.6.4	O Soma, the god, you are praised, you are praised by the sacrificer, you are praised in the praise, you are praised with the hymn, you are praised at the end of the day, you are praised as the one who gives horses and cows, you are praised for the food. I partake of you, the invited, the invited one.
1.6.5	I release thee, O God, in the place of praise, in the abodes of Vishnu. Thou, O God, hast gone to the place of praise. We have attained the firm foundation.
1.6.6	O Soma, do thou be with me, be with me, O Soma, in the assembly, with Indra's power.
1.6.7	You are the best, the light of the gods, the assembly of the gods, you who go with your body, you who praise Brahma, may you praise me with that, may you generate me with that, make me shine.
1.6.8	This is the flower of the waters, the essence of the plants, Indra's most beloved offering, svāhā.
1.6.9	O god, for you, the Soma-sacrificer, the praise-worthy praise, the praise-able praise, the horse-sacrifice, the cow-sacrifice, the oblation, I have been invited, I have been invoked, I partake of the oblation.
1.6.10	You are the expiation for the sin committed by gods, you are the expiation of the sin committed by the ancestors, you are the exiatiation of the sin committed among men, you are the cxpiation of the sin commited by us. You are the expiatiou of the sin committed during the day and night, you are the espiration of the sin committed while sleeping and awake, you are the espiation of the sins committed by the wise and the ignorant. You are the espiatiou of the sins committed.
1.6.11	In the waters, O god, is thy Soma, pressed by men.
1.6.12	I make the offering sweet.
1.6.13	Together with the waters and plants.
1.6.14	May it turn to me according to my desire.
1.6.15	May the strength be in me, may it place strength in me.
1.6.16	O Soma, be awake in my Soma-drinking.
1.6.17	I have performed the sacrifice for Dadhikra, for the shining, for the horse, for the steed. May it make our mouths fragrant, may it lead us to long life.
1.7.1	You are a horse, you are a steed, you are a bay, you are a charger, you are a swift-running horse, you are an ox.
1.7.2	Go to the self of the Adityas. May there be reverence for you. Do not harm me.
1.7.3	I take thee with the lustre of Vayu, I take thee with thy form of the stars, I take thee by the radiance of the sun.
1.7.4	Thou art Rathantara, thou art Vamadeva, thou art Brihat.
1.7.5	The two wheels, the wheels of the chariot, which move towards the darkness, the wind, the distant arrow, the winged one, may those fires of yours, O Agni, protect us.
1.7.6	Vaisvānara, in the ancient way, mounts the sky, moving slowly on the back of heaven, with good thoughts, with wealth for the living, as before, he goes around in the same manner, the watchful one.
1.7.7	This is your chariot, O Agni, this is your chariot, ye two Asvins, the chariot without blemish, the healer of all.
1.7.8	Bind the left-hand ones, the poor ones.
1.7.9	Take the right-hand ones, your slaves.
1.8.1	I take thee in the impulse of the divine Savitr, in the arms of the Asvins, in the hands of Pusan.
1.8.2	May Varuna lead thee, O Goddess, to the right, to Varuna. Mayst thou attain immortality with the horse. May the giver be more prosperous than I, and the receiver.
1.8.3	May Varuna lead thee to the right, O Goddess, unto Rudra. Mayst thou obtain immortality with the cow. May the giver...
1.8.4	May Varuna...to the right, to Agni, the goat.
1.8.5	To Agni, gold.
1.8.6	To Agni and Soma, the sheep, may I attain immortality. May the giver be more prosperous than the receiver.
1.8.7	The lord of food has given me food, free from disease, nourishing. May the eater of all people, the one who is thin, not harm me.
1.8.8	May Varuna lead thee, O Goddess, to the right, may Tvashtra lead thee to the left. May I attain immortality with the life-giving gift. May the giver be more vigorous than I, the receiver.
1.8.9	The Gnas have cut thee, the Apas have stretched thee, the Vaitryas have joined thee.
1.8.10	May Varuna lead thee, O Goddess, to the right, to Brihaspati. Mayest thou attain immortality by the garment. May the giver be more prosperous than I, and the receiver.
1.8.11	May Varuna lead thee to the right, O Goddess, lying on thy back, to Angiras. Mayest thou obtain immortality by the breath. May the giver, etc.
1.8.12	May Varuna lead thee, O Goddess, to the right, to Pusha the camel.
1.8.13	To Vayu the deer. Therewith attain immortality. May the giver of life be more abundant to me, and the receiver.
1.8.14	To Japati the elephant, to Prajapati the boar, to Prajapiti the barley and the rice. Therewith attain immortaity. May the giver...
1.8.15	May Varuna lead thee, O Goddess, to the Lord of the Southern Quarter. May the sesame and beans lead thee. Mayst thou attain immortality. May the giver of life be more vigorous than I, and may the receiver of gifts be more vigorous than the giver.
1.8.16	May Varuna lead thee to the Goddess of the Southern Quarter, to Savitar, to the horse or mare, by her mayst thou attain immortality, may the giver of life, etc., as before.
1.8.17	Who gave this? Desire gave it. Desire is the giver, Desire is the receiver, Desire entered the ocean. With desire I receive you, this is yours, O Desire.
1.9.1	You are the ray, for prosperity. You prosper prosperity. Praised by Savitar, for Brihaspati.
1.9.2	You are Preti, for Dharma. You prosper Dharma. Praised by savitar, for Brihatpati.
1.9.3	You are the Anviti (goddess). For the heaven, you win the heaven. Praised by Savitar, you are praised by Brihaspati.
1.9.4	You are the Sandhi (goddess). For space, you win space. Praised by savitar, you are prasied by Brihaspati
1.9.5	You are the Pratithi (goddess). For earth, you win earth. Praised by the Savitar, you art praised by Brihas pati.
1.9.6	You are the one who supports, for rain. You support rain. Praised by Savitar, you are praised by Brihaspati.
1.9.7	You are the eastern dawn. You support the day. Praised by savitar, you are prasied by Brihaspati
1.9.8	You are the night following. You support the night. Praised by the Savitar, you praise Brihaspati.
1.9.9	You are Ushij. For the Vasus, you invoke the Vasus. Stuted by Savitar, invoked by Savitar, for Brihaspati, you are praised.
1.9.10	You are Praketo. For the Rudras, you invoke the Rudras. Stuted by savitar, invoked by savitar, for Bribaspati, you are praisd.
1.9.11	You are Suditi. For the Adityas, you invoke the Adityas. Stuted by Saritar, invoked by Saritar, for Brihspati, you are praised.
1.9.12	Thou art strength. I invoke thee for the Fathers. Thou invokest the Fathers. Thou art invoked by Savitar, thou art praised by Brihaspati.
1.10.1	Thou art the thread. I invoke thee to the creatures. Thou invokeston the creatures. Thou art invoked Savitar, thou are praised by Brihas pati.
1.10.2	Thou art Rodasi. I invoke thee unto the plants. Thou invokestone the plants. Thou art invoked unto Savitar, thouart praised by Brihas-pati.
1.10.3	You are the army of eight. For the cattle, you win cattle. Blessed by Savitar, you are praised by Brihaspati.
1.10.4	You are the supreme lord. For Indra, you win Indra. Blessed by Savita, you are praised to Brihaspati. 
1.10.5	You are the lord. For the breath, you win the breaths. Blessed by Savitā, you are praised for Brihaspati.
1.10.6	Dhāruṇa is for your breath. You have breathed. You have been praised by Savitar, by Brihaspati.
1.10.7	Sansarpa is for your sight. You have seen. You have been prasied by Savitar, Brihaspati. 
1.10.8	Vayo-dha is for your field. You have fielded. You have been praise by Savitar, Brhaspati.
1.10.9	Thou art the three-fold, for the three-fold thee; thou art the all-pervading, for the all-pervader thee; thou art spreading, for the spreading thee; thou art following, for the following thee; thou art praised by Savitar, by the impulse of Savitar, to Brihaspati.
1.10.10	Thou art the Restrainer, for the restraining of thee. Thou art the Suppressor, for the suppressing of thee. Thou are the Procreator, for the procreating of thee. Thou Art the Reproducer, for the reproducing of thee. Thou hast been praised by Savitar, by Brihaspati.
1.10.11	Thou art the possessor of wealth, thou art the possessor of prosperity, thou art the splendour of the garment, thou hast been praised by savitar, by Bribaspati.
2.1.2	One should praise the eldest son of the eldest.
2.1.3	The praise goes from the beginning to the beginning. One should praise with this (verse) because one who praises with the praise going from the beginning to beginning, indeed, conquers the half of the sacrifice. Therefore, one should praise with this verse. It is for prosperity.
2.1.4	The one who recites this hymn, which is the support of the virtuous and the removal of evil, does not go to a lower state. One who is not obstructed does not go to an obstructed state. The sinner does not ascend to the better state. The people do not approach the people. The offspring of one does not belong to another. They are apportioned according to their fields. The rain-god becomes unreliable. These worlds are the verses. He approaches them with the invocation.
2.1.5	This is the established praise of the three-fold (Stoma). He who praises with this, stands firm.
2.2.1	He makes three (Stomas) going forward, and three going backward. He makes three (Stotras) going forward, then three going backward. Then he makes three (Stostras) going forward, going backward, and turning around. The praise of the three (Stotras)
2.2.2	He who recites this hymn attains the highest heaven. The continuous praise is the breath, the out-breath, and the through-breath. They are the verses. He unites them with the introductory sound. He attains the whole life, not before his time. He who recites it becomes a rain-giving Parjanya. These worlds are the triads. He unites them by the introductory sound.
2.2.3	But the Lord, as it were, wipes off the animals. This is the better way, and the better way is indeed the better. But not the worse.
2.2.4	The Bhallāvas worship this. Therefore, those who praise them do not fall from their position.
2.3.1	For he makes the offering to three (deities) going away from him. He makes the offering to the three (deities), the middle one is the first, the highest one is the middle one, the first one is the highest one. He makes the offerings to three (deaties), the highest one is first, the first one the middle one, and the middle one the highest one. The Kulayinī is the praise of the Trivrt (Stoma).
2.3.2	One who desires offspring or cattle should recite this. Cattle are the Kulaya. One becomes the Kulaya.
2.3.3	One should perform this for one who is younger than oneself. One goes to the forefront of those who have gone to the forefront of offspring.
2.3.4	He should perform this for many sacrificers. When all the verses are at the beginning, in the middle and at the end, he makes them all equal sharers, not harming one another. All become equal sharers of Indra's power.
2.3.5	Parjanya becomes a rain-giver. These worlds are the verses. He arranges them with the introductory verse.
2.3.6	But it is indeed a sin-destroying rite.
2.3.7	The lower and the higher are obstructed, as if they were closed. The sinner goes to the higher, the higher to the lower. The people go to the people, the progeny of one to the progeny of another. They give to each other, not as per the field.
2.4.1	He makes five offerings with the formula, then three, then one, then one. He makes five offerings, then one, three, then one. Then he makes five offerings, one, one, then three. The five-by-five is the praise of the fifteen.
2.4.2	The man is fivefold, the cattle are fivefold; he obtains the man and the cattle. The five-fold animal is the thunderbolt; when he arranges five (animals) he arranges the thunderbolt for peace. This is the praise of the fifteenfold (animal); he who praises with this stands firm.
2.5.1	He performs five times, then three times, then once; he performs three times, then in the reverse order, then seven times, then once, then three times.
2.5.2	One who desires Brahmic glory should perform the Stoma in the reverse order of three Stomas.
2.5.3	With five, the fifteen; with three, the Trivrit; with seven, the seventeen.
2.5.4	The Stotras are indeed energy; he thus gathers energy in one place. For the attainment of brilliance. He who recites this Stotra becomes brilliant and lustrous.
2.6.1	For three (times) he makes the offering, then with five (times), then with one (time), then with three (times), then again with one (time). For seven (times) he offers, then with one (offering), then with three, then with three (offerings). The praise of fifteen is rising.
2.6.2	The gods went to heaven by means of this (hymn). One who desires heaven should recite it. For the attainment of the heavenly world. One who recites it does not fall from the heavenly world.
2.6.3	The praise is advancing. One advances by means of the advancing (hymn). For one advances by means of what has been advanced. Therefore, one should recite it. By means of prosperity.
2.7.1	He makes five offerings with "Hiṅ", then three, then one, then one. He makes five offerings, then one, three, then one. He makes seven offerings, then one; then three, then three. The praise of seventeen is ten and seven.
2.7.2	The gods, indeed, by means of this (hymn) overcame the Asuras. He who recites this hymn overcomes his sinful foe.
2.7.3	The hymn is recited in the manner of marching forward. One should recite it in the manner of advancing forward, for one conquers the sacrifice by advancing forward. Therefore, one should recite it. One conquers by means of prosperity.
2.7.4	One who recites this (hymn), becomes pregnant. One is born with offspring and cattle.
2.7.5	The seventeenfold is the embryo of the king. He makes the embryo the king.
2.7.6	The unapproached does not approach; the approached does not go away.
2.7.7	The seventeenfold is food. When there are five in the middle and five on each side, then food is placed in the middle. The sacrificer becomes fit for eating, and his offspring becomes fit for eating.
2.7.8	The Purusha of the Viraj is the seven domestic animals. When they are ten in the beginning and seven in the end, then he establishes the sacrificer among the animals.
2.7.9	This is the established praise of the seventeen. He who praises with this praise stands firm.
2.8.1	This is indeed the arrangement. Seven are in the middle.
2.8.2	The first is the abode of Brahman, the middle of Kshatra, the last of the people. If he distributes the first most, then he places the strength and energy in Brahman itself, and makes the Kshatra and the people follow it. The light of this Kshatra is seen by those who praise with this (hymn).
2.8.3	They worship this (hymn) as having three Khars. Therefore, those who compete do not become exhausted.
2.9.1	He makes seven offerings with three, three, and one. He makes three offerings with three, one, and one. With three he makes seven offerings, with three, one and one. Seven are the fixed ones.
2.9.2	One should praise one's enemy. Just as one makes peace with the fixed ones, so one destroys the evil enemy.
2.9.3	He should perform this for many sacrificers. The first call is the first one. He performs seven calls for it. By that it is divided into seven. If seven are placed in the middle, by that it is divided by seven. The last call is the last one. He performs the seven calls for it, by that it becomes divided into seven. He makes them all equal sharers, not harming one another. They become equal sharers of Indra's power.
2.9.4	They worship her as the one who crosses over. Therefore, they are the most powerful of all.
2.10.1	This very arrangement is both, with seven in the middle and without the middle.
2.10.2	One should recite the Anujāvara (hymn). The Anujāvara is indeed the world of light. The seven are the first, the seven are the last, and three are in the middle. The man has three syllables. He makes that world in the middle for him. He stands in that world.
2.10.3	One who desires offspring should perform this rite in the middle. He who does not obtain offspring is indeed rooted in the middle. It makes that world in the middle for him. He is born in that world with offspring and cattle.
2.10.4-5	He should perform this very same sacrifice for one whose king has been captured. The Saptadasa is indeed Prajapati. One whose king has been taken captive is indeed Prajapata himself. He enters the middle of Prajapati, for the sake of protection.
2.11.1	He makes five offerings with the three, one, and one. He makes three offerings with the three. He makes nine offerings with the three and three. He makes three with the three.
2.11.2	One desiring Brahmic glory should recite the four Stotras. One should recite the Pañca, the Pañcadaśa, the Tris, the Trivṛt, the Nav, the Trinava, the Svayamas, the Saptadaśa. Stoma is indeed energy. He thus gathers energy in one place. For the attainment of Brahmic glory. One becomes lustrous and Brahmic glory. He who recites with this.
2.12.1	For three (times) he makes the offering with the formula, then with five (times) he offers with one (time), then with three (times), then with one (time). For nine (times) he performs the offering with three (times) then with three (timess), then with three times. The praise of seventeen is rising.
2.12.2	The gods, indeed, went to the heavenly world by means of this (Stoma). One who desires heaven should praise. For the attainment of the heavenly world. One who praises does not fall from the heavenly world. The praise is a march. By means of the march, indeed, one conquers the sacrifice. Therefore, one should praise by means of this. By means of prosperity.
2.13.1	He makes five offerings with three, then three, then one. He makes five offerings, then one, then three, and then one. He offers five times, then one, and then three. The hole of the bellows is above.
2.13.2	He who hates him should do this. As one would blow away the dust with a bellows, so he blows away the sacrificer's cattle. The praise goes away. The sacrificer's animals go away. He becomes worse than the one who praises with this.
2.14.1	He makes seven offerings with the formula "Hiṅ kari" (i.e. "Make a hissing sound"), three with the formula "S" (i. e. "Be"), three with the same formula, one with the formula "Sa" (i.c. "Be"), seven offerings with the same formula "Hiṅ kar", one with the formula "Sa", three with the same, three with the formula "S" (i.e." Be"), seven offerings with "Hiṅ kar" (i. c. "Make a sizzling sound"), three with "Sa" ( i. e. " Be"), three with the "S" ( i.e. " Be"), seven offerings. The praise of twenty-one is seven times seven.
2.14.2	These are the seven domestic animals. He wins them with this (verse). The seven vital airs are in the head. The vital airs are the senses. He wins the senses with this (verse)
2.14.3	This is the praise of the Ekavimsa (Stoma). He who praises with this (verse), stands firm.
2.15.1	He makes five offerings with the formula, then three, then one, then one. He makes seven offerings with the formula; then one, then three, and then three. He makes nine offerings with the formula: then three, then three,then three. The twenty-one offerings are concluded.
2.15.2	The gods, indeed, went to the heavenly world by means of this (Stoma). One who desires heaven should praise. For the attainment of the heavenly world. One who praises does not fall from the heavenly world. The praise is a march. By means of the march, indeed, one conquers the sacrifice. Therefore, one should praise by means of this. By means of prosperity.
2.15.3	This is the Trivṛt Prāyana, the Trivṛd Udayana. When the Bahispavamāna is Trivṛt, these become the Ekavimśa. The Trivṛt is the breath. He thus places the breath on both sides. Therefore this half-share of the breath is the breath. One goes to the full life of the remaining breaths. One does not die before one's time, who praises with this.
2.15.4	They worship that (goddess) who is the destroyer of the wicked; therefore they all attain the full span of life.
2.16.1	He makes nine offerings, three times, three times, and three times. He makes five offerings, once, three times, once, and seven offerings, three times once, and three times, the praise.
2.16.2	The Trivṛt is praised with nine (verses), the Pañcadaśa with five, the Saptadaśa with seven, and the Ekavimśa is accomplished by himself.
2.16.3	Those very Stotras carry the sacrifice. He satisfies them at the last Stotra. Just as one would satisfy horses or horse-carts or oxen, so he satisfies the Stotras at the last Stotr. He who is satisfied with this Stotra is satisfied with offspring and cattle.
2.16.4	One should perform this for one who desires to be a Purodha. The three-fold is Brahman, the twenty-one-fold is Kshatra. When one attains the three-fold and twenty-one-folds, then one places the Brahman in front of the Kshatra. One goes to the Purodha, one does not fall away from the Purodha. One who praises with this (stotra).
2.16.5	They attend this (stotra) at Pravahana. Therefore they do not fall away from Purodha.
2.17.1	He makes nine offerings with the formula, "To the three, to the three, to three." He makes nine offerings in the opposite direction with the formula, “To the three,to the three, to thee.” He makes nine offerings to the three with the formula, "To the three, to the three,to thee." The sun is burning on both sides.
2.17.2	One who desires Brahmic glory should praise (the fire). The Trivṛt is indeed brilliance, the Purusha has three syllables. Since they are on both sides of the Trivṛt, there are three in the middle. Just as one would heat gold, so they heat him in the Trivṛts for brilliance and Brahmic glory.
2.17.3	Indeed, the powerful ones burn the cattle, as if they were not there. For they heat him on both sides.
2.17.4	He who is cursed should perform this rite. One who is cursed by indecent speech, the one who speaks indecently to him, he is burnt by the two Trivrt stomas. He becomes lustrous, he who praises with this.
3.1.1	He makes nine offerings with "Hiṅ", three, five, and one. He makes nine offerings, one, three, and five. He makes nine, five, three, and one.
3.1.2	Nine is the thunderbolt, he arranges it as the thunderbolt for peace.
3.1.3	The one who is made with five (verses) is the attendant. The animals are the attendants. The sacrificer is the attendant. When he makes it with five (verses), one becomes the attendant. He thus establishes the sacrificer among the animals. This is the praise of the Tri-navas. He who praises with this, stands firm.
3.2.1	He makes seven offerings with three, one, and three. He makes nine offerings with one, three, and three. He makes eleven offerings with five, three, and one. He makes thirteen offerings with five, one, and one. The rising of three is the praise of thirty-nine.
3.2.2	The gods, indeed, went to the heavenly world by means of this (Stoma). One who desires heaven should praise. For the attainment of the heavenly world. One who praises does not fall from the heavenly world. The praise is a march. By means of the march, indeed, one conquers the sacrifice. Therefore, one should praise by means of this. By means of prosperity.
3.3.1	He makes offerings to eleven (deities), with three, with seven, and with one. He makes offerings to one, with three, with eleven, and with seven. He makes offerings with seven, with one, with three and with eleven.
3.3.2	The thirty-three is the end, the thirty-three is supreme. The Stoma is arranged with seven (verses) and has one Paricara. The seven domestic animals are the Paricara of the sacrificer. When he arranges with seven, there is one Paricara, he establishes the sacrificer at the end among the animals. This is the established praise of the thirty-three. He who praises with this (stotra) stands firm.
3.4.1	He makes offerings to eleven (deities), with three, with five, with three. He makes offerings to the eleven (deities) with three, with three, with the five. He makes offerings with the five, with three, and with three. The offerings are made in a descending order.
3.4.2	The thirty-three gods are within. Just as a great tree, having fallen, does not move from its place, so this one does not move from the place of the thirty-three gods.
3.4.3	The three attendants are made with five (verses). The animals are five-footed. The man is of this size. The wife is the offspring. When he makes it with five (verses), the three attendants become (the verses). He thus establishes the sacrificer among the animals. He becomes possessed of animals, who praises with this (Stotra).
3.5.1	He makes offerings to nine (deities), then to three, then to five, then to one. He makes offerings to eleven (deities), to one, then to three, and then to seven. He makes offerings (to deities) thirteen times, then to seven, then to three. The praise of the thirty-three is rising.
3.5.2	The gods went to heaven by means of this (hymn). One who desires heaven should recite it. For the attainment of the heavenly world. One who recites it does not fall from heaven. One who recitess it attains the highest place. The praise is advancing. By means of advancement, one attains the half of the sacrifice by advancing. Therefore, one should recite it. By means of prosperity.
3.6.1	He makes offerings to thirteen (deities), then to three, then to five, then to five. He makes offerings to eleven (deities), to five, to three, to three. He makes offerings (to deities) to nine, to three, then three, then three. The praise of thirty-three is descending.
3.6.2	Just as a great tree, having grown from the top of a branch, descends to the branch below, so does this (verse) descend to this world for the sake of stability.
3.6.3	He goes with the three-fold (verse), he comes with the three-folds. The three-fold is the vital airs. He goes with the vital airs, he comes with the vital airs. The whole life he attains, he does not die before his time, he who praises with this (verse).
3.6.4	They worship her with their hands, and therefore they all attain the full span of life.
3.7.1	He makes five offerings to the fifteen, then three, then five, then eleven. He makes five offerings to eleven, then five, and then three. He makes three offerings to three, then one, and then three.
3.7.2	He who knows the thirty-three in the twenty-one, he stands firm. The twenty-one is the firm foundation of the Stoma-s. When these seven are the highest of the thirty-three, it is the praise of the twenty-one in seven ways. He establishes the thirty-three indeed in the twenty- one. He who is praised with this (Stoma) stands firm.
3.8.1	He makes it with eight, then with three, then with four, then with one. He makes it with one, then with three and then with four. He makes it eight times, then with four and then with one, then again with three.
3.8.2	The Chhandogas are the animals. When he makes the offering to eight (deities), it is because animals have eight hoofs. Animals have eight hoofs, and thus he obtains animals.
3.8.3	The four-footed animals are the attendants, the sacrificer is the attendant. When he makes four (animals) and one (animal) is the attendant, then he establishes the sacrificer among the animals. This is the praise of the twenty-four. He who is praised with this praise, he stands firm.
3.9.1	He makes it with fifteen (bricks), three, eleven, and one; with fourteen, one, three, and ten; with fifteen, eleven, one, and three.
3.9.2	The first is the abode of Brahman, the middle of Kshatra, the last of Vish. If the two fifteen-day fortnights are in the beginning and the fourteen-day fortnight is in the end, then he places strength and valour in Brahman and Kshatra. He makes the Vish follow both Brahman and Kshattra. His fame becomes like that of Kshatra. For him who praises with this.
3.9.3	The Stoma-s are the Chanda-s. The Stoma- s are odd, the Chanda- s are even. This is the even praise of forty-four. Therefore, they are Stoma-s.
3.9.4	This is the praise of forty- four which is established. He who praises with this, becomes established.
3.10.1	He makes a sacrifice to the fourteen (deities), with three, with ten, and with one. He makes a sacrifice of fifteen (deities), one, three, and eleven. He makes a sacrfice of fifteen (deaties), eleven, one, and three. The middle one is omitted.
3.10.2	This world is as if it were, and that world is as if there were a hole in the sky, for this is without a middle. He is born following these worlds, he is born with offspring and cattle, he who praises with this.
3.11.1	He makes offerings to the fifteen deities, then to the three, then to the eleven, then to the one. He makes offerings to fifteen deities, then one, then three, then eleven. He makes offerings for fourteen deities, then to ten, then to one, then to three.
3.11.2	The first is of the Gāyatrī verses, the second of the Pṛṣṭhas, and the third of the Ukthas.
3.11.3	The one for the Yajyas is of the Hotri, the one for the Prsthas is of the Maitravaruna, the one for Ukthas is of the Brahmanachchhansa. The one for the Hotri is of the Acchhavacha, the one for Prsthas is for the Sahotri, the one of Ukthas is of Maitravaruna. The one for Yajyas is for the Brahmanachchhamsa. The one for Hotri is of Acchhavachaka. The one for Ukthas of Hotri, the Yajyas of Maitravaruni, the Prsthas of Brahmanachchhnsa. The one for Hotr is of Acchhavaka. All are in the Ajyas, all in the Prsthas, all in the Ukthas.
3.11.4	The animals are indeed the same as the Sāman. Since this Sāman is performed at all the pressing-rounds, it indeed makes him prosper with animals. He who sings this Sāman becomes prosperous with animals.
3.12.1	He makes it from sixteen (bricks), three, twelve, and one; he makes it from sixteen, one, three, and twelve; he makes it of sixteen, twelve, one, and three. 
3.12.2	The number of animals is forty-eight. He makes sixteen from sixteen. Animals have sixteen parts. He thus obtains animals.
3.12.3	The twelve-fold (sacrifice) is the one-fold service. The twelve months are the year, the sacrificer. When he performs with twelve (sacrifices), there is one-fold service; he thus establishes the sacrificer at the end of the year in the animals. This is the praise of the forty-eight (verses). He who praises with this (verse) stands firm.
3.13.1	He makes offerings to the sixteen deities, three times, ten times, and three times. He makes offerings to sixteen deities, three, three, and ten times. He makes offering to sixteen deities, ten, three, and three times, not in a descending order.
3.13.2	Or, it is forty-eight. Just as the top of a great tree, having fallen, falls from the top to the bottom, so this (consciousness) falls from the top of the present to the bottom of the past.
3.13.3	The Viraj is ten syllables long. The man is of that size, the wife is the offspring. When he makes three attendants with ten, then the sacrificer is established in Viraj, in food, at the end. He becomes a food-giver, he who praises with this.
4.1.1	The cows were the sacrificers at this sacrifice. In the ten months they gave birth to calves. They said, "We are not men. We shall rise up. We do not know." They rose up.
4.1.2	They said to them, "We shall attain the twelve months of the year." On the twelve months of them the horns were turned. They attained all food. These are the foremost ones. Therefore, they turn all the twelve months. For they attained all food.
4.1.3	He who knows this obtains all food.
4.1.4	Prajapati was alone here. He desired, "May I be many and procreate." He saw this Atiratra and brought it. With it he created day and night.
4.1.5	When this Atiratra (sacrifice) is performed, they produce the day and night; they stand firm in the day and night. The year indeed consists of the day and night, and by means of the day and the night they attain the year.
4.1.6	The Jyotisṭoma is the beginning of the sacrifice, they attain that. The Uktha is for the continuation of the sacrifice. The Ratri is for the attainment of all.
4.1.7	He saw these Stotras: Jyoti, Gau, and Ur. These are the worlds, these are the Stotras. This one is Jyoti, this one in the middle is Gau, and that one is Ur, the life.
4.1.8	When these Stotras are performed, they generate these worlds and they are established in these worlds.
4.1.9	He again performed this three-day sacrifice and with that six-day sacrifice he generated the six Kratus.
4.1.10	When this six-day sacrifice is performed, it generates the seasons and they are established within the seasons.
4.1.11	He again performed this six-day (rite). By these two six-day rites, he generated the twelve months.
4.1.12	When these two six-days are performed, they generate the months and they are established in the months.
4.1.13-15	He again employed those two six-day periods. With those four six-day periods, he generated twenty-four half-months. Since there are these four six-day fortnights, they generate half-months. They are established in the half-months. He, having generated this world, placed the strength in himself with the six-day period of the Prsthya.
4.1.16	When this is the six-day Pañchadasha sacrifice, they stand firm in the end in the form of strength.
4.1.17	By that he generated the months and the year. When this is the month, they generate the year. They stand firm in the year.
4.2.1	This is the preparatory day.
4.2.2	The gods, by the Prayaniya day, attained the heavenly world. That is why it is called Prayaniya.
4.2.3	Therefore, at the Prayaniya rite, one should be an officiating priest. This is the nearest to the heavenly world. One who is not an officiating priest at this rite, falls away from the heavenly world.
4.2.4	It consists of twenty-four verses.
4.2.5	The Gāyatrī has twenty-four syllables. The Gāyatrīs are the brilliance and the radiance of Brahman. They begin with brilliance and end with radiance.
4.2.6	It becomes twenty-four. The year is twenty-four. They begin directly with the year.
4.2.7	As many as are the Stotriya verses of the twenty-four Uktha, so many are the nights of the year. By the Stotriyas they attain the year.
4.2.8	There are fifteen Stotras. So many are the nights in the half-month. By the half-month they attain the year.
4.2.9	The fifteen Stotras and the fifteen Sastras are included in the month. They attain the year.
4.2.10	They say, "This is indeed a very difficult office, the office of the Praisa-priest. If one were to conclude the Praisa, he would be too powerful. If one were not to conclude it, he would be deficient." If one were to place the Uktha at the end, then the Ekakubha and the Vamshiyana, then one would be established at the end. Indeed, these two are the same in power. One is established at the end with power.
4.2.11	Now they say, one should perform the Agniṣṭoma alone. This is the sacrifice leading to heaven, namely, the Agniṣṭomah. The Hotr priest continues to be above.
4.2.12	The Agniṣṭoma has twelve Stotras. The year has twelve months. Thus it is of the size of a year. There are twelve Stotras and twelve Sastras. That makes twenty-four. The year has twenty-four half-months. Thus it is the size of ayear.
4.2.13	Now they say, the Uktha should be performed for the prosperity of the day.
4.2.14	All forms are made, for all is obtained in a day.
4.2.15	The Soma-pressings flow for the Vāja-sāman, with a thousandfold power. The first day should be made of a thousand verses.
4.2.16	It is the form of the year, and he purifies them all with this, and praises them all.
4.2.17	Now they say, "Do it thus: 'Flow on, O Speech, the foremost!' " The mouth is the foremost of the year; from the mouth they begin the year.
4.2.18	The Vyāhṛtis are like a couple: Pavasveti is the male form, Vāceti is the female form, Someti is the male form and Citrābhi is the female form. He places the couple at the mouth of the sacrifice for propagation.
4.2.19	"O Agni, do thou yoke the horses that are thine." This is the Jārabhīti Agniṣṭoma Sāman. They go to the end of the year with the yoked one. It consists of twenty-four syllables. The twenty-four is the form of the year.
4.2.20	Now they say, it should be the Yajñāyajñiya Sāman.
4.2.21	The Yajñājyñiya is the path. They go by the path.
4.3.1	The Abhivarta is the Brahman Sāman.
4.3.2	The gods went to heaven by means of the Abhivarta. In that the Abhivarta is a Brahman-sāman, it is for the attainment of heaven.
4.3.3	It ends with a single syllable. Speech is indeed a single syllable. Having begun with speech, they go to heaven.
4.3.4	They go with the Sāman, and return with the Rk.
4.3.5	The world of the Sama is yonder world. When they proceed with the Sama, they proceed towards the world of heaven. When they return with the Rc, they stand firm in this world.
4.3.6	If they were to proceed with the Sama they would fall from the world of heaven; if they were to proceed in accordance with the Rc they would perish from this world.
4.3.7	The same is the same, one another is the same, the praise is the same, another is the same. The variegated path he goes, knowing.
4.3.8	The bull is the semen-bearer, and the Prāgātha is the semen-bearing; when it comes to the Prāgathas, it bears semen. When the Sāman is the same as the Prāgâtha, the Prāgatha is different from the Sāman, then it bears semen. If the Prāgitha is the same as that which is after, and the Sāman different, then it bears the semen. It generates the semen.
4.3.9	When the Prāgătha is milked from the Sāma, and the Sāmāni from the Prāgtha, it is for the sake of having the same hair.
4.3.10	Those who return from the path do not go to him, but those who go without returning go to him.
4.3.11	Those who make it a habit go to him, as one would go to a milked cow.
4.3.12	Those who do not make it a habit attain whatever desire they may desire.
4.3.13	The Brahmavādins say that the Samvatsaras are exhausted and the Aiyatamas are not exhausted. They should say that they are not exhausted. Other Stotras return, but the Brahma-sāman goes upward.
4.4.1	In the five months, the Barhitas are obtained.
4.4.2	When they are obtained, they should be joined with the Chanda.
4.4.3	There are three Uṣṇīṣa verses, one Gāyatrī verse. These three are Brhatī verses.
4.4.4	They say, "This is like a sharp arrow, when two verses are joined together."
4.4.5	One should proceed with the four subsequent verses.
4.4.6	The four-and-a-half metres are animals. By means of animals they bring down the heavenly world.
4.4.7	They perform the Gāyatrī for one day, the Aṅgirasī for one day, and the Anushtubh for one day. They perform the Brihatī for five months, the Paṅkti for one day, they perform the Tristubh for the sixth month. They perform the Jagatī when the equinox is approaching.
4.4.8	They say that these metres are not properly arranged. At midday, the Brihatī and the Tristubh should be recited.
4.4.9	These two metres are the most powerful. They are the actual form of midday.
4.4.10	On the Rathantara day the Brihatī is to be used. This is the natural abode of the Rathantara, namely the Brihatī. The Rathantara stands in its own abode. On the Bṛhat day the Tristubh is to be used; this is the natural abode for the Bṛhat, namely the Tristubh. The Bṛhat and the Rathantara stand in their own abodes.
4.4.11	One should go with thirty-three (verses). The gods are thirty-three. They go, established in the gods. One should go with twenty-four (verses). The seasons are twenty-four. They go, having established themselves in the seasons. One should go (with verses) in twelve (verses). The year is twelve months. They go, being established in the year. One should go in six (verses). The six seasons. They go, establishing themselves in the seasons, in four (verses). The animals have four feet. They go, well established in the animals. One should go to three (verses). These are the three worlds. They go, firmly established in these worlds. One should go by two (verses). The sacrificer has two feet. He goes, having conquered the heavenly world, for a man stands with one foot on one foot.
4.5.1	These are the Svarasāmans.
4.5.2	Svābhānu, the demon, covered the sun with darkness. The gods touched him with the Svarasāmas. Therefore, they are called Svarasāmans, for the touching of the sun.
4.5.3	The gods sent the sun to heaven by means of the Parānis. When they sent it, that became the superiority of the Parāṇis.
4.5.4	He who knows this, the Parāṇi sends him.
4.5.5	They become seventeen.
4.5.6	They approach Prajapati, who is seventeenfold.
4.5.7	They are in the Anushtubh metre. Prajapati is Anushtubh. They directly approach Prajapati.
4.5.8	Three are in front, three are behind.
4.5.9	The gods, fearing that Aditi would fall from heaven, strengthened her with these seventeen Stotras. Because these Stotras were performed, Aditi was strengthened.
4.5.10	There are thirty-four (verses). The thirty-four is the height. They measure him by the height.
4.5.11	Because of his going beyond, they were afraid of him. They surrounded him with all the Stotras. The two Stotras Visvajit and Abhijiti are the two Stotras of Vairya. By means of Vairya they surround the Sun for stability.
4.5.12	For non-injury, for non-injury.
4.5.13	They say, "This is like a leap from the Kṛt-saman. When one performs the seventeenfold sacrifice after the thirty-threefold sacrifice." The intervening sacrifice should be performed as a Prsthya.
4.5.14	The seventeenfold sacrifice should be performed at the end of the sacrifice for the sake of having hair.
4.5.15	They say that the seventeen is the belly of the Stotras. If they were to place the seventeen in the middle, then the creatures would be without food, the sacrificers would be without food.
4.5.16	Having approached from the thirty-three, they enter the seventeen. The thirty-three is the heaven, the seventeen is the heaven. They enter the heaven from the heaven.
4.5.17	They say, "The Uktha-s should be performed in various ways." If they are Uktha-s,
4.5.18	Uktha-s are cattle, cattle are peace. They perform the Visuvat with peace.
4.5.19	They say, "This is like a vivisection, namely, the Agniṣṭoma, the Visuvat, the Agniṣtoma, the Viśvajit and the Abhijit. The other Uktha-s would be (performed) in various ways."
4.5.20	All the Agniṣṭoma sacrifices should be performed.
4.5.21	Agniṣṭoma is indeed power; they indeed stand firm in the middle of power. There are nine hymns; there are nine vital airs; they indeed stand firmly in the vital airs.
4.6.1	This is the Visuva sacrifice.
4.6.2	This is indeed the world of gods; they indeed ascend that world of gods.
4.6.3	It becomes twenty-one. The sun is twenty-one in this world. They ascend the world of the sun.
4.6.4	Twelve months, five seasons, these three worlds, and the sun are twenty-one.
4.6.5	They stand in the middle of the sacrifice.
4.6.6	"Vayu, the bright one, has come." The first day is bright. It is the form of the sun.
4.6.7	Vayu, the deity, has taken this (verse) from the gods. If it were to be the first (verse) of any other (metre), it would burn.
4.6.8	They say that those who go to the first verse of the Gāyatrī go away from the vital airs. Since they become Vāyu, they do not go away from the life-force, for Vāyu is the life-force.
4.6.9	And indeed, they pacify him with this (verse). For Vāyu is indeed pacification.
4.6.10	Come, O Soma-drinker! Thus is the Pavamana hymn of Soma.
4.6.11	It becomes a Niyutvatī (hymn). Niyutvat means cattle. Cattle are peace. By peace they approach the sun.
4.6.12	The Diwakirti (hymn) is the Sama.
4.6.13	Svabhanu, the Asura, covered the sun with darkness. The gods removed that darkness with the Diwakirttis. When they are performed, they remove darkness. The Diwakirttis are the rays of the sun. They directly approach the sun through the rays.
4.6.14	The two verses, "Bhrāja and Abhrāja" etc. are at the beginning; they remove darkness from the beginning.
4.6.15	The two verses, "Mahādivākirti" etc. are in the middle; they remove darkness in the middle. The verse "Bhāsa" is at the end; it removes darkness at the end.
4.6.16	It has ten Stoma-s. Viraj has ten syllables. They establish themselves in Viraj.
4.6.17	They say, "In six months from now, they will go to the path and in six months they will return. Then where is the heavenly world for which they perform the Sattra?"
4.6.18	They begin with the head of heaven, the heavenly world.
4.6.19	"The Discontent of the Earth" - they establish themselves in this world.
4.6.20	"The All-consuming Fire, born of Truth" - thus the form of the equinox is made.
4.6.21	"The Sage, the Sovereign, the Overlord of Men" - they obtain food.
4.6.22	"The Gods did not generate the unworthy" - they are born.
4.6.23	It is in the Tristubh and Jagati metres. The Tristubh and the Jagati are the sun. If it were in other metres, they would fall from heaven.
4.6.24	It is in the Samradbati metre. Heaven is the kingdom of the king. They stand in heaven.
4.7.1	Now this (day) is the self of the year, and the two fortnights are on either side of it. The two (days) on which they go by the way they have gone before and on which there is a Prāgātha from the other side, these two should be on the day of the equinox. Thus they place the two fortnights in the self of the sacrifice for the completion of the heavenly world.
4.7.2	There is a Prāgātha: “O Indra, I have come to thee with a prayer.”
4.7.3	Vasishtha saw him who was killed by his son. He became endowed with progeny and cattle. Since this is a Pragaatha, it is for the sake of progeny.
4.7.4	"The verse "We have attained life, light" is for those who cross the year safely, they attain life and light.
4.7.5-6	The unknown, the unapproachable, the unapproached, the unapprochable, the unapproachables, the unapprochables, the unapproachers, the unapproachers, the unapproacher, the unapproaching, the unapproachableness, the unapprochability, the unapproachings, the unapproaches, the unapproacheable, the unapproachable, the unapproach, the unapproch, the unapproches, the unapproched, the unapprocher, the unapprochers, the unapproching, the unapprochera, the unapprochery, the unapprocheth, the unapprochet, the unapprochets, the unapprochables, the unapprochas, the unapprochae, the unapprochai, the unapprochay, the unapproha, the unapprohi, the unapprohe, the unapprohes, the unapproh, the unapprohs, the unapprohed, the unapproher, the unapprohers, the unapprohing, the unapprohera, the unapproheri, the unapproheres, the unapprohere, the unapprohesh, the unapprohet, the unapprohets, the unapprohable, the unapprohas, the unapprohae, the unapprohai, the unapprohay, the unapproah, the unapproahi, the unapproae, the unapproaes, the unapproe, the
4.7.7	Today, tomorrow, the day after tomorrow, we are men, he is the day after tomorrow. The verses of the Santainya are to be recited. One of them should be recited for the sake of uniformity. They continue the same as yesterday.
4.7.8	But they say that the verse "Indra, I will not break your vow" should be recited for prosperity.
4.7.9	The months are to be recited in reverse order.
4.7.10	Just as they climb up a tree from here, so they climb down from it. Having climbed up the heavenly world, they stand in this world.
4.8.1	The Stoma of a cow and life becomes.
4.8.2	The Sacrificer has two feet for stability.
4.8.3	They become deficient and excessive. Creatures are born according to the deficiency and excess. For propagation.
4.8.4	The two Virājas are food. They stand firm in food and nourishment.
4.8.5	There are twelve days in the twelve-day sacrifice.
4.8.6	This is the prosperous Virāj, for the twelve days are prosperous Virāj. They stand firm on the prosperous.
4.8.7	The Prstha (stotras) are the last ones. The Prsthas are indeed valour. They stand firm in valour. They are the Chandomas. The Chandomas are indeed cattle. They stand firm among cattle. This is the tenth day, the Aptastoma, the Aptachhanda, the Aptavibhakti, the unmentioned, the Prajapati's.
4.8.8	What they recite is what they reject. Therefore, one should not recite.
4.8.9	They recite the Anushtubh verse indirectly. Anushtubh is Prajapati. If they were to recite it directly, they would reach Prajapati.
4.8.10	He who knows the truth of the Sattra becomes true. The Vamadevya is the truth of the Sāmans, Agni is the truth of deities, the Viraj is the truth of metres, the Trayastrimsa is the truth of Stomas. Having thus brought them together in one place, they rise up.
4.8.11	The Brahmavadins say: From where did the Sattra rise?
4.8.12	Those who rise up after praising with the Rathantara, when they rise up, one should say to them, "They will be without a firm foundation." Those who rise up having praised with the Brihat, they rise up from the standing (saman), one should say to those, "Their prosperity will be lasting, they will not be more prosperous."
4.8.13	Those who rise up after praising with Vamadevya, they rise up from the true to the true, from the full to the full, from the abode to the abode, for the beings are of the abode of the sky.
4.8.14	In the thirty-three syllables, they rise up having established themselves in the thirty-three deities.
4.8.15	The Vamadevya is the Prajapati; the animals are the Vamadevya; they stand up having taken their stand on the animals.
4.9.1	Having offered the Patni-offerings, having gone forward, they stand by the Havirdhana with the verse, "This man of a thousand." This is the Atichandas; they stand by the Atichandas.
4.9.2	These worlds are the Atichandas, they stand up having found support in these worlds.
4.9.3	The word "cow" is the final word. This is the form of Viraj, and by Viraj they indeed stand firm.
4.9.4	They praise with the verses of Sarparajniya, facing each other.
4.9.5	Arbudasarpas (the serpent Arbudas) removed the dead skin with these (verses). With these (verses) they remove the dead skin.
4.9.6	This is the Sarparājyā (hymn). They are established in this (hymn).
4.9.7	They praise with three (verses). These are the three worlds. They are established in these (worlds).
4.9.8	He turns back with the mind.
4.9.9	For the mind makes the offering, the mind praises, the mind sings, the mind responds, the mind concludes. For the completion of the incomplete.
4.9.10	What they do not attain by speech, they attain by mind.
4.9.11	They praise when the (sacrificial) grass is spread out, for the grasping of Brahman.
4.9.12	They speak the Brahmanic utterance, they stand firm in Brahmanic splendour.
4.9.13	The Hotṛ recites the four Hotr verses; he praises what has been praised, for what has been praised is not praised if it is not praised.
4.9.14	They praise Prajapati. They say, "He has obtained him."
4.9.15	The householder holds the Udumbara branch. The householder is the one who is the source of energy. He gives them energy.
4.9.16	They restrain speech.
4.9.17-20	The Soma-pressings are indeed the most important of the sacrifices. The Soma-pressings indeed are the most important of sacrifices. The pressing stones are indeed the most prominent of the Soma-pressings. The pressing stone is indeed the most prominent among the Soma-pressers. The pressing-stone is indeed the most important among the Soma-stones. The pressing is indeed the most promiment among the Soma-pressing. The pressing indeed is the most prominent among Soma-pressings.
4.9.21	With two (verses) he removes the hair; with two (verses) the skin; with two (verse) the flesh; with two (the bones); with two (the marrow); with two (verses), the fat and blood.
4.9.22	They shave the head; they remove evil. The lighter ones go to the heavenly world.
4.9.23	And they become like cows, for the securing of all food.
4.10.1	Prajapati created the creatures. He became distressed and fell ill. The gods approached him. They said, "Let us perform a great vow for him so that he may recover." They performed the vow for him. They gave him food cooked for a year. He recovered from it. They said, "The great vow is that he recovered from it." That is why the Mahāvrata is called Mahāvrata.
4.10.2	Prajapati is indeed the great one. This is his vow. Food itself.
4.10.3	They say that one should eat in the middle of the year. Food eaten in the middle of a year nourishes.
4.10.4	They say that when they perform the rites in the middle, they obtain half of the food and half they make to be obtained. One should perform the rites only after the year. In the year all food is cooked.
4.10.5	It consists of twenty-four (bricks). The year consists of twenty-five (days).
4.10.6	Or, the Udayaniya is the same as the Pravargya, which is the twenty-fourth.
4.10.7	The food which they collect during the year, that becomes the twenty-fifth.
5.1.1	The Vamadevya and the Mahavrata should be performed.
5.1.2	The head is three-fold.
5.1.3	The head, hair, skin and bone are indeed three-fold.
5.1.4	The other self is the hair, skin, flesh, bone, and marrow.
5.1.5	One praises with the head, having uttered "sakrid" once.
5.1.6	Therefore the head is praised, not the limbs. It is not praised again, nor is it praised again.
5.1.7	One praises again with the other self. Therefore the other self is praised and is praised again.
5.1.8	The head is in the Gāyatrī verses of the Arka.
5.1.9	Arka is food, Gāyatrī is brahmic lustre. He places food and brahmic lustre in the mouth.
5.1.10	The fortnights are fifteen and seventeen. By the fortnights the sacrificer, having become old, goes to the heavenly world.
5.1.11	They say that they should be equal, or fifteen or seventeen, for the sake of the sacrifice.
5.1.12	They say that when they are equal, then they are of equal strength. Therefore they should be fifteen or seventeen. The sacrifice is like a bird with its two wings, and it falls when one of them is broken.
5.1.13	The larger one should be on the right side, because the right half of the body is stronger.
5.1.14	Now they say that the function of the Brahman-priest is to be performed from the north side. The Brihat is in the Trishtubh metre. The Brahman-priest is in the Trishtubh metre. The Pañchadasa Stoma is in the Tristhubh metre.
5.1.15	The Rathantara should be sung to the south of the half of the Maitrāvaruṇa. The Rathantara is in the Gāyatrī metre, the Maitrāvaruṇas are in the Gāyatra metre, and the Stoma is in the Gâyatra metre.
5.1.16	The tail should be of twenty-one verses.
5.1.17	The twenty-one is the foundation of the Stomas. Therefore a bird, having settled on the tail, flies up; having settled on thetail, it sits down.
5.1.18	The Yajñāyajñiya Sāman should be sung at the end of the Mahāvrata Sāman, because the Yajñā-yajñiya is the end of the Mahavrata.
5.1.19	Some say that the Yajñayajñiya Sāmā should be sung at its end, because it is the most excellent of the two-footed Sāmans.
5.2.1	The Vāmadevya Sāman should also be sung at the beginning of the Mahā-vrata Sāma, because its head is the Gāyatrī, its wings are the Bṛhat and Rathantara, and its end is the Yajñāya-yajñīya.
5.2.2	He who knows the thousandfold thread of the great vow obtains a thousand animals.
5.2.3	His eastern direction is the head, with the metres, a thousand. The other wing is a thousand, with the stars. This other wing is a thou- sand, with the herbs and trees. The atmosphere is the body, with the seasons, a thousand. His western direction is the tail, with the fires and rays, a thousand. He who knows thus obtains cattle.
5.2.4	They say that the Vamadevya is without a back, because it has no end.
5.2.5	The Sama Veda without an end is indeed without a base.
5.2.6	The Rajana and Mahavrata should be performed.
5.2.7	This Rajana is indeed the actual food, because it is fivefold. Food is fivefold.
5.2.8	It has the sound of "hiṅkāra", because of that it has the form of Vamadevya.
5.2.9	It has an end, because of that it is the form of the back.
5.2.10	In the Ati-chanda-s, the Vamadevya Brahma-saman should be performed with five-ending.
5.2.11	The Ati-chanda is indeed superior to other metres, and the Mahavrata day is superior to other days.
5.2.12	By means of the Brahma-saman, it surpasses other days.
5.2.13	It has five endings, because food is fivefold.
5.3.1	The Ilandam is to be sung at the Agniṣṭoma.
5.3.2	This indeed is the food itself, namely, the Ilandam. It is food. They indeed stand at the end in food in the Irá.
5.3.3	This indeed, is the ocean, the verse, the water, the hairy. He indeed becomes like the ocean, like water, like the hairy, he who becomes so.
5.3.4-6	Therefore, one should perform these rites for prosperity. The word "vratam" means the end. It is the form of the great vow. It becomes "svarga". It becomes "shakuna". The sacrificer, having become like a bird, goes to the world of heaven.
5.3.7-8	Or, whatever speech does not exceed, that should be the Agniṣṭoma Sāman. Speech does not exceed speech. Speech is the Yajñāyajñiya. Speech alone finally stands.
5.3.9	Agni, the all-consuming, burned this (world). The gods were afraid of him. They restrained him with the branch of the Varana tree. Because they restrained him, it is called Varavantiya.
5.3.10	Therefore, one should be healed with the Varana tree, for by this the gods protected themselves.
5.3.11	Therefore, a Brahmin should not drink with the Varana (tree), saying, "I do not want to be consumed by the all-consuming Agni."
5.3.12	The Vāravantīya is the peace of cattle. Cattle are peaceful. They rise from that peaceful year.
5.4.1	They stand before the Āhavanīya with the Prāṇa (breath). They conquer the Prāṇa.
5.4.2	They stand behind the tail with the Apāna (breath). They win the Apāna.
5.4.3	The two fortnights of the Vrata and the Paksa are established in the directions, and they conquer them.
5.4.4	They are established in the heart of Prajapati and in the Apikaksa, and they conquer lordship.
5.4.5	They are establised in the Nihava of Vasishtha and in the Chatvala, and they attain the world of heaven and proclaim prosperity.
5.4.6	In the verse of the Visvadevya sacrifice, it is said, "The form of all animals is the form of all animals." They conquer the animals.
5.4.7	They stand near the Agnidhra (fire-tending priest) for the prosperity of the Sattra (sacrificial session), standing for prosperity.
5.4.8	The wealth consists of four syllables. Animals have four feet. They stand in the animals.
5.4.9	They attain the end of the two worlds, and obtain all life.
5.4.10	By the verses and sub-verses they stand at the Havirdhana, and thereby conquer fame.
5.4.11	By the Yama they stand at the Marjalyas, and thereby conquer the world of the fathers.
5.4.12	By the Ayus and Navasthobhas they stand at the Sada, and thereby conquer both Brahman and Kshatra.
5.4.13	They attend on the Garhapatya with the Rṣya-sāman.
5.4.14	All the beings praised Indra. One of the Rṣya did not praise him. He knew that. He praised him with this (sāman). He approached his dear abode. With this (sāma) they approach his dear abode.
5.4.15	Whatever is beyond the eye, that they attain as the final goal. They release the Hriitamukha (chant) and attain the Hriitmukha directly. They conquer the Hriitmuka.
5.5.1	One ascends the seat and sings. One conquers the upper world by means of the witness of the gods.
5.5.2	It is made of Udumbara wood. The Udumbara is energy. One obtains energy.
5.5.3	It is the size of a span. For the non-destruction of this world.
5.5.4	He ascends to heaven by means of the metres. He ascends to that world.
5.5.5	He descends by means of the Metres. He stands in this world.
5.5.6	He takes up the Udgitha in its entirety, thinking, "May I not be obstructed in these worlds."
5.5.7	When one Stotriya verse is sung, he offers two feet.
5.5.8	They attain stability along with the sacrifice, and they attain stability in these very worlds.
5.5.9	Having ascended the Prastara, the Hotṛ recites. That indeed is the form of greatness.
5.5.10	When the beings enter the greatness, they ascend the Prastara then.
5.5.11	Having ascended a wooden plank, the Adhvaryu responds.
5.5.12	The others sit on their heels, and they go up, going upwards.
5.5.13	The Abhigaras and Apgaras are the two classes of priests. One praises them and the other censures them. He who censures them removes their sin, and he who praises them praises what is well praised and well sung by them.
5.5.14	The Śūdra and the Ārya compete in the skin. They make the Ārya's colour shine.
5.5.15	The gods and the Asuras competed in the sun. The gods won it. Then the gods became victorious, the Asuras became defeated. He who knows this becomes victorious over his enemies.
5.5.16	When they recite the noble verse, they recite themselves.
5.5.17	The skin becomes round, it is the form of the sun.
5.5.18	In all the directions, the drums sound, they conquer that speech which is in the trees.
5.5.19	The earth-drum is the speech of the earth; they conquer that very speech.
5.5.20	All the voices speak in those worlds; they conquer that same speech.
5.5.21	They go forth in armour, in array; that is made the form of Indra. Then they honour the great vow.
5.6.1	All the priests should praise with the great vow.
5.6.2	The Adhvaryu chants from the head, the Maitrāvaruṇa from the right wing, the Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin from the left wing, the Grhapati from the tail, and the Udgātṛ from the self.
5.6.3	If they were to do so, then they would approach the Udgātā with each Stotriya verse.
5.6.4	The Udgātṛ should sing the first three verses, then the one from the head, then the other three verses, then that from the right wing, then the other two verses, then that of the left wing, then the three verses, then either the one from the tail or the one from the front.
5.6.5	They place the limbs of the body on the self for the attainment of the world of heaven.
5.6.6	Now they say, how should the Adhvaryu chant the Sāman in many verses? The Udgātṛ alone should chant the entire Sāman. That is indeed prosperous. They stand in prosperity.
5.6.7	Having praised the Havirdhana with the head, they go back to the east, having gone around the Dhishnyas on the right, and having sat down behind the Maitrāvaruṇa's Dhishnya, they chant with the Rathantara in fifteen verses. They go back to the north, having gone around behind the Hotr's Dhishnyas, and having sat behind the Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin's Dhishnva, they chant with Brihat in seventeen verses. They go out by the same way as they had gone in, and having gone around the Agnidhra on the north, and having sat near the Garhapatya, they chant with Pucchana in twenty-one verses. They go in by the same way by which they had gone out, and having sat in their respective places, and having ascended the sacrificial post, the Udgātṛ chants for himself.
5.6.8	His wives sing to him with the Upaghatila verses. The wives thus perform the priestly duties. They go together to the world of heaven.
5.6.9	In every family food is prepared. If they are asked what they are doing, they should say, "These sacrificers will eat food."
5.6.10	He who proclaims the sin of the initiated, takes away a third part of the sin. The eater of food takes a third part, the ants take a third part.
5.6.11	They wander with the boundary-stones. The boundary-stones are the skin and hair of the Great Vrata. They obtain the skin and hair by means of the boundary-stones.
5.6.12	They spread out the arrow. The arrow is the end, the Great Vrata is the end. They greet the end with the end.
5.6.13	It has a hundred strings. Man has a hundred years of life, a hundred powers.
5.6.14	He should draw it with the words, "For your breath, for your out-breath, for your through-breath." Thus he obtains the in-breath, out-breath and through-breath.
5.6.15	The Kumbhinis, the Marjalas, go around saying, "This is honey, this is honey." Having become that age, they go to heaven together.
5.7.1	The gods divided speech. What essence of it overflowed became the Gaurīvit. The Anushtubh follows it. Speech follows the Anushtubh. The essence of speech is the Gaurīvita.
5.7.2	Whatever he praises with the Gaurīvit, that he gives to speech, and speech gives the taste to it.
5.7.3	He who knows thus speaks with taste.
5.7.4	It is a double-elimination. These are the ends of the heavenly world. They establish the previous day with the previous one, and exceed the subsequent day with the subsequent one.
5.7.5	This is the morning-milk of the sacrifice, that is the Gaurīvit. If they were to follow the Gaurīvita, they would be without offspring.
5.7.6	They say, "The sacrifice stands apart." It is only speech that does not stand apart. When the Gaurīvīta is performed every day, they again employ speech.
5.7.7	The Swarna-dhanam is performed every day.
5.7.8	Those who perform the Svārnidhana sacrifice ascend to the divine world. They say, "One should offer the Svārnidhāna sacrifice to those who are performing a Sattra (sacrifice), so that they may ascend to the divine realm." One who is seated in the divine realm does not suffer any harm. When the Svārnidhi sacrifice is performed daily, they do not suffer any harm.
5.7.9-10	They say that those who perform the Svārnidhana sacrifice are departing from this world. When they proceed in the form of a verse, they stand firm in this world. When it is a single syllable, it is in the sky. When it is in the form of the Saman, they stand firm everywhere in all worlds. Those who praise with the Svārnidhāna sacrifice.
5.7.11	The gods, going to the heavenly world, were afraid of the unknown. They saw this recognition and went by it. Whatever is well-known, they go by it.
5.8.1	Those who take food by speech become eaters of food. Those who are angry become rough.
5.8.2	The Gaurivit, the Syavasvam, and the Nihav are the Sāmans. These are the food of speech. These have food in speech. If these do not fall, then they take up speech as food. By that all become eaters of food.
5.8.3	They are sung in excess and in deficiency. The form of speech is in excess and in deficient.
5.8.4	The Plava is sung every day.
5.8.5	Those who perform the Samvatsara sacrifice are like those who bathe in the ocean. He who bathes in the ocean without a raft does not rise from it. When there is a raft, one reaches the heavenly world.
5.8.6	"He crosses all evil deeds." Whatever is ill-sung and ill-praised, they cross it by this.
5.8.7	The Okaniṣṭha sacrifice is at the end of the six-day sacrifice.
5.8.8	Those who go to the end of the six-day ritual go to the highest heaven. When the six-day rite ends with the Ukoniṣṭha (Sāman), it is for recognition.
5.8.9	When a man returns to his own abode, then he knows everything. Everything belongs to him during the day.
5.9.1	One should initiate on the Ekastaka (day).
5.9.2	This is the wife of the year, in that it is the Ekastaka (day). When he dwells in this night, then indeed they commence the consecration, beginning with the year itself.
5.9.3	The reason for this is that they enter the waters without delight.
5.9.4	Those who are initiated on the Ekastaka day are initiated at a time when the year is incomplete. The two seasons of Anta and Nama are incomplete.
5.9.5	Those who are initiated at a season which is incomplete are initiated at a incomplete year.
5.9.6	Therefore, one should not be initiated on the Ekāṣṭaka day.
5.9.7	One should be initiated in Phālguna.
5.9.8	The month of Phālguna is the mouth of the year; they begin the year from the mouth itself.
5.9.9	If the equinox falls in the month of Sammāgha, it is good.
5.9.10	They should be initiated on the full moon of Citrā.
5.9.11	The full moon of the bright half of the month is the eye of the year. The eye is in front of the face. They begin the year from the face. There is no escape from it.
5.9.12	They should initiate four days before the full moon.
5.9.13	Their purchase falls on the day of Ekastaka. They do not make it fall on Ekastaka.
5.9.14	If the former half of the month is taken as the first, then the months are completed in the former half of a month. The months rise in the former half. The animals and plants rise after them. The auspicious voice praises them, saying, "These sacrificers have attained the good." They succeed.
5.10.1	Those who release (the animals) increase the year.
5.10.2	Just as a shield is inflated, so is the year not released. If they were not to release it, they would die of dropsy.
5.10.3	The year is indeed the breath, the months are the exhalations. When they release it, they place the exhalations in the breath. If an initiated person dies, the impurity of the year not released reaches him.
5.10.4	They say, "Should one discard or not discard?"
5.10.5	If they were to discard, they would discard the praises. That which is discarded is not discarded.
5.10.6	But some say, "One should do it in one place. That which is directly discarded is not discarded."
5.10.7	They say that the year is a gap for those who omit the Stoma.
5.10.8	They offer a sacrifice to the Stoma, for the Stoma is indeed a sacrifice.
5.10.9	They release the calves in the morning, saying, "We have been let loose." They offer the animal in the morning. They proceed with the oblation. Then with the Savaniya cake on eight potsherds, then with the Agniya cake on eight potshers, then with the Dadhi Indra cake, then with the cooked rice for the Visvedevas. Thus the morning pressing is concluded.
5.10.10	Then with the Pasupurodāsa of eleven potsherds, then with the Savanīya of eleven potsherads, then with the Marutvatīya of eleven potsheds, then with the Indra-charu. Thus the Madhyamdina Savana is concluded.
5.10.11	Then with the Savanīya oblation of twelve potfuls of cooked rice, then with the Vaiśvadeva oblation of twelve pots of cooked rice, and then with the cake on twelve potfuls of rice to Agni-Maruts. Thus the third pressing is concluded.
5.10.12	Having performed with the Pṛṣadājya oblation, they offer the Patnīsaṃyāja oblations.
6.1.1	Prajapati desired, "May I be many, may I beget offspring." He saw this Agniṣṭoma sacrifice, brought it forth, and created these beings with it.
6.1.2	And with the elevenfold Stotra he created the Agniṣṭoma, and the eleven months of the year; and with the twelvefold Stotra he took possession of the Agniṣṭomas, and the twelve months of the year.
6.1.3	Therefore, offspring are born after carrying the embryo for ten months and one month. Therefore, they do not exceed the twelfth month. For they are encompassed by the twelfth month. He who knows this thus, takes hold of the offspring when they are born, and they generate the offspring when they have been born.
6.1.4	Of those that were taken, the horse strayed away. The semen that was lost, he put into the mare. Because the mare has two kinds of semen, therefore the horse is without offspring, for the semen was lost.
6.1.5	Therefore, it is not fit to be given. If the sacrifice were to be performed without Dakṣiṇā, the Dakṣiṇās would be excessive. For the sake of having hair, one should give at the Stotra of the Ṣoḍaśī. The Ṣoḍasi is excessive, and one gives the excessive to the excessive.
6.1.6	He desired, 'Let me create a sacrifice.' He created the Trivrt (Stoma) from his mouth. The Gāyatrī metre was created separately. Agni was the deity. The Brāhmaṇa was the human being. The spring was the season. Therefore, the Trivrt is the beginning of the Stomas, the Gāyatrī is the beginning of metres, Agni is the beginning of deities, the Brāhmaṇa is the beginning of human beings, and the spring is the beginning of seasons. Therefore, the Brāhman performs heroic deeds with his mouth, for he was created from the mouth.
6.1.7	He who knows this makes effort with his mouth.
6.1.8	He created the Pañca-dasa (Stoma) in the arms from the chest. It is followed by the Tristup metre, Indra is the deity, the king is the human being, and the summer is the season. Therefore, the Pañca dasa Stoma of the king is Tristup metre, and Indra is the deity. The summer is the season, and therefore he is strong in the arms, for he was created by the arms.
6.1.9	He who knows thus makes effort with his arms.
6.1.10	He created the seventeenth (verse) from the middle itself. The Jagati metre was created after him. The Viśve Devas were the deity. The Vaiśya was the man. The rainy season was the season. Therefore, when a Vaiśya is not maintained, he does not perish, because he was created for reproduction. Therefore, one who has many cattle is Vaiśvadeva, because the Jagat is his. The rainy season is his season. Therefore, the Vaiśya is below the Brāhmaṇa and the Rājanya, because he was the last to be created.
6.1.11	He created the Ekavimsa (Stoma) in the Patti (Stoma). The Anushtubh metre was created after it. No deity was created after it, the man was a Sudra. He who has many cattle, is unfit for sacrifice, and is without gods, for no deity was created after him. Therefore the feet are not to be worshipped. It does not increase beyond. The Patti was created. Therefore the Ekavimsha Stoma is the foundation. It was created in the foundation. Therefore the metres do not follow the Anushtubh.
6.1.12	The Vasisthas are the upholders of sin.
6.1.13	He who knows this becomes the upholder of sin.
6.2.1	One who knows the Stotras as the most excellent becomes the most excellent.
6.2.2	The Trivrit is the breath, the Pancadasa is the half-month, the Saptadasa is the year, the Ekavimsa is the Aditya. These are the Stotras as most excellent. He who knows this becomes most excellent.
6.2.3	These worlds are thirty-nine. By the Brahman these worlds are again made nine times.
6.2.4	He who knows this stands firm in these worlds.
6.2.5	The gods are indeed the thirty-three. The Vasus are eight, the Rudras eleven, the Adityas twelve, Prajapati and the Vasat-call are the thirty-three.
6.2.6	He who knows this, offers sacrifice to the gods with the sacrifice.
6.2.7	He who knows the lord, becomes the lord. The thirty-three are the lord of the Stoma, the man is the lord of the cattle.
6.2.8	From him the other animals eat, the man is above, for he is the lord.
6.2.9	He who thus knows, becomes the lord of equals.
6.3.1	This indeed is the sacrifice, namely the Agniṣṭoma.
6.3.2	One sacrifice is offered for one desire; the Agniṣṭomah is offered for all.
6.3.3	The Agniṣṭoma has twelve Stotras, the year has twelve months, the year is the animals, they are born according to the year, therefore it is animal-like, prosperous.
6.3.4	The twelve Stotras and the twelve Shashtras make twenty-four, which are the twenty-four half-months, the year. Animals are born in accordance with the year. Therefore, it is prosperous and connected with animals.
6.3.5	The Stotra is in Agni, the Shashtra is in Agni. It stands firm. Therefore, it leads to Brahmic glory.
6.3.6	They say, what is the nature of the Jyotistoma? It is said to be the Viraj. The Viraj is the light of the metres.
6.3.7	He who knows this becomes the light of the equal ones.
6.3.8	The Agniṣṭoma is indeed the supreme sacrifice.
6.3.9	Prajapati created the creatures. They did not stand for him as the best. He saw this Agniṣṭoma and brought it. Then the creatures stood for him as the highest.
6.3.10	Those who know this stand for him as best.
6.3.11	Now they say, the morning pressing is Gāyatrī, the midday pressing is Triṣṭubh, and the third pressing is Jagatī. Where then is the fourth metre Anushtubh?
6.3.12	The sacrificer is affected by the loss of the metres.
6.3.13	The Gāyatrī has eight syllables, the Hingkāra is the ninth, the Tristubh has eleven syllables, and the Jagatī has twelve syllables. The Anushtubh is attained by means of the metres, for the non-deprivation of the sacrificer.
6.3.14	He who knows the Anushtubh metre which is present in all the Savanas, becomes present everywhere. This Anushtubh is present in all Savanas. He who knows this becomes present everywhere.
6.3.15	Now, when kings run a race, they yoke those horses that are the most vigorous. The Trivṛt, Pañcadaśa and Ekavimśa are the most vigorous among the Stotras. He yokes them. For the attainment of the heavenly world.
6.3.16	It consists of four Stotras. The four Stotra is a firm foundation. For firm foundation.
6.4.1	Prajapati distributed the strength among the gods. Then the Udumbara (tree) came into existence. The Udumbara is of Prajapati. The Udgatr is of Prajapata. When he begins the first rite with the Udumbara of the Udgatr, he chooses himself for the priestly duties with his own deity.
6.4.2	He raises it with the verse, "May the Maruts raise thee, O heaven-born, may they establish thee in heaven, may they fill the atmosphere, may they strengthen the earth."
6.4.3	He then embraces it with the verse. "We place thee in thy abode, in the shade of the Avati, in the heart of the ocean."
6.4.4	The sacrifice is the life; its abode is being made.
6.4.5	The sacrifice is Avati; its shade is being made.
6.4.6	In the middle of the self is the heart, and in the middle of that is the Udumbara (wood) placed.
6.4.7	He says, "Salutations to the ocean, salutations to the eye of the ocean." The ocean is speech, the eye of the sea is the mind. He thus pays homage to them.
6.4.8	He says "The Sama was the youthful carrier." The Sama is the youthful carrier. He thus pays obeisance to the Sama, intending to perform the priestly duties.
6.4.9	He who thus worships the Samaveda and performs the priestly duties of the Samaveda, does not fall away from the Samaveda, nor is he harmed by the Samaveda.
6.4.10	He who recites it in a contrary manner, suffers misfortune.
6.4.11	"Ourg, Ourg-giver, give me Ourg, give me Oura, give me food, give me food. This is the belly of Prajapati, the Ourg of the Udumbara tree, which is placed in the middle of the sacrificial hall, he thus places food and Ourg in the middle for the creatures.
6.4.12	Therefore, where this is performed, the people become hungry.
6.4.13	The Sama is the food of the gods. By performing the Sama, one makes the gods attain food. He himself, being established in that food, distributes food to the people.
6.4.14	The Udgātṛ, sitting towards the north, sings; he distributes the energy towards the north. The Prastôtṛ, sitting towards west, chants; he distributes the enrgy towards the west. The Pratihartṛ, sitting towards south, responds; he distributes the enerty towards the south. The other priests, sitting towards east, perform their priestly duties; therefore this is the most energetic direction, for the most are gratified in it.
6.4.15	The Brahmavādins say, "Why do the priests other than the Udgātṛ perform their priestly duties?" The Udgātṛ moves around. "For the sake of the desired directions, for the delight of the directions," one should say. Therefore, food is found in all directions, because all are desired and delighted.
6.5.1	Prajapati desired, "May I be many, may I beget offspring." He sorrowed. From his sorrow the sun was created from his head. It struck his head. It became the Dronakalaśa. The gods took the semen in it. He lived beyond the distress of life.
6.5.2	He who knows this lives beyond the distress of his life.
6.5.3	"He says, 'You are of the tree, you are of the sky, you are of Prajapati, you are the head of Prajapati. You are the vessel of long life. I am sending myself forward for brilliance and radiance.'
6.5.4	When he says, 'You belong to the tree,' he sends him forward with truth.
6.5.5	When he says, "Barhaspatya," he unites him with Brihaspati, the Udgata of the gods.
6.5.6	When he says, "Prajapati," for this is the deity of the ladle, and when he says, "On the head of Prajapati," for it was taken from the head of Prajapatis.
6.5.7	The vessel of the gods is the vessel of the gods, for it is the vessel of all the gods.
6.5.8	One who knows this obtains the vessel of the Gods.
6.5.9	One should not doubt a Brahmin who is like a Brahmin. One who knows this obtains a vessel of the gods and does not fall from the vessel of men.
6.5.10	Speech departed from the gods. It entered water. The gods again requested it. They said, "If we give it back, what will happen to us?" They said, "What do you desire?" They said, "Whatever the men do to us that is impure, by that we will not be mixed."
6.5.11	The waters are pure, they become pure for him who knows thus.
6.5.12	She again went away from them, she entered the trees. The gods again requested her, she did not give them back, they cursed them, "With your own arm, with the thunderbolt, we shall strike you down." Therefore they strike down the trees with their own arm, with a thunderbolt. For they were cursed by the gods.
6.5.13	The trees placed the speech in four places: in the drum, in the lute, in the dice, and in the bow. Therefore this is the most eloquent, this is the most cheerful. Speech is of the trees, for this was the speech of the gods.
6.5.14	They throw down the lower axle and the pot of Drona. They hold back her speech. They give the upper axle and the strainer. They hold her speech on both sides.
6.5.15	If one wishes to make a sacrifice for him, one should throw the Dronakalaśa with both arms and touch it with water. One makes a sacrifice for him who is not a friend, and one seizes his speech. If one wishes to be his friend, one should throw it without touching it. The Dronakalaś is the vital airs; he makes his vital airs prosper.
6.5.16	Why do they say this? The other priests are chosen. Why do the Udgātṛs, when chosen, perform the priestly duties?
6.5.17	Because they approach the Dronakalaśa, therefore the Udgātars are chosen.
6.5.18	The Udgātṛ are Prajapatya, the Dronakalaša is Prajapatya. He chooses her for the priestly duties in the Dronakalaṣa itself.
6.5.19	They place the Dronakalaśa facing east, saying, "We shall perform the beginning of the sacrifice facing east."
6.5.20	The east is the direction not conquered by the Udgātṛs. When they place the Dronakalaśa facing east it is for conquering the directions.
6.5.21	Now they say, "What is the connection between the Asvas and the Prasavas? What is the connection between a bull and a she-goat? What is the relationship between the Udgātṛs?" When they sit down at the Dronakalaśa, that is their relationship. Therefore one should sit down only with those who are connected, for one who is not connected does not carry.
6.6.1	They pour the Droṇakalaśa into the Gravas. The Gravas are the people, Soma is food, the Droṇakalaša is the kingdom. In that they pour the Droṇakalaśa into the gravas, they pour the kingdom into the people.
6.6.2	If one wishes to hate someone, one should perform this rite, saying, "I am driving out so-and-so, the son of so-and-such, from the clan of so-and such, from the food of so-and so." One should drive him out. One drives him out from the clan and from the food.
6.6.3	If he is dear to him, having placed the stones in front of him, he should say, "I am invoking the son of so-and-so, belonging to so-and-such a clan, in the food of so-andso." He should invoke him. He invokes him in the food of his clan.
6.6.4	Then, disregarding both of them, he should think, "I am this, I am that; I am in the radiance, I am in the splendor." He should think, "In the radiance, in the splendor, I am the Self."
6.6.5	If one wishes to destroy a country, one should place the Dronakalaśa below the gravels, and place the Upāṃśusavana above it, saying, "I am destroying this country with this country." The country is destroyed.
6.6.6	He who knows the divine purifying rites becomes pure and fit for sacrifice. The divine purifying rites are the metres. With them they purify the pot of the cauldron.
6.6.7	The Vasus purify thee with the Gayatri metre, the Rudras with the Trishtup metre, the Adityas with the Jagatī metre. These are the divine purifying rites. He who knows this becomes purified and fit for sacrifice.
6.6.8	Svabhanu, the Asura, covered the sun with darkness. The gods did not know him. They approached Atri. Atri removed the darkness with his radiance. What he removed first became black. What he removed second became silver. What he removed third became red. With which color he covered, that became white.
6.6.9	Therefore, Soma, the white and pure, is Shukra. He is Shukra for the sake of purity.
6.6.10	One should perform the purification of these colors for the one whom one hates. He strikes him with darkness and sin. The one who is dear to him should be made white and attached. Gold is light. He places light in him.
6.6.11	Therefore they desire that the moon should be the son of Atri, for Atri is its light.
6.6.12	They take up the filter. They do the work of the hands. This is the work of the sacrifice. This is the taking up of the filter, the work of the Udgātṛs.
6.6.13	He who knows thus does not fall away from the work of the hand.
6.6.14	He who does not quarrel with him, he is taken away from his life.
6.6.15	He should say to him, "You are trembling, you will die." He dies while trembling.
6.6.16	The Udgātṛ recites the Dhāraṇā verse, "May the Goddess of Wisdom come to us, our chariot is well-built, may it be swift."
6.6.17	"Flow for my life, flow for my radiance. The waters know the birth of earth and heaven, may they listen to the waters flowing below. Sing to Soma here." He says, "For my radiance, for my brilliance."
6.6.18	This indeed is the Udgītha of Soma, when Soma flows. He sings the Udgīthi as the Sāman.
6.6.19	They purify the severed (sacrificial animal) and also the life-breaths. They purify continuously. For the continuity of the sacrifice.
6.7.1	Brihaspati sang for the gods. The Raksases attacked him. He attacked those who were the lords of these worlds with a share in the sacrifice.
6.7.2	He offers with the formula, "May Surya protect us from the evils of the day, may Vayu from the evils of space, may Agni from the evils of earth, svāhā."
6.7.3	These are the lords of these worlds. He approaches them with a share.
6.7.4	He who knows this attains strength through speech and does not suffer any harm.
6.7.5	Speech fled from the gods. The gods followed her. She said, "I am without a share. Let there be a share for me." "Who will make a share for you?" "The Udgātṛs," she said. The Udgātṛ-s make a share for Speech.
6.7.6	He should offer to her with the verse, "You are the one named Bekura, agreeable to the gods. Salutations to speech, salutations to the lord of speech. O goddess, whatever is sweet in your speech, may that be in me. To Sarasvati, svāhā."
6.7.7	Sarasvati is indeed the speech. He thus invokes her with her own share.
6.7.8	One who hates someone should offer this oblation to him, or meditate on speech with the mind. He seizes his speech.
6.7.9	They move in the outer Pravargya rite. They move towards heaven, the world.
6.7.10	They move like a snake, like a fire moving against the wind. Heaven is the world. They move like a deer. The sacrifice is like a deer. For the peace of the sacrifice, for non-trembling,
6.7.11	When they restrain speech, they restrain the sacrifice. If they were to speak, they would destroy the sacrifice. Therefore, one should not speak.
6.7.12	The five priests move in unison. The sacrifice is fivefold. They extend the sacrifice to its full extent.
6.7.13	If the Prastôtṛ is absent, the head of the sacrifice is cut off. Having given a boon to the Brahman, he should be brought back. The cut-off (part) is restored.
6.7.14	If the Udgâtri is absent, the sacrificer is obstructed by the sacrifice. The sacrificial rite without Dakṣiṇā should be concluded. Then another one should be brought and given in it as much as would have been given.
6.7.15	If the Pratihartṛ is excluded, the sacrificer is defeated. The Pratihartṛ are the animals. If the entire Veda is not given, one is defeated in all (kinds of) sacrifices.
6.7.16	The Adhvaryu takes the Prastara.
6.7.17	The Prastara is the sacrificer. He takes the sacrificer to heaven.
6.7.18	The sacrifice, having become a horse, fled from the gods. The gods found it with the Prāstara (kindling wood). Therefore the horse, being rubbed with the Prāstarā, approaches. When the Adhvaryu takes the Prāstāra, it is for the peace of the sacrifice, for non-trembling.
6.7.19	Prajapati created the animals. They, having been created by him, went away, seeking food. He gave them the Prāstara (grass) as food. They returned to him. Therefore, the Adhvaryu should throw the Prāstāra grass a little, for the animals return to the grass like a fire that has been extinguished.
6.7.20	Those who know this, the animals return to them.
6.7.21	Having approached the sacrificial grass, one should chant for the non-scattering of the oblations.
6.7.22	One should chant for the sacrificer to prevent him from falling from heaven.
6.7.23	One should recite when spitting or touching, so that his oblation is not scattered and the sacrificer is not prevented from heaven.
6.7.24	Having looked at the sacrificial ground, they chant the Bahispavamāna. Here indeed was that Aditya. The gods brought him to heaven by the Bahispavamaṇa. When they chant the Bahispāvamāna having looked at the sacrificial area, they bring the sacrificer to heaven.
6.8.1	They say, "He should perform the sacrifice." They say, "Those who know Viraj as the mouth of the sacrifice."
6.8.2	They praise with nine (verses), the tenth being the Hina-verse. The Viraj has ten syllables. He places it in the mouth of the sacrifice.
6.8.3	They praise with nine (syllables), the tenth being Hina. The breath is ninefold. They make it complete by the breath. The tenth is Hina. Therefore the navel is not cut off. The tenth is of the breaths.
6.8.4	Nine (verses) are recited. At the morning pressing the Adhvaryu takes up nine cups. He purifies them. He releases their life-breath.
6.8.5	Prajapati is the Hinkara. The three verses of the Bahispavamana. When he recites the Hinkara and then sings, he places the pair in his mouth of sacrifice for procreation.
6.8.6	This is the union of the Stoma, for when one recites the Hiṅkāra and then recites, one recites with the united Stoma.
6.8.7	This is the essence of the Sāman, for when one chants the Hiṅkāras and then chants, one chants with the essence.
6.8.8-10	They praise the wild animals when they praise the Bahispavamāna. They praise them with uniform (verses). Therefore, the wild animals are of one form. They praise them with verses going in the opposite direction. Therefore, the offspring are born in the opposite direction and stand in the opposite direction.
6.8.11	They praise outside and praise inside; therefore they eat in the village what has been brought.
6.8.12	They praise the animals of the village with the Ajya (hymns) of various forms; therefore the village animals are of various forms.
6.8.13	They praise again and again; therefore those who have died return again.
6.8.14	The Parigrhitis are sung in the Parigrhita Sāman. Therefore, the domestic animals are enclosed.
6.8.15	They sing for the world beyond. The Bahispavamāna is sung for the world beyond, because they sing with the single-uttered and the reversed verses. The world beyond is attained once.
6.8.16	They praise this world with the Ajya verses. They praise again and again. Therefore, this world is born again and again.
6.8.17	They say that the vital airs of those who praise with the Bahic-pvamana verses going away are many. One should sing the last verse going towards (the world). For the stability of the vital airs.
6.8.18	They say that those who chant the Bahispavamānī verses in the reverse order fall from this world. One should chant the Rāthantara verse as the last one. This world is Rāthantara. One stands firm in this world.
6.9.1	One should chant the verse "We sing to him" for one who desires a village.
6.9.2	The man is the village of the gods; the village is the offering for him.
6.9.3	Food is the offering for one who has eaten.
6.9.4	One who desires offspring should use the formula, "May he be born, may he be born."
6.9.5	He is born, he is born.
6.9.6	One who is desirous of prosperity should use the formula "May he prosper, may he prosper."
6.9.7	The great god who kills the animals, may he purify us. May he be auspicious to the cattle. He makes a remedy for the four-footed.
6.9.8	May he be auspicious to men. May he be (auspicious) to the two-footed. May he be for the one-hoofed.
6.9.9	The plants are smeared with poison, which is equal to the poison of the great god who kills animals. When he says, "O king, you are equal to the plants," he makes the plants taste good for him. Both kinds of plants are cooked for him - those grown without cultivation and those grown with cultivation.
6.9.10	"Flow, O most excellent of speeches," one should recite this verse for him whom one desires to be the foremost among equals.
6.9.11	"Flow, O most excelent of speeches," he makes him go to the foremost.
6.9.12	Speech's excellence is the foremost; he places excellence in him.
6.9.13	"These are the excellent drops," one should recite for many.
6.9.14	"These" (he says) to all of them, to prosper and to flourish.
6.9.15	"These" (he said) to the gods, "Asrig" to the men, "Indava" to the ancestors, "Beyond the strainer" to the planets, "Ashva" to the praise, "Vishvani" to the benediction, "For good fortune" to the other creatures.
6.9.16	Because of this, the number of gods is the same as it was before.
6.9.17	This statement is indeed true.
6.9.18	Because of this, humans are born every day.
6.9.19	Because of the word 'Indra', the fathers are like Indra.
6.9.20	Like the mind.
6.9.21	Those who have been created as the subjects, they attain prosperity. Those who know this way, they attain prosperity.
6.9.22	The Gandharva Visvavasu stole the Soma which was being brought (to the sacrifice). He entered the water. The deities sought him. Vishnu saw him in the water. He desired, "This is mine." He struck him with his foot. From that the separate drops were produced. He said to the deities standing around, "These are the drops." At the Bahispavamana (hymn) the sacrifice is produced. When he chants, "These are drops," he announces to the deities the sacrifice which has been produced.
6.9.23	The morning pressing is a bad and unpropitious rite, for the Iḍa is the morning pressing. He says, "The Iḍa has been given to us." He makes the morning pressing like the Iḍa, with cattle.
6.9.24	One should recite the verse "May we be victorious in the gambling" for the guest.
6.9.25	"The dice-throwers go forth, the Gāyatrī metre is stretched out, the Triṣṭubh is stretched out, and the Anuṣṭubh. The Soma-drinks are bright, the head of the cow, the Jagatī. This is the form of all the metres. The first step is like the metres, indeed, the vow-step. With its own form he thus makes them prosper.
6.9.26	The Vratas are indeed the elders in strength and energy; the Chhandas are the strength and energy. He thus makes them strong and energetic by means of strength and energy.
6.10.1	One should recite the verse, "O Agni, do thou purify the life-breaths" for those whose initiates die.
6.10.2	Those whose initiated ones die are as if impure. If the Agnipavamānī is the first step, Agni himself burns them and Pāvamānī purifies them.
6.10.3	When he says, "For life," he places life in those who are alive.
6.10.4	One should perform the first step with the verse, "Come to us, O Mitra-Varuna."
6.10.5	When a person's life and breath have departed, his life and breath are Mitra and Varuna. He places life and breath in him.
6.10.6	"He blows away the evil, Soma blows away the evil." One should recite this verse for one who is being slandered with untruth.
6.10.7	Those who slander with untruth are indeed evil. He thus removes them from him.
6.10.8	"Going to Indra's share" - he thus makes him go to Indra's pure, sacrificial share.
6.10.9	"Flow, O bull, in the receptacle" - he should make the first foot for the king; the king is a bull; he makes him a bull.
6.10.10	To Marutvat, and to Matasar. The Maruts are the clan of the gods; he thus unites him with his own clan. He does not depart from his clan.
6.10.11	"With all strength," he says; with strength and vigour he thus encloses the clan in front of him. He does not go away from his clan.
6.10.12	"O Indra, flow on, O son of the bull!" one should recite this verse if he desires, "May I prosper among the people."
6.10.13	"Make us the people of fame!" He prospers among the people.
6.10.14	"You two are indeed the lords of heaven!" One should recite this verse twice. He makes them equal sharers in the sacrifice and bestows both of them with the fame of the sacrifice.
6.10.15	"Let the streams flow forth" (he says) for one who desires rain.
6.10.16	"Let the streams flow" (he says), "Let the streams cease" (he says). He causes rain to cease from heaven. "The strength of the Soma pressed" (he says); from the atmosphere.
6.10.17	"They follow the gods" (he says): he establishes it in this world.
6.10.18	The rain is given by the strength and vigour of the Vrishni. When it is not given, it is given by the vigour and strength of the Vrishnis. By saying this, he gives the rain from heaven by his vigour and strength.
6.10.19	With that stream of yours, by which the cows have come here, may your daughters bow to our house. One who desires, 'May my daughters, the cows, bow to me,' should perform this step. He obtains his daughters, the cows. 'May my daughters obtain the kingdom,' is the step. By this step his daughters, the cow, bow to him. His daughters obtain the kingdom.
7.1.1	These worlds are the Gayatri, sung three times. The worlds are three. When he sings the Gayatri three times, he unites him with these worlds.
7.1.2	If he sings twice, he would make a hissing sound. If he sings thrice, he would exceed the Gayatri.
7.1.3	When he sings thrice, then he exceeds the Gayatri.
7.1.4-6	He who sings with the Gayatri that is not obstructed, becomes unshakeable. The Hingkara is the obstruction of the Gayatri. He should sing with the Gayatri which is obstructed, with the mind. He becomes unshakeable by singing with the Gayatri. He who sings the Gayatri from these worlds, is not excluded from these worlds. These worlds abide with him in abundance.
7.1.7	He takes it in a low tone, then in a higher tone, then in the highest tone. It went from these worlds.
7.1.8	This is the unuttered song. The uttered is cruel to Gayatra. If one sings the unuttered, he turns away the cruelty.
7.1.9	If the breath were to go out while reciting the Gayatri, then one would become short-lived. If it does not go out, then one attains the full life span.
7.1.10	If the breath were to be held while reciting the middle verse, then one would attain the full life span.
7.1.11	One who desires cattle should offer the Iḍa as the final oblation. One who desires heaven should offer the Svāha. One who desires fame and brahmic lustre should offer the Yashas. One who desires longevity should offer the Ayus. One who desires to harm should offer the Hamsī.
7.1.12	These are the milking of the Gāyatrī.
7.1.13	One who knows this becomes one who has brahmic lustre and cattle.
7.2.1	Prajapati, having made himself the sacrifice, gave it to the gods. They did not stand for the foremost place among one another. He said to them, "Let us go to the race." They went to the race. Because they went to the race, that is why the Ajyapas are called Ajyapas.
7.2.2	He knew that Agni would be the first to rise up. He said, "Whoever does not rise up first, he will be with us." Agni rose up first, then Mitra-Varuna, then Indra. This one remained the only one not to have risen up. Indra said to Agni, "Whatever we agreed upon, that is ours." This is the Indra-Agni half-verse. The praise of Agni is half, the praise of Indra is half.
7.2.3	There are four (kinds of) Sants and six (kinds of) Devatiyas.
7.2.4	The sacrifice is divided into six parts, and he undertakes the sacrifice as much as it is.
7.2.5	All the Svārāṇis are Ajyas. They praise the non-killing with different Devatiyas.
7.2.6	They praise the domestic animals with the Ajya verses. They praise again and again. Therefore, the domestic animals go away and are born again. Therefore, they go away and return again.
7.3.1	With this much, he completed the Madhyamdina Sāman.
7.3.2	With three metres and five Sāmans.
7.3.3	Whatever is sung with the Madhyandina Pavamāna, that they purify with the Madhyandinasavana.
7.3.4	All the Samavedas are included in the Madhyandina pavamāna.
7.3.5	The Gāyatrī is the final one, the Aindra is without a final one.
7.3.6	Whatever is sung with the Mādhvandina Pavamāna is sung with all the Sāmans.
7.3.7	The Pavamāna is the Self of the sacrifice, the Gāyatrī is the mouth, the Prāṇa is the Gāyatry. When they praise with the Gāyatrīs and the Gāyatrya, then they place the Prāṇas in the mouth itself.
7.3.8	The Prāṇas and Apānas are these metres. The Prāṇa is Gāyatrī, the Vyāna is the Brhatī, the Apāna is the Tristubh. When they praise by these metres, it is for the uninterruptedness of the Prāṇās and Apānas.
7.3.9	These are the worlds, these are the metres. This is the Gāyatrī, this is the middle Bṛhatī, that is the Triṣṭubh. When they praise with these metres joined together, it is for the continuity of these worlds.
7.3.10	If any other metre were to be inserted in between, it would sever these worlds.
7.3.11	Having praised with the Gāyatrī verse having a concluding verse, they praise with the Gāyatri verse. The Gāyatri is in this (earth). The support is made in this (earth) itself.
7.3.12	If they were to praise with the verse without a concluding verse, the sacrificer would be without support.
7.3.13	They praise with the verse having a concluding (verse). The Gāyatrī is indeed vigour. The concluding verse is vigour. By means of vigour, he thus augments vigour.
7.3.14	They begin with the Aindra verse having the Brihatī metre.
7.3.15	The Iḍā is cattle, the Brhatī is cattle; thus he places cattle in cattle.
7.3.16	In the Brhatī there are most of the Sāmans.
7.3.17	There also there are three-fold.
7.3.18	This middle world is indeed the weakest; that is its support.
7.3.19	It is three-fold; the three openings of the Savanas are closed by it.
7.3.20	There are three kinds of wealth. These are the three worlds. He stands in these worlds alone.
7.3.21	There are three kinds of riches. This (rite) is established in the Madhyamdina Sâman. If there were not three kinds of riches, the Madhyamdinsaman would not be established.
7.3.22-25	The oblations have two syllables. The sacrificer has two feet. He establishes the sacrificer in the sacrifice and in the animals. The last oblation is without a syllable, for the attainment of the heavenly world. If it had a syllable, it would have thrown the sacrificer out of the heavenly world.
7.3.26	By means of the voice, the food is given to the gods at the end. By means of the same voice, he gives the food to the gods at its end.
7.3.27	The Gayatri is in front and the Svaras at the end.
7.3.28	The breath is the Gayatri, the Svaras are the breath. He thus places the breath on both sides. Therefore, the animals have breath on both sides.
7.3.29	What is Gayatra in the beginning, what is Svaram at the end, one goes with the Prānas and stands firm with the Apānas.
7.4.1	This indeed is the heavenly part of the sacrifice, the midday pressing, the midday Pavamāna, the Brihatī of the Pavamāna. When Dakṣiṇās are given at the Brihatī Stotra, they are given in the abode of heaven.
7.4.2	The gods said to the metres, "We shall go to the heavenly world by you." They employed the Gāyatrī metre, but did not succeed. They employed the Tristubh metre, but did no succeed. They employed Jagatī metre, but did succeed. They employed Anushtubh metre, but succeeded only partially. They added four syllables to the essence of these directions and it became Brihatī. By that they succeeded in pervading these worlds.
7.4.3	The Brihatī is the boundary which extends over these worlds. That is the greatness of the Brihatī.
7.4.4	They placed these animals at the end. The Brihatī are animals. When gifts are given at the Brihatī Stotra, they are given in their own place.
7.4.5	Why is it called "Brihatī"? Because it pervades these worlds, and no other verse does so. All the verses, from seven to twenty-one, are included in the Brihatī. Therefore it is called "Brihatî".
7.4.6	Why do they sing the Gāyatrī at the morning pressing, the Tristubh at the midday pressing, and the Jagatī at the third pressing? Why do they sing in the Bṛhatī metre at midday?
7.4.7	The gods, with the Bahispavamāna, brought the sun to heaven. It did not hold. They established it in the middle of the day with the Brihatī. Therefore they praise the sun with the Brihatî in the middle of day, for it supports the sun in the middle of its course.
7.4.8	Those who praise at midday with whatever metres, they all converge on the Tristubh. Therefore they lead the Tristubh from the midday pressing.
7.5.1	Prajapati desired, "May I be many, may I beget offspring." He stood, grieving, not being honoured. He saw this (verse) which honours (him). By that he created these beings. When they were created, they did not honour (him). Because they did not honour, therefore it is the honouring (verse).
7.5.2	Those created by him fled from him. He took their life-breaths in heaven and on earth. He took their breaths. They returned to him when their breaths were taken. He gave them back their breaths, saying, "The great protection of the fierce ones." They went away from him, saying, "We praise you." He heard their anger. Then they stood for him as the best.
7.5.3	Those who know this stand for the highest position.
7.5.4	And this is the creation of offspring, and the maintenance of the evil-doers, that is the Amāhi-yava.
7.5.5	One becomes the maintainer of the evil-doing, he who knows this.
7.5.6	The gods, desirous of fame, performed a Sattra sacrifice. Agni, Indra, Vayu and Makha said to each other, "Let him who obtains fame for us, share it with us." Makha obtained fame for them, and taking it, he departed. They desired to take it from him, and surrounded him. He stood firm by his own bow. His bow fell down and struck his head. That became the Pravargya. Makha is indeed a sacrifice. When they perform the Pravargya, they restore the head of the sacrifice.
7.5.7	The gods divided up his fame. Agni took the Raurava.
7.5.8	That indeed is the animal power, which he took. Animals are Raurava. 
7.5.9	One becomes an animal-owner who knows this.
7.5.10	Agni is Raurava. This is his Raurava.
7.5.11	The Asuras attacked the gods. Then he saw the two fires Raurava and Visvanga as the Stoma. With them he attacked them back. When they were attacked back, they roared. Because they roared, therefore it is Raurava.
7.5.12	Then Indra attacked Yaudhajayana. That indeed he attacked with the thunderbolt. The thunderbolt is Yaudhajayanam.
7.5.13	He who knows this strikes the thunderbolt at his enemy.
7.5.14	Indra, the conqueror in battle, is the one who has this (victory).
7.5.15	"He conquered in battle." Therefore it is called Yaudhajaya.
7.5.16	Then Vayu brought down the Oshan.
7.5.17	He brought down the strength of life. Oshan is life.
7.5.18	He who knows this attains the whole of life.
7.5.19	Vayu is the one who bestows blessings, and this is his blessing.
7.5.20	Ushanas Kavya was the priest of the Asuras. The gods invited him with the cows that bestow what is desired. They gave him these blessings. The blessings are cows that bestow what one desires.
7.5.21	Those who know this are blessed with cows that bestow what they desire.
7.6.1	Prajapati desired, "May I be many, may I beget offspring." He meditated silently in his mind. What was in his mind became the Brihat.
7.6.2	He thought, "This embryo of mine has been hidden. I will generate it with speech."
7.6.3	He released speech. That speech became the Rathantara.
7.6.4	The Rishis threw the Rathantara. That is why it is called Rathantara.
7.6.5	Then the Brihat was born. Brihat is the limit. It became the eldest. That is why the Brihat is called Brihat.
7.6.6	Just as a son is the eldest, so is the Brihat the eldest of Prajapati.
7.6.7	This is the eldest of the Brahmanas.
7.6.8	He who knows thus attains the highest.
7.6.9	They say, "Why is it that the Brihat was first created in Prajapati, and why did the Rathantara take up the yoke first?"
7.6.10	The Brihat was indeed first created, but the Rathantara was first created in the beginning of creation. Therefore it took up the yoke first.
7.6.11	Their death was the same. They did not stand in that (contest). They went to the race. The Bṛhat (Sāman) conquered the Prāṇa (vital breath) of them. The Rathantara (Sāman), the Apāna (exhalation), united with it.
7.6.12	The Prāṇāpāna are the Brhat and Rathantara. If one has a disease, one should perform both. The Prāṇās and Apānas of one who has a disease have departed. He places the Prāṇās in him.
7.6.13	Why do they say that the Brihat and the Rathantara are both outside and inside the Nidhana? Why does the Brihat take the outside Nidhanas and the Rathantara the inside Nidhanas?
7.6.14	The Brihat is the breath, and therefore it takes the outside Nidhanan, for the breath is outside. The Rathantara is the out-breath, and therefore it taks the inside Nidhanan, because the out-breath is inside.
7.6.15	The two great trees, Bṛhadratha and Antare, are offered to the god of death.
7.6.16	When the two great trees fall, much of the wood is broken and scattered.
7.6.17	The Brihat is the Air, the Rathantara is the Ether; the Brihat is the mind, the Rathantara the speech; the Brihat the Sama, the Rathantara, the Rik; the Brihat, the Prāṇa, the Rathantara Apāna; the Brihat this world, the Rathantara that; one should sing them after having contemplated them in the mind. He sings with the two well-established ones.
7.7.1	The Brihat and Rathantara are animals. He recites the first verse with eight syllables. He thus obtains animals with eight limbs.
7.7.2	He recites the two verses with two syllables. The sacrificer is biped. He thus establishes the sacrificer in the sacrifice and in the animals.
7.7.3	With the five-syllabled (mantra) he repels the Rathantara; he thus wins cattle in groups.
7.7.4	With the four-syllabled one he repels the Brihat; he thus wins four-footed cattle.
7.7.5	The Brihatī and the Rathantara do not belong to the same metre. Therefore they placed the Kakubha in between. Therefore the Brihatī is the first, and the Kakubha is the second. Therefore they perform the Brihat and Rathantara with one verse, for they do not belong to one metre.
7.7.6	One ascends nine Brihatī steps. The breath-prāṇas are nine. One obtains the breath-prānas.
7.7.7	He climbs three (steps) in the first (part of the rite), the past, the present and the future; he thus obtains them. He climbs three (more) in the middle (part of the ritual), the self, offspring and cattle; he thus obtains these. He climbs three in the last (part of the ceremony), these three worlds; he thus stands firm in these worlds.
7.7.8	He who, knowing this, climbs the great steps, obtains all his desires.
7.7.9	The Prastôtṛ strikes the Udgâtri with the thunderbolt when he chants the Rāthantara; he should chant after having concealed the ocean. The ocean is speech. He conceals the ocean for the sake of non-injury.
7.7.10	The strong song is the thunderbolt. Thus proceeding, he takes it back.
7.7.11	The Balvala (singers) sing the Geya, as if to tempt the thunderbolt. They tempt only the thunderbolt.
7.7.12	The Geya is sung quickly for the sake of the attainment of the world of heaven.
7.7.13	The Rathantara is the chariot of the gods. Those who establish it with the syllable 'a' and 'na' establish it with the syllables 'a' and the 'na'. The chariot stands firm with the 'na' and the 'a'.
7.7.14-15	He who stands without touching the chariot of the gods, falls away from this world. This world is the chariot of the Gods. Having touched it, one should sing. One does not fall away from this world.
7.7.16	The Rathantara is the begetting of offspring. When he says, "To the standing ones," the Udgâtri's speech becomes sterile. He should say, "To the well-standing ones." When he says, "To the standing ones," the Udgâtr's speech becomes fertile. It does not destroy the begetting of children.
7.7.17	The Prsthas were created. By them the gods went to the heavenly world. The Rathantara could not rise up by its greatness.
7.7.18	Vasishtha, having placed the greatness of that (Prstha), praised it with that (verse). Having gone to the heavenly world, having collected them, one should sing.
7.7.19	Whatever thy glory is in the cows, whatever thy glory is in water, or in thy chariot, or in thy thunder, whatever thy glory in thy fire, by that glory, O Rathantara, do thou prosper, and be rich in wealth.
7.8.1	The waters were the Ritu-offering. The wind blew on their backs. Then the Vama came into being. In it Mitra and Varuna saw. They said, "The Vama is the boundary. It belongs to the gods." Therefore it is called Vamadevya.
7.8.2	Then they, taking it, said this: "Do not be angry with us." Prajapati said: "This was born from me, or this was born from me." Agni said: "This food was born from me or this was born for me." Indra said: "This is the place of the best, I am the best among you. This was born for me or this was for me." The Visve Devas said: "This belongs to our deity, which arose above the waters. This was born from us or this was for us." Prajaputi said: "Let this be for all of us. Let all of us live by this." They placed it in the back-supports. Vaamadevyam belongs to all the deities.
7.8.3	Whatever is in the Kavatī verses, that is Prajapatya. For who is Prajapati? Whatever is in the Anirukta verses, that is also Prajapatya, for Anirukta is Prajapati.
7.8.4	Whatever is in the Gāyatrī verses, that is Agnēya. For Agni is the Gāyatrīs.
7.8.5	Whatever is placed in the Prstha verses, that is Indriya. For all the Prstha-verses are exclusively of Indra.
7.8.6	By which the Maitrāvaruṇa recites, thereby the Maitrāvaruņa.
7.8.7	By which the Bahudévatya is the highest position, thereby the Vaishvadeva. In all forms he stands firm.
7.8.8	Prajapati saw this Gayatri as the womb. He thought, "I should create the backs from this womb."
7.8.9	He created the Rathantara. The sound of the chariot followed it.
7.8.10	He created the Brihat. The sound of thunder followed it. He created the Vaivāhika. The sound of that followed it.
7.8.11	 Translation: He created the Vaivarupa. The sound of fire followed it.
7.8.12	He created the Sakvaris. The sound of water followed it.
7.8.13	He created the Revatis. The sound of cows followed it.
7.8.14	These were created together with their sounds.
7.8.15	All sounds and all auspicious words are spoken in him, he who knows this.
7.9.1	Vamadevya is the father, the Prsthas are the sons.
7.9.2	From this womb these were created.
7.9.3	Therefore they praise the back-verses with the Vamadevya hymn for peace.
7.9.4	For whatever a son does that is not peaceful, his father pacifies it.
7.9.5	This world is the middle one. The Vamadevya is this world. From this these two worlds, the Brihat and the Ratantara, were created.
7.9.6	Those who are praised by the Rathantara hymn, those animals which are Rathantara, they are supported by the atmosphere. Those who are praised with the Brihat hymn, those animals that are Brihat, they are supported in the atmosphere. They are restrained by the hymn of Vamadevya.
7.9.7	One should sing the Vamadevya hymn while sitting firmly for the increase of animals.
7.9.8	The cattle turn towards him who knows thus.
7.9.9	The Vamadevya is the sky, the Udgitha is like a broom, the sky is like a broom. The Vamadevya are the cattle, the Udgītha is like non-injury to the cattle.
7.9.10	How is the Vamadevya to be sung?
7.9.11	Just as a mother, having chastised her sons, does not break them, and just as the wind gently blows over the water.
7.9.12	The hymn to Vāmadevya is sung by one's own wife.
7.9.13	He who sings the hymn to Vāmadeva by his own wife becomes his own wife.
7.9.14	One goes by one's wife's control, not by another's control.
7.9.15	The Brhat and Rathantara are not suitable for singing. One should sing in one's own place. One becomes the owner of a place.
7.9.16	The gods divided the animals. They placed Rudra in between. He is attentive to the praise of Vamadeva.
7.9.17	The Anirukta is to be sung.
7.9.18	Rudra gives animals to him who gives them to Rudra. Rudra gives animals to that one who gives them equally. One becomes the giver of animals.
7.9.19	One desiring cattle should chant the Vamadevya hymn in the Revati asterism.
7.9.20	The Revati asterism is water, and the Vamadevyam is cattle. He thus generates cattle for him from water.
7.9.21	One becomes cattle-possessing, not turning back; one's offspring become like a swarm of bees.
7.9.22	For one goes to the Kavati (hymn) from Prajapati.
7.10.1	These two worlds were together. They said to each other, "Let us have a marriage. Let us be together."
7.10.2	He gave this one to that one, the black one. That one gave this one to him.
7.10.3	Then they went away from each other. The marriage of the gods is the black and the white.
7.10.4	He who knows this obtains the marriage of the Pravasīyas.
7.10.5	From here these worlds, being conceived as above, go; from there the worlds, being conceived below, come.
7.10.6	When they praise this world with Rathantara, they unite it with the sky. When they praise the sky with Vamadevya, they unite it. When they praise that world with Bṛhat, they unite it to the sky. When the sky is praised with Vamadevyā, this world is united.
7.10.7	He who knows this worships the worlds as they are.
7.10.8	When they use the Rathantara and the Naudhasa for the Brihat, they use the Brihat for him; for the Naudhasa is the Brihat in the unseen world. When they use the Shyaita for the Brihat and the Rathantara for the Shyaita, they use the Rathantara for him; for Shyaita is the Rathantara in the unseen world.
7.10.9	He who knows thus, is praised by both the Brihat and Rathantara (Samas).
7.10.10	The gods divided the Brahman. The Naudhas came to them. They said, "The Rishi has come. We shall give him the Brahman." They gave him this Sama. Therefore it is called Naudhas. The Brahman is Naudhas.
7.10.11	One who desires Brahmic glory should praise with this; one becomes Brahmic glorious.
7.10.12	Now this is the Shyaitam.
7.10.13	Prajapati created the animals. They, having been created from him, fled. He addressed them with this Sama. They stood by him. They became Shyita. Because they became Shyita, therefore it is Shyaitam. The animals are Shyaitam.
7.10.14	One who desires cattle should praise with this (hymn). One becomes possessed of cattle.
7.10.15	Prajapati created the beings. They, when created, lamented. He sniffed them with the hymn "Shyate". Then they became united. Those who know thus, praise with "Shyate" where they become united.
7.10.16	This indeed is the Prajapati of the sacrificer, the Udgata. When he makes the Shiti, he becomes Prajapati and conquers the subjects.
7.10.17	It has Vasu as the final verse. Vasu means cattle. He indeed stands firm in cattle.
8.1.1	The Kanva-sāman should be used at the Vasat-call, and the Abhi-sāman at the Abhi-sāmānin-sāman.
8.1.2	The Vasat-call is indeed a divine act. Indra struck Vritra with the thunderbolt. He struck him with the thunderbolt and then struck him with the Vasat-cry among the gods.
8.1.3	One who desires cattle should perform the Traikakubha sacrifice. The Brahma-sāman is to be performed on these verses: "You are praised, O Anga."
8.1.4	Indra gave the ascetics to the Salavrikas. Three of them remained behind, Rayo Vajo, Brihadgiri and Pṛthurasmi. They said, "Who will support our sons?" Indra said, "I will." He placed them in Trikakub and went away. He saw this Sama Veda there. Since he saw it in Trikakub, it is called Trikakubha.
8.1.5	He again approached himself, saying, "O Anga, you are the most praised god, the most powerful. O Maghavan, there is none other than you. O Indra, I speak these words to you." With this hymn and this Sama, he created a thousand animals. He gave them to these (gods). They stood firm.
8.1.6	One who desires cattle or prosperity should chant this hymn with this Sama. One obtains a thousand cattle and prosperity.
8.1.7	This Sama is of three kinds of power, of three kinds of faculties, of Indra, of Indra, and of Indra. One thus stands firm in power and strength.
8.1.8	One should perform the Brahma-sāman for one who is afflicted by three kinds of diseases.
8.1.9	These worlds, with their inhabitants, were grieving. Indra removed their grief with this hymn. Since he removed the grief of the three who were grieving, it is called "Triśoka".
8.1.10	The one he removed from the sky entered the female. The one from the atmosphere entered the neuter. The one from yonder entered the male.
8.1.11	Therefore one should not grieve for them. He who is grieved for them, he himself is freed from grief.
8.1.12	He who is pierced by grief, for whom the disease increases, when the Brahma-sāman is performed in three parts, it removes grief from him.
8.1.13	They conclude with "to the day". The day is prosperity. He makes prosperity for him.
8.2.1	One who desires stability should perform the Brahma-sāman with the Kānva-sāman as the final one.
8.2.2	Kaṇva saw this sāman as the final (sāman). He did not attain stability. He heard it being chanted by Vṛṣadamba when it was raining. He saw that very same final (sāma). From then on he attained stability. In that this is a sāman, it is for stability.
8.2.3	One who desires offspring should perform the Brahma sāman with the Vasīṣṭha-sāman.
8.2.4	Vasishtha, having been struck by his son, saw this Sama. He was born with offspring and cattle. This Sama is for the sake of being born with offspring and animals.
8.2.5	One should perform the Brahma-Sama for one who desires the world.
8.2.6	The Atharva-s saw this Sama for the sake of desiring the world. By that they saw the world of the immortals. This Sama is performed for the sake of the birth of the world of heaven.
8.2.7	One should perform the Brahma-sāman for the one who is about to conquer his enemies.
8.2.8	The gods conquered their enemies with the Abhivarta. When the Brahma-sāmā is performed, it is for the purpose of conquering one's enemies.
8.2.9	One should perform the Brahma sāmā for one who has deviated from the sacrifice.
8.2.10	Prajapati united with his own daughter Ushas. His seed fell down and was deposited in her. She sprinkled it, saying, "May this not be spoiled for me." She made it good. It became cattle.
8.2.11	When the hymn of Brahma is sung, it makes one prosper and makes one good.
8.3.1	The gods and the Asuras were contending for these worlds. The gods approached Prajapati. He gave them this Sama. "He said, "With this I shall destroy them." With this they destroyed them from these worlds. Because they destroyed them, it is called Kalaya.
8.3.2	He who knows this destroys his enemy from these worlds.
8.3.3	The Stoma was the name of the god among the gods, the sacrifice was the name of Asura among the Asuras. The gods, knowing the Stoma, surrounded the sacrifice of the Asuras.
8.3.4	He who knows this, surrounds the sacrifice of his enemy with the Stoma.
8.3.5	The gods called Sahdyas, having been excluded, went to heaven with the midday pressing, which is the third pressing. The gods then united with the world-knowing (priest). When it is the time for the third pressing, it is for the continuity of the third pressing.
8.3.6	The third pressing is indeed the possession of knowledge. When he chants with the verses "With the trees, with the possession of knowledge," he thereby exceeds the third pressing.
8.3.7	All the forms are in Kāleyi. Since it has the beginning of a foot, it is Rāthantara. Since it rises above the heights of Bṛhat, it is Bṛhat. Since it is a Stobhavana and a Pratihara, it is Bārhat. Since it has a flowing Iḍa, it is Rathantara. It stands in all the forms.
8.4.1	The gods called Sadhyas, having gone to heaven with the whole sacrifice, said to the metres, "Bring Soma." They sent the Jagati. It came, having lost three syllables and become one-syllabled. They sent the Tristubh. It came, after losing one syllable and becoming three-syllabled (the Jagati). They sent the Gāyatrī. Then the metres had four syllables. It came, taking those syllables, having become eight-syllabled, and having taken the three pressings with its hands, having bitten the two pressings with its teeth, and having sucked the third pressing. Therefore the two pressings are with grass, and the third pressing is sucked, for it was bitten with the teeth. It took the Soma, and its parts that fell down became Pūtikā. The flowers that were not eaten became Arjuna. What it spread out became Prāprotha. Therefore they pour down the Āśira at the third pressing. The cows eat that Soma, and they pour down its juice for the sake of being Soma.
8.4.2	They said to the Gāyatrī, "We approach you." She said, "What will be mine from that?" They said, "What you desire." She said, "Let me have all the morning pressing. I shall be present at the later pressing." Therefore the morning pressing is Gāyatrī and the Gāyatrī is present at the later pressings.
8.4.3	She (the Gāyatrī) became eleven-syllabled by being joined with the Tristubh metre having three syllables. She became twelve-syllabled when joined with the Jagatī metre having one syllable.
8.4.4	Therefore they say, "The Gāyatrī indeed nourishes all the metres, for the Gāyatrī nourishes these nourishments."
8.4.5	Indra, having become angry, went away from the third pressing. The gods made him drink, saying, "You are the sweetest." They made him drunk, saying, "The most intoxicating." They purified him, saying, "O Soma, flow for Indra to drink." Then Indra returned from that, saying, "I am the sweetest, the most intoxicating." When one praises with "You are the most intoxicating," it is for Indra's presence at the third pressing.
8.4.6	The cattle of the gods were the sweetest, those of the Asuras the most intoxicating. The gods won the cattle of the Asuras by saying, "The sweetest, the most intoxicating."
8.4.7	He who knows this wins the cattle of his enemy.
8.4.8	In them is the collection.
8.4.9	The gods named Sadhyas, having been excluded, went to heaven with the midday pressing and the third pressing. The gods united them with the Samhita. Because they united them, it is called Samhita.
8.4.10	This is the time before the Samhita. The Samhita is afterwards. For by these two the third pressing is united.
8.4.11	All the forms are included in it. Since it has the beginning of a verse, it is Rathantara. Since it ascends the peaks of Brihat, it is Bṛhat. Since it has a verse as its end, it is Rathantara. It stands in all the forms.
8.5.1	These two, Uṣṇīka and Kakubha, are there.
8.5.2	Or, when Indra struck Vritra with the thunderbolt, he struck him with the Kakubha, and with the Uṣṇīha he struck him from the Kakubha. Therefore the Kakubha is the middle verse, having the most syllables, for it is the striking. He struck him with the Uṣnīha, therefore the Uṣṇiha is the last verse, having the greatest number of syllables, for the thunderbolt is like a leader.
8.5.3	He who knows this strikes the thunderbolt at his enemy.
8.5.4	The Uṣṇīṣa and Kakubha are the two nostrils of the sacrifice. Therefore, though they are of the same metre, they carry the sacrifice separately. Therefore, from the same nostril, the two breaths come out separately.
8.5.5	The Uṣṇīṣa and Kakubha are the vital airs. Therefore, they do not offer the Vasat-call with them. If they were to offer the Vasat call, they would offer the vital airs into the fire.
8.5.6	Among them, the Vihfa is like the Sapha. The third pressing is like the third pressing. For the Sapha-ness of the third pressing, the Oushkala. By this, indeed, Prajapati created the Puskalas (cattle). He placed the form in them. In that this is a Sama, he places the form in the cattle.
8.5.7	The two verses, "Puroriti vo andhasah" belong to the two metres, the Padyā and the Aksarī. By the Padyā metre the gods went to heaven, by the Aksarī metre the sages. Since these two verses belong to the two meters, the Padyá and the Aksarí, it is for the attainment of the heavenly world.
8.5.8	Among them, Śyāvāśva.
8.5.9	Savasva, the son of Arvanasa, was seated at a sacrifice when the rain-bearing clouds came. He saw this Sama and created rain with it. Then he stood firm and found the tune. This Sama is indeed the knower of the tune.
8.5.10	One who recites this (Sama) finds the tune and stands firm.
8.5.11	Indra, having been frightened away from the third pressing, the gods called him back with the hymn "O black-hoofed one, come hither!" He returned. In that this is a Sāman, it is for the sake of Indra's presence at the third pressing.
8.5.12	Now this is the Anndhiga-song. Anndhigu, desiring cattle, saw this Sama. With it he created a thousand cattle. In that this is a Sama, (it is) for the prosperity of cattle. The Nidhana is in the middle. It is the Iḍa. By this the third pressing is established. If there were no Iḍa in the middle, the third pressing would be unestablished.
8.5.13	The ten-syllabled (verse) is the final (verse) in the middle. The ten-syllabic Viraj is the Viraj. He stands firm in the Viraj.
8.5.14	"The verse, "The dear ones flow forth," is the Kava Prajapati Sama."
8.5.15	"The dear ones are the offspring, the dear ones are the cattle. He stands firm among the offspring, among the cattle."
8.5.16	The two Aushani verses are the rays of the sacrifice. This is the treasure of the gods which has been raised up for the sacrifice. They are at the end, for the safety of the sacrifice.
8.6.1	The gods divided the Brahman. What of its essence remained over, that became the Yajnyayajniya.
8.6.2	The Yajñāyajñiya is indeed the essence of Brahman. When they praise with the Yajñāayajñiya, they establish the sacrifice in the essence of Brahman itself.
8.6.3	The Yajñāyājñiya is indeed a womb. From this womb Prajapati created the sacrifice. Therefore, it is the Yajñāyaajñiya.
8.6.4	Therefore, formerly the Brahmanas sang the Bahispavamana hymn with this (verse), "We shall extend the sacrifice from the womb." They praise the sacrifice from there. He establishes the sacrifice in the womb.
8.6.5	The Asuras had all the sacrifices. The gods saw the Yajna-yajniya (hymn). They took the Agnihotra (hymn) by saying, "Your sacrifices are your fires." They took the Darsha-Paurnamasa (hymn) with the words, "By word and by word, by Daksha." They took the Catu-r-masya (hymn) saying, "We go to the immortal, the all-knowing." They took the Soma sacrifice with the words, "I praise the dear friend."
8.6.6	The gods, having turned back the Asuras, won the sacrifice by means of the metres.
8.6.7	He who knows thus wins the sacrifice of his foe by means of the Metres.
8.6.8	This is what Kusaṃba, the son of Svayava, said: "Who today will be the child-killer, standing on the path of sacrifice, to be honoured?"
8.6.9	This is indeed the child-killer standing on the path to sacrifice. When he says "Giri giri" in the Yajñāyajñiya hymn, the Udgātṛ then sings himself.
8.6.10	Having sung the Airā, he establishes the sacrifice in the Airā. The Udgātṛ becomes one who does not die prematurely.
8.6.11	When he says, "May we go forward," the Udgātṛ dedicates himself to Vaiśvānara. He should say, "May we proceed." He goes around Vaiśvānaran.
8.6.12	He who approaches the one who is praising with the words, "You are praising," becomes worse off. This is the praise of the one who is being praised. One should say, "I am praising well." One does not approach the one who is praised with the words, “You are praising.” One becomes better off.
8.6.13	For him whose sacrifices end with the Veda, they flow through the gap in the Veda. Those sacrifices end with the veda which end with the Yajnyayajniya. That is the gap in the veda, namely, falsehood. If one utters falsehood, then his sacrifice flows after that. One should make up for the gap in the sacrifice with the syllable "akshara".
8.6.14	This is the form of Viraj, namely, the syllable. One thus stands at the end in Viraj.
8.7.1	From here the chants of the morning are joined, from there the chants of the evening. The Yajñāyajñiya Stotra is joined. "The verses are: "O Agni, we join you with the voice and with the Dakṣas." "The twelve-syllabled verse is: "We praise the immortal one who knows all, the one who is born." "The eleven-syllabled one is: "I praise the dear friend." "The eight-syllabled is: "O Mitra, I praise you.
8.7.2	He makes the Anushtubh verse the last one. The Anushtubh is this (earth). He indeed stands on this (earth).
8.7.3	The Anushtubh indeed is speech. He indeed stands on speech. The Anusthubh is seniority. He indeed stands in seniority.
8.7.4	How is the Yajnayajniya to be sung? They say, like a bull urinating, thus and thus.
8.7.5	They say, "The Udgātṛ approaches the Vaiśvānara (fire) when he recites the verse of the Yajñāyajñiya." He moves around as if going around the Udgītha. He moves around the Vaiśvânara.
8.7.6	The Adhvaryu, indeed, directs the members of the sacrifice towards Vaisvânara when he turns to the Stotra of the Yajñâyajñiya. It should be recited with the Pravrta (verse) in order to avoid the danger of burning by Vaisvânaras.
8.7.7	The Fathers do not know the covered. The Fathers, when they are seeking to know the praise of the Yajñayajñiya, cover their ears. They know the covered and the uncovered. The Fathers do not injure the Vaishvānara.
8.7.8	The wives let loose the water behind. They thus appease the Vaishvânara. Water is appeasement.
8.7.9	Then indeed they sprinkle the semen, for the semen is water.
8.7.10	They sprinkle the right thighs, for the semen flows from the right side.
8.7.11	It is as if a great obstacle is removed; they generate his mind.
8.7.12	The Udgātṛ sprinkles the wives for the purpose of impregnating them.
8.7.13	He sprinkles them in response to the sound "hiṅkāra," for the semen is impregnated in response to the "hiṅkāara".
8.7.14	They count the third as three, for semen is threefold.
8.8.1	The gods, having won the Agniṣṭoma, were unable to win the Ukthas. They said to Agni, "With you as our leader, we shall win them." He said, "What will be mine from it?" They said, "Whatever you desire." He said, "Let the Ukthas be dedicated to me."
8.8.2	Therefore they recite the Agniya hymns.
8.8.3	Therefore, the Gāyatrī verses are recited, because Agni is of the Gāyatrīs.
8.8.4	Having made Agni their leader, they marched together with the horse. Because they marched together with a horse, therefore it is called Saṅgāmaśva.
8.8.5	Therefore they offer the Ukthas together with the horse, for by this (horse) they conquered them first.
8.8.6	Indra said, "Who will follow me in this?" "I will," said Varuna. Varuna followed him. Indra took it. Therefore the praise is offered to Indra and Varuna.
8.8.7	He said, "Who will know this with me?" "I will," said Brihaspati. Brihaspati attended on him. Indra brought it. Therefore one praises the Indra-Brihaspati (hymn). He said, "Which one will know this with us?" "I will." "Vishnu," said he. Vishnu attended on him. 
8.8.8-9	He brought the cattle to them. Cattle are the praises. One desiring cattle should praise with praises. One becomes prosperous.
8.8.10	They say that the Rathantara is the same as the Yajus. The Rathantara is the Sāman, the Rathantara is in the middle of the Brihat. When they chant with the Sauvaralā, they chant in the middle of Brihat, for the Sauvarala is the brilliance of the Brihat.
8.8.11	If the Soma-sacrifice is to be performed with the Brihat-sāman, then the Sūbhaga-hymn should be chanted with the Brahma-sāman. It is indeed the Brihat-samana that makes the Sūbhagamana hymn more brilliant.
8.8.12	If one were to perform the Sūbhagama rite with the Rathantara-sāman it would be for the sake of immortality.
8.8.13	The directions of the gods who went to heaven became unsteady. They became steady by the Saubhara. Then they became firm. Then they stood firm. Then they knew heaven. One who desires heaven, one who desires stability should praise with the Saubhara; he knows heaven, he becomes stable.
8.8.14	Prajapati created the creatures. When they were created, they were hungry. He gave them food with the Saura-svara. Then they became satisfied.
8.8.15	Those who know this, when they sing with the Saura svara, their offspring become satisfied.
8.8.16	They said, "You have given us a good gift." Therefore it is called Saura.
8.8.17-20	He who desires rain, or who desires food, or who desires heaven, should praise with the Saura-sambara. One who desires rain should conclude with the verse "Heed!" One who desires food should conclude with the words "Food!" One who desires heaven should conclude with the word "Heaven!" All desires are Saura-samba. One stands firm in all desires.
8.8.21	Now this is not a sacrifice.
8.8.22	While Angiras was sitting at the sacrifice of Nṛmedhas, he was challenged by dogs. He ran to Agni, saying, "Protect us, O Agni, from the one." Vaisvānara stood around him. From that he stood up. From that he found the way.
8.8.23	He who knows this, obtains the knowledge of the Gāyatrī metre. One who praises with this (metre) stands firm in the Gāyatri.
8.8.24	For this is neither the form of the day nor of the night, which is the form of the Uktha hymns.
8.8.25	The Kakup, the Anushtubh, and the Puroravis are the metres. They lead with the Anushtubha metre, of the Acchāvāka Sāman.
8.9.1	It becomes the colour of a deer.
8.9.2	The Asuras were in these worlds. The gods drove them away from this world with the words, "Obeisance to Hari-Sri" from the atmosphere with the words, "Obeisance to Viraj" and from heaven with the words, "Obeisance to heaven."
8.9.3	He who knows thus drives away his enemies from these worlds and ascends these worlds.
8.9.4	Now, Harivarṇa, desiring cattle, saw this Sama. By it he created a thousand cattle. In that this Sama exists, it is for the prosperity of cattle.
8.9.5	The Angirasas went to heaven, from where the Rakshas followed them. By this Harivarṇa drove them away. In that this is a Sama, it is for driving away the Rakshas.
8.9.6	The backs were created. What of their lustre and sap overflowed, the gods collected that and it became the Udvashi.
8.9.7	This is the lustre of all the backs. Therefore, before the birth of the son, they did not cross it for the sake of protection from sin.
8.9.8	For he who praises with the Prstha hymns, praises with the Udvasaniya.
8.9.9	The Udvasaniya is all forms.
8.9.10	They sing you, O Gāyatri, they sing you. The form of Rathantara is approached, for the Rathantara is approached.
8.9.11	The beginning of the Brihat is above, for the Brihat is like the sky.
8.9.12	The Paristobha is the Vaivārupya, for the Paristobha belongs to the Vaivārupa.
8.9.13	The Anuttoda is the Anutunna of the Vairāja.
8.9.14	The Ardhaeda is the Sakvarīṇāṃ, the Atiśvara is the Revatīṇāṃ.
8.9.15	By the Ardhaeda the gods conquered the Asuras, by the Atiśvara they ascended to heaven.
8.9.16	He who knows this conquers his foe by the Ardhaeda and ascends to heaven by the Atiśvarā.
8.9.17	The earlier (Sāmans) are established with half-tones, the later ones are begun with the Atiśvara (Sāman).
8.9.18	The later sacrifice bows down to him who knows thus.
8.9.19	This is a five-fold (Sāman), the sacrifice is five-fold, the animals are five-fold, he is established in the sacrifice and animals.
8.9.20	One who desires prosperity should perform the Aṣṭādaṃṣṭra (Sāman) for him.
8.9.21	The eight-toothed one, the deformed one, the sonless one, the one without offspring, became old. He thought that he had destroyed these worlds. He saw these two Sāmans in old age. Because of the non-use of them, he was afraid. He said, "One who praises with the two Sāmans will prosper."
8.9.22	This is the blessing of the sage, that one becomes eight-toothed. One prospers.
8.10.1	Those who desire radiance and brahmic glory should offer the Uktha hymns in the Gāyatrī metre. The Brahma-sāman in the Anushtubh metre and the Acchāvāka-sāman are offered in the Gāyatri metre. This Gāyatri is accomplished.
8.10.2	Gāyatri is radiance and brahmic splendour. One attains radiance and brahmic splendor.
8.10.3	In the Gāyatrī verses, one desiring cattle should recite the Uktha verses in the Uṣṇik metre, the Brahma-sāman in the Anushtup metre, and the Acchāvāka-sāman. This becomes the Uṣṇika metre.
8.10.4	The Uṣṇik is indeed cattle; one obtains cattle.
8.10.5	In the Gāyatrīs, one desiring men should recite the Ukthas in the Kakubh metre, the Brahma Sāman in the Anuṣṭup metre, and Acchāvākasāman. This Kakubh becomes.
8.10.6	The Kakup is a man; he obtains men.
8.10.7	One desiring food should recite the Ukthas in the Viraj, the Brahma-saman in the Ushnih, the Acchhavasasaman in the Anushtup. This Viraj is accomplished.
8.10.8	The Viraj is food; he obtains food.
8.10.9-10	Those who desire pre-eminence among the verses of the Veda should compose the Uktha hymns in the Usnih metre, the Brahma-saman in the Anushtubh metre, and the Acchāvāka-saman in Anushtubh. This becomes Anushtubh.
9.1.1	The gods, having conquered the praises, were unable to conquer the night. They did not see the Asuras who had entered the night and darkness. They saw this Prastara with the Anushtubh at the head, the Viraj, the light. They saw the Viraj, and the light, and with the Anushtubh and the thunderbolt they struck down the night.
9.1.2	When this is the Prastāra beginning with Anushtubh, he sees the Viraj in the light, and with the Anushtubh and the thunderbolt he destroys the enemy of the night.
9.1.3	They pushed them around in a circle. The reason they pushed them around in circles was that they were the circles.
9.1.4	The first feet are again the first ones of the first circle.
9.1.5	For the first time they took up again from the first night.
9.1.6	He recites the verse, "May we be at the end of your feast."
9.1.7	The end of the feast is the day, the night is the day. Thus they begin with the day.
9.1.8	In them (the verses) there is Vaitehavya.
9.1.9	Vītahavya, Śrāyasa, Jyoga, and Niruddha saw this Sama. He understood and stood firm. One who recites this Sama understands and stands firm.
9.1.10	They enter it as if it were the night, and they approach the night. When the end of the night is at the beginning, it is for recognition.
9.1.11	When a man returns to his own home, then he knows everything and everything belongs to him by day.
9.1.12	They resorted to the middle stage. They deprived their enemy of speech by means of the upper abode.
9.1.13	He who knows this deprives his enemy of speech.
9.1.14	It consists of three stages.
9.1.15	Just as the midday pressing of the day is the abode of three kinds of wealth, so this middle period of the night is the abode of the three kinds of wealth. For the attainment of the same world.
9.1.16	The middle periods of the night again become the beginning. For the middle period of the day is attained again with the middle periods of the day, from the middle of the night.
9.1.17	They resorted to the supreme period. The cattle of those who had fallen from the ghee were destroyed by the destruction. The cattle are the fallen from the ghee.
9.1.18	He who knows this destroys the cattle of his enemy.
9.1.19	The supreme periods again become the beginning ones. For the supreme period is again taken up with the supreme periods. They proceeded from the supreme night.
9.1.20	He (the sacrificer) escapes them by means of the Sāmnīyī verse.
9.1.21	He makes them go to the Asvinīyī verse without help.
9.1.22	He makes his enemies go to the Asvīnyī verse without help, who knows thus.
9.1.23	This is the union of the Agniṣṭoma, that is the night.
9.1.24	The Agniṣṭoma has twelve Stotras, the night has twelve Stotras.
9.1.25	This is union of the Uktha, that is the Night.
9.1.26	The three Utkhas are the juncture of the three deities.
9.1.27	Just as the Utkhas are in the day, so is this the juncture of the night. The Utkhas are of different forms in the day, and these verses are of different forms.
9.1.28	One desiring stability should perform the juncture with Rathantara.
9.1.29	This is the Rathantara, one becomes stable in this.
9.1.30	One who desires heaven should perform the sacrifice at the end of the Brihat (Sāman).
9.1.31	Heaven is the world, one stands firm in heaven itself.
9.1.32	One who desires cattle should perform the sacrifice with the Vāravantyā or Vāmadevya or Śrutyā (Sāman) at the end.
9.1.33	These are the Sāmans for cattle, one stands firm among cattle.
9.1.34	The Hotṛ recites the Āśvina (Sāman)
9.1.35	Prajapati created this thousand and gave it to the gods. They did not succeed in it. They made the sun their goal and ran a race.
9.1.36-37	Of them the Asvins ran first, and they said to them, "Let there be with us." They said, "What will be next?" They said, "Whatever you desire." They said, "Let this hymn be in your deity." Therefore it is called Asvin.
9.1.38	They run quickly, like the crops at the time of harvest. One should recite the Sūrya hymn at sunrise, for they made Sūrya the limit.
9.2.1	"The last part of the sacrifice" is recited at the end of the night. Those who reach the end of the day reach another field. The last part of the night is at the beginning, for the sake of not being excluded from the limit.
9.2.2	"Indra, the intoxicating drink," is the Gaurivit.
9.2.3	When the Brahmans divided the gods, what was left over became the Gaurivit;
9.2.4	The Gaurivit is the surplus, this hymn is the surplus, the night is the surplus, he places the surplus in the surplus.
9.2.5	"We have come to you for that purpose," is the Kanva.
9.2.6	By this (verse) Kanva attained the company of Indra; by this (verse) one attains the company of Indra.
9.2.7	"O Indra, the Soma pressed for thee to drink." This is the verse of the Kshatra class. By this (verse), one becomes a Kshatra.
9.2.8	"This is thy Soma, O Indra." This is the (verse) of Daivodasa.
9.2.9	The gods conquered this world by means of the Agniṣṭoma, the intermediate world by means of Uktha, the heaven by means of Atiratra. They desired to conquer this world again. They came here and settled down in this world. In that this is a Sāman, it is for stability.
9.2.10	They also recite the Urdhvasadman in the evening.
9.2.11	The Asuras were in these worlds. The gods drove them away from these worlds by means of the upper abode.
9.2.12	He who knows thus, having driven away his enemy from these worlds, dwells in his own abode at the sacrifice.
9.2.13	"Come to us, O Indra, the powerful one," (said) Ākūpāra.
9.2.14	The Angirasas who were not in the Kupa had a sister, and her skin was like the skin of a frog. Indra, having purified her with this three-fold hymn, made her the skin of the sun. Indeed, she then desired that by this hymn one should praise, and that desire is fulfilled for them.
9.2.15	"O bull, they have pressed thee for thee." This is the hymn for the bull. By this he becomes a lord.
9.2.16	"This is thy pressed Soma, O Vasu." This is the Gar hymn. By this Gar pleased Indra. By this Indra becomes pleased with him.
9.2.17	"This, O Vasu, is pressed for thee." This hymn is for the Madhucchaṇḍasa. This is the body of Prajapati, which is not exhausted, and is employed.
9.2.18	"Sit down to these (gifts)." This is the guest-offering.
9.2.19	The guest-offering, with his son, wandering in the forest, found the cattle of Urvaśī. He approached them with this verse. They stood up to him, having become spotted cattle. In that this is a verse, (it is) for the prosperity of cattle.
9.2.20	"May I attain your highest state in each yoga." This is the Saumedha hymn for the nights, for the prosperity of the night itself.
9.2.21	"O Indra, among the Soma drinks." This is the hymn of Kautsas.
9.2.22	Indra and Lusha challenged each other. Indra approached Kutsa. He bound him with a hundred old she-goats at the testicles. Lusha spoke to him: "Release yourself. Come here, away from Kutsa. What is the use of being bound at the testicles?" Having cut them off, he fled. Kutsa saw this Sama Veda. He followed him with it. He approached.
9.2.23	This is the Sama Veda. It is for Indra's sovereignty.
9.3.1	If they were to consecrate for a Sattra and then the Sama Veda would rise, having divided the Soma, one should offer with the Visvajit Atiratra and the Sarvasva. One consecrates for all and obtains everything.
9.3.2	One uses them saying, "These are the Dakshina gifts."
9.3.3	If the praise is interrupted by the repetition of the same verse, they should praise with fifteen verses, five each for the Hotṛ and the others.
9.3.4	They should praise with the verses "Agni, Vivāsvat, Uṣas" at the junction. The Trivṛt stoma is indeed the life-force, and the Rathantara Sāman is the life-force of the stomas. They attain the life-force and the foundation.
9.3.5	The Hotṛ recites sixty-three hundred verses.
9.3.6	There are so many nights in a year. By means of verses corresponding to the year, he attains the desired goal.
9.3.7	What is recited before is not recited; what is recited now is recited; what is over-recited is well-recited.
9.3.8	If they sing less, they should sing as many verses as they would have sung. Or they should sing more verses.
9.3.9	If they sing more, they should sing the same number of verses as they would sing. Or they should chant fewer verses.
9.3.10	If they sing less, the Agniṣṭoma Sāman should be performed as the final (Sāman). If there are two (Sāmans), then it is made equal to them.
9.3.11	If they sing more, the Svarā Sāman should he performed. The Svarā Sāma is indeed less than the Sāman. By that it is made equal.
9.4.1	If the two Soma-plants were to be pressed, one should recite the morning-hymn at the great night.
9.4.2	One who recites the morning-hymns first, seizes the speech, the metres and the deities first.
9.4.3	One should recite the first verse with the word 'vrsanvat' (endowed with male organ). Indra is the male. By this he seizes Indra from the morning pressing.
9.4.4	Now they say, it should be done at the opening of the pressing, at the opening of pressing. From the opening of pressing, from the opening of pressing he wins Indra.
9.4.5	One should offer to the well-kindled fire. Agni is all the deities. He offers seeing all the deities.
9.4.6	He offers with the formula, "To the Gāyatrī metre, to the overlord, for the purpose of lying down and sitting down, svāhā." "To the Triṣṭubh metre, to the Overlord, for the sake of lying down and seating, svāhā. To the Jagatī metre, to the Overseer, for the sake lying down and seating svāhā."
9.4.7	The overlords are the metres. By them he overpowers them. Both Bṛhat and Rathantara should be performed.
9.4.8	Where Indra's horses are, that is Indra. Indra's horses, Brihat and Rathantara, are the two. When the two are Brihat and Rathantara, then the horses of Indra are begun with the former.
9.4.9	They are to be used for the purpose of fame.
9.4.10	The Soma-pressings of Turāśa and Śravaśa were the same. Then Turāśa saw the two Sāman-chants. Indra brought their oblation from the Salmalis on the Yamuna. By them he obtained oblation for Turāśa. He obtains their oblation.
9.4.11	They should press first.
9.4.12	Those who bathe first, they win the holy place first, and they begin with Indra first.
9.4.13	The Vihavya is the crop.
9.4.14	Now, when Soma was pressed for Jamadagni and the Rishis, then Agni saw the Vihavya and Indra turned back. When the Hotri recites the Vihavya, he wins Indra for them.
9.4.15	If the Agniṣṭoma were to be the other, the Uktha should be performed. If the Uktha were to be the Atiratra, then the one who is greater in the sacrifice, that is dear to Indra. By this sacrifice, he wins Indra with greater (gifts).
9.4.16	But they also say, "The other path is difficult to reach. One should not go from the sacrifice which one has begun."
9.4.17	The barley of Agastya is the crop. The barley of Kyaśubhi is the crop.
9.4.18	He divides them by the day and night from the pair of dogs of this one and that one.
9.5.1	If the Soma bought is stolen, another should be bought.
9.5.2	If the bought one is stolen, another one who is near should be brought. In the case of the sale of Soma, one should give something.
9.5.3	If they do not find Soma, they should press the Pūtīka plants. If they do not have Pūtīkas, they should press Arjuna plants.
9.5.4	Gāyatrī brought Soma. Having released it, the Soma-protector cut off a leaf. The ray that fell down from it became Pūtikā. The gods found support in it. Pūtikā is indeed support. When they press Pūtikā, they find support for him.
9.5.5	And the buttermilk in the morning, and the curd in the afternoon.
9.5.6	They say that Soma departs from him whose Soma is stolen. He enters the plants and animals. He binds him to the plants and animals.
9.5.7	Indra killed Vritra. The Soma which was in him flowed out. Those were the tawny wool, the tawny-coloured. Those were the red wool, the tawny wool, which were from the womb that was cut open. One should sprinkle those. This is indeed the form of Brahman. He directly sprinkles the Soma.
9.5.8-11	The Sraayantiya Brahma-saman should be performed. It makes him good. One should offer the Yagnyagniya hymn in the Anushtubh metre. It increases him by speech. The Varavantiya Agni-saman should be performed. It is for the attainment of power and strength. Five Dakshina should be given. The sacrifice is fivefold. One undertakes as much as the sacrifice is.
9.6.3	The rite is to be performed in the verses beginning with "Vidhu, the moon, is seen by many"
9.6.4	For this pot is seen by many when it is broken.
9.6.5	They say that the rite is not to be performed in verses beginning with "The afflicted does not afflict the afflicted" because the one who performs the rite in verses beginning with the pot being broken afflicts the afflicted.
9.6.6	The rite is to be done in the verses beginning "Shrayanti."
9.6.7	Prajapati created the creatures. He, being milked, thought of himself as being milked. He saw this Sraiyantiya (verse). By that he united himself with offspring, cattle and strength.
9.6.8	This is like milk that is being churned, when the pot breaks. When the Brahma-sāman is sung as the Śrāyanta-sāman, one again unites oneself with offspring, cattle and strength.
9.6.9	If the Brahma-sāmā is sung as the Sräyanta-sāmā, one should perform the Vasat-offering in the Anushtubh verses dedicated to Visnu.
9.6.10	Whatever flows out of the sacrifice, it flows out into speech. Speech is Anushtubh. The sacrifice is Vishnu. He fills up the gaps in the sacrifice with speech itself.
9.6.11	Whatever flows out of the Yajna, it flows out at the end. The Vāravantiya Agniṣṭoma Sāman should be performed. It prevents the gaps in the Yajna.
9.7.1	If Soma should be left over from the morning pressing, they should chant the Marutvatiya Stotras in the Gayatra metre, saying, "Here is Soma, pressed."
9.7.2	He who exceeds the morning pressing, desiring to exceed the midday pressing, therefore they praise in the Marutvatī verses, for the midday pressing is connected with Maruts, and therefore in the Gāyatrī verses, for the morning pressing is connected with Gāyatrī.
9.7.3	The Stoma from which one exceeds, that Stoma should be performed, for the sake of having the same Stoma.
9.7.4	The Hotr recites the verses addressed to Indra-Vishnu.
9.7.5	Indra is power, Vishnu is sacrifice; he thus establishes power in the sacrifice.
9.7.6	If there is excess after the midday pressing, they should recite the verses addressed to the sun, beginning with "Thou art the great one in the sun" and ending with "Thou art Gaurivit."
9.7.7	The third pressing is what he desires to exceed when he exceeds the midday pressing. Therefore they praise with the Aditya verses, for the third pressing is Aditya. Therefore also in the Brihatī verses, for the midday pressing is Bṛhat.
9.7.8	If it exceeds the third pressing, then they should chant the verses addressed to Vishnu in the Gaurīvit metre.
9.7.9	If it exceeds the third Savana, then they should recite the verses addressed to Vishņu in the Gaurîvit metre.
9.7.10	The sacrifice is Vishnu, the one who has stepped over. He stands in the sacrifice, in Vishnu. The excess is the Gauriviti. He places the excess in the excess.
9.7.11	If one were to exceed the Ukthyas, then the Atiratra should be performed. One who exceeds the Ukthyas exceeds the night. If one were to exceeed the night, then they should praise with the verses of Visnu's ship. They say that one who exceeds the night exceeds these (verses).
9.7.12	He who exceeds the night, desiring this world, exceeds it. They praise with the Brihatī verse; he deserves to attain the great world; he attains that very world.
9.8.1	If one among the initiated dies, having cremated the bones, they should bind them to the foot of the sacrificial post. The one who is the nearest to him should be initiated and then they should offer the sacrifice together.
9.8.2	They may do something else, having poured out the Soma, without taking up the cups. The Dakṣiṇā-cow is the channel of the sacrifice. They may praise it at the Marjālīya (Sāman).
9.8.3	Or they may propitiate him with this (Sāman) whose sacrifice is destroyed.
9.8.4	They praise with the Yamā Sāman. They send him to the world of Yama.
9.8.5	They praise with three (verses), for the world of the Fathers is threefold.
9.8.6	They praise with the verses from the opposite direction, for that world is distant.
9.8.7	They praise (with verses) from the Serpent-king.
9.8.8	The Serpent Arbudu struck off his dead skin with these (verses). With these (verses) they strike off the dead skin.
9.8.9	They recite those verses, going around the Marjalyan three times, striking the left thighs.
9.8.10	They praise the eulogy, establishing him in that very world.
9.8.11	They say, "They go on the path," when they perform for the dead. He takes up the Indra-Vayu cups first; they go back to the path.
9.8.12-14	The Agni Ayus Pavasas should be recited on the Pratipa day. It bestows life on those who are alive. One should perform the Asthi rites in the Samvatsara year. Samvatsara is the peace for all. If one were to perform it before the Samvatsara, one would incur the harsh and unwholesome speech.
9.8.15	When the Pavamāna verses are in the Trivṛt (Stoma), then the Pavamāna is in the Saptadaśa (Stoma). The Trivṛt is the vital airs; they obtain the vital airs. When the other Stoma is in the Sapta-daśa, then the Saptadaśas are in the Trivrta. The Saptadaśa is Prajapati; they obtain Prajapati.
9.8.16	They say that those who perform the rites for the dead are deprived of the vital airs. Therefore he takes the Maitrāvaruṇa and Āgrayaṇa cups. The vital airs are Mitra and Varuna. By the vital airs they are enriched.
9.9.1	If the pot is placed on the ground, the vital air does not follow the pot. The vital air is Soma.
9.9.2	They say, one should pour down milk.
9.9.3	But they also say, one should place gold in water, one should place it above water.
9.9.4	Water is the breath, gold is immortality. He places his breath in immortality. He lives through all his life.
9.9.5	The Nārāśaṃsa hymn is recited over him, and the breath follows the Nārāśamsa hymn, for the breath is Soma.
9.9.6	If the Adhvaryu were to take up the last cup, he should pour it into the cup of the one who is to be initiated.
9.9.7	The cup is taken up for atonement; he makes atonement for him.
9.9.8	If the Soma-juice and the Soma-juice mixed with water were to be mixed together, one should offer it after removing the embers from the fire, saying, "Indra and Agni drink the Soma-juice that has been offered and that has not been offered, and that has been offered but not offered, and the Soma-mixed with water, svāhā." That is the atonement for that.
9.9.9	One should offer it to Prajapati, saying, "Svāhā," if it is not fit to be eaten. The Uparava is the one that is in the middle of the north and south.
9.9.10	"The Moon has come to the Moon." One should eat the sprinkled (Soma).
9.9.11	"Of him, of Indra's drink, of the one who has all the groups, of the one invited, I eat the invited."
9.9.12	"He who is born as the lord of beings, the first-born, Hiranyagarbha, has come forth," one should offer with clarified butter, having approached the Agnidhra, saying, "He who was born as the lord, the one, he supported the earth and the sky. To him, O Indra, we offer oblations. Svāhā." That itself is the atonement.
9.9.13	If the stone breaks, the sacrificer is obstructed. The stones are the animals. They should be praised with the Marut-sambandha-saman of Dyutana.
9.9.14	The stones are Marut-s. He thus makes them prosper in their own form.
9.9.15	If the Soma were to be burnt, the Adhvaryu should offer the Grahas, the Udgata should chant the Stotras, the Hotri should recite the Sastras. Then they should proceed with the sacrifice as before. Five Dakshina should be given. The sacrifice is fivefold. He undertakes the sacrifice as much as it is. Having risen from the Avabhrtha, he again consecrates. There he should give what would be given. One should consecrate before the twelfth day. If one were to go beyond the twelfth day, it would be lost.
9.10.1	If the Mahāvīra were to be split, one should touch it while split, the one who, without any injury, has struck from the sides, the one who has united, the generous one, the one who is the remover of the broken, the one who again makes the broken whole, the one who makes the broken whole. Do not be afraid, O Indra, like a forest that has been burned, like a forest, O Indra, do not abandon the forests. The forests are not to be abandoned. The forests are to be enjoyed. The forests are enjoyed. The forests have not been enjoyed. The forests will be enjoyed. The forest is enjoyed. The forest has not been enjoyed. O Vṛtra-slayer, the forest is enjoyed. Once in the great-born, O hero, we may enjoy the praise. Thus one should touch the Mahāvīrā which has been split. That itself is the atonement.
9.10.2	When the color of the sun is made from this (wood), then the splendor, strength, energy, food, offspring, and cattle depart from him whose sacrificial post grows. He who has a sacrificial post becomes more powerful and worse.
9.10.3	One should offer a Tvashtri animal of many forms. Tvashtri is the creator of the forms of animals. One approaches him. He again blesses him with brilliance, strength, vigour, food, progeny, and cattle. That itself is his atonement.
10.1.1	Agni, with the earth and plants, this world is threefold. With Vayu, the sky and the winds, that world is threefold. This world within, with the sun, the day and the stars, that world is thrice threefold. This is the abode of the threefold. This is his kinship.
10.1.2	He who knows this becomes one who has an abode and kinship.
10.1.3	They say that he is established in the Trivrt-stotra, for he is established in these three worlds.
10.1.4	The fortnight is the abode of the fifteen days. This is his kinship.
10.1.5	He who knows this becomes one who has an abode and kinship.
10.1.6	They say that he is strength and power, for in the fortnightly periods the creatures and cattle grow in strength and power.
10.1.7	The abode of the seventeen is indeed the year, the twelve months and the five seasons. This is indeed the abode of the seventeen. This is his kinship.
10.1.8	He who knows this becomes one who has an abode and kinship.
10.1.9	They say that he is indeed Prajapati, for creatures and cattle are born after the year.
10.1.10	The abode of the Ekavimsa is indeed the sun. The twelve months, the five seasons, the three worlds, and the sun are the Ekavimśa. This is indeed the abode of the Ekāvimśa. This indeed is his kinship.
10.1.11	He who knows this becomes one who has an abode and kinship.
10.1.12	They call him the bed of the gods. One indeed attains the bed of the Gods who knows this.
10.1.13	The Trivrit is indeed the abode of the Trinava. This is his kinship.
10.1.14	One who knows this becomes one who has an abode and kinship.
10.1.15	They call him Pushti (Nourishment), for he is indeed nourished by the Trivrit.
10.1.16	The thirty-three gods are the abode of the thirty-three gods, and Prajapati is the thirty-fourth. This is the abode of the Thirty-three. This is his kinship.
10.1.17	He who knows this becomes one who has an abode and kinship.
10.1.18	They call him the Supreme. For Prajapati is not supreme to anyone.
10.1.19	The Chandomas are the abode of the Chhandas. This is their kinship.
10.1.20	He who knows this becomes one who has an abode and kinship.
10.1.21	They are called Pusht (nourishment) because the Chandomas are cattle.
10.2.1	Prajapati created the creatures. He became exhausted. To him Vāj brought the light. He said, "Who has brought this light to me?" He said, "Your own speech." He said, "I will sacrifice you as Viraj, the light of the Chandas."
10.2.2	Therefore, he who attains the Stoma of Viraj, is called Jyotis toma Agni stoma. Viraj is the light of the metres.
10.2.3	He who knows this becomes the light of equals.
10.2.4	Anushtubh and Saptadasha were born together. Anushtubh created the metres with four extra syllables, and Saptadasha created the Stomas with six extra syllables. They generated these in the middle.
10.2.5	Trivrit and Trinava were born as Rathantara. They were born as a goat and a horse. Therefore, they blow the Rathantara from the front.
10.2.6	The two, the fifteenth and the twenty-first, are the Barhaspatya. The cow and the sheep were born from them. Therefore they make the sun rise in the east.
10.2.7	Thus do the learned say: He knows the speech of even the domestic animals.
10.3.1	Prajapati desired, "May I be many, may I beget offspring." He saw the ritual in himself. From that he created the ritualists. When he created them from the ritual, that became the ritualism of the ritualists. With them he approached this twelve-day (ritual). He failed.
10.3.2	The fathers of us have been pleased. The months approached him. They pleased him with the consecration. At the Upasads they consecrated the thirteenth (month). It became the Anuvyaya. Therefore, one who consecrates at the Upasads becomes Anuvyaya. And indeed they consider the thirteenth month.
10.3.3	One should be initiated, for Prajapati was one. Twelve should be initiated, because there are twelve months. Twenty-four should be initiated, since there are twenty-four half-months.
10.3.4	If they were to indicate the fifteen as five, five, five, and four, and one, then those who are desirous of wealth would follow only that one, and all the others would obtain wealth.
10.3.5	He who knows the householder of the gods obtains the householdership, he obtains the householdership.
10.3.6	The year is the householder of the gods, he is indeed Prajapati. His own months are the ones who are consecrated together.
10.3.7	One obtains the ones who are together consecrated, one obtains the Garhapatya. One obtains the Garhaptya indeed, he who knows thus.
10.3.8	He who knows the sovereignty of the metres attains sovereignty, attains the sovereignty of the supreme. The Brihatī indeed is the sovereign of the metres. He who knows this attains sovereignty, attains sovereignty of the supreme.
10.3.9	Having excluded this (rite) from the food-offering, they perform this twelve-day rite. There are twelve consecrations, twelve Upasads, twelve Prasutis. These are thirty-six nights. The Brihatī has thirty-six syllables.
10.3.10	One is born through consecration, purified through Upasads, and attains the world of gods through the Sutyā.
10.3.11	The year is indeed the extent of the power and strength. These twelve nights are the full-moon days, the new-moon days, and the dark fortnights. The year is the extent of the strength and power. One attains that by means of the twelve-day sacrifice.
10.3.12-13	This is the Viraj with thirty syllables. The six seasons are in the Viraj. It stands in the seasons. By the seasons, it stands in the Viraj.
10.4.1	The former Atiratra is the past, the latter is the future. The former Atiratras is the earth, the latter is heaven. The former Atira is Agni, the latter is Aditya. The former Atitra is the prāṇa, the latter is udāna.
10.4.2	The two Atiratras are the eyes, the two Agnistomas are the pupils. Because between the two Agnistomass and the two Atiratras, therefore between the two eyes there are the pupils.
10.4.3	Now these two nights are the fangs of the year, and one should not sleep on them, lest one should bite oneself on the fangs of the Year.
10.4.4	They say: Who is fit to sleep? What the Prāṇa has watched, that is the waking.
10.4.5	They indeed abide in this Gayatri, having the light for its wings, when they perform this twelve-day sacrifice, with eight Ukthas in the middle, and two Agniṣṭomas at the end. Having come to the heavenly world, he eats the imperishable food, shining.
10.4.6	They chant the Rathantara three times in front, because speech is threefold. Having thus obstructed the entire speech, they perform the twelve-day sacrifice for the entire food.
10.4.7	They say that this is done at the sacrifice to make it non-Jamai, when they chant the Rathantara thrice in front. The Sukala is the Brahma-saman of the Sukalas. By that alone it becomes non-Jamai.
10.4.8	The Prāṇavati verses are the introductory verses of the Pravargya rite. By them he gains the Pravargya.
10.4.9	They perform the Rathantara Saman three times above. Speech is threefold. Having obstructed the whole speech, they obtain the whole food. They rise from the twelve-day rite.
10.5.1	These three are the three nights, namely, this twelve-day sacrifice with the Gayatri-faced first, the Gayatri-centred second, and the Gayatri-topped third.
10.5.2	Because the first is Gayatri-faced, therefore Agni shines above. Because the second is Gayatri-centred, therefore the wind blows horizontally.
10.5.5	They go with brilliance, they place brilliance in the middle, they rise with brilliance. They go with light, they place light in the middle, they rise with light. They go with the eye, they place the eye in the middle, They rise with the eye. They go with breath, they place breath in the middle,They rise with breath. Those who go with the Gayatri, they place the Gayatri in the middle,they rise with the Gayatri.
10.5.6	This twelve-day sacrifice is a kind of ritual, and the Gāyatrī verse is a kind of ray. The Gāyatrī is not a kind of ray.
10.5.7	The son of Girīṣi, Uccaṃ-manyu, said to Kāksasenī, the daughter of Abhipratarī, "How is the twelve-day (rite)?" "Just as a wheel moves around, so does the Gāyatrī move around it for non-slipping. Just as the wheel is held at the navel, so is the twelve-days held in it."
10.5.8	They are indeed excluded from the Anushtubh for food, because this twelve-day (ritual) is excluded.
10.5.9	The first day of the twelve-day sacrifice is performed with eight verses, the second with eleven, and the third with twelve.
10.5.10	The remaining three verses are left over, and he continues with the same three verses for the next three days.
10.5.11	The three verses of the third three-day period are the same as the first three verses.
10.5.12	They lie down towards the west, towards the south, and towards the north, for the sake of food. Therefore, the offspring and cattle live on the west, south, and north.
10.5.13	The metres, each one, were studying the world of the other. The Gāyatrī studied the Tristubh, the Tristubh the Jagatī, the Jagatī the Gāyatrī. They were separated according to the world. Then they became whatever desire they desired.
10.5.14	If one performs the twelve-day sacrifice with the metres separated, that desire is fulfilled.
10.5.15	The twelve-day sacrifice is the abode of the gods. Just as men have entered this world, so the gods have entered the twelve-day sacrifice. One who knows this and performs the twelve-day rite, he indeed performs the sacrifice of the gods.
10.5.16	The twelve-day sacrifice of the gods is the abode. One should not be afraid of the abode.
10.5.17	He who knows the twelve-day Agniṣṭoma sacrifice as to be performed, he prospers. The first three-day period prospers by the morning pressing, the second by the midday pressing, the third by the third pressing. The tenth day prospers by the Agniṣṭoma Sāman.
10.5.18	He prospers who knows this.
10.6.1	It goes, it comes, it is swift, it is far-reaching, it is golden, it is radiant, it is yoked, the form of the first day, of the Stoma of three verses, of the Gāyatrī metre, of the Rathantara Sāman.
10.6.2	Bull-like, Indra-like, wealth-like, all-like, present, the form of second day, of the Stomas of fifteen verses, of the Tristubh metre, of the Brhat Sāman.
10.6.3-4	The form of the third pressing is like Udvat, Trivat, Digvat, Gomat, Tashavat. The form of the fourth pressing is like Rajanvat, Janvat, Suryavat, Viradat, Anutodat. The form of twenty-one stoma is like Anushtubh, Rajas, Vairupa, and Rajas.
10.6.5	The verse is like a picture, the line is like a child, the Sakvari is like a gambling game, the verse is like a cow, the verse is the sage, the verse is Indra, the verse is a thunderbolt, the verse is Abhimat. The form of the fifth day is the Trinava Stoma, the Sakvari metre, and the Sakvari Sāman.
10.6.6	The Parivats, the Prativats, the Saptadasas, the Vipadas, the Vinarasamsas, the Gomats, the Rishavas, the form of the sixth day, the form of all the metres of the Trayastrimsa Stoma, the form of Revatisamans.
10.6.7	Because this (Stoma) is the same, but divided into six days, and has different forms, therefore the year is irregular.
10.6.8	He who knows this, is born after the irregular.
10.7.1	"Agni" is the form of the first day, "Agnivibhakti" is the form for the second day, "Agne" is the form fot the third day, and "Agni" for the fourth day.
10.7.2	The gods desired prosperity. They did not find it on the first day, nor on the second, nor on the third. They found it on the fourth day. He who knows this finds prosperity. "It is said, "Agni is the fifth." It is said, "Prosperity is found in the fifth."
10.7.3	He who knows this becomes invincible to his enemies.
10.7.4	Agni, Agni. By that form by which they go, they rise up.
10.7.5	Because this devotion to Agni is the same, but of different forms, therefore the sun shines according to the season.
10.8.1	"Indra" is the form of the first day, "Indravibhakti" is the form for the second day, "Indram" is the form used for the third day, "Indrena" is the form to be used for the fourth day, "Indrad" is the form that is used for the fifth day, "Indre" is the form which is used for the sixth day. They rise up with the form by which they go down. Since this Indravibhakti, though being the same, has different forms, therefore, just as plants ripen according to the season.
10.9.1	Whatever is chanted with a verse, that is the form of the first day. The Stobha at the beginning is of the second day. The Stobhas on both sides are of the third day. The Anuttana is of the fourth day. The Abhirabdha is of the fifth day. The practice with the word "here" is the form of sixth day.
10.9.2	Because this is the same, but different, in the case of the Svaras, therefore the wind blows according to the season.
10.10.1	The form of the first day is the final syllable of the first day. The form of the second day is the final syllables of the second day. The form is the final syllables. The form of fourth day is the final. The form of fifth day is the final of the fifth day. The form which is practised here in the form is the form of the sixth day. Since this final syllable, though being the same, is of different forms, therefore these worlds, though existing together, are different.
10.11.1	The form of the first day is "Dravadiḍa". The form of the second day is "Ūrdhvaḍa". The third day is "Pariṣṭubdhaḍa". The fourth day is "Eḍābhida". The fifth day is "Adhyardhaḍa". The sixth day is "Yad iha ākareṇābhyastaṃ tad ṣaṣṭasya ahno rūpam". The form of all the days is "Eḍa". The reason is that although the form of the days is the same, the forms of the animals are different.
10.12.1	The Bharadvāja-sattriins were performing a sacrifice. They asked, "What does one do on the first day?" "One does the Prai" "What does one does on the second day?" "One performs the Avam." "What does one perform on the third day?" "One bathes in the water." "What does he do on the fourth day?" "One places the Sat in the Sat." "What does on do on the fifth day?" "One cuts off the breath." "What does ne do on the sixth day?" "One comes here."
10.12.2	By which (verse) the gods, having praised, saw the cattle in front, then by the Svarasvara they let them loose from both sides, then by the Svara they gave the food of the cattle from these worlds, then by the Anuttarasvara they taught them, then by the Nidhanasvara they placed the foetus in them, and they generated them by the Havata Svarasvara.
10.12.3	The gods conquered this world by the conquest of the foot, the other world by the conquest outside, the air by the conquest of direction, immortality by the conquest of eternity, and the lustre of Brahman by the conquest of truth. They attained this world by the conquer of this world, and stood firm by the conquest of here.
10.12.4	The gods conquered this world by the Ida, the other world by the Urdhva-Ida, the atmosphere by the Pariṣṭubha-Ida, the firm foundation by the Ida, and the foundation by the Adhyardha-Ida. They conquered this world by means of the Ida, and established themselves in this world by means
10.12.5	The speech does not exceed the year. The Iḍā exceeds the year. They are born after a year has passed. Thus it exceeds.
10.12.6	These four are the six-day rites. The Iḍa exceeds. This is the new one, this is the uneven one, this is facing west, this is the Veda.
10.12.7	The year is Agni, the year is speech. When Agni is divided, then it is speech that is divided.
10.12.8	They divide it into two syllables each, for there are two months in a season. Thus the form of the months is made.
10.12.9	They divide the six days. The six seasons are the seasons' stability, the seasons' foundation. And indeed it is the form of the seasons that is made. The six men whom Agni follows.
10.12.10	This Agni, who is spread out in many ways, is the sun. He is the one who shines upon all beings. These two deities are not separated from each other. There is no other deity than them.
11.1.1	The Stoma is joined with the Sattraiye (priests) for the days, with the Pratithavati and the Upavati.
11.1.2	When the Prāṇavati verses are yoked before the Upavatī verses, then the Brahman is yoked before the Kṣatra. The Brahman is yoked first before the Kṣatras.
11.1.3	The mind is yoked before speech. The mind is yoked first because whatever is sought by the mind, one speaks with the speech.
11.1.4	The Brihat is yoked first, because the Brihat is the first to be conquered. But the Rathantara is yoked first.
11.1.5	The verses are arranged in order of their length, so that one may gather the longest first. They arrange them in this way for the sake of progress.
11.1.6	The nine are the nine of the Navagrāhya. He yokes the verses according to the method of the Navagrhyā. He places the dice as in the case of the Navagrhā. He places them in the same way. For the purpose of going.
11.1.7	The Stoma becomes Trivrt. For brilliance, for Brahmic splendour.
11.2.1	The Bahispavamānas are yoked with both forms. When the Stoma becomes Sama, then in the Ajyas.
11.2.2	The offerings are without invocations. He invokes them in the proper manner.
11.2.3	"O Agni, come, O Vītayas, come to us. O Mitra-Varuna, come. Your friendship is good. O Indra-Agni, come to the Soma that has been pressed." The Rathantara is the form that he illuminates. The Stoma is the form that is illuminated.
11.3.1	"The Somas, the wise ones, have come forth," (thus) it is a Gāyatrī verse. "The dark ones have come forth to the waters," (thus) for the purpose of advancing. "Praised to Indra and Vāyu," (thus) in order to sanctify. "O Soma, the god, the destroyer," (thus) to go forth. "Do go forth," (thus), to go forth. They go forth with this day.
11.3.2	It is a Gāyatra verse.
11.3.3	Whatever is the Brāhmaṇa of the Gāyatra.
11.3.4	It is an Aśva verse.
11.3.5	Having become a horse, Prajapati created beings. He was born and became many. One who praises with the Asvin hymn becomes born and becomes many.
11.3.6	They conclude with the one-syllabled (verse). The Rathantara is not to be exceeded.
11.3.7	One whose enemy is not exceeded knows this.
11.3.8	It becomes the Soma-sastra.
11.3.9	Just as these other plants are, so was Soma. He practised austerities, and saw this Soma-sama. By it he attained sovereignty and lordship, and became famous. He who recites the Soma-sama attains sovereignty and lordship, becomes famous.
11.3.10	The Yaudhajya is performed, because of the Brahmanical text on the Yaudhajyas.
11.3.11	The Ausana is the Stoma of Ausana.
11.4.1	"O hero, they call thee to them." This is the form of the Rathantara. For this day is Rathantara.
11.4.2	"What wondrous thing has happened to us?" The verses are of the kind called Kavatyas. For Prajapati is the lord of creation.
11.4.3	That your strong, powerful, pouring, flowing, milker of wealth, is the one who follows the cows in their own pastures. This is the form of Rathantara. For this day is Rathantara.
11.4.4	"We invoke Indra with songs." They invoke him.
11.4.5	"With the trees, with the wealth-giver," (the verse says). The Stoma is the tree, the wealth-giver is the sacrifice. The sacrifice is yoked with the Stoma. When he says, "With the trees with the wealth-g iver," he yokes the sacrifice.
11.4.6	It is the Rathantara (verse). The Rathantara is Brahman. The Prayaniya day is Brahman. Having approached Brahman, they proceed.
11.4.7	This is the Rathantara. Having established themselves in this, they perform the Sattra.
11.4.8	The Vamadevya (verse) is recited. The Vamadevya is the cattle. For the securing of cattle. The Vamade vya is the Prajapati. Having established themselves on Prajapati, they perform the Sittra.
11.4.9	The Naudasa (verse) is uttered. The Naudasa is the Brahman. The Brahman is the Pravaraniya day. They enter the Brahman.
11.4.10	This is the Kalēya metre, which is in the same world. The Rathantara is the Kalēyas, and the Rathantara is the cattle. The Kalēyas are the cattle. Having established themselves in this and the cattle, they perform the Sattra.
11.4.11	The Dradviḍa is the form of this day.
11.5.1	The Soma-juice flows forth, indeed, is a Gāyatrī verse. The third pressing is connected with the Madhu (Soma-juice). He thus bestows on it the Madhu (juice) and the Rasa (juice). The verse, "Do thou, O God-possessed, flow forth," is in the form of Rathantara. This day is Rathantara. The verse, "The golden one flows forth from the day," is in the Brihatī form. He thus yokes the Brihatī on this day. The yoked (horses) start at dawn. The verse, "Flowing forth to the Soma-juice," is in the Prati-form. This day is Prati. The verse, "He flows forth to the dear ones, and to the good," is in the Rathantara form. This day is indeed Rathantara.
11.5.2	"The sacrifices, the sacrifices, O Agni," - the sacrifice of Agni is the sacrifice; he thus establishes the sacrifice.
11.5.3	It is in the Gāyatrī metre; the Brāhmaṇa text on the Gāyatrīs is known.
11.5.4	It is a collection; it is in the Vyākaraṇa metre; for stability; they sit for the sacrifice for stability.
11.5.5	It is with a Saph (verse).
11.5.6	The gods attained these worlds with foam. In that they attained them, that is the foaminess of foam. By this (rite) they attain these worlds and perform the Sattra.
11.5.7	It is with salt.
11.5.8	These were the eight Kadrughas. Of them one fell apart. That became agriculture. He prospers in agriculture who knows thus.
11.5.9	Among them, the gods and the demons competed. The gods drove the demons away with the milking of the cows. One who recites this (verse) drives away his enemies with the milking of cows.
11.5.10	From these worlds, the juice had escaped. Prajapati drove it back with the milking. What he drove back, that is the milking.
11.5.11	Therefore, he who was formerly meritorious and later becomes sinful, should perform the Brahma-sāman with the Aksara (verse). He indeed places his own power, his own energy, his own taste in himself.
11.5.12	The Jani-ekarci becomes one of the days for stability. Whatever was not stable in this day, that he stabilizes by these two.
11.5.13	It becomes Gaurivit.
11.5.14	Gaurivitti, the Brahman, saw something extra and it became Gaurivitti.
11.5.15	They praise with something extra, with something extra. If one praises with Gaurivitti then one becomes like a cow with calf. Even for offspring, it is provided.
11.5.16	This is the Vaja-saman of the bull, the bull is the semen-bearer. They praise today, tomorrow one is born.
11.5.17	The Anushtubh is the metre of the Anushtubh verses; the Anushtubb is the womb of the metres; he places the seed in its own womb for propagation.
11.5.18	He who knows this is propagated and becomes many.
11.5.19	The two Udasas (verses) are (verses) of two Udasas; these two are the boundary-markers of the heavenly world; with the former (verse) they establish the previous day, with the latter they exceed the subsequent day.
11.5.20	Just as on the previous day they go on eating the grass and drinking water, so also they go on enjoying the heavenly world.
11.5.21	Gautama says:
11.5.22	One who is yoked to heaven like a divine sage, does not fall from heaven, when he praises.
11.5.23-27	The Brāhmaṇa text of the middle Nidhana of the Anushtubh is this. It is a Kavya. One who recites the Kavya obtains the world-drop, the world. By means of the Svarasvara, indeed, the food is given to the gods at the end. By means of the Svarabhakti, one gives the food to the gods at the end. The Yajñāyajñiya is recited.
11.5.28	The Yajñāyajñiya is in the voice, the sacrifice is established in the voice, they establish the sacrifice in the voice itself. They begin the sacrifice after the voice.
11.5.29	The Stoma becomes Trivrit for brilliance and Brahmic lustre.
11.6.1	The Pratipada (verse) is used.
11.6.2	One begins the Dvi-ratra (rite) to avoid the loss of rain.
11.6.3	"O Indra, flow on, O Indra, the son of the bull," (thus) one becomes the Anurūpa. The second day is Indra-related and Triṣṭubha, and it is related to the bull. Thus he praises it.
11.6.4	He praises the earlier form with the later form. When he praises the earlier form by the later form, that is the reason for the Anurūpā being Anurūpa (i.e. suitable).
11.6.5	One whose son is born as Anurūpa knows this.
11.6.6	The two verses are suitable for the Stotriya, for the control of the vital airs.
11.6.7	The verses end with "Vrusanvant", for the control of power and strength.
11.6.8	The last verse is the highest.
11.6.9	By which breath they depart, by that they rise up.
11.6.10	The Stoma is indeed fifteen.
11.6.11	That indeed is the strength and vigour of the Ojas. The fifteenfold is the strength and valour.
11.7.1	The Bahispavamānas are yoked with both forms. When the Sama is a Stoma, it is in the Ajyas.
11.7.2	The Ajyas are placed outside.
11.7.3	We choose Agni as our messenger, we call Mitra, Indra, the great, the singer. Indra and Agni, the great, are great. Thus he illuminates the form of the Barhaspatya hymn.
11.8.1	"Flow, O bull, in the stream," thus it becomes a Gāyatrī verse, for the support of the day.
11.8.2	The verses are in the Tristubh metre, for the Tristubh is the second day.
11.8.3	"The Soma, purifying, is held," for support.
11.8.4	"The bull, red, thunders forth to the cows."
11.8.5	The verses are in the Trishtubh metre, the second day is the Trishtubha, and the second day is Indra's day, and it is the bull, and it is prosperous.
11.8.6	It is Gāyatrī because of the Brāhmaṇa of Gāyatrī.
11.8.7	It is Yauktaśva.
11.8.8-9	Yauktaśva Āṅgirasa, when the two children were born, took them away. From that the Mantra departed. He performed austerities. He saw this Yauktaśvas. The Mantra returned to him. Indeed, he then desired. It is indeed a desire-granting verse. One obtains desire through this.
11.8.10	Aṅgīrasa Ayasya ate the food of the initiated Ādityas. He was afflicted by the sin of eating. He performed penance. He saw these two Ayasya. By them he removed the sin. Having removed the sin, he praised the two Ayasya.
11.8.11	From these worlds indeed the rain departed; he (the sacrificer) restored it by the two Ayaśya verses; he who recites the Ayaśya verses restores the rain.
11.8.12	Food indeed departed from these worlds; he (the Sacrificer) restored it with the two Ayaśa verses; he who chants the Ayaśya restores food.
11.8.13	It is in Vasishtha metre.
11.8.14	Vasishtha, having sung with this (hymn), saw heaven by his own power. For the fame of the heavenly world, he who sings does not fall from heaven.
11.9.1	"You indeed we invoke." "You" is the form of the Brihat. This is the Brihat day.
11.9.2	"The Sura-loving one is invoked" (is recited) with the first (verse). The first day is indeed yoked, for they proceed with it.
11.9.3	"You are the man of today" (is recited). One begins with today and tomorrow for the non-slipping of the two-day (rite).
11.9.4	"It becomes great" (is recited), for the second day is indeed great. They enter the greatness by means of greatness.
11.9.5	It is white, because the Soma is the carrier of the Sāman, for the continuity of the sacrifice.
11.9.6	It is in the Madhucchada metre, like the Ārsheya Sāman, it is yoked to heaven, he who praises does not fall from the heavenly world.
11.9.7	It is upward, because that is the form of this day's Stoma.
11.10.1	"The verse "Your intoxicating drink, O most excellent one," is in the Gāyatrī metre.
11.10.2-5	The third pressing is like the Soma, like the juice. He thus places Soma and juice in it. "He presses the most sweet (Soma). They press as it were with this day. The most sweet (Soma) means food. Food is sweet. He thus places food and nourishment in the sacrificer." "These (Soma) drops for Indra, the pressed (Soma). He thus places food in the sacrificer. This is Pūṣan, wealth, Bhaga."
11.10.6	The Anushtubh verses are true, the Tristubh verses are true in form, for this day is Tristubh.
11.10.7	The verses of the Vrsamati clan flow forth, the discerning ones, the Jagatls are true, the JagatIs are true in form; for this day is JagatI.
11.10.8	It becomes Gâyatra, as is the Brahmanical explanation of the Gâyatra.
11.10.9	It becomes the Havismat.
11.10.10	The two Angirasas, Havishmat and Havishkrit, were the priests on the second day. Havishmat failed on the ninth day, and Havishkrt succeeded.
11.10.11	Havishmat, having become the priest of the day, said to the gods, "This is Havishmat." He blessed him with the Samaveda, for the Samaveda is a blessing.
11.10.12	The stake becomes the support of the day. Whatever is not supported by the stake, that it supports.
11.10.13	They call this the 'Seeding'. By this Prajapati descended upwards to these worlds. In that he descended, that is the meaning of 'Seeding'. He who recites the 'Seeding' hymn descends upwards to these worlds, he who recites the hymn 'Seeding'.
11.10.14	It becomes well-known.
11.10.15	The Rathantara is the form of heaven, the Barhaspatya is the form of gold.
11.10.16	It becomes the form of gold, for that is the form of this day.
11.10.17	They both are the Pluta, for the completion of the heavenly world.
11.10.18	It becomes Gaurivit, as is the Brahmanical explanation of Gaurivit.
11.10.19	It becomes Kraunch.
11.10.20	Speech is the Krouncha. Speech is the Dvadaśāha. He praises with speech for the prosperity of the sacrifice.
11.10.21	The Yama is performed.
11.10.22	Yama obtained the lordship of this world without being conquered by this. He who praises with the Yama obtains the lordship of this heaven without being conquered.
11.10.23	By this (hymn) Yama went to heaven. For the fame of the heavenly world. He who praises does not fall from the heavenly world. The Stoma is praised.
11.11.1	"Come, O ye, I will speak to you." They become those who come. For the continuation of the third pressing.
11.11.2	"The sacrifice is like a cut off branch, if it is the hymns. If one goes (to the next hymn), it is for the sake of having hair."
11.11.3	"For you are indeed the one who bestows victory to the heroes," they say, speaking in unison. "This is how it is, and this is how it is not."
11.11.4	"They have increased Indra, the one who is all," for now they are increasing the sacrificer with this (verse).
11.11.5	It becomes simultaneous with the horse. The Ukthas are conquered by the one who conquers, for the sake of advancing.
11.11.6	For by this (verse) they conquered the Ukthas first, and by this they advanced.
11.11.7	The word 'aamhiiyavam' is used in the sense of 'klipti' and 'annadyam'. When the statements are made in the same way, it is said that this is done in such a way.
11.11.8	This is the Kshatra day, when it is fifteen days. When there is a Brahma-sāman in the Gāyatrī verses, then he unites the Brahman and the Kshatra. He places the Kshatra before the Brahman. He makes the Kshatra and the people follow the Brahman.
11.11.9	The first day is Brahman, the second is Kshatra. When the Gāyatrī verses are sung, the Brahman becomes the Sāman. It unites with Brahman and fame, for the Gāyatri is Brahman.
11.11.10	It is done in the verses that are spoken equally for prosperity.
11.11.11	They are sung in the Aṣṭādaṃṣṭra metre.
11.11.12	"He struck Indra Vritra with the words, 'Aiyaha!' and he seized him with the words, ‘Aiyaha! Hovah!' The two Vratra-killing Sāmans are full of strength.
11.11.13	One obtains strength and vigour through these two.
11.11.14	The Stoma is fifteenfold, for one stands firm in strength and vigour. Strength and vigour are fifteenfold.
12.1.1	The third day of the Tri-day sacrifice is marked by the verse, "The lightning flashes forth."
12.1.2	The Gāyatrī, the Tristubh and the Jagatī are the three forms of the Tri-stoma. One should begin with these three forms for the non-falling of the Tri-night sacrifice.
12.1.3	The Anurūpa verse is, "These have flowed forth as drops."
12.1.4	"These" (are the names of) Prajapati, the gods; "Asriga" (is the name of) men; "Indava" (is the) name of the Pitrs. He thus speaks of them.
12.1.5	He also speaks of the former form by the latter form. When he speaks of the former by the latter form, that is the meaning of "anurupa". The son of him who knows this is born in the same form.
12.1.6	The two verses of the Stotriya are appropriate. They are for the purpose of obstructing the Prāṇa and Apāna.
12.1.7	"The king is led by the Medhas, Pavamāna goes by the mind, through the atmosphere."
12.1.8	The verse is for the deity Antarikṣa. This day is for the deity Antarīkṣa, which is the third. It is indeed that which is praised.
12.1.9	It is fivefold; the Paṅkti has five feet; food is Paṅkti; for the securing of food.
12.1.10	The last verse is threefold; by that very breath by which they depart, they approach it.
12.1.11	The Stoma is indeed seventeen; for stability, for propagation.
12.2.1	"Agni is kindled by Agni" - this is the butter for Agni.
12.2.2	On the very same day, he kindles the third day.
12.2.3	"He invokes Mitra, the pure-minded," - this is the Rathantara, for Mitra-Varuna."
12.2.4	"Huv" is the form of the Rathantara.
12.2.5	This is the Rathantara in the indirect form. The Rathantara is the form that illuminates.
12.2.6	"He desires to unite with Indra," - this belongs to Indra.
12.2.7	The gods of the atmosphere, indeed, saw these worlds as if they were near. This is the third day, which is dedicated to the gods of the atmosphere. It is the same as that which is mentioned here.
12.2.8	"He praises (the gods) by saying, "To whom this belongs." The Rathantara is dedicated to Indra and Agni."
12.2.9	"The Rathantara is so called because it is praised (huva). The Rathantara is the form of the Rathantara. The Rathantara is a form of the Rathantarasamans. The Rathantara indeed illuminates the form."
12.3.1	"Your birth is high, O Andhas." The Gāyatrī verse is used.
12.3.2	This is the third day, which is the highest. It is indeed the highest.
12.3.3	It has the word "Andhas" in it. The day is indeed the Andhas. The beginning of the day is the Andhas.
12.3.4	"The Soma-pressers have come forth."
12.3.5	"Abhi" is the form of Rathantara, "Brihat" is the form for both Brihat and Ubha, for this day has both colours.
12.3.6	"Tisro vaaca irayati pravahni" is the form (of the verse) for the third day, by which they begin the third day.
12.3.7	The Tristubh has the form of the Jagati, for this day is Jagati.
12.3.8	It is Gāyatrī because of the Brāhmaṇa of Gāyatrī.
12.3.9	It is Vaistaṃbha.
12.3.10	The day indeed became weak. The gods supported it with Vaistaṃbha (bricks). That is the reason for the name Vaistaṃbha, Vaistaṃbha means support.
12.3.11	They conclude with the verse "Obeisance to the directions." For the stability of the directions.
12.3.12	It is Pāruṣamādga.
12.3.13	The day, as it was setting, was followed by the Rakshas. Therefore the gods slew the Rakshas with the Purumitra. He who is satisfied with the Purumitri, slays sin.
12.3.14	The gods and the Asuras were contending. The gods defeated the Asuras with the Purorug. In that they defeated them, therefore it is called Purorug. With this he defeats his enemy, the evil one.
12.3.15	It is for Gautama.
12.3.16	It is the Brahman of Gautama.
12.3.17	The Stotra is on both sides, for such is the form of this day.
12.3.18	It is Antarikṣa (the atmosphere).
12.3.19	This day is connected with the atmosphere, for the third day is connected with atmosphere. He praises the atmosphere by means of the atmosphere for the sake of stability.
12.3.20	The Āṣkāraṇi-niṣṭha of Kaṇva is performed.
12.3.21	The Rathantara is the form of "as" and the Bāhrata is the form of “has”. They adopt the third form for prosperity.
12.3.22	The Sāman is the "Sankrośa" of the Angirasas.
12.3.23	By this Sāman, the Angirasas, while singing, attained the heavenly world. For the fame of the heavenly world, one who sings does not fall from the heavenly world. The Stoma is satisfied.
12.4.1	If one says, "If a hundred of yours, O Indra," they become a hundredfold.
12.4.2	The form of cattle is a hundredfold, the form of cattle is thousandfold. With these (verses) one attains the form of cattle.
12.4.3	"We have come, we are the sons," (verses) in the Brihatī metre, the youngest metre, for non-deterioration.
12.4.4	Taronir it sisasati vajam purandhyayukam ava indram puruhutam na girety avad aksaram udhatam iva va tritiyam ahara yad eva tatavd aksaram bhavati ahara eva etena prati-sthapati.
12.4.5	The Pañcanidhana Vaivara hymn is the Prstha hymn. For the stability of the directions.
12.4.6	The Paṅkti has five feet. Food is Paṅkti. It is for the removal of the deficiency of food.
12.4.7	This is the direction of the Sama. The Vaivāhika is the direction. One praises the directions with this.
12.4.8	And because it has five endings, it is for the seasons. There are five seasons.
12.4.9	The seasons and the directions are the worlds, and they are enclosed by them. He establishes the sacrificer in both of them. The Udgātṛ follows the sacrificer who has established himself. He who knowing thus sings with the Vairūpa metre.
12.4.10	He becomes like the directions for the destruction of his foe.
12.4.11	They conclude with the verse, "The directions are the worlds." For the stability of the directions.
12.4.12	The Has is the end of the directions above. He attains it. By that he attains the Barhaspatya.
12.4.13	This world is Rathantera, that one is Barhaspatya; he thus attains both in the form of the Barhaspatyas and Rathanteras.
12.4.14	The two animals are the path of the gods for the sacrificer, namely the Barhaspatyam and Rathantera; he thus yokes them for the attainment of the heavenly world.
12.4.15	It becomes like a horse for the sake of progeny.
12.4.16	They conclude with the same refrain as the frog, for the sake of non-exhaustion.
12.4.17	There are twelve deformities, the year has twelve months, he indeed stands in the year.
12.4.18	The year is deformed, food is deformed, for the sake (of the year) obtaining food.
12.4.19	The Brahma-sāman is sung with the Mahāvaishțambha (sāman). It is for the attainment of food.
12.4.20	When a man eats food, then he is stabilized from within.
12.4.21	They conclude with the verse "In the directions." It is for the stability of the directions.
12.4.22	They praise with the Brihatī verses in the first two days for the purpose of counter-effort.
12.4.23	The Raurava is sung as the Acchāvāka-sāman.
12.4.24	Agni is the Ruru, Agni is Rudra.
12.4.25	Agni takes away the cattle of him whose cattle have strayed; Agni brings back the cattle of him of whose cattle have come back.
12.4.26	The cattle of him who knows this and praises with the Ruru hymn come back again and again.
12.4.27	The Stoma of this day is the same as that of the Paristut-edha.
12.5.1	"The three voices have arisen," thus it is the form of the third day. By this they begin the third day.
12.5.2	This is the third day, which is the same as the Trivrit. It is indeed the same as the third day. It is indeed that which is praised.
12.5.3	"Let the streams flow around," thus they become Parivati.
12.5.4	The third day is the end of the sacrifice, and these (verses) are for its completion.
12.5.5	"He sits down with his friends," he says. The third day is like a rising. When he says "sits down," he establishes it in the day.
12.5.6	"The most intoxicating of drinks," (he says). The Anushtubh verses are in the form of the Jagati, for this day is Jagati.
12.5.7	"Thy holy (thread) is spread out, O Brahmanaspati."
12.5.8	The sky is indeed spread out. The third day is connected with the sky. It is that which he now mentions.
12.5.9	It is Gāyatrī verse. The Brāhmaṇa text on the Gāyatrī is known.
12.5.10	It is Pāṣṭhauha.
12.5.11	Now, the Angirasas, having heard the speech of the fourth day, said, "It is indeed speech." It attained the finality. That was its rising. It stayed on that day.
12.5.12	The Sama is of speech.
12.5.13	The twelve-day sacrifice is indeed speech. One praises with speech for the prosperity of the sacrifice.
12.5.14	They were not able to know the third day. While they were singing this Sama, speech came to them. By that they knew the third day. They said, "This indeed has known the third day for us." This is the sight of the third day.
12.5.15	It is Shaukta.
12.5.16	By this Angiras saw the heaven of the moon, for the fame of the heavenly world, he who praises does not fall from the heavenly world.
12.5.17	It becomes Gaurivit. The Brahmanical explanation of Gaurivit is this.
12.5.18	It becomes the Tvashtri-saman.
12.5.19	Indra, the god of the eye-disease, was not asleep. The people did not sleep. The Tvashtri-s made him sleep with this (verse). They indeed desired this then.
12.5.20	The Tvashtri Sama is a desire-fulfiller. One obtains desire with this.
12.5.21	Indra, being afraid of Vritra, entered the cow. The sons of Tvashtra said, "We shall generate you." They generated him with these Sāmans. "The great one is generated" - they perform the Sattra. They are indeed generated.
12.5.22	One becomes free from injury.
12.5.23	The gods and the Asuras were contending. He whom the gods struck down did not recover, he whom the Asuras struck down recovered. The gods practised penance. They saw this Aritsta (weapon). Then he whom the gods struck did not recover, and he whom the Asura struck recovered. By this (weapon) they struck down the Asuras. This is the reason why Aritsta is called Aritsta. By Aritsta alone is the final (weapon) made.
12.6.4	Listen to the call of the distant one. By listening alone.
12.6.5	One becomes the most powerful.
12.6.6	By the most powerful Indra hurled the thunderbolt at Vritra. One who has an enemy should offer the Ukthas with the most powerful (verse). One overcomes the enemy. One becomes superior to oneself.
12.6.7	One becomes of the colour of a horse.
12.6.8	Indra and Namuchi, the demon, made a pact: "Neither by night nor by day, neither when wet nor when dry." When the sun had set and not yet risen, he cut off his head with the foam of water. This is neither by night nor by the day, when the sun has set and not yet arisen. This is neither when wet nor dry, when the foam of water is. Then he turned to him who spoke the evil words: "The slayer of heroes, the destroyer of enemies!" He could not destroy him by means of the Rc and the Saman.
12.6.9	By the destruction of Harivarṇa alone, he is struck down.
12.6.10	By the destruction of Harivarna, the one who praises obtains prosperity and Hari.
12.6.11	One becomes prosperous.
12.6.12	The Angirases, going to the heavenly world, followed the Rakshas. They went round them by this (verse). The Angirases went round them by the oblique (verse). Because he went round them by an oblique (verse), therefore he was excluded from them. Sin followed them. He struck it with the oblique (verse), and destroyed sin. Having struck sin with the oblique (verses), he praised.
12.6.13	The Stoma is seventeen in number, for stability and propagation.
12.7.1	The fourth day of the Tri-night begins with the verse, "The Pavamana cows are indeed the Ashwinis."
12.7.2	Having reached the Tri-night, the Gayatri verses proceed to the second stage, for the form of the Gayatri is indeed the form of the Tri-day.
12.7.3	The Jagati is the metre. This is the third day. They enter the Jagati by the Jagati.
12.7.4	If any other metre were to be used, it would be contrary or favourable.
12.7.5	The Pavamana has generated (the metres) - this is the Anurupa metre.
12.7.6	The fourth day is like the people, for it produces food. It produces Viraj, it produces the twenty-one-fold Stoma.
12.7.7	And that form is indeed the former, and the subsequent form is the subsequent. That is the reason for the Anurupa.
12.7.8	A son is born to him in accordance with this, who knows this.
12.7.9	The two verses of praise are appropriate for the purpose of closing the vital airs.
12.7.10	The two verses of six verses are for the purpose of holding the seasons.
12.7.11	The last verse is for the purpose of which vital air they depart by, they rise up by that.
12.7.12	The Stoma is indeed twenty-one for the purpose of stability, he stands firm.
12.8.1	The Gopa of the people is born, the watchful one. This is the Agniya offering of clarified butter.
12.8.2	This is the fourth day, which is like the people. It generates food, generates Viraj, generates the Ekavimsa stoma.
12.8.3	This is your Mitra-Varuna. This is the Barhaspatya offering of Mitra-Varuna.
12.8.4	This is the great, the remote, the Vaíraj. It illuminates the form of the Bârhata.
12.8.5	Indra with Dadhîci's bones. The three verses are of Dadhîci.
12.8.6	Dadhânga Angiras was the priest of the gods. Food is the priest of Brahman. For the obtaining of food.
12.8.7	This is my mind for the left. The Indra-Agni.
12.9.3-6	O Soma, I am your friend, O Indra, O friend, every day the ravens wander around me. Come beyond the boundaries. He has indeed gone beyond, like a bird that has fallen. He has indeed fallen. Purifying, he has gone beyond. The Gāyatrī verses are true, the Tristubh verses are in form. Therefore, Tristubh verses are made in the world.
12.9.7	The Gāyatrī verse is the Brahman of the Gāyatrī.
12.9.8	The Atharvan verse is the four-fold wealth, for the stability of the four-night (rite).
12.9.9	The Anushtubh verse is the four feet, this is the fourth day.
12.9.10	The Atharvī verses are the remedy, he makes it a remedy.
12.9.11	It is for one who desires the final attainment.
12.9.12	One (verse) is connected with another verse, with the same final word, for the sake of desire. This (verse) is for the sake of all desires, for the attainment of all desires.
12.9.13	It is the Ashtadamstra (verse).
12.9.14	It is the Brahmanical verse of the Ashtadamtra.
12.9.15	It is Abhishus (verse). For the stability of the day.
12.9.16	Whatever was not stable, he stabilised with Abhishus.
12.9.17	He sings the Anutunna (verse). Thus indeed is the form of this day.
12.9.18	The Angirasa (hymn) is the fourfold wealth, for the stability of the four-day (rite).
12.9.19	The Svaprakṣa (hymn), for that is the form of this day.
12.9.20	It is the Sattrāsaha (hymn).
12.9.21	What the Asuras could not bear, the gods bore by the Sattrāṣāha (rite). They conquered them by the Sattrāsāha (rite), thus it is the Sattrāsäha (rite).
12.9.22	He who is victorious in the sacrifice conquers his enemies.
12.9.23	They praise in the Gāyatrī verses for stability and brahmic glory. They rise up with the very breath by which they depart.
12.9.24	The Gāyatrīs become Vṛṣaṇvatī. They lead to the form of the Tristubh. The Stoma is
12.10.1	Drink Soma, O Indra, may it delight thee. The flowing Soma has been pressed by the tawny-horsed Adri, the presser, by his arms, by the two arms. It has flowed like the fourth day, for the sake of that pressing.
12.10.2	"O Indra, thou hast overcome all foes." The Atijagati metre is the youngest. It advances for non-failure.
12.10.3	The Jagatī is the smallest of the metres, and it is as if one were to go to the smallest metre when one goes to the Jagatī on the fourth day.
12.10.4	"He who is the king of the people."
12.10.5	For now the speech has gone to the kingdom, and they lead the sacrificer to the kingdom.
12.10.6	The gods, by means of the metres, brought the sun to the heavenly world. It did not hold fast. They made it hold fast by means of the Vairāja (metre). Therefore the sun shines from afar and from near. The sun shines from afar, the song from near.
12.10.7	Having begun the Prastara, he makes the Vistambha firm. He thus places food at the mouth itself, for the mouth is the Prastara of the Sama.
12.10.8	He supports it ten times. The Viraj has ten syllables. The Viraj is food. For the securing of food.
12.10.9	He supports it thirty times. For the securing (of food) in greater quantity.
12.10.10	The Viraj is the Sama. They praise the Viraj. The Viraj supports. He places the Viraj in order for the securing of food.
12.10.11	The (priest) sings the Anutunna (hymn) to the Anutunna, for from the Anutunna the seed is deposited.
12.10.12	They churn the fire on the right thigh, for the seed is deposited on the right side.
12.10.13	They churn when the (fire) is taken up and when it is not taken up. The born one makes a hissing sound.
12.10.14	Therefore cattle make a hissing sound over the born son.
12.10.15	To him, when born, they offer oblations on the Garhapatya, the Agnidhra, and the Ahavaniya.
12.10.16	They offer oblations on Ahavaniya. The sacrificer has his abode here. When he offers on the Ahavaniya, he makes his abode luminous.
12.10.17	He becomes luminous and endowed with brahmic glory, he who knows thus.
12.10.18	He offers with the Abhijuhu formula for peace.
12.10.19	He offers with ghee. Ghee is brilliance; he thus bestows brilliance on himself.
12.10.20	He offers with the Viraj verse, "Agni, well-kindled, shine forth in front." The Viraj is food; for the attainment of food.
12.10.21	The Brahma-sāman consists of three Shoka verses.
12.10.22	They praise with Atijagati verses. By passing beyond the day, they pass beyond the day.
12.10.23	They attain the end of the day for the sake of removing sin, having killed the sinful one, he praises with the Triṣṭubh.
12.10.24	The Pṛṣṇi of Bharadvāja is the Sāman of the Acchāvasas.
12.10.25	The gods say that Pṛṣṇī is food, for the attainment of food.
12.10.26	With the Iḍās, the Iḍa, for that is the form of this day's Stoma.
12.11.1	The verses beginning with "The wise one is dear to heaven" are the Parivati verses. The fourth day is the end; these are for its completion.
12.11.2	"You are indeed divine" means "you are" (the fourth day). The form of the fourth day is Bṛhat, because this day is Bṛhaspati.
12.11.3	Soma, purifying, flows with waves, purifying the speech, flowing ahead, roaring.
12.11.4-6	For this is the foremost of the utterances, and they make the sacrificer go to the foremost. "Purorjitīva andhasa" (RV. 10.189.1) - this is at the Viraj (stotra), for this day is connected with Viraj. "Soma flows forth, the begetter of thoughts" (RV. 10.10.1) - at the morning pressing, the Soma is taken up sixteen times, and at the third pressing they generate it.
12.11.7	The Tristubh is true, the Jagati is form. Therefore, Jagatis are performed in the world.
12.11.8	It becomes Gāyatrī, as is the Brāhmaṇa of Gāyatrī.
12.11.9	It becomes golden.
12.11.10	The Angirases were performing a sacrifice. They had attained the heavenly world, but they did not know the path leading to the heavenly world. Their friend, the Angiras, went to them. He saw the Gandharva Urnayu dancing in the midst of the Apsarases. He said, "Let us go." Wherever he pointed, she desired him. He said, "Let us go." She said, "Let it be so." "The heavenly world has been attained by you. But you do not know the path to the heavenly world." This is the heavenly world-leading Sama Veda. Now tell me if I have seen it or not."
12.11.11	He said, "That is good." He said, "The path to heaven has been obtained by us. But we do not know the path to heaven. This is the heavenly Sama Veda. By praising with it, we will go to heaven." He said, "Who told you?" He said, "I saw it myself." By praising with it he went to heaven. Kalyan became inferior. Because he spoke untruth. That is the white one.
12.11.12	This is the heavenly Sama. One attains the heavenly world, the world of merit, by singing the Aurṇāyava.
12.11.13	It is the Brihatka.
12.11.14	It is praised by the Sama-rshi. "One says, "You are indeed!" for the sake of obtaining food. Food is given by saying, "Indeed!" One also aims at the Sodashin.
12.11.15	It is sung in the Ati-shada mode.
12.11.16	The Atiṣṭādadiyaṃ (verse) is for the attainment of life, for the attainment of the essence of life.
12.11.17	They attain the end of the Ātamitīya (verse), thus attaining all life.
12.11.18	There is a joyful cry.
12.11.19	Having passed over the fifth day, which is greater, they begin the sixth day. Thus they begin the sixth days for continuity.
12.11.20	He recites with the sixteen-syllabled (hymn) and also offers the sixteen-fold oblation with it.
12.11.21	It is Anndhigava.
12.11.22	One who is satisfied with Anndhigava obtains food and drink.
12.11.23	It is Vatspara.
12.11.24	The Vairāja is established in this (hymn). One who is satisfied with Vatspara becomes established.
12.11.25	Vatsaprin, Bhalandana, not finding faith, he practised austerities. He saw this Vatsapra. He found faith. They perform the Sattra, saying, "We shall find faith."
12.11.26	The Ni-dhanas are thus the form of this day. The Pavamana verses end with Ni-dhanas. For the stability of the day, the Stoma.
12.12.1	"We have increased Agni, the growing one."
12.12.2	They indeed increased the sacrificer then. They increase him in the same way.
12.12.3	"We have gone to you, the new one." They indeed went to the new body of Prajapati then. They make the sacrificer go to the new one.
12.12.4-5	"O Indra, drink this pressed (Soma), the best, the immortal, the intoxicating." The Jyestha (Soma) indeed is the first to be drunk. They make the sacrificer go to the state of being the eldest.
12.12.6	The king-sage Sindhukshit, while wandering in the forest, saw this Sairndhukshit hymn. He came to it and stood firm. He who recites it comes to it and stands firm. He who is satisfied with Sairndhukshita.
12.12.7	It is the Sauvaralika hymn. The brilliance of the Brihat (hymn).
12.12.8	The fourth day is like a fallen one. By this he attains the brilliance of the Briha(t hymn). By the Sauvaralaka.
12.12.9	It becomes dear to Vasishtha.
12.12.10	By this Vasishtha attained the greatness of Indra, and one who praises with Vasishtha attains the greatness of the deities.
12.13.1	Indra and Brihaspati became one. That Indra was surpassed by Brihaspati with one body. He thought, "I will not be overcome by his superiority." He said, "This is your sixteenth sacrificial rite." It became the sixteenth. That was its birth.
12.13.2	He who shines with excessive glory, is overcome by his enemies in the Gāyatrī verses of two feet, in the Brihat and Ṣoḍaśa hymns.
12.13.3	"Come to us with your horses, praised!" These are the Gāyatrīs of two feet, and this is to be praised in them.
12.13.4	Indra approached Prajapati, saying, "I wish to slay Vritra." He gave him this Anushtubh verse, which he recited. When he struck it, it resounded. That is the origin of the name "Nanadasyanad."
12.13.5	He again approached him. He gave him the Haro of the seven Hotr priests, which he recited and struck.
12.13.6	He strikes him whom he wishes to strike. He who knows this.
12.13.7	Therefore they praise the Harivati verses, they recite the Harivati, the Graha is taken in the Harivati. For him Hari, having created, gave (it).
12.13.8	This is the twenty-one-fold foundation, namely the Sodasi. For at the morning pressing seven Hotr priests perform the Vasat call, at the midday pressing seven, and at the third pressing seven.
12.13.9	It becomes the Gauriviti.
12.13.10	Gaurivitti saw that Brahma had something extra, and that became Gaurivitti. They praise the extra with the extra. One who recites the sixteen verses becomes one who has a good morning, and is provided for his progeny.
12.13.11	The great Upodgati, the son of Gopaleya, having sung the Anushtubh metre, sang the sixteen-fold Gaurīvit, and attained prosperity. He did not fall from prosperity.
12.13.12	He who, having made the Anushtubh metre, praises with the Gaurivit, the sixteen-fold metre, attains prosperity without difficulty, and does not fall away from prosperity.
12.13.13	One should praise with the sixteen-fold verse in the Shakvari metre if one desires to become wielder of the thunderbolt.
12.13.14	The sixteen-fold is the thunderbolt; the Sakvaris are the thunderbolt. With the thunderbolt he wins the thunderbolt. He becomes a thunderbolt.
12.13.15	One should praise with the sixteen-fold in the Anushtubh metre, one who desires that speech should not exceed him.
12.13.16	The sixteen-fold is indeed the thunderbolt; the Anushtubb is speech. With the thunderbolt, he wins speech. Speech does not exceed him.
12.13.17	The hymn to be chanted is "Soma, the Soma, Indra, he."
12.13.18	One desiring food should chant the Sodasi in the Viraj. The Sodasi is the thunderbolt, and the Viraj is food. He thus wins food with the thunderbolt, and becomes a food-giver.
12.13.19	The hymn to be chanted (is) "We bear you to the great increase."
12.13.20	These are the thirty-three syllables of Viraj, namely, the twenty-one and the twelve. The twenty-one is the foundation, the twelve is the progeny.
12.13.21	He who knows this is born with foundation and progeny, and does not age in the end.
12.13.22	Or these are the one-footed verses, the three-syllabled verses of Vishnu, the Bhuris, the Sakvaris.
12.13.23	With these Indra killed Vritra. Quickly one kills sin with these. Quickly one becomes more prosperous.
12.13.24	The praise is of thirty-four syllables. The deities are thirty-three and Prajapati is the thirty-fourth. One approaches Prajapati, the deity, for non-injury.
12.13.25	When one gives gold, one praises with the Sodasi. The Sodasi becomes luminous.
12.13.26	The black horse stands up with the gaze of the Sama. He stands destroying the sight of his enemies.
12.13.27	The one-syllabled was the lowest metre of the gods, the seven-syllabled the highest; the nine-syllabled metre was the lowest of the Asuras, the fifteen-syllabled highest. The gods and Asuras contended with one another. Prajapati, becoming the Anushtubh, stood between them. The gods and the Asuras disputed with him. He turned to the gods. Then the gods became victorious, the Asuras were defeated.
12.13.28	He who knows this becomes the conqueror of his own self and of his enemies.
12.13.29	The gods, by the one-syllabled (verse), overcame the Asuras by the fifteen-syllabled; by the two-syllabled, the fourteen-syllabled ; by the three-syllabled the thirteen-syllabled , by the four-syllabled twelve-syllabled . By the five-syllabled they overcame the eleven-syllabled. By the six-syllabled ten-syllabled verse, by the seven-syllabled nine-syllabled and by the eight-syllabled eight-syllable verse.
12.13.30	Thus indeed does one win prosperity from his rival, he who knows this.
12.13.31	This (sacrifice) is like a sacrifice without obstacles. When there was the Sodashin, then the gods were inferior and the Asuras were superior. One who knows this wins his superior rival.
12.13.32	Because there is no other than him who was born, who illumines all the worlds, the Lord of Creation, knowing the creation, he moves in the three luminaries, he is the sixteen. The Udgātṛ looks at the Graha.
12.13.33	He who knows this becomes luminous.
12.13.34	The Stoma becomes twenty-one, for stability, one becomes stable.
13.1.1	The verse, "O Soma, do thou flow, knowing cattle, wealth, and gold," is the Prastāra of the fifth day.
13.1.2	Soma knows cattle, wealth, gold, and the Sakvaris.
13.1.3	The Sakvaris are cattle. One obtains everything through cattle.
13.1.4	"Thou art the most heroic, O Soma, knowing all," this is the praise of the heroic one whose cattle are heroic.
13.1.5	May they flow for you, honey-like, ghee and milk. Honey-like is ghee and milk. Animals flow. He thus speaks of that.
13.1.6	"The Pavamāna knows all." The Anurūpa verse is this.
13.1.7	He thus speaks of him who knows all. He indeed wins all by means of animals.
13.1.8	"Your courses have flowed." The days are indeed like the created ones.
13.1.9	The former form is followed by the latter form. The former form is called Anurūpa because it is followed by the Anurūpa form. A son is born to him who knows this in accordance with the Anurūpā. The two verses of the Stotriya are Anurūpa, for the purpose of restraining the Prāṇa and Apāna.
13.1.10	There are seven verses, for the purpose or holding the metres.
13.1.11	There are four verses, for the sake of stability.
13.1.12	The third verse is the best, by which very breath they depart, they ascend it.
13.1.13	The Stoma is indeed Tri-Nav, for stability and prosperity. This is indeed the three-fold prosperity.
13.2.1	The Agniya Ajya is indeed "Your glories are in the rain, like lightning."
13.2.2	Wealth is indeed cattle, wealth is the Sakvaris. He indeed speaks that very thing.
13.2.3	"The days are like the rays of Agni. The days are indeed like the rays of the sun."
13.2.4	"They are like your chariots, each separate. The days are now indeed separate."
13.2.5	"Even Pururuci is not enough for you. Now indeed for you, O Varuna." The Maitrāvaruṇa (priest) says this.
13.2.6	Whatever is ill-performed in the sacrifice, that Varuna seizes. That he now releases.
13.2.7	"Rising with strength, together." This is Indra's.
13.2.8	The rising has five forms. "Rising with strength, with vigour," they rise with vigour and strength.
13.2.9	"O Indra and Agni, you two, the young ones." This is the Rathantara, Indra-Agni's.
13.2.10	This Rathantara is the indirect form, while the Sakvaris are the direct form. The Stoma illuminates that form.
13.3.1	"The verses beginning with "O Soma, flow forth most brilliant" are the Gāyatrī verses addressed to Vishnu."
13.3.2	The Gāyatrī is indeed Brahman, and Vishnu is the sacrifice. He thus establishes the sacrifice in Brahman.
13.3.3	Soma, being pressed, with the pressers, is the form of the Somas. With its own form he prospers them.
13.3.4	"What Soma is variegated, praiseworthy," are the Gāyatrī verses. The truth is in the form of the Tristubh verses. Therefore, Tristubh verses are made in the world.
13.3.5	It becomes Gāyatrī. What is the Brāhmaṇa of the Gāyatrīs.
13.3.6	It is in the Yajnya metre. The Yajnya metre is cattle; (the verse) is for the winning of cattle.
13.3.7	It is sung continuously; for the continuity of the sacrifice.
13.3.8	It is half a quarter; for that is the form of this day.
13.3.9	It is in the Sakala metre.
13.3.10	By this Sakala established himself on the fifth day; he who praises in the Sakala establishes himself.
13.3.11	It is the Varsha metre.
13.3.12	Vrishan Vaiganasa was the priest of Tryaruna, the son of Tryadhatu, the son of Ikhsvaaku. He drove away the Ikhsvaaku prince with a chariot and cut him off. He said to the priest, "This has happened to your pupil." He appeased him with this Sama. He then desired this. The Sama of Vrishan is for the sake of desire. One obtains desire by it.
13.3.13	The form of this day is half an Edam.
13.3.14	It is the Manava stoma.
13.3.15	By this Manu attained the world of Prajapati. One who recites the Manava stotra becomes many.
13.3.16	It is Anupa stoma.
13.3.17	Through this Vadhryashva attained the world of cattle. One who recits the Anupa stotra attains the world of cattle.
13.3.18	It is the Vāma (verse).
13.3.19	It is praised by Māmarsheya. Whatever cow, horse or man is praised, they praise it as Vāma. They praise it with this (verse). It is the day (verse).
13.3.20	Half of the day, because that is the form of this day.
13.3.21	The Agniya (verse) is Triṇidhāna (verse). It leads to prosperity.
13.3.22-23	Agni was created, but did not blaze. Prajapati subdued him with this Sama. He blazed. This Sama is indeed brilliance and Brahmanic lustre. With this he obtains brilliance and Brahmanic splendour.
13.3.24	The child Angiras, the creator of mantras, addressed his fathers as "sons." The fathers said to him, "You are not doing what is right. You address us, who are your fathers, as 'sons.'" He said, "I am indeed your father, because I am the creator of mantres." The gods asked him about this. The gods said, "He indeed is the father who is the creator of mantre." He indeed won that (victory). He who praises with the child-like (verse) wins.
13.3.25	They praise the Gāyatrī verses for prosperity and brahmic glory. By which breath they depart, they rise up again.
13.3.26	The Gāyatrī hymns are dedicated to Viṣṇu. They do not go beyond the Tristubh form. The Stoma is (thus).
13.4.1	Indra approached Prajapati, saying, "I wish to slay Vritra." Prajapati, having created the power and strength of the Chandas, gave it to him, saying, "With this you can." That is why the Sakvaris are called Sakvaris. He struck the boundary of the Simas. He made the Simas great. There was a great sound there. That is why the Mahannas are called Mahannas.
13.4.2	The five-footed (verse) supports the directions, the six-footed (verse), the seasons, the seven-footed (verse,) the metres, the two-footed (verse, ) the Purusha.
13.4.3	The Upasahs are praised as two-footed. Therefore, the animals are two-footed.
13.4.4	The Ida is on both sides of the Athakara. Therefore, the horns are sharper than the tuft.
13.4.5	The Upkshudra sings. Therefore, the cattle are small.
13.4.6	The cow sings with her shoulders touching each other, therefore the animals do not touch each other.
13.4.7	The cow sings with various forms, therefore the animals have various forms.
13.4.8	Indeed, the waters were the taste of milk. The gods were afraid of sin and evil. Having deposited the waters, they praised. For the removal of sin and evil,
13.4.9	One who knows this becomes a remover of sin and evil.
13.4.10	The Gayatri path is for one desiring Brahmic glory. The golden-hued path is for one seeking honey. It stands in the yonder world. The Tristubh path is for one who desires strength. The Athakaranidhana path is for one desirous of ghee. It stands in yonder world. The Jagat path is for one wanting cattle. The Edanidhana path is the one for one seeking milk. It stands in this world.
13.4.11	"The Śakvarī verses were recited by Anjasārya, Mālya, and Śakvarī. The Hotr said, "Let us recite the Parijānata verses." "The Kuna-s said, "If we can establish them." This is what they conquer by these (verses). Those who quickly recite and sing with these (verses) are established.
13.4.12	Having praised with the Śakvarī (verses), one praises with the Pūriṣa (verses).
13.4.13	The Sakvaris are the cattle. The cow-pen is the excrement. They encircle the cow-pen for the cattle. They turn them towards it for non-slipping.
13.4.14	"For Indra to grow in strength." They indeed grew in strength at that time.
13.4.15	Among them the Barhadgiran.
13.4.16	The fifth day is called Visuva, because it is the equal of the other days. It is the most prosperous of the days.
13.4.7	Indra gave the ascetics to the Salavrikas. Three of them remained behind: Prithurasmis, Brihadgiri, and Rayovajas. They said, "Who will support these sons?" Indra said, "I will." Having placed them in charge, he wandered around serving them, and having made them grow, he said, "Boys, choose boons." Prithurasmis said, "Kshatra for me." He gave him Kshatra with this Prithurasmis. One who desires Kshatra should praise with this. His Kshatra becomes manifest. Brihadgiri said, "Brahmavarchas for me." He bestowed it on him with this Brihadgiri. One who desires Brahmavarchas should praise with this; one becomes Brahmavarchas. Rayovajas said, "Cattle for me." He granted cattle to him with this Rayovajas. One who desires cattle should praise with this, one becomes cattle-possessing.
13.4.18	For a king, one should perform the Brahmasama (hymn) of Parthurasma; for a brahmin, the Barhadgiran; for a vaishya, the Rajovajiyam. One thus prospers with one's own form. The Stoma is thus.
13.5.1	"The verse "The shining ray for joy" is in the Gāyatrī metre. The third pressing is indeed full of joy and taste. One thus places joy and taste there."
13.5.2	"The bright, the great fame" is the form of Rathantara. "The great" is the form common to both. He approaches the form of both, for both are the colours of this day.
13.5.3	"The breath, the child of the great ones" is the form for the Simanas, for the Simanas are great. He thus makes them prosper by their own form.
13.5.4	"Do thou flow, O Vājasañjaya (Vajasāyin), O Viṣṇu" - these are the Anushtubh verses of Viṣṇu.
13.5.5	Viṣṇu is the sacrifice; what is not done here, that he does by means of Viṣṇusacrifice.
13.5.6	"The strong Indra flows, the youthful, the leader of the cows" - this is the form of the Sīmānas. By means of its own form, he prospers them.
13.5.7	The Tristubh is true, the Jagati is form. Therefore, in the world, Jagatis are performed.
13.5.7	It becomes Gāyatrī, as is the Brāhmaṇa of Gāyatrī.
13.5.9	It becomes Sāntani, for the continuity of the fifth day.
13.5.90	This is indeed the continuity of the twelve-day sacrifice, and this fifth day is its zenith. He thus continues it.
13.5.11	It is the Cyāvana (hymn).
13.5.12	The Cyāvana is the begetting of offspring; one begets offspring and becomes many by means of the Cyāvana.
13.5.13	From these worlds indeed rain departed; Prajapati brought it back by means of the Cyavana. In that he brought it back, that is the Cyāvanas Cyāvana-ness. He brings back rain by means of the Crāvana.
13.5.14	The Krosa (hymn) is recited.
13.5.15	By this (verse) Indra, Indra-shouting, Vishva-mitra and Jamadagni shouted, "These are our cows," to obtain cattle. The shouting is done.
13.5.16	It becomes the "cow-shouting" (verse). The Brāhmaṇa about the cow-shouting is the same.
13.5.17	A bull of the Shaka tribe becomes.
13.5.18	The Shakvaris are animals. In this way he gains the union with animals for propagation. Animals do not propagate without bulls.
13.5.19	It is a Pārtha (verse).
13.5.20	By this (verse) Pṛthu, son of Vena, obtained lordship over all animals. He who recites the Pārtha obtains lordship over all animals.
13.5.21	The hymn is in the form of a stanza.
13.5.22	Indra took up the thunderbolt against Vritra and bound it with sixteen coils. He saw this hymn in the form of stanza and bound it. One should sing like one who is binding, for the sake of removing sin.
13.5.23	Sin indeed seized him. He drove it away with the Stobha of the feet. He praised with the Stobha, having driven away sin.
13.5.24	He saw the supreme of the feet. That is the Stobha of feet.
13.5.25	It has twelve Stomas, for the establishment.
13.5.26	It is the Dasaspati (Stoma).
13.5.27	The cow which is praised as belonging to the Dasa-s, is praised as belonging here. By this he praises the day.
13.5.28	The Pavamana hymns end with the Nidhana. The Stoma is for the stability of the day.
13.6.1	"Come, O Agni, we kindle thee."
13.6.2	The Uktha hymns are like a cut off part of the sacrifice. When it comes, it is for the sake of having hair.
13.6.3	"He sings the song to Indra." The Kakubhas are completed. By that one becomes free from hunger.
13.6.4	Kakubha is a man. He pleases him in the middle.
13.6.5	"He sings, "Indra, the Soma is pressed for you." The form of the boundaries. By his own form he prospers them.
13.6.6	It becomes successful.
13.6.7	The gods and the Asuras were contending. They said, "Whichever of us shall be victorious, his cattle shall be." The gods conquered the Asuras by means of the Samjaya. Because they conquered by means of the (Samjaya), therefore the Samjaya is performed for the purpose of obtaining cattle. It is performed for the Samjaya.
13.6.8	It is performed for Soma.
13.6.9	The Rakshas Long-Tongued, the destroyer of sacrifices, was licking the sacrificers and moving about. Indra, by some trick, wanted to kill him. Then the good Kutsa Sumitra said, "Tell me this." He told him, "Tell me that." He said, "I do not know that. But I heard something pleasant to my heart." He told him that, and he performed it. They indeed desired that then. The Sama is connected with desire. By this one attains desire.
13.6.10-12	When he was cruel, though he was Sumitra, speech reproached him. He was afflicted by the curse. He practised austerities. He saw this Sāmitra. By that he removed the sin. When the sin of the animal was removed, he praised Sāmitra.
13.6.13	The Hayas, the Ihas, the Ohas, the Ohes - by this (verse) they lead the cattle.
13.6.14	It consists of three verses, for the stability of the three-day (rite).
13.6.15	They offer the Ida which flows as the last (verse), for the continuity of the sixth day.
13.6.16	The Stoma consists of twenty-seven verses, for stability and prosperity. The three-fold is indeed the prosperity.
13.7.1	The verse "The light of the sacrifice flows forth, dear to the sweet" is the first verse of the sixth day.
13.7.2	The Gayatri is the light of the metres, the Revati is the light of Sāmans, the Trayastrimsa is the light of Stotras. Thus he joins the light properly. Even the son of a son becomes luminous.
13.7.3-6	"Madhu priyam" (Honey is dear) - the animals are the Revati (stars). Honey is dear to them. He thus speaks of what is already known. "Madintama, Matsara, Indriya, Rasa" (The best, the jealous, the controlling, the juice) - Controlling power is the juice. Animals are the controlling power. He thus speaks what is already known.
13.7.7	The former form is followed by the latter form. The former form is indeed followed by the latter. The son born to him who knows this is in accordance with the form. The two verses of the Stotriya are in accordance with the former. For the purpose of controlling the Prāṇa and Apāna.
13.7.8	There are ten verses. The Viraj has ten syllables. Viraj is food. For the purpose controlling food.
13.7.9	The Uttara-sāman is of ten verses, with the Sāman, for the purpose of not letting the juice of the power of Indra's strength leak away.
13.7.10	Where the gods saw the power, strength, and juice of Indra, they struck it together.
13.7.11	It consists of four verses, for the purpose (of securing) stability.
13.7.12	The two Aśvins, who were giving away thousands to Dhvasra and Puruṣantī, saw that they were giving away the thousands to them. They thought, "How can this be taken by us without being accepted?" They said, "We give the thousands to you, who are giving away the thousands, to you who are running and slow." Then it was taken by them without being accepted.
13.7.13	He who knows this, his wealth is not taken away.
13.7.14	One should recite without the Rāśaṃsa verse, for the obtaining of both kinds of food, human and divine.
13.7.15	The last verse is in the Triṣṭubh metre, by which breath they depart, by that they rise up.
13.7.16	The Stoma is indeed thirty-three, for stability. He is indeed established among the deities.
13.8.1	This Stoma is worthy of Agni, the knower of beings. The Ajya offering to Agni is with the Udarka verse, for the non-excessive flow of the juice of power and strength. Where the gods saw power, strength, and juice, they struck it down.
13.8.2	The sun has risen again. The Maitravaruna offering is with the Sūrava verse.
13.8.3	The sun is the end, and the sixth day is the end. He praises at the end for the sake of stability.
13.8.4	"He breaks all the enemies." This is Indra's hymn with Soma. For the sake of not letting the juice of power and strength leak out, where the gods saw power, strength, and juice, they struck it.
13.8.5	For the sacrifice are the priests. The Indra-Agni hymn with the Udarka verse is for the non-excessive flow of the juice of Indra's power and strength. Where the gods saw Indra's power, strength and juice, they struck it with the Stoma.
13.9.1	To Indra, O Indra, to the Maruts. The Marutvatya verses are in the Gāyatrī metre.
13.9.2	For the Maruts are the Madhyandina pressing.
13.9.3	The form of the Simas is being rubbed, the form of the Revatis.
13.9.4	The form of the Simis is the same as that of the Revatis, for the Revatis are born from the Simis.
13.9.5	He stands in the middle of these creatures, the ten-streamed one. The Adityas are these creatures; he stands in the middle.
13.9.6	The Gāyatrī verses are true, the Tristubh verses are in form. Therefore, Tristubh verses become popular in the world.
13.9.7	It becomes Gāyatrī because of the Brāhmaṇa of Gāyatrī.
13.9.8	It becomes Iṣovṛdhiya.
13.9.9	The fifth day is for the cattle, the sixth for the cattle-increasing (rite). They increased the fifth day for the cattle, and the sixth for the increasing of the cattle. Now they increase the sacrificer by this (rite).
13.9.10	It is the Crow-like (rite).
13.9.11	The sixth day is like the approaching (day). Now they obtain the approaching (day) by this (rite)
13.9.12	They are the Vājadāvarī (verses).
13.9.13	Food is strength. For the attainment of food. For when there is food, then there is a cow, then a horse, then a man, then strength.
13.9.14	They are the Revati (stars). For stability.
13.9.15	Six-stringed (sutra). For the stability of the six-night (rite).
13.9.16	The waters are indeed the Revatis. If they were to make the back (of the altar), the sacrificer would be without cattle; they would burn his cattle. Where the waters flow, there the plants grow; where they stand still, there they become withered. Therefore they perform the Pavamana; for one who praises with the Pavamana praises from afar.
13.9.17	The cow is the same as the cow of Indra, the rope is the same as a rope, the calf is the same as an ox, the mother is the same as Revati, when these are performed in this way, then the milk is given in this way.
13.9.18	The cow and the rope are from the same place.
13.9.19	The two verses of the Ukshana-sutra are the means by which Kavya saw heaven directly. For the fame of heaven, one who praises does not fall from heaven.
13.9.20	One becomes victorious in the race. For the attainment of all, for the victory of all, those who come to the sixth day win the race of all.
13.9.21	The race is food. For the attainment and non-obstruction of food.
13.9.22	It is the Varuna-sāman.
13.9.23	By this Varuna attained sovereignty and lordship, and became famous. He who recites the Varuna-samān attains sovereignty and lordship, becomes famous.
13.9.24	It is the Angirasa-sāman, the cattle-pen.
13.9.25	The cattle-pens are the Revatis. They enclose the cattle-pens for the cattle. They lead them to that, for non-loss.
13.9.26	Here (the hymn) is like the Vamadevya.
13.9.27	By this very (hymn) Vamadeva went to the front of food. Food is the front of Brahman. For the attainment of food.
13.9.28	They praise in the Gāyatrī verses for stability, for the protection of Brahman. By which breath they depart, they rise up with that.
13.9.29	The Marutvatiya verses are in the Gāyatrī metre. They do not go beyond the Tristubh metre. The Stoma is in the Gāyatra metre.
13.10.1	The other metres are exhausted, but the Gāyatrī is not exhausted. Therefore they praise in the Gāyatiri metre.
13.10.2	"The six verses beginning with 'O Indra, the creator of beauty, the creator of good fortune' are the form of the sixth day. With this they begin the sixth day for continuity.
13.10.3	The six verses beginning 'O Indra, when you, the two worlds' are the form for the sixth day. By this they begin the six day for continuity. The Revatī verses are the form of sixth day.
13.10.4	The Vāravantīya Sāman is used in the Revatī verses.
13.10.5-7	The Revati verses are the essence of water, and the Varavantiya is the essence of the Revati verses. He employs the Revati verses in the essence of the essence. He praises with the Varavantiyas. The Varavantiya (verses) are the essence of the Reva (verses). He who knows this becomes Reva.
13.10.8	This Sama was composed for Keshi by Dalbhya. He said to him, "Let the singers not sing for me, let them not sing for me." He said, "How should I sing for them?" He said, "One should sing as if singing for one who is going away, for stability. He knew that Parjanya was lying down behind the Parijanata tree. He knew that he was singing this song. He said to it, "I place you in front." They said, "Who is this? Why is it enough?" He said, "It is enough for me." That is why it is called "enough."
13.10.9	One should sing "Here, here" for the establishment.
13.10.11	One becomes a bull of the Raivata (clan).
13.10.11	Raivata is indeed cattle. One thus obtains cattle as a pair for propagation. Cattle are not born without bulls.
13.10.12	One becomes an eagle.
13.10.13	The hawk, indeed, obtains the birds that have died before him. The earlier days are like those that have died before. For their obtaining (the hawk) is made.
13.10.14	The hawk, indeed, is capable of crossing this day. He is the most aged of the birds. For the non-destruction of that (crossing), this is made. The sixth and seventh days are the end.
13.10.15	The Brahmanas say that the Brihatis are the long-lasting places, the Prsthas are the two Gāyatrīs and the two Jagatīs. Where then are the Brihatis?
13.10.16	The two Jagatīs are joined to the two Gāyatri, and thus all become Brihatis. The Prsthas are long-lasting places. One becomes long-lasting.
13.10.17	They praise with six-footed (verses) for the stability of the six-day (rite).
13.10.18	He offers with seven-footed (verses), for the continuity of the seventh day. The Stoma is (thus) continued.
13.11.1	The verses beginning with "Parisvan" are Parivati Gāyatrī verses, for the fulfilment of everything.
13.11.2	"He who is to be praised by the Vasus" - the Vasus are cattle; for the attainment of cattle.
13.11.3	The Valakhilyas say, "For your friendship, O Soma, we drink."
13.11.4	These two Valakhilya verses are in the sixth and seventh days.
13.11.5	Since these two Valakhilyaverses are in the sixthand seventh days, it is for the continuity of the day without interruption or omission.
13.11.6	"The Somas flow, the drops," these are Anushtubh verses, they are the places of rest, for support.
13.11.7	"O Indra, do thou flow, do thou flow forth, with wealth." This is a Tristubh verse. The truth is in the Jagati metre. Therefore, Jagati verses are performed in the world.
13.11.8	It becomes Gāyatrī because it is the Brahman of Gāyatrī.
13.11.9	They are Vaidanvatas.
13.11.10	Vidavant, the son of Bharadvaja, was a rival of Indra. He was afflicted by Indra's curse. He performed austerities and saw these Vidavant hymns. By them he removed the curse. By removing the curse, he became satisfied.
13.11.11	The hymn of Bharadvajas's hair is for obtaining cattle.
13.11.12	Hair is cattle. For the attainment of cattle.
13.11.13	They say that this is the long one, for long life is the long one; for the attainment of life.
13.11.14	It is the Karna-shravasam (hymn). They listen to the one who praises.
13.11.15	Karna-shravan saw this Sama, the Angirasa, desiring cattle. With it he created a thousand cattle. In that this is a Sama, it is for the prosperity of cattle.
13.11.16	It is the Gaurīvit, the Brahman of Gaurīvit.
13.11.17	It ends with the Madhucyut.
13.11.18	For the attainment of the supreme food, this is the supreme food, namely honey.
13.11.19	These two are the breasts of Prajapati, namely, the Ghrta-chyuni-nidhana and the Madhu-chyuni- nidhana. Prajapati is the sacrifice; he is milked by these two, and he is milked according to the desire of him who desires.
13.11.20	They are in the form of a crane.
13.11.22	It is in the form of the lips.
13.11.23	Śaunaka, by means of this, saw the heavenly world by a direct path. For the fame of the heavenly world, one who recites this does not fall from the heavenly world.
13.11.24	This is the final verse of the Vaisvānara Sāman of Agni. They conclude with "shine". For Agni Vaisvānari shines.
13.11.25	The Pavamāna verses end with the final verse. For the stability of the day, the Stoma.
13.12.1	The Brahmanas say that the two-footed ones should be performed from the Prāyana.
13.12.2	The two-footed ones are to be performed from the Udayana, for the man is the two-footed one, and he is the support.
13.12.3	All the sacrifices are performed by speech. Therefore a man speaks all speech, for all that is praised in him stands firm.
13.12.4	The Gūrda becomes.
13.12.5-6	The Kirāta-Kulyas, the sons of Asura, having placed the Asuras in the midst of the assembly of the Gopāyanas, threw them down. They approached Agni with the verse, "Thou art our last refuge." They touched the Asuras with it. They then desired this, "May we obtain the desire." One who desires obtains it.
13.12.7	He indeed bestows a blessing on him by this (verse), for the Sama is a true blessing.
13.12.8	By this (verse) alone, indeed, Gautama attained the greatness of his fame. Therefore, those who are beyond Gautama and those who are near him, both the sages are called Gautama.
13.12.9	One becomes the son of Udbanshi.
13.12.10	What is Udbanshi, that is the son of Udbhanshi.
13.12.11	One sings the Ardhaeda.
13.12.12	Therefore the streams of the Uddhatī flow beyond. It stands at the end of the Dāyāmānuka in the animals.
13.12.13	The Rk and the Saman are released above. The seventh day is sung with the Svarasvara for continuity.
13.12.14	When the six-day period is completed, speech is like a humming bee. One should not speak much, ask another, or tell another.
13.12.15	He should offer honey or ghee, as much as he can afford.
13.12.16	The Stoma is indeed thirty-three, for stability. Among the deities, it is indeed established.
14.1.1	The Stomas and the metres are indeed completed in the six-day (rite).
14.1.2	Having completed the six-day rite, having made the Stomas and metres, they proceed.
14.1.3	The one who speaks the praise, O Ushanas, goes to the end in the form of the Gāyatrī.
14.1.4	This is indeed the Gāyatrīs, they go to the end having attained this.
14.1.5	The Tristubh becomes the step.
14.1.6	The Tristup is strength and energy. Having gone beyond strength and energy, they go to an end.
14.1.7	The Stotriya verse becomes for the restraint of the Prāṇas and Apānas.
14.1.8	They are the Hariti verses, for the completeness of the metres.
14.1.9	They are twelve-versed,
14.1.10	for the year has twelve months; he thus takes hold of the year for the sake of the six-day (rite), for the purpose of the sacrifice.
14.1.11	There are twenty-four (days) in a month, twenty-four months in a year. He thus takes up the year for the sake of the year, for the sake of six days.
14.1.12	"The king of the birds is the hawk," said the hawk, the bird of prey. "Those who go to the top of a big tree, what are they like? They are birds, O king, falling with wings, they fall without wings."
14.1.13	Those who are wise are the birds, those who are not wise are the wingless ones. Having made the two Stomas of Trivrit and Panchasad the wings, they go to the world of heaven.
14.1.14	The Stoma becomes twenty-four for brilliance and Brahmic lustre.
14.2.1	The Ajya becomes the head of heaven and the earth.
14.2.2	The third day is the head of heaven.
14.2.3	"The verse "Vaisvānara, born of truth, Agni". Vaisvānara means the dear abode of Agni. He instructs him indirectly by means of his dear abode.
14.2.4	"For you, O Mitra, sing" (is the verse) addressed to Mitra-Varuna. The heaven and earth are the abode of Mitra-Varuna; he instructs them indirectly by means of their own abode.
14.2.5	"O Indra, come to the variegated light" (is theverse) addressed to Indra. The Rishis are the abode of Indra; he instructs him indirectly by means of his own abode.
14.2.6	"Call him, the one who is in the flames," is an unspecified (hymn) to Indra-Agni, for the invincibility of the gods. In the last half (of the verse) he has not mentioned the gods, for the non-destruction of the gods. The Stoma is (thus).
14.3.1	"Flow, O bull, in the stream," is a Gāyatrī verse, for the stability of the day.
14.3.2	It has the form of a Tristubh verse with the bull, because this day is Tristubh.
14.3.3	"Purifying, O Soma, the holder," for firmness.
14.3.4	"The Moon has gone forth to Indra's doing," they proceed, for this day is like a proceeding.
14.3.5	The Jagati verses are true in form, hence the Tristubh verses are made in the world.
14.3.7	The Santani verse is for the seventh day, for continuity.
14.3.8	Just as the sky and the earth are separated, so these two days, the sixth and the seventh, are separated. Just as one would bring them together and join them, so he joins them with this Sama.
14.3.10-12	Sacrifice indeed fled from the gods. It assumed the form of a Suparna and wandered. The gods then caught it with these Sāmans. This is indeed like a sacrifice, in that it is a Chandomā. This is indeed the beginning of a sacrifice.
14.3.13	Viśvāmitra, the son of Bharata, having truth in his mind, having placed his share in the people, having said, "You all give me a little bit, you all fulfill these for me," having said, "These two red stones are being carried away," he saw these two Sāmans, having yoked them, he released them, and he conquered.
14.3.14	The twelve-day sacrifice is indeed a continuous series of sacrifices. These (verses) are for the victory in that (series).
14.3.15	The Kanvarathantara (verses) are sung. The Kanvarathantara is indeed the brilliance of the Rathantara.
14.3.16	He employs the Rathantara in the Sarasvatī (verses). When he praises with the Kanvarathantara on the seventh day, he employs the Rathantara.
14.3.17-18	Ogrādeva, the king, said, "There is a twelve-day (sacrifice). The sixth day is Barhaspatya, the seventh is Barhaspatyam. If it is Kanvarathantara, then it is Ajami. It is Gaungavam.
14.3.19	Agni desired, "May I be the eater of food." He practised austerities. He saw this Gauṅgava. By that he became the eater of food. Whatever food he ate, whatever he belched, that is the Gauṅgava's Gauṅgava-ness. For the attainment of food, the Gauṅgavam is performed.
14.3.20-21	Whatever deity the Sama praises, by that the sacrificers attain their true aspirations. They indeed perform the Sattra with the aspiration for truth. They attain their true aspirations.
14.3.22-23	Aṅgiras, the son of Ayasya, ate the food of the initiated Ādityas. He strayed. He saw these Ayasya-s. With them he united himself. The seventh day is as if lost. This is a Sāman. By it one unites oneself with the day.
14.4.1	We have gone and are the sons of the great ones. The Brihatī verses are the youngest metre. It is ascended for non-deterioration.
14.4.2	No one can destroy that deed. The Brihatīs are true. The Jagatīs are at the beginning.
14.4.3	It is as if they were to descend from a higher to a lower Stoma. When the Jagatîs are sung in the beginning, it is for the support of the day.
14.4.4	The Kânavas have the Abhi-nidhana.
14.4.5	Indra struck Vritra with the thunderbolt, or he struck him with the thunderbolt by means of the thunderbolt. He who strikes his enemy by means of the (thunderbolt) is praised.
14.4.7	The Vaikhānasas were the Rishis who were dear to Indra. Rahyus, the son of Devamali, killed them at the death of the sage. The gods said to him, "Where are the Rishis?" He wanted to send them. He did not find them. He united these worlds with one stream. He found them at the death. He united them with this Sama. He indeed desired this. The Sama is connected with desire. One attains desire by this. The Stoma is this.
14.5.1	"Thy most excellent Madhu is thine" is a Gāyatrī verse. The third pressing is full of Madhu and Rasa. He thus bestows Madhu and Rasa on it.
14.5.2	"With this stream of thine, O pressed one" is a Kakubha verse. "Truth" is a Tristubh verse.
14.5.3	The Stoma of the Jyeṣṭha (greater) and Kaniṣṭha (lesser) Stomas is like a broken (Sastra). When they are performed in the reverse order, it is for the support of the day.
14.5.4	The two verses of the Valakhilyas are recited in the sixth and seventh days. The two verses of Valakhilyas being recited in the sixth day and seventh day, it is for the purpose of not missing the day and for continuity.
14.5.5	"Purujitī vo andhasa" (RV. 10.189.1) is Viraj. Food is Viraj. For the purpose of not being deprived of food.
14.5.6	The verse, "The horse is the axle," is a line of syllables, the abundance of stomas.
14.5.7	And this is indeed the measure of the verses now, for it is a line of syllabess, and thereby the verses are made to be of the measure.
14.5.8	The Brahmanas say that the Stotras are attained in six days. What are the Stotras? They are the metres. What are the metres? They are the rows of syllables.
14.5.9	The Soma-offerings are the highest. The sacrifice has gone to the highest. They seek it with this.
14.5.12	It is the last offering.
14.5.13-14	Prajapati created the creatures. They, created by him, became weak. He placed in them this Sama, called Dakshaye. When this Sama is sung, one places in oneself strength and vigour.
14.5.15	Indra was praised by all beings. He approached the sage Sharka, the son of Shishumara, and said, "Praise me." While leaping over the water, he said, "I will praise you this much." Therefore, he made the water flow with force. He felt as if it was insufficient. He saw this Sama Veda. He followed the water with that Sama. Indeed, he desired this then. The Sama of Sharka is indeed connected with desire. One attains desire through this.
14.5.13	It becomes a raft.
14.5.17	They say, "Those who perform the twelve-day rite are crossing the ocean." One who crosses the ocean without a raft does not rise from it. When there is a raft, one reaches the other shore. For the attainment of the heavenly world.
14.5.18	"I cross all the great evils." Whatever evil they have done, whatever evil they have praised, they cross it by this.
14.5.19	It has the eleven-syllabled Nidhanas. The Tristubh has eleven syllables. The Tristubb is strength and vigour. He stands in strength and vigour.
14.5.20	It has the Gaurīvit. The Brahmanical formula of the Gaurīvita is indeed this.
14.5.21	It has Kartayasa.
14.5.22	They take up the Nidhanas with the word "hi". For the removal of sin.
14.5.23	Having sung with the Kartayasa, he removes sin.
14.5.24	It is indeed with poison.
14.5.25	Angiras saw heaven by means of this Suhavi, for the fame of heaven, one who praises does not fall from heaven.
14.5.26-27	The Brahmanas say that the Stotras are completed in six days. What is the meaning of the word 'Stoma'? One should say that the Stoma is a person. The Stoma is a five-fold person, the Stoma is the two-footed person, for the completeness of the Stotras.
14.5.28	Food is the Jārabhīdī (hymn). The mouth is the Gāyatrī. He places food in the mouth and eats food.
14.5.29	One who knows this becomes a giver of food.
14.5.30	They praise in the Gāyatrīs for stability and brahmic glory. They rise up with that very breath by which they depart.
14.5.31	The Pavamāna hymns end with the syllable "Ida". The Ida is cattle, the Chandomas are cattle. He thus places cattle in cattle. The Stoma.
14.6.1	"Thy calf, O mind, has come to thee." The Uktha hymns are like a cut off part of the sacrificial animal. When it comes, it is for the sake of having hair.
14.6.2	"Thou, O Indra, with the thunderbolt." The directions are filled.
14.6.3	The Jāyasa stoma is like a defective stoma, when they perform a stoma smaller than the Jāyasa. When these are full-cornered, it is for non-defectiveness.
14.6.6	Vatsa and Medhatithi, the son of Kanva, were together. Medhatithi abused Vatsa, saying, "You are not a brahmin, you are the son of a shudra." He said, "Let us go away from the fire, whichever of us is more brahminical." Vatsa went away, and Medhatithi went away. Medhatithi did not even touch his hair. Indeed, he then desired it. The Vatsa Sama is for the sake of desire. One attains desire through it.
14.6.7	It is the Sauśravasa.
14.6.8	Upagu, the son of Sauśravasa, was the priest of the son of Kutsa. Kutsa cursed him, saying, "He who sacrifices to Indra." Indra approached Sauśravas and said, "Sacrifice to me, as if you are hungry." He sacrificed to him. Indra approached Kutsa and said, "You did not sacrifice to me. Where was your curse?" "Who sacrifices to you?" "Sauśravas." Kutsa, the son of Aurava, approached Sauśravs. While Sauśravas was chanting, he cut off the head of the Udumbara. Sauśravas said to Indra, "This has come to me from you." He appeased him with this Sama. Indeed, he desired this then. The Sama is for obtaining desires. One obtains one's desire with this.
14.6.9	It is a Vīṅka (hymn).
14.6.10	Chyavana, the son of Dadhīci, was dear to the Asvins. He became old. They made him young again with this Sāman in the waters. They made him youthful again. Indeed, they desired that then. The Sāman is conducive to desire. One obtains desire through it.
14.6.11	The Stoma is twenty-four, for brilliance and for Brahmic glory.
14.7.1	"The hymn "They anoint the child, the newborn, the tawny one" is the eighth of this day."
14.7.2	He is born like a child with the seventh day, and they anoint him with the eighth day.
14.7.3	The Stotriya verse is for the restraint of the vital breaths.
14.7.4	They are the Hariti verses, for the non-exhaustion of the metres.
14.7.5	They are the Navarcha verses.
14.7.7	It is the Pancharcha verse, the Paṅkti has five feet, food is Paṅkti, for the attainment of food.
14.7.8	It is Banavān, Ban is the end, this is the eighth day, he praises the end with the end, for stability.
14.7.9	There are three verses, for the continuity of the vital airs.
14.8.1	"The Agnivo Devam Agnibhiḥ Sajoshā" is the Agniya offering of clarified butter.
14.8.2	"The Agnis" refers to the previous days, which are kindled, and the eighth day is kindled.
14.8.3	"We call Mitra, the friend" is the Bharata offering of clarified butter to Mitra-Varuna.
14.8.4	The Chandomas are indeed like a deep and wide river. Just as one crosses a deep and wide (river) by stepping over it, so he steps over the Chandomas in this form, to avoid confusion.
14.8.5	"He makes Indra strong." It is connected with Indra.
14.8.6	The gods conquered Indra on the eighth day, and on the ninth day they killed Pāpmā. By this (verse) they make Indra strong.
14.9.2	The Gāyatrī verses are true, in the form of Tristubh, for this day is Tristubh.
14.9.3	"The Soma-pressers have come forth" means "they have come forth"; this is the form of Rathantara. "The great ones" means the form of Brihat. He attains the form of both together, for both colors belong to this day.
14.9.4	The one who supports the heaven, the one who purifies, the one who makes the juice, the one who is not supported, as it were, is the three-day (rite). By means of support, indeed, it is.
14.9.5	The Jagati verses are true in the form of the Tristubh. Therefore, the Tristubh verses are made in the world.
14.9.6	It becomes the Gāyatrī. The Brāhmaṇa of the Gāyatrīs.
14.9.7	It becomes variegated.
14.9.8	The animals are the Vairūpa. The animals are the obstruction. The Vairūpa is the obstruction to the animals. The year is the Vairūpas. The food is the Vairupa. The food is an obstruction to the food.
14.9.9	One becomes the Ashu of Bhārgava.
14.9.10	The day was indeed obstructed. The gods then overcame it with the Ashu. That is the Ashu-ness of the Ashu.
14.9.11	One becomes a Margiyava.
14.9.12	They say that this is the god of hunters. By this he obtained lordship over all animals. He obtains lordship over all animals by reciting the Margiya hymn.
14.9.13	It is in the Sāumitra metre.
14.9.14	The Brāhmaṇa of the Sāumitrī metre.
14.9.15	It is the Aitāyinī metre.
14.9.16	Kaavyāṅga saw heaven by means of this (verse). For the fame of heaven, for not falling from heaven, one who praises (this verse)
14.9.17	It becomes a verse on the horse. The Brahmanical explanation of the verse on the horse is the same.
14.9.18	They say that it is the yoke. The yoke is the vital airs. For the attainment of the vital airs.
14.9.19	It becomes the verse on the slow-moving hawk.
14.9.20	The Sauparna sacrifice is the self of the Sauparnas. The two wings are on the eighth day. The two wings extend to the seventh and ninth days. The self extends between the two wings. Because the self extends between the wings, it is called Vilanbasauparna.
14.9.22	The Sauparna sacrifice brings about the attainment of the heavenly world.
14.9.23	This is the second form, namely, the Chandomasa.
14.9.24	The Vamadevya is for cattle, the Chandomas are for cattle; thus he unites cattle with cattle.
14.9.25	It has a shoulder of the Gayatri.
14.9.26	The day was injured; the gods restored it with the shoulder of the Gayatra; therefore it is the shoulder of the Gāyatra.
14.9.27	The three-night sacrifice which was destroyed, they healed it with these Sāmans, taking it up with the Gāyatrī-pārśva, making it firm with the Santani, making it complete with the Samkrti, making it firm in the two former three-nights, making it firm here. If these same Sāmans are performed, it is for the sake of firmness.
14.9.28	It becomes Pāruhaṇman.
14.9.29	Puruhampan. By this (hymn) the Vaikhanasa saw heaven by a direct path. For the fame of heaven. He who recites it does not fall from heaven.
14.9.30	It is Abhiaghatya (hymn). The Chandomas are Abhiaghatya.
14.9.31	It is Dvaigatam.
14.9.32-33	By this (rite) the son of Bhrigu went twice to heaven, and having returned, went again. It is performed for the attainment of two desires.
14.9.34	Indra, desiring brilliance and strength, performed austerities. He saw this Dhārayana (verse) and obtained brilliance and strength through it. One becomes brilliant and strong by reciting the Dhārayana.
14.9.35	It becomes flawless.
14.9.66	Whatever flaw there was in this day, the gods repaired it with the flawless (verse). That is why the flawless (verse) is called flawless.
14.9.37	It is a hymn of praise to the great.
14.9.38	Brahman, through this hymn of praise, went to the forefront of food. Food is the forefront of Brahman. For the attainment of food.
14.9.39	It is a hymn of Bhargava.
14.9.40	The gods went to heaven by the path. They went by the path of Bhargava.
14.9.41	The Pavamānas end with the Nidhanas. The Stoma is for the stability of the day.
14.10.1	Who knows him when he is drunk? The Satobṛhatī verses.
14.10.2	The Satobṛhatīs are indeed a falling away on the seventh day, but not on the eighth. Therefore, they should be performed on the eighth day to avoid falling away.
14.10.3	They say, "This is a loose metre, when one goes beyond the Satobṛhatī." This is the established Bṛhatī, which has the Punaḥpada. "In front, behind, above, Indra" is the consideration of the directions for establishment.
14.10.4	Among them, the Brahmasāman of Naipāthika.
14.10.5	It is yoked for heaven like the Sāmarṣeya. The one who praises does not fall from heaven.
14.10.6	Listen to both.
14.10.7	The past and the future days, both of them, are continuous.
14.10.8	In them is the Vyāśva (Stoma).
14.10.9	Vyāśva, by this, saw heaven through Angiras, the heaven-world. This Stoma is performed at the end of the past and future days.
14.11.1	"Flow, O god, for life, may Indra go to thy intoxication." This is a Gāyatrī verse. The third pressing is full of intoxication and juice. He thus places intoxication and juice.
14.11.3	"The child of the great ones is the breath." They are full of breath. He thus places the breaths in the sacrificer.
14.11.4	"Do thou, O Agni, come to us, O most bountiful one." The word "abhi" is the form of Rathantara. This is the Rathantara day.
14.11.5	"O Soma, flow forth, great as the ocean" is a line of syllables. The Stoma-s are increased. And this is the metre now. The Stoma -s are made up of the metre which is not deficient, because it is a line of syllablesthe Stoma-s become made up of the metres which are not deficient. The Brahmavadins say: "The Stoma-s being completed in the six-day (rite), what is the metre of the Stoma-s?" One should say: "This is the metre of Stoma-s, namely, these lines of syllables."
14.11.6	The Gâyatrîs are the Usra-s, they stimulate the sun. The Jagatîs are the forms of truth. Therefore, in the world, the Jagatîs alone are performed.
14.11.7	The Gâyatra is the Brahmanical text of the Gâyatra.
14.11.8	The Arka is the head of the self.
14.11.9	The Arka means food. For the attainment of food. The head of the self means the vital airs. For the attainment (of food) of the vital airs.
14.11.90	The Surupa is the form.
14.11.12	The animals are the Surabhi. For the attainment of animals.
14.11.12	One shines, one shines, one who praises.
14.11.13	The Rathantara is the last verse, for this is the day of Rathantara.
14.11.14	Suryabanu, the Asura, covered the sun with darkness. It did not shine. Atri removed the darkness with light. It shone. Whatever light it became, that is the nature of light.
14.11.15	The days are like darkness; he removes them by this Sāman.
14.11.16	It is in the Kāksīvat metre.
14.11.17	Kāksīvat of the Auśija family attained prosperity and progeny by this (Sāman). He who recites it becomes prosperous and has progeny.
14.11.18	It is (sung) in the Āsita metre.
14.11.19	Asita and Devala saw the sight of the three worlds by this (verse). The Asita is performed for the obstruction of the three desires.
14.11.20	It becomes Aishira.
14.11.22	It becomes Traita for stability.
14.11.23	The Rathantara is the last verse. The Rathantara is indeed this day.
14.11.24	The lord is the lord of the sacrifice, the lord is the lord, the lord is found by the lord. These days are the lord-finders. By these metres he finds the lord.
14.11.25	It becomes the Gaurivit. The Brahmanical explanation of the Gaurivit is this.
14.11.26	It becomes Kautsam.
14.11.27	By this very (rite) Kutsa saw the river Vipā. He used to observe the Suradritinopvasatha (rite). It is performed for the sake of obtaining food of both kinds. It is called Kautsa.
14.11.28	It is performed for purification.
14.11.29	Indra gave the ascetics to the Salavrika (s). He was abused by a woman of loose character. He thought himself impure. He saw this purification and impurity. By that he became pure. He who is satisfied with the purification and impurity becomes pure.
14.11.30	The Kraunch (hymn) is sung. The Brāhmaṇa of the Kraunch is what is said on the second day.
14.11.31	The hymn is sung for prosperity.
14.11.32	The animals are the most prosperous of animals, for the purpose of obtaining them.
14.11.33	It is the Audala (hymn).
14.11.34	By this hymn, Audala, the son of Vaisvānara, attained prosperity and progeny. One who recites the Audala hymn becomes prosperous and has many offspring.
14.11.36-37	The Brahmanas say that the Stotras are completed in six days. What is the meaning of the word chandas? One should say that it is the word of man. Man is the Paṅkti, man is the two-footed. The Stotras are not deficient in the two-footed.
14.11.38	Agni desired, 'May I be the guest of every family, may I partake of hospitality in every family.' He practised austerities. He saw this (verse) for every family. By that he became the guest of every house, he partook of hospitality in every house. One becomes the guest of every household, one partakes of hospitality in every household, by reciting the Vishovishiyam.
14.11.39	They praise the Gāyatrī verses for stability and for Brahmic glory. By which breath they depart, by that they rise up.
14.11.40	The Pavamāna verses end with Ida. Ida is cattle, the verses are cattle. He thus places cattle in cattle. The Stoma
14.12.1	"He says, "The most excellent guest of you all." Thus the form of hospitality is made.
14.12.2	"O Indra, may thy dwelling be dear to us." For the purpose of obtaining the power of Indra.
14.12.3	"The young, wise, and unlimitedly powerful Indra was born, the upholder of all duties, the wielder of the thunderbolt, the much-praised." By means of firmness.
14.12.4	It becomes auspicious.
14.12.5	Uśanas Kāvya desired, "May I attain the same world as the other Kāvyas." He practised austerities and saw this Uśanas. By it he attained the same world as was of the other Kāvyās. Indeed, he then desired this. The Uśanas Sāman is indeed connected with desire. One attains desire by it.
14.12.6	It is the Saṃvarta (hymn).
14.12.7	The Rakshas demons were about to destroy the sacrifice of the gods. Indra hurled the Saṃvartaka (hymn) at them. Because he hurled the Saṃvartana, it is called Saṃvarta. Sin indeed followed them. He struck it down with the Saṃvartak hymn. When sin was struck down, he praised with the Saṃvartka hymn.
14.12.8	It is the Māruta (hymn).
14.12.9	The months are the rays, the Maruts are the rays. The Maruts are the most numerous of the gods. They sit at the sacrifice to be the most numerous. They become the most numerous. The earlier days are in accordance with the seasons, the Chandomas are not in accordance with the season. In that this is a Sama, thereby these days become in accordance with the days and the seasons.
14.12.10	The Stoma is forty-four; he thus stands in the strength and vigour of the Ojas, for the Triṣṭubh is strength and vigour.
15.1.1	"The ninth day's verse is, "The sea has crossed the highest law."
15.1.2	This is the highest day, the highest law; it is the day which is different from the other days, for the ninth is the best, the highest.
15.1.3	"Thou seekest the wind for the sake of sacrifice and prosperity." This is the Varuna hymn. Whatever is ill-sacrificed in the sacrifice, that Varuna seizes. That he releases it.
15.1.4	The Stotriya verse is for the release of the vital airs.
15.1.5	It has ten verses. The Viraj has ten syllables. Viraj is food. For the release of food.
15.1.6	The gods saw the power, strength, and sap of Indra in the eight-versed hymn. They struck it down.
15.1.7	It is an eight-versed hymn:
15.1.8	Animals have eight hoofs, and thus one obtains animals. The Gayatri has eight syllables, and the Gayatri is brilliance and splendor. One obtains brilliance and splendor.
15.1.9	The six verses are for the stability of the seasons.
15.1.10	There are four six-verse verses, twenty-four half-months, and a year. One stands firm in the year itself.
15.1.11	The last verse is six-verse, for the attainment of both the indirect and the direct.
15.1.12	The last three verses are for the attainment of the very breath by which they depart and by which they rise up.
15.1.13	The Stoma is indeed forty-eight for stability and propagation.
15.2.1	The Ajya offering is indeed dedicated to Agni, "We have reached the most excellent one with great devotion."
15.2.2	Those who go to the ninth day are indeed going.
15.2.3	"He who shines, do thou be kindled, O Dūrvā. He who shines, indeed, is he who sings for nine days. Svāhuta, indeed, is (the Agni) who is offered for nine days. From all sides, do thou turn towards us. From all sides indeed, does he turn towards us."
15.2.4	"Thou art Varuna, thou art Mitra, thou art Agni." This is the Varuna-rite. Whatever is ill-performed in the sacrifice, that Varuna seizes; he thereby releases it.
15.2.5	"I invoke Mitra, the pure-minded." This is the Rathantara, the Maitravaruna-rite.
15.2.6	The Chandomas are indeed like a deep and impassable river. Just as one would cross a deep and impassible river by jumping from one bank to the other, so he jumps from one form to the other for the Chandomas not to be mixed up.
15.2.7	"The great Indra who is strong," (with these words) he offers to Indra. With the eighth (verse) the gods conquered Indra, with the ninth they killed the evil one. By this (verse) they make the day great.
15.2.8	Those are the ones to whom this belongs. The Rathantara is for Indra and Agni.
15.2.9	The Chandomas are like a deep and swift-flowing river. Just as one would jump into a deep and swift flowing river, so here he jumps into the form of the Chandomas, for the non-interruption of the Stoma.
15.3.1	The verses beginning with "The flowing Soma juice of Pavamāna, the lord of the sacrifice" are in the Gāyatrī metre. They are sung for the purpose of not transgressing the prescribed number of verses.
15.3.2	"The flowing Soma juice" is the form of the Brihatī metre. "The lord of the sacrifice, the Soma juice" is in the Jagatī metre. It approaches the common form of both the Sāman and the metre.
15.3.3	The Parivati verses are those beginning with "Pour around the son." They are the final ones. The ninth day is the end. They are for the completion of that.
15.3.4	"The Soma is the bull, the tawny, the red." These are the Jagati verses. They are in the form of Tristubh. Therefore, Tristubh verses are made in the world.
15.3.5	It becomes Gāyatrī. The Brāhmaṇa text on Gāyatrī.
15.3.6	The son of Bharadvaja is the source of the nectar.
15.3.7	The people of Nanajana followed Divodasa, the priest of Bharadvaja. He approached the Rishi and said, "May I obtain your song." Through this Sama, he obtained the song. This Sama is known as "Gatuvid" (knowing the song). "Do not let me be separated from my wife." Thus one who is separated from his wife obtains the state of being separated. One who sings does not run away from his wife. One who is separated from one's wife is satisfied.
15.3.8	The one who is handsome is the one who is handsome among Brahmins.
15.3.9	The hymn ends with Hariśrī.
15.3.10	Hariśrī is the cattle, for the attainment of cattle. The one who praises approaches both prosperity and Hari.
15.3.11	The hymn is about Saindhukṣita, as is the Brahminical text about Saindhukșita.
15.3.12	The hymn about Vābhravan ends with the word "gata" (gone), for the purpose of going.
15.3.13	Vabhru Kaumbya saw heaven by this (hymn). For the fame of heaven, he who praises does not fall from heaven.
15.3.14	The Iḍā-s are mixed.
15.3.15	The Iḷā-s are cattle, the Cāman-s are cattle. He thus places cattle in cattle.
15.3.16	The bull is Pavamāna.
15.3.17	The Chandomas are animals; thus he wins the animal-mate for procreation. Animals are not born without bulls.
15.3.18	It is a Prstha (hymn).
15.3.19	The ninth day is the back of the days; thus he praises the back with the back for support.
15.3.20	It is Kaulamalabariṣa.
15.3.21	Kulmalabari saw heaven by this (hymn), and attained the state of progeny. One who recites the Kulmalabari hymn becomes many.
15.3.22	It has the Arka flower.
15.3.23	The gods say that food is Arka. The flower is its juice. One who recits the Arka flower hymn obtains food and juice.
15.3.24	It is the Dairghashravas.
15.3.25	The royal Rishi Dairghashrava, while wandering in a famine, saw this Dairghashravam. By it he obtained food from all directions. He obtained food from all quarters. By reciting the Dairghasravas, one obtains food.
15.3.26	The Vaiśvaṃ is for the purpose of the Vaiśva Brahman.
15.3.27	The Abhiśava is for the purpose Abhiśava.
15.3.28	The Devāsthāna is for the purpose establishment, the Saṃskṛti is for the purpose sanctification.
15.3.29	The gods, standing in the place of the gods, restored it with the Samkrti (verse). That is why the Samkrti is called Samkrti. The gods, indeed, stood in the heavenly world by means of the place of the heaven. May we stand in the heavenly world.
15.3.30	Varuna, the deity, did not stand for the kingdom. He saw this divine place. Then they stood for him for the kingdom. Those who are equal stand for him for the best.
15.3.31	His light becomes like that of the Kshatriya. He who knows this stands firm.
15.3.32	He becomes satisfied with Bhaga through Bhaga, with fame through fame.
15.3.33	It is Vasishtha, whatever is the Brahman of Vasishtha.
15.3.34	The sun is the long-lasting one; food is the sun; for the attainment of food.
15.3.35	The Sama-raja (hymn) is sung; one attains sovereignty, lordship, by singing the Sama-raja.
15.3.36	They say that it is the year; the gods attained heaven by the year, by going forward.
15.3.37	The Pavamana hymns end with the Nidhana; the Stoma is for the stability of the day.
15.4.1	They are like the rays of the sun. The verses are connected with the sun.
15.4.2	This day is connected with the sun-god. The sun is the end. The ninth day is the end. He praises the end with the end for the sake of stability.
15.4.3	From that which causes fear, O Indra, make us free from fear. O Maghavan, be gracious to us, so that we may overcome our enemies and adversaries. Having destroyed the enemies and adversaries on the ninth day, they rise on the tenth day.
15.4.5	The ninth day is indeed prosperity, prosperity is the tenth day, he thus establishes prosperity in prosperity.
15.4.6	It is complete.
15.4.7-8	One who desires cattle should chant all around. One who desires a Purohita should chant all around.
15.5.1	"Thou art Soma, the holder," (thus) it is a Gāyatrī verse; for the support of the day. "Thou" is the form of the Brihatī; for this day is Brihatī.
15.5.2	"Thou art indeed the divine member," (thus) "thou" is the form (of the verse) of the Brihatî; for this day (is Brihatī).
15.5.3	"Flow, O god, with streams," (thus) is the form of Brihatī; because this day is Brihati.
15.5.4	The Paritya, Harata, Hari hymns are the Parivati hymns. The ninth day ends with them. For sufficiency.
15.5.5	"Flow, O Soma, for great power." This is a line of syllables. The Stoma-s are increased. And this is the measure of the Chanda-s. The Stoma is made up of the Chanda. The Stoma and the Chanda are made up of the syllables. The Stomas are made up of syllables. The Brahmanas say, "If the Stoma-s and the Chanda- s are obtained in the six-day (rite), then what is the Chanda of the Chanda?" One should say, "This is the Chanda, namely, these lines of syllables."
15.5.6	The Gāyatrī verses are recited, "May the one who is born be well-nourished." They are in the form of the Jagatī, hence Jagatīs are performed in the world.
15.5.7	It becomes Gāyatrī because it is the Brahman of Gāyatrī.
15.5.8	The Aśva Sūkta is recited.
15.5.9	Agni is offered to in the earlier days, and this is the day dedicated to Aditya. The Shukra is offered. This Aditya is Shukra. He offers to him.
15.5.10	It becomes Shammda.
15.5.11	Through this Shammda Angiras saw the heavenly world by a direct path. For the fame of the heavenly world, one who praises does not fall from the heavenly world.
15.5.13	He indeed bestows a blessing on him by this (hymn). The Sama is a true blessing.
15.5.14	Now, the Angiras Dāvasu, desiring cattle, saw this Sama. By it he created a thousand cattle. In that this is a Sama, (it is) for the prosperity of cattle.
15.5.15	It is sung in the reverse order.
15.5.16	The semen is deposited by the Idaa-s going towards the east or by other Idaa-s. Then this Idaa going towards the west is the one that is seen. For propagation. Therefore, the foetus is born going towards the east and is born going towards west. Therefore, they are not born from the pits going towards the east, because they are held by this (Idaa).
15.5.17	It is done with the Havis. For stability. It is a repetition of what is already known.
15.5.18	It is Saura because of the Saura Brahman.
15.5.19	It is Vaishvamanasa.
15.5.20	The Raksas seized the Rishi Vishvamana who had gone to study, Indra knew that the Raksas had seized the Rishi. He said to him, "O Rishi, who is this?" The Raksas said, "He is a tree." He said, "He said he is a tree." "With this, strike him." He gave him a reed-like thunderbolt and said, "With this, break his boundary." He broke his boundary. That reed-like thunderbolt was Indra's. He seized him. He was released by Vishvamana. When Papman was killed, he praised with Vishvamana.
15.5.21	The Gaurīvit is the same as the Gaurīvit Brahmanical text.
15.5.22	The Nihava is for the securing of food.
15.5.23	Food is given with the word "hi" and Agni eats food with the word "iti".
15.5.24	The sages did not see Indra face to face. Vasishtha desired, "How can I see Indra face toface?" He saw this Nihav. Then he saw Indra face to face, and Indra said to him, "I will tell you the Brahman, how your Purohita Bharatas will be born, but do not proclaim it to the honored sages." Therefore he spoke these Stomabhāgas. Then the Bharatas with Vasishtha as their Purohita were born. This is the Indra-possessed Sama, because it is a Sama. For Indra-possession.
15.5.25	What is the most excellent?
15.5.26	These are the hymns of Brahma's fame, heard by the ear. One becomes famous among Brahmins by reciting the most excellent hymns.
15.5.27	There is the Asita hymn, which is the Brahmanical explanation of Asita.
15.5.28	There is Sadhra, for success.
15.5.29	There is Akoopara.
15.5.30	With this (verse) Akūpara Kaśyapa attained the great glory of Jeman. He who recites with Akūpara attains the great glory of the Jeman.
15.5.31	It becomes a rule for the sake of upholding the rule.
15.5.32	The Brahmanas say that the Stotras are completed in six days. What is the meaning of the word 'Stoma'? One should say that it is the Stoma of the person. The person is five-fold, the person is two-footed, for the completeness of the Stotras.
15.5.33	It becomes a Stoma.
15.5.34	Stoma is indeed animals. For the attainment of animals.
15.5.35	Prajapati created the animals. They, having been created, fled from him. He called them back with this Sama, saying, "Come hither." They returned to him. In that this Sama exists, it is for the return of the animals.
15.5.36	Those who know this, the animals return to them.
15.5.37	The Gāyatrī verses are sung for the sake of prosperity and Brahmic glory. The Ida-ending Pavamāna verses are sung for that very breath by which they depart and by which they rise up. The Ida is cattle, the Chandas verses are cattle. Thus he places cattle in cattle. The Stoma.
15.6.1	The Upavasatha rites are performed in the forenoon. The Udgâtrias of the preceding days are recited in the forenoon, and the Udgâtriâs of this day are recited in the afternoon. Thus he stands firm in both forms.
15.6.2	The Agnihotra is offered.
15.6.3	They chant the Agniya and the Indraya verses. Thus he unites the Brahman and the Kshatra. He places the Kshatra before the Brahman. He makes the Kshatra and the people follow the Brahman.
15.6.4	It is Trikakubha.
15.6.5	He stands in the strength and vigour. Strength and vigour are Trikakubha.
15.6.6	The Udvamshiya (hymn) is recited; as for the significance of the Udvamshiyas.
15.6.7	The Stoma is forty-eight in number, for stability and propagation.
15.7.1	The seventh day is Gāyatrī, the eighth Trishtup, the ninth Jagatī, and this tenth day is Anushtup.
15.7.2	They say, "If one were to use the Stoma of the Anushtubh verse directly, the sacrificer would go to the farthest end and not return." The twenty-four Gāyatrī verses are eighteen Anushtubh verses. By using the Stoma of Anushtubh indirectly, one attains stability and returns.
15.7.3	By this day they go round Prajapati. There is a rule that when one is going round the best (person), one should not speak. For when one speaks while going round the best, it is a hindrance to food. Therefore one should not speak, for the non-hindrance of food.
15.7.4	This is the rule: just as one announces the path when a gift is being taken to the best, for the purpose of going, so is it.
15.7.5	Having recited the Anushtubh verse, they should recite the speech in the same measure. That is not excessive and is for the prosperity of their own sacrifice.
15.7.6	They say, "Those who praise with ten days' rites ascend the gods." The rites of the five days are performed in reverse order, as one would ascend and then descend. It consists of nine verses, for one gives away those that are below and leaves aside those that are above.
15.7.7	This is the Varuna-rite. Whatever is ill-performed in the sacrifice, that Varuna seizes. He thus releases it. This is the rite for Aditi. This is Aditi. He thus stands firm in this (earth).
15.7.8	The Stoma is indeed twenty-four. For the sake of brilliance and for the sake of Brahmacarya.
15.8.1	"He carries the Apriya (oblations) with the verse, "The well-kindled one brings (the oblations)."
15.8.2	Prajapati created the creatures. He became distressed and thought. He saw these pleasing, agreeable oblations. With them he pleased himself. He who performs the Dasahara sacrifice is like one who is distressed. When these pleasing, agreeable offerings are made, he pleases himself with them.
15.8.3	"Today the sun has risen" - this is the Maitrāvaruṇa hymn.
15.8.4	The sun is the end, the tenth day is the end, he praises the end with the end for the sake of stability.
15.8.5	"May the Soma-juices delight you" - this is an Indra hymn, the form of rising.
15.8.6	"O Indra and Agni, come to the pressed" - by which form they go, they rise with that form. The Stoma is
15.9.1	"Your birth is high, O Soma, in the stream." The Gāyatrī verses are elevated, as a form of rising.
15.9.2	"Purifying, O Soma, the stream." They conclude with the path.
15.9.3	"The sage, the knower of truth, is awake." If they were to make the verses of the Apti (Sāman) excessive, then the verses would be excessive. They become elevated for non-excessive performance.
15.9.4	It is Gāyatrī because of the Brāhmaṇa of Gāyatrī.
15.9.5	It is Āmahiyāva because of the arrangement and food. They rise up with this arrangement and food.
15.9.6	It is Ajigam because of victory.
15.9.7	This is the victory of the twelve-day sacrifice which is spread out.
15.9.8	It is Abhiga (i.e. Abhiga-sāman), for the purpose of advancing.
15.9.9	The Angirasas, having performed penance, and being distressed, saw this Sama. They were rained upon by the Abhigas. By that they appeased the distress. Because they were rained upon by Abhigas, therefore it is Abhiga. The distress which they had experienced in the previous days, they appeased by this (sāman) and then rose.
15.9.10	The height is (the height of) the altar.
15.9.11	The gods, with the height, held back the animals; with the enclosure, they surrounded them.
15.9.12	The height and enclosure are within the Yajñāyajñiya (Sāman).
15.9.13	Animals are food; the Yajñayajñiya is animals. He thus encloses animals and food with the height and enclosure.
15.9.14	At the Madhyamdina Pavamāna, the gods, having established the sacrifice with the Yajñāyajñiya hymn, ascended to heaven. He who knows this, having established the Yajña with the Yajnayajniya hymn at the Madhyamdine Pavamāna, ascends to heaven.
15.9.15	Then the Anushtubh becomes remote. This Anushtubh is the direct Anushtubh, namely the Yajayajniya. If they were to perform it at the third pressing, they would attain the direct Anustubh. Therefore they perform it at midday. Thus they attain the remote Anushtubh.
15.9.16	It becomes Gaurivit.
15.9.17	This is the morning-milk of the sacrifice, that is the Gaurīvit; this is the place of sacrifice, that is midday; that the Gaurīvít is at midday, it is the morning- milk that the sacrificer places on himself. The Stoma.
15.10.1	"By what wonderful thing did it come to us?" (so says the verse). It is a verse of praise. By that (verse) they are the offspring of Prajapati, for who is Prajapati? For the attainment of Prajapati.
15.10.2	"Let no one else be praised!" - this is the blessing, indeed, for now.
15.10.3	"You are the most intoxicated with honey!" - this is a blessing for the rising sun, indeed, for this day.
15.10.4	"With the trees, with the wealth-giving (tree)," the tree is the Stoma, the wealth-giving is the sacrifice; the sacrifice is yoked with the Stoma. When he says, "With the trees, the wealth-giver," he yokes the sacrifice.
15.10.5	The Rathantara is the Raksha of the Vamadevya.
15.10.6	The Gāyatrī is the source of the Rathantara; he establishes the Rathantara in its own source.
15.10.7	The Gayatri is the brilliance, the Rathantara is the brilliance, and the twenty-four stomas are the brilliance. He thus properly joins the brilliance. Even the son of a son becomes brilliant.
15.10.8	He recites the first verse with an eight-syllabled (verse). He obtains animals with eight udders.
15.10.9	With the two syllables of the heaven, he recites the two verses at the end. The sacrificer is two-footed. He establishes the sacrificer in the sacrifice and in the animals.
15.10.10	The Rathantara is in the Gāyatrī metre. When the Rathantara is in Gāyatrī verses, one prospers in one's own people. The Gāyatrī is these worlds. When the Rathantara is in Gāyatri verses, one rises up having attained these worlds.
15.10.11	It is in the Madhyātinī metre.
15.10.12	By this (rite) Medhatithi Kanva, having taken the cows from Vibhınduka, obtained them for the sake of cattle. The Medhatithi rite is performed.
15.10.13	The Abhivarta Brahma-sāman is sung, ending with one syllable, for the sake of stability.
15.10.14	Speech is one syllable. One stands up by means of speech.
15.10.15	The Kalaya is sung as the Acchāvāka-sāman.
15.10.16	In the same world, Kāleyā and Rathantara are the same. Rathantara is cattle. Kāleyā is cattle. They stand on this and cattle and rise up. Stoma.
15.11.1	"With the sweetest and most intoxicating," it is a Gāyatrī verse. The third pressing is intoxicating and tasty. It puts intoxication and taste in it.
15.11.2	It is Gāyatrī. The Brāhmaṇa text on Gāyatrī.
15.11.3	It is a collection of verses, with the number of syllables of the sky as the sacrificial fee, for stability. They rise up for stability.
15.11.4	It is a collection of hymns.
15.11.5	By means of the collection of hymns, the gods attained these worlds. They attained them. That is the reason for the name of the collection of verses. By means of this, they attain these worlds and rise up.
15.11.6	It is the collection of verses of the red cow. The Brahmanical text of the collection of red cow verses.
15.11.7	He places the two Virājas of Śyavasva and Dhiga on the right side for the sake of food.
15.11.8	They praise the Virājas in the middle of the ants.
15.11.9	Indra, having slain Vritra, thinking that there was no thirst, went to the farthest end. He arranged this Anushtubh verse in the middle. He entered the house of Indra. He who knows this performs the sacrifice in the house of Indra, and rises up fearless. He who knows thus and praises in these (verses), rises up fearless.
15.11.10	The Sauhaviṣa Sāman has the Yajñāyajñiya Sāman as its concluding Sāman. They do not go beyond the Yajñayajñiya Sāmāndhi.
15.11.11	He becomes the winner of the prize.
15.11.12	For the attainment of all, for the conquest of all, those who come to the tenth day win all the prize. Food is the prize. For the attainment of food.
15.11.13	They conclude with a verse of ten syllables for the stability of the ten-night (rite). The Viraj has ten syllables. Food is Viraj. For the attainment (of food).
15.11.14	The Sūryavatī verses are sung; the Sun is the end, the tenth day is the end, he thus sings with the end at the end for support.
15.11.15	They are sung as Upatya and Parvatya verses for support, as Parvatya and Upatya verses for the fulfilment of all.
15.11.16	The Stoma is twenty-four for brilliance and for Brahmic glory.
15.12.1	The Vamadevya is the Agniṣṭoma Sāman of the Virāṭs, for peace and prosperity.
15.12.2	The Vamadevya indeed is the best of the Sāmans, the Virāṭ of the metres, the Trayastrimsa of the Stomas. Having united the ends of the good ones, they rise up. Even the son attains the good.
15.12.3	The Brahmins say, "He has risen from the sacrifice." If they say, "From what?" you should say, "They will be without support and offspring." If they say "From the standing," you should say, "Their prosperity will be stationary and not under their control." If they say "From the full, the full has risen," you should say,
15.12.4	These indeed, having praised with the Vamadevya, rise up from the full (stotra) to the full.
15.12.5	The Vamadevya is the atmosphere; this whole (universe) is full with the atmosphere.
15.12.6	This indeed is the prosperous Stoma, namely the Trayastrimsa. The Trayastrimsa has thirty-three syllables. They indeed stand firm in prosperity.
15.12.7	All these are the forms of the metres. Because they have three feet, they are Gāyatrī. Because they have eleven syllables in each foot, they are Triṣṭubh. Because they have twelve syllables in each foot they are Jagatī. Because they have thirty-three syllables they are Virāj. And because they are Virāj, they are Anushtubh, for they do not deviate from the thirty-three syllables.
15.12.8	The Stoma is indeed thirty-three, for stability. He is indeed established among the deities.
16.1.1	Prajapati was alone here. There was no day, there was no night. He moved in this dark darkness. He desired. He found this. Then it became bright for him. This is the light that is carried. That which became light, that is the light of light.
16.1.2	This indeed is the first of sacrifices. He who performs other sacrifices without performing this, he indeed is the owner of a pit. He is defeated and is not honoured.
16.1.3	Just as from the born fire, other fires are spread, in the same way from this (Agnihotra) other sacrifices are spread.
16.1.4	He who performs the Trivṛt sacrifice, illuminates it. He who performs the Pañcadaśa sacrifice, illuminates it; he who performs the Saptadaśa sacrifice, he who performs the Ekavimśa sacrifice, illumines it.
16.1.5	This is what they say when they say that there is one sacrifice. For all these are Jyotiṣṭoma sacrifices.
16.1.6	The sacrifice is indeed a continuous one, for two Stomas each carry the Savana. The morning Savana consists of the Trivrt and the Pañcadaśa; the midday Savana consists of Pañcadaśin and Saptadaśin; the third Savana consists of Saptadaśin and Ekavimśin.
16.1.7	If it is to be with limited Dakṣiṇā, this alone should be done. This indeed is the light, this is the instrument of the unlimited. This indeed is worthy of being the instrument.
16.1.8	Of that, there are ninety-one Stotriya verses. Of them, those eighty-one are the thirty-six Virajas. The six are the seasons. It is established in the seasons.
16.1.9	Now, this Viraj is in the Self, and this Purusha is established in it.
16.1.5	The cow, the horse, the ass, the mule, the camel, the goat, the sheep, the barley, the wheat, the sesame, and the peas are established in this Viraj.
16.1.11	The sacrificial fee is a hundred and twelve.
16.1.12	The Soma-pressing is indeed the most heroic of the gods. He who presses Soma, he presses the hundred Vairājas. He then presses the ten vital airs with the ten vital airs. The eleventh is the self. The twelfth is the Dakṣiṇā.
16.1.2	The gods, with the help of the cow, drove away the Asuras from these worlds. He who knows this drives away his enemy from these worlds.
16.1.3	That with which the gods drove away the Asura from these worlds, that is the cowhood of the cow.
16.1.4	He who knows this drives his evil enemy away.
16.1.5	His fifteenfold Bahispavamāna is the thunderbolt. He thus places the thunderbolt in front and thereby conquers.
16.1.6	This is a sacrifice for cattle. Cattle are like this: the head is the largest, the neck is smaller, the sides are larger than the neck, the thighs are larger than the sides.
16.1.7	The Bahispavamāna is fifteen verses, the Tyājyāni are three, the Madhyandina Sāman is seventeen, and the Tṛtīyasāman is twenty-one. Thus he makes it complete by its form.
16.1.8	One Stuta is in excess of the Viraj. Therefore, after the animal sacrifice, there is an excess.
16.2.1	Now this is the cow.
16.2.2	The gods, with the help of the cow, drove away the Asuras from these worlds. He who knows this drives away his enemy from these worlds.
16.2.3	That with which the gods drove away the Asura from these worlds, that is the cowhood of the cow.
16.2.4	He who knows this drives his evil enemy away.
16.2.5	The fifteen-fold is the outer Pravargya. The fifteen-fold indeed is the thunderbolt. He thus places the thunderbolt in front. By it he conquers.
16.2.6	This is indeed a sacrifice for cattle. The cattle are indeed like this: the head is the largest, the neck is smaller, the sides are larger than the neck, the thighs are larger than the sides.
16.2.7	The Bahispavamāna is fifteen verses long, the Ajyas are three-fold, the Madhyandinasavana is seventeen verses long, the Tṛtīyasavana is twenty-one verses long. Thus he makes it complete in form.
16.2.8	One of the Stuta hymns exceeds Viraj. Therefore, after the animal sacrifice, there is an excess.
16.3.1	Now this is the life.
16.3.2	The gods, by means of their life, conquered the Asuras in the battle for life. He who knows this, conquers his enemies by means of his life.
16.3.3	One who desires heaven should offer this sacrifice.
16.3.4	The Stotras go upwards, for non-decline.
16.3.5	One who is free from disease should be offered this sacrifice. The Atiratra should be performed.
16.3.6	He attains the Gayatri. The Gayatri is the breath. Life is the Gayatri. He places both life and breath together in it.
16.3.7	The Jyotiṣṭoma is indeed a heavenly Stoma. He places the Jyotiṣṭōma in front of him, for heaven. Then this is the cow with one (verse) exceeding the Viraj. That is the beginning. Then this is life with one (verse), deficient from the Viraj. It is the end. Then these two Stomas, deficient and excessive, are the pair for procreation.
16.3.8	These are the three-fold Stoma. By these Indra was satisfied with all satisfaction.
16.3.9	He who knows this is satisfied with offspring and cattle.
16.4.1	Prajapati created the creatures. They did not stand for him as the best. He took the essence of the creatures of the directions and made a garland, and released it. Then the creatures stood for him as the supreme.
16.4.2	Those who know this stand for him as supreme.
16.4.3-4	He desired, "May Indra be the best among my offspring." He released the garland to him. Then indeed, the offspring stood for Indra's supremacy. They saw that craft, which they saw in the father.
16.4.5	Then indeed Indra conquered the whole (universe). Because he conquered the whole, therefore it is called Viśvajit.
16.4.6	He desired, 'May I conquer what is unconquered by me.' He saw this Abhijit. With it he conquered what was unconquered.
16.4.7	When one becomes Abhijit, it is for conquering what is unconquered.
16.4.8	These two are the Indra-stomas, the two most powerful ones. These two were called the Shilpa stomas.
16.4.9	One who knows this sees the art in his house.
16.4.10	The two are not called the Yama stomas. One who worships with the Yama stomas should worship with these for prosperity.
16.4.11	Again the Stotras return, for Indra won the unconquered by these two.
16.4.12	He offers three Trivṛt, three Pañcadaśa, three Saptadaśa, and three Ekavimśa. They make twelve. The year has twelve months. Prajapati is the year. He attains Prajapati.
16.4.13	The four-fold, the three-fold, the All-conquering, the four-fold, fifteen-fold, the four- fold, seventeen-fold, these make twelve. Twelve months are a year, the year is Prajapati, he attains Prajapati.
16.5.1	"The verse, "The kinsmen have approached thee with songs," has the Upāvatii as the first verse. It is the form of Stoma.
16.5.2	They say that he who gives everything, who performs all Stotras and all Prsthas, is deprived of his life. When it is dedicated to Vayu, it is for the prosperity of the vital airs.
16.5.3	They are on the north of Sarasvati and Sarasvati.
16.5.4	Sarasvati and Sarasvati are a pair. He places a pair at the mouth of his sacrifice for procreation.
16.5.5	Savitri is the fourth.
16.5.6	He who gives everything does something difficult. When it is Savitri, it means, "May my work be blessed by Savitr." His work becomes blessed by Savitr.
16.5.7	Brahmaspati is the fifth.
16.5.8	Brahmas pati is indeed Brahman. He places Brahman at the mouth of his sacrifice.
16.5.9	The sixth verse is from the Agni-Pāvamānī.
16.5.10	Agni himself burns him, Pāvamānī purifies him, and the hymns of praise lead him to the purified sacrificial ground.
16.5.11	They say, "Those who perform the rites together go on the path."
16.5.12	The last verse is from the Pāvamānî, and it leads them on the path.
16.5.13	They say that he should praise with the Prstha Stotras. He who would join these in the Bahispavamana.
16.5.14	The first step is with the Upavati metre. The Rathantara is joined with the Upavatis. He joins it with that.
16.5.15	The second step is with the Sarasvati metre. The heaven world is Sarasvati. The heaven world, the Brihat. He joins it to him with that.
16.5.16	The third is of Sarasvati. Sarasvati is speech. Speech is the Viraja. He yokes him to the Viraja with it.
16.5.17	The fourth is Savitri. Savitar is Prajapati. Prajapati is the Viraj. He yokes it to the Viraj with it.
16.5.18	The fifth is the Brahman-Brahmanspati; Brahman is Brahman-Brahmans pati; the Sakvaris are the Sakvaris; he yokes him with that.
16.5.19	The sixth is the Agni-Pavamani; the Gayatri is the Revati; the Gayatri metre is the Revati. He yokes him with the Revati.
16.5.20	Four do not divide from six. What is not pronounced, that divides.
16.5.21	All the verses are of the same deity, and they praise the unborn with verses of different deities.
16.5.22	"The verses beginning with "Susamiddha na āvahe" are of the same nature."
16.5.23	Prajapati created the creatures. He, being milked, thought of himself as being milked. He saw these dear, agreeable oblations. With them he gratified himself. He who gives everything is indeed milked and milked. In that there are dear, agreeable oblatioins, he gratifies himself with them.
16.5.24	Now they say that the verses are arranged according to their place, that Rathantara is the first, Brihat is the last, and the others in between.
16.5.24	They say that this is done in the sacrifice for the sake of the Jāmi, because all the verses are performed together. When the Soma flows in between, when the Ukthas are recited in between, when they offer the Vasat call in between, then it is for the sake of Jāmi.
16.5.26	The Iḍās and the Nidhanas are in reverse order, they say.
16.5.27	They say that the Revatī verses move away from their abode, when they move away from the Tristoma. When they are Gāyatrī verses, they do not move away from their abodes, for whatever is Gāyatrī is Revatī.
16.6.1	They say that he who gives everything away is deprived of his weapons. He wears a hide. He prospers with cattle.
16.6.2	It is a red hide. This is the most common form of cattle, namely, red. He directly wins them.
16.6.3	He lives in the forest for three nights. He wins food by means of them.
16.6.4	The Udumbara tree is the source of strength; the Udumbara tree brings forth strength.
16.6.5	By digging with a spade, one conquers non-existence.
16.6.6	The spade is sharp on both sides; from both sides it brings forth food for him, from this world and from the other.
16.6.7-9	She dwells in the Niṣādas. She dwells in the people. She dwells in her own people. She dwells among her own people.
16.6.10	These are twelve nights. The year has twelve months. One follows the year for food. Having obtained that, one is satisfied.
16.6.11	One should not beg for a year. What is given immediately is like food. The year is immediate to the gods.
16.6.12	One should neither push back what is being pushed forward, nor should one push back what is not being pushed back.
16.6.13	He wears a turban for the sake of skill.
16.6.14	One should not drink from a clay vessel. The mouth of a brahmin is indeed an oblation. One should not offer an oblation into a clay vessel. Therefore, if one drinks from a non-clay vessel, one offers the oblation into one's own mouth.
16.7.1	The Agniṣṭoma has twenty-five (sāmans).
16.7.2	All the gods conquered everything. For the conquest of everything, for the victory of everything, he conquers everything by this, he conquers all.
16.7.3	Its Mahavrata is the Prstha.
16.7.4	The Arka is praised.
16.7.5	Twenty-four half-months make a year. The year is twenty-five. Food is the vow. By this he obtains food from the year.
16.7.6	He who knows this becomes the giver of food.
16.7.7	By this very (hymn) Gaura Angirasa crossed over all sin. He who recites this hymn crosses over all sin.
16.8.1	Now this is the Light.
16.8.2	The three-day sacrifice is indeed the supreme one, and the Agniṣṭoma is the inferior one. If one fails in the three-day sacrifice, there is no further (chance). But if one fails in the Agniṣṭomam, one should perform the expiation for that, because one should again perform the sacrifice with the twenty-one Dakṣiṇās. For whatever rite one fails in, that itself is the expiation.
16.8.3	He recites the morning prayer a thousand times. That is this world. The thousand gifts are the atmosphere. These syllables are this world. He who knows this stands firm in these worlds.
16.8.4	The Rg-sutra says, "The thousand is in the Rg-sūtra." The Aksara-sutra says "The thousand is elsewhere." What is given in the three-day sacrifice is in the Rgsutra, and what is in the Agniṣṭoma is in the Aksara-sūtra.
16.8.5	When there is a Brahma-sāman in the Sahasrāksaras, it is indeed a praise of the thousand.
16.8.6	The sages say that the distance between the upper and lower worlds is a thousand yojanas. The distance between this world and heaven is a thousand yojana. Therefore, they say that one who performs a thousand sacrifices attains these worlds.
16.8.7	They say that one who gives a thousand at once is deprived of cattle. The Brahma-sāman is in the Paṅkti verses. The sacrifice is fivefold, cattle are fivefold. One finds support in the sacrifice and cattle.
16.8.8	The Stoma becomes Trivṛt, the metre Viraj.
16.8.9	The breath is the Trivrit, food is the Viraj. Breath does not sustain without food, food does not sustain without breath. He is established in breath and food.
16.9.1	This is the light of all, the attainment of all, the conquest of all. By this he attains all, conquers all.
16.9.2	This is indeed the supreme sacrifice, the supreme thousand, he attains the supreme state, he who knows this.
16.9.3	Its two hundred verses are the limit of speech. The limit is two hundred. The limit is a thousand. He thus establishes it at the limit.
16.9.4	This is the rite of the accomplished. One obtains everything by it. One conquers everything. One conquers all by the accomplished.
16.9.5	One attains Viraj. Viraj is food. One obtains food.
16.9.6	The Agniṣṭoma sacrifice has twenty-one (Stotras). The twenty-one is indeed stability. He thus attains stability at the end of the sacrifice.
16.10.1	Now this is the Viśva-jyotiṣ Utkha.
16.10.2	The Utkhas are indeed animals. The Viśva-Jyotiṣ is the entire light. He thus attains to stability in the animals, in the entire light.
16.10.3	By days one attains these worlds in the three-day (rite), by pressings (one attains them). This is the highest day of the three-day rite. The pressing is the youngest, the youngest of this. By that one attains the three-day. This is the highest of these worlds. One attains these worlds by that.
16.10.4	This sacrifice is indeed uninterrupted. Two Stomas carry the pressing. Two Stomas are pressed.
16.10.5	The Trivṛt, Pañcadaśa, Saptadaśa, Pañviṃśa, Catuviṃśa and Ekaviṃśa are the Stomas of the morning pressing.
16.10.6	Whatever is deposited in a yoked and continuous (cart) carries it. Just as one would deposit in a yoked cart, so one deposits a thousand in this (cart).
16.10.7	Both Bṛhat and Rathantara are employed.
16.10.8	This is the Rathantara. The Brihat is indeed from this world. The Gâyatra is from the other world. It stands on both worlds.
16.10.9	The Anushtubh is the Atharvan.
16.10.10	The Atharvans are the remedy of the gods. It is for the remedy and for the non-destruction.
16.10.11	The Udbanshiya is the last of the Ukthas. It is the form of all the Prsthas. It is established in all forms.
16.10.12	It is the Uktha. The Ukthas are cattle. Cattle are the thousand. He thus places cattle in cattle.
16.11.1	One who knows the three-day Agniṣṭoma should give a thousand. The three-day Agnișṭoma is the basis of a thousand.
16.11.2	"The verses "We approach him, O singers, the born, the purifier, flow forth, O Agni, the foremost of speech." These are the introductory verses. This is the three-day (Agniṣṭoma).
16.11.3	He makes the Rathantara in Pavamana, the Vamadevya in the last Pavamana, and the Brihat in the back.
16.11.4	This (earth) is the Rathantara, the Vamadetya is the atmosphere, the Brihat is the sky; these worlds are the three nights. When he makes the Sama-s with the same tune, he thus unites these worlds. By that he attains the three nights.
16.11.5	He raises the Kakubha towards the east.
16.11.6	For in front of it, the truth is that one makes the animals' strength.
16.11.7	In that (verse) there is the mixing of the Idas. The Kakup is a man, the animals are the Idas. He establishes the animals in himself.
16.11.8	The eternal nectar, the ancient praise, is the Satobṛhatī verses.
16.11.9	The gods, having become great, pervaded these worlds; he, having become great by means of these (verses), pervades these worlds.
16.11.10	These are the Gāyatrī verses, because they have three feet. These are the Jagatī verses, because they consist of twelve syllables. These are the Brihatī verses, because there are thirty-six syllables. These are all the forms of the metres. He obtains all the forms of cattle.
16.11.11	This is the actual Mahāvrata. Its head is Gāyatrī, the wings are Bṛhat and Rathantara, the body is Vāmadevya, the tail is Yajñāyajñiya, the Arkya is the Dakṣiṇā. He who performs this sacrifice is actually praised by the Mahāvrata.
16.11.12	Its great back is in the Pankti-s. The Brahma-sāman is said to be afflicted by the metre when the great back is in Pankti-s and the Brahma-sāma.
16.11.13	The Śrāyantiya alone should be done. The metre is not afflicted.
16.11.14	This is the praise of a thousand.
16.11.15	They say, "One surpasses a thousand" and "One follows a thousand"
16.11.16	The Kakubha (verse) is the East. When this Kakubha verse is made in the world of two feet, it is the support of a thousand.
16.11.17	It becomes the Anushtubh (verse). Speech is Anushtubh. Speech is the Tri-night. By that he attains the Tri-night.
16.12.1	The Angiras and the Adityas performed the consecration. They competed for the heavenly world. The Angiras told the Adityas about the consecration for the next day. The Adityas saw this and immediately hired a Udgataar, and having praised with him, went to the heavenly world.
16.12.2	One who has an enemy should perform this sacrifice.
16.12.3	He who knows this becomes the conqueror of his enemies.
16.12.4	Therefore, having made the sun a white horse, he brought it as a gift. Having accepted it, he wandered away. He saw these horses and mixed himself with them.
16.12.5	These horses are for healing and peace.
16.12.6	One who desires heaven should offer.
16.12.7	He attains the Brihatī (Sāman). By the Brihatī the gods went to heaven. By this (Sāman) one attains the heavenly world.
16.12.8	One desiring cattle should offer.
16.12.9	The Brihatī is cattle. One indeed stands in cattle.
16.13.1	Having made the Ekavimśa (Sāman), one should offer to one who is free from disease.
16.13.2	The breath is the Trivrit, the breath is the sun, he who is afflicted with disease is deprived of breath; he makes him whole by means of the breath.
16.13.3	He attains Viraj, the food and drink depart from him who is afflicted with a disease; Viraj is food, he places food in him.
16.13.4	The Agniṣṭoma sacrifice consists of twenty-one (Stotras). One who is afflicted with disease is not firmly established. The Pratiṣṭha (sacrifice) consists of twenty-onestotras. One is firmly established.
16.13.5	One who desires food or firm establishment should perform this sacrifice. Food is Viraj. The Pratiștha (sacrifice) consistsof twenty-one (stotrās). One eats food and is firmly established.
16.13.6	The altar is of good soil; this is the most vigorous of her (the earth's) vigour; with vigour he thus supplies the sacrifice.
16.13.7	The northern altar is in a hollow; for here the sap comes together; he thus makes the sacrifice sapful.
16.13.8	The sacrificial post is in a hollow, for by it they draw out that sap.
16.13.9	The bull to be bought for Soma has three cows; for sovereignty.
16.13.10	All the directions, the horses and chariots, the Soma-invokers, run.
16.13.11	He obtains food from all directions.
16.13.12	In the east, in the direction of four yojanas, he says thus: "Those who run the measure of the path, the path-runners, run in the three-footed (direction). In the north, in the direction, in the two gavyutis, by the union of two, in the south, in the krosa, in the thick (direction). This is the form of the directions. By that form of the directions, they increase the sacrifice."
16.13.13	The chariots with milk-curds become, then what comes out as butter, that also is to be used as ghee, for the sake of promptness.
16.14.1	Now this is the Anukra sacrifice of the Angirasas.
16.14.2	By this sacrifice the Angirasas attained the Adityas. He who is inferior, like a younger brother, should offer this sacrifice. He attains the position of his elders. By this sacrifice the Angirass attained the Adityass.
16.14.3	And the Pavamāna (hymn) has twenty-four verses.
16.14.4	The Gāyatrī metre has twenty-four syllables. The gods, by means of the Gāyatrī, pervaded these worlds. By means of this (hymn) he also pervades these worlds.
16.14.5	The Gâyatrî is splendour and Brahmanic lustre. He obtains splendour and Brahmanic luster. The Gâyatrî (hymn) is the breath. The Gâyatrl is the generation. One is born from the breath and the Gâyatrî.
16.14.6	Both the Stotras are in pairs, the even and the odd. That is the pair. From that pair, offspring is born.
16.14.7	One attains Viraj, food. Viraj is food. One attains food.
16.14.8	The Agniṣṭoma becomes twenty-one. The twenty-one is stability. One attains stability at the end of the sacrifice.
16.15.1	Now this is the Viśvajit, the art.
16.15.2	He who knows this sees the art of the Stotras in his house.
16.15.3	It has eighteen Pavamāna verses.
16.15.4	This sacrifice is like a wheel, one obtains whatever desire one desires with it. One obtains whatever one desires with the wheel.
16.15.5	One who desires heaven should offer.
16.15.6	Heaven is the world, the Prsthas are heaven. One obtains heaven with this.
16.15.7	The lustre and the radiance are the backs. When the backs are of one kind, he places the lustre and the radiance in him.
16.15.8	Food and cattle are the backs. If the backs are of a single kind, he places food and cattle in him.
16.15.9	They say that the different kinds of hymns were composed for a single sacrifice. The lord of sacrifice is established in the imperishable.
16.15.10	The Hotr's hymn is of twenty-one verses. The twenty-one is indeed stability. He is established in the middle of the sacrifice. The Agniṣṭoma is of twenty- one verses. The twenty one is indeed stability. It is established at the end of the sacrifice.
16.15.11	These two are the twenty-one. The sacrificer is the two-footed. He establishes the sacrificer in the sacrifice and in the animals.
16.16.1	This is the one-triad, the growth of Prajapati.
16.16.2	By this indeed did Prajapati grow up to these worlds.
16.16.3	This is indeed the completed Stoma, for the completed has grown.
16.16.4	When they are sung with one (verse), then indeed Prajapati is one; he attains Prajapati. And when they are sung with three (verses), then indeed these three worlds are three; he is established in these worlds.
16.16.5	They become four; animals have four feet; he is established indeed in animals.
16.16.6	He attains the Gayatri, the radiance, the splendour of Brahman. The Gayatri is indeed radiance and splendour of Brahman. He attains radiance and splendour of the Brahman.
16.16.7	The Gayatri is the breath, the generation. One is born from the breath, from the Gayatri.
16.16.8	"The purifying one, shining with golden radiance." This is the Pavamana of the Arbhavas.
16.16.9	This is the form of all the metres. He establishes the Pavamāna in all the metres.
16.16.10	In that (verse) the Gayatra is on one side, it does not go from the Gayatra, nor from the Sama, nor from the Nidhana.
17.1.1	The gods went to the heavenly world. Their servants, the Vratyas, went away. They came back. From where the gods went to the heaven, they found that Stoma and that metre by which they could reach them. The Maruts, the gods, said to them, "Give us that Stoma and metre by which you will reach us." They gave them this Stoma of sixteen verses, the Anushtubh metre, indirectly. Then they reached them.
17.1.2	Those who go to the Vrātyas are inferior, for they do not practice celibacy, nor agriculture, nor trade. The sixteenth Stomas are worthy of completion.
17.1.3	This is the Marut-stoma, the minor metres are the Maruts.
17.1.4	Having taken the Kakubha (verse) in the east, and since this Kakubha verse is made up of two feet in the world, he thus makes it complete by its form.
17.1.2	"O Indra, the singer!" (is the verse) in an uneven metre. The assembly is uneven. He makes all these equal.
17.1.6	In them is the heaven.
17.1.7	Dyutana Maruta was their householder. They performed the sacrifice with this Stoma. All of them prospered. If this Sama is used, one prospers.
17.1.8	If they had used the Nirukta as the concluding verse, only the householder would have prospered. The others would have been left out. But when they use the Anirukta, he establishes all of them in prosperity and in the established state.
17.1.9	Those who eat the food of Brahma and others, who speak ill of those who have not spoken ill, who strike with a stick those who do not deserve it, who live without initiation, who speak the words of the initiated, they are sixteen in number. The Stoma of sixteen is capable of destroying sin. Since these four are sixteen, they are freed from sin.
17.1.10	"The gods are your givers of wealth" - the Agniṣṭoma Sāman should be performed. It establishes them in the deities.
17.1.11	Some say, "The seer is the best at singing" - the Satobṛhatī should be performed. The assembly is uneven. It makes them all Satobṛhatīs.
17.1.12	They say, "This is a weak verse, the moving and the unmoving. The Satobṛhatī verse should be used."
17.1.13	This is the established Bṛhatī verse, which has the feet again. When one repeats the foot again, therefore a son approaches his mother.
17.1.14	The turban, the whip, the bow-string, the bridle, the saddle, the saddle-cloth, the black-coloured garment, the black-spotted antelope skin, the golden coin, that belongs to the householder.
17.1.15	The two ends of the antelope skin, the two leather bags, the two leather straps, the two shoes, the two antelope skins, the two antelope-skin garments.
17.1.16	This is the wealth of the Vratyas, for they give this (wealth) to him. They go to him only when they are satisfied.
17.1.17	They approach the householder with thirty-three (gifts). The thirty-three gods prospered. They prosper.
17.2.1	Now, those who are censured as cruel and wicked, and who go to live among the Vrātyas, they should offer this sacrifice.
17.2.2	Those who are censured and wicked are indeed seized by evil in the form of the Vrātyan curse. Since there are sixteen Stotras, they are thereby freed from evil.
17.2.3	When the Agniṣṭoma has twenty-one (Stotras), it is for stability. The twenty-one is in the middle of the sacrifice, and he is established.
17.2.4	The Uktha is for cattle. The Ukthas are cattle. The cattle lead the human to the front. He leads them to the front with cattle.
17.3.1	Now this is the sixteenth (rite). Those who, being the youngest, go to the Vratya rite, they should offer with this (rite).
17.3.2	Those who, being the least, go to the Vrātya rite, they are indeed inferior. Since there are Pavamāna Stotras consisting of three verses, the Trivrt is the mouth of the Stotras. He thus leads them to the end of the sacrifice from the mouth.
17.3.3	Whatever is in the sixteenth Stotra, by that they are freed from sin.
17.3.4	The Agnishtoma becomes of twenty-one stomas. The twenty-one is indeed stability. He indeed attains stability at the end of the sacrifice.
17.4.1	Now this is the Stoma for those who are inferior and have no progeny. Those who, being the eldest, would live in the company of the outcastes, they should offer this.
17.4.2	The upward-moving Stomas grow from the foremost to the foremost, for non-decline.
17.4.3	By this (hymn) the Shamni-camas and the Medhra performed the sacrifice. Among them Kusthaka, the householder, was the one who knew the Sama-veda. The Khargali of Lushaka recited it. They desired to omit the two Stotras. They approached the younger ones. Therefore, among the Koushikas, no one is excessively deficient. The sacrifice is scattered.
17.5.1	Indra, the son of Tvashtri, was struck by a thunderbolt. He was cursed by a woman of loose character. He approached Agni. He saw this Agni-stotra. Having placed it on himself, he worshipped him with it. By that he removed the curse of loose speech.
17.5.2	He who knows this removes the curse of loose character.
17.5.3	If one is impure, he should perform the Agniṣṭoma. Agni removes his sin and bestows brilliance and brahminical splendour through the Trivṛt (stoma).
17.5.4	They say, "If it is Trivṛt, it removes sin from only one part (of the body), from the mouth alone."
17.5.5	One should perform the Jyotiṣṭoma.
17.5.6	Whatever is impure from his mouth, that he removes with the Trivṛt; whatever is impure from his chest and arms, that he removes by the Pañcadaśa; whatever is impure in his middle, that he removes through the Saptadaśa; whatever impure is in his feet and mouth, that he cleanses with the Ekavimśa.
17.5.7	They say, "He enters the fire of Agniṣṭoma" when one performs the Agniṣṭoma sacrifice. The Vāravantīya Agniṣṭoma Sāman should be performed. Whatever is impure in it, Agni purifies it, and then the other one rises pure and purified.
17.6.1	The Agniṣṭoma has three stomas. The Agniṣṭoma sāman is to be performed in the Vāyavīyas.
17.6.2	One who desires Brahmic glory should offer this sacrifice.
17.6.3	The Trivṛt is indeed brilliance, and the Brahmic glory is in the Vāyavya Agniṣṭoma Sāman. By performing this, one attains brilliance.
17.6.4	Just as one would heat gold, so does the Agniṣṭoma heat him.
17.7.1	Having performed the Vāravantīya Agniṣṭomam in the Revatī constellation, one who desires cattle should offer this sacrifice.
17.7.2	He who has no cattle is like one with grey hair. Just as cattle do not delight in one with grey hair, so they do not delight in him who has no cattle. When the fire burns the one with grey hair then it rains on him, then plants grow on him, then cattle delight in him.
17.7.3	The animals rejoice in him who knows this.
17.7.4	Whatever is not auspicious for him, that the Agniṣṭoma burns up; whatever the Agniṣṭomah burns up, that the Adbhi Revatī pacifies.
17.8.1	One who has strayed from the sacrificial rite should offer the Jyotiṣṭoma Agniṣṭoma.
17.8.2	In which sacrificial rite one may have strayed,
17.8.3	Agni eats the oblation of him who fails in the sacrifice; the deity does not convey the oblation. He makes Agni alone the eater.
17.8.4	Whatever is broken, they make it good with that. When they make it good, then it becomes good. In which stomas the sacrifice breaks down, in which yajnakratus, one should offer in those very ones. In which stoma the sacrifice breaks down in which yajnakrama, it stands firm in those very ones.
17.9.1	One desiring food should offer the Agniṣṭoma sacrifice with seventeen (Stotras).
17.9.2	Agni is seventeen, Agni is the giver of food. Agni indeed gives him food.
17.9.3	One who knows this becomes a giver of food.
17.9.4	All (Stotras) become seventeen. Prajapati is seventeen. He indeed attains Prajapati.
17.10.1	The Agniṣṭoma has three stomas. Its morning Soma-pressing is not mentioned.
17.10.2	Prajapati created the beings. They, created by him, fled from him. He saw this morning Soma-pressing which is not mentioned. By that he united with them in the middle. They returned to him and entered around him.
17.10.3	If one desires a village, one should offer the morning Soma-pressing which is not cut off. One goes to the middle of them, and they return to him and enter around him.
17.10.4	He who knows this becomes the first among them, and no one becomes before him.
17.11.1	The Agniṣṭoma has three stomas.
17.11.2	At the morning pressing, when the Nārāśamsa verses have been recited, he directs the gifts of eleven cows and a horse. At midday he gives away both the gifts. At the third pressing he gives away eleven gifts. At the Vasatīvarī verses he gives away the gifts.
17.11.3	These are the thirty-three sacrificial fees. The thirty-three deities are the deities. He obtains the horse as the thirty-fourth sacrificial fee. Prajapati is the thirty-fourth deity. He obtains Prajapati.
17.11.4-7	This is the Brihaspati-sacrifice. Brihaspati desired, 'May I become the priest of the gods.' He performed this sacrifice and became the priest of the Gods. He who knows this goes to the priesthood. This is the Sthapati-sacrifice. If one is to be consecrated as a Sthapati, he should perform this sacrifice. He who goes to the priesthood knows this. He who is to be consecrated goes to the priesthood.
17.11.8	Having anointed him in the Kṛṣṇājina, this is the direct (means) of obtaining Brahmic lustre. He is anointed with Brahmic lustre.
17.11.9	He is anointed with ghee. Ghee is lustre. He bestows lustre on himself.
17.12.1	The Agniṣṭoma has three stomas. It has all the Svasvara (verses). One who desires, "May I go to this world without disease", should offer this sacrifice.
17.12.2	The Trivrt stoma is indeed the breath, the Trivrt stomas are the breath, the breath is the Svaras, he places the breath outside of him, he is released from death.
17.12.3	The Trivrt is the most extensive of the stomas, when it is Trivrt, it is for prosperity, they meet together, the Svaras are endless, that world is endless, he makes him go to that endless heavenly world.
17.12.4	The Abhivatya and Pravatya (verses) are sung; they lead him from this world to the heavenly world.
17.12.5	At the Arbhava Pavamana, the Udumbara (cow) is given as Dakshina, covered with a garment, and lies down; it is then united.
17.12.6	This is the Shunaskarna Stoma. Shunaskarna Baskiha performed with this; hence it is called Shunaskarna Stotra.
17.13.1	The Trivṛt Agniṣṭoma is the world of the Viśvadev.
17.13.2	The Pratipada is dedicated to Agni, the animal sacrifice to Viśvedevas, and the Anubandha to Brhaspati.
17.13.3	They do not erect the sacrificial post, nor do they spread the northern altar.
17.13.4	They employ the animal sacrifice in the enclosing sticks.
17.13.5	The Dakṣiṇā is fifty.
17.13.6	Wearing fresh clothes, he rises from the Avabhṛtha. For four months he does not eat meat, nor approaches a woman.
17.13.7	After four months, the Varuna-prastha rites are performed for two days.
17.13.8	The first day is dedicated to Varuna, the animal sacrifice is dedicated to Maruts.
17.13.1	The first lunar day is dedicated to Kavya, the animal sacrifice to Varuna.
17.13.10	The Maitrāvaruṇa priest performs the Anubandhya rite, they erect the sacrificial post, they spread the northern altar, they attach the animals to the sacrificial post.
17.13.11	One hundred is the fee, one wears new clothes, one emerges from the Avabhṛtha rite, one eats meat for four months, one does not approach a woman.
17.13.12	After that, in the four months, there is the Trirātra rite of the Sākamedhas.
17.13.13	The Anīkavati is the first step, the Agniya animal, the Marutī is the first step; the Indra-Agni animal, the Vaishvānara is the first step. The Ekādaśinī animals, the Sauryānu-bandhyā, they erect the sacrificial post, they spread the northern altar, they attach the animals to the sacrificial post. The Dakṣiṇā is five hundred.
17.13.14	Wearing a new garment, he rises from the Avabhṛtha. For four months he does not eat meat, nor does he approach a woman.
17.13.15	After four months, when the world is covered with grass, the Jyotiṣṭoma Agniṣṭoma is performed.
17.13.16	The Upavasatha day is the first day of the month, the animal sacrifice is to Vayu, the Anubandhya is to Asvins. They erect the sacrificial post, spread the Uttaravedi, attach the animal to the sacrificial post, and give twelve hundred as Dakṣiṇā.
17.13.17	Agni is the year, Surya is the Parivatsara, the moon is the Idavatsara, Vayu is the Anuvatsara. One obtains Agni, the year, through the Vaishvadev; Surya, the Parivatsaras, through the Varunapraghasa; the moon, the Idavatsaras, through Sākamēdha; Vayu, the Anuvatsaras, through Shunāsīrya.
17.13.18	The gods conquered this world by means of the Haviṣ-sacrifices, the world of the atmosphere by means of the Soma-sacrifices involving animals. He who knows this obtains these worlds and is established in these worlds.
17.14.1	When one offers the Agnihotra, then one attains the status of a householder. When one offers the Dashasra Agnihotra for ten years, then one attains (the status of) one who performs the Darsha-Paurnamasa sacrifices. When one performs the Darsha and Paurnamasa sacrifices for ten years, one attains (the state of) one who offers the Agnishtoma. When one performs ten Agnishtomas, one attains (status of) one who makes a thousand offerings. When one performs with ten thousand, one attains (state of) one who has made ten thousand offerings. When he performs with ten million, he attains (the state) of one who has made a crore offerings. When he offers with ten crores, he attains (status of one who has) made a hundred crores. When he offers ten hundred crores, he attains the status of one who has offered a thousand crores. When he performs ten thousand crores, he attains status of one who offers a hundred thousand crores. When one performs a hundred thousand crores, one attains the status (of one who offers) a hundred thousand crores.
17.14.2	When the householder becomes the householder of the year, then he attains the measure of the Visvedeva. From this, the others are more and more distant. All of them are indeed more and more distant from each other.
17.14.3	He attains these worlds, he conquers these worlds, he who knows thus.
18.1.1	The Agniṣṭoma has seventeen (sāmans).
18.1.2	The gods and the Asuras were the two sons of Prajapati. The Asuras were more in number and stronger, the gods were fewer. The gods approached Prajapati. He saw this Upāhvya (oblation).
18.1.3	He thought, 'If I offer the known (oblation), the Asuras will destroy my sacrifice.' He offered the unknown (oblation).
18.1.4	He turned to the gods with the supreme praise, "May the gods give us wealth."
18.1.5	Then the gods became victorious over the Asuras.
18.1.6	He who knows this becomes victorious over his enemies by himself.
18.1.7	But they also say, "May the Agni-Agniyas give us wealth." This should be done.
18.1.8	Agni is all the deities. By him, he does not transgress any of the deities.
18.1.9	Indra gave it to the ascetics, the Salavrikas. An indecent woman cursed him. He approached Prajapati. He gave him this Upadhyava. All the gods called him. Therefore, he is called Upadhyava.
18.1.10	One should perform the Upadhyava sacrifice for one who is being slandered.
18.1.11	The gods wander away from one who is slandered with falsehood. The gods take away his food.
18.1.12	The men eat the food of that which is purified and digested.
18.1.13	One should offer a sacrifice for the sake of a village.
18.1.14	It is dedicated to Maruts. The Maruts are the villages of the gods. It unites the village with him. The village does not leave him.
18.1.15	One should make an offering for the sake of cattle. It is dedicated to Pūṣan.
18.1.16	Pūṣan is cattle. He obtains cattle.
18.1.17	It is performed for all the gods, for all the gods call him.
18.1.18	It has the Brihat-sāman.
18.1.19	For Prajapati gave him to Indra.
18.1.20	A horse with a black head is the fee.
18.1.21	For it is undefined.
18.1.22	It should be given to the Brahman.
18.1.23	For the Brahman is undefined among the priests. He thus makes him prosper in his own form.
18.1.24	As long as the young prince is born, there is no fear in him, and as long as he knows this, there is no more fear.
18.2.1	The Agniṣṭoma has seventeen (sacrifices).
18.2.2	It has twelve days of consecration and Upasads.
18.2.3	One who desires heaven should offer it.
18.2.4	The year has twelve months, and heaven is the world of heaven. By this one attains that world of heaven.
18.2.5	One should observe the vow of ghee.
18.2.6	Devavrata is indeed ghee. One reaches the deities by means of Devavrata.
18.2.7	One approaches with the northern and northern section. The northern and northern sections are superior to these worlds for the attainment of heaven.
18.2.8	The Brihat Sama is performed. The gods indeed went to heaven by means of the Brihat. One indeed attains the heavenly world by this.
18.2.9	Having recited the truth, they proceed. By means of truth, they send him to the heavenly world.
18.2.10	The Soma cup is the fee. One goes to the deity by means of the deity.
18.2.11	It is made of Udumbara wood. The Udumbara is energy. He indeed obtains energy.
18.2.12	It should be given to a Brahman of the same clan, for the sake of not drinking Soma.
18.2.13	All (the Soma cups) are of seventeen (cups).
18.2.14	The twelve months are the five seasons. That is the year. The year is the heavenly world. By this he attains the heavenly world.
18.3.1	The Agniṣṭoma has seventeen (sāmans).
18.3.2	At the Diksaniya Isti he gives twelve hundred pieces of gold, at the Prayaniya Isti twenty-four hundred, at the Atithya Isti two twenty-four hundred pieces, at the morning Upasad of the first day eight twenty-four hundred; at the afternoon Upasad of that day sixteen twenty-four hundred. At the morning Upasac of the second day thirty-two twenty-four hundred are given, at the afternoon Upasadi of that day sixty-four twenty-four hundred is given. At the morning of the third day eighty-two hundred twenty-four hundred and twenty-four hundred twenty-four is given, at the evening of the third day one hundred and eighty-two twenty- four hundred is given. Two hundred and eighty- two twenty-four hundreds are given at the morning of the fourth day, at the evening one hundred and eighty two twenty-four-hundred is given. Four hundred and eighty-four twenty- four hundred are given at the Udayaniya Isti. At the morning Savana when the Nara-samsa hymns are recited, sixteen hundred and eighty- four twenty-four hundred (pieces of gold) are given. At the midday Savana when the Narasamsa hymns are recited thirty-two hundred and eighty-five twenty-four hundred gold pieces are given. At Savana when the Narsa-samsa hymns have been recited sixty-four hundred and eighty- five twenty-four hundred golden pieces are given. Two hundred eighty-five twenty four hundred golden pieces are offered at the Vasa Isti.
18.3.3	He who knows this attains the world of the bull.
18.3.4	He who, knowing this, offers with this (Agnihotra) conquers the world of light and merit.
18.4.1	The Agniṣṭoma has seventeen (Stotras).
18.4.2	At the morning pressing he offers the Soma-juice pressed out for him, at midday with curds, and at the third pressing with milk.
18.4.3	One who desires cattle should offer.
18.4.4	All the Savanas are blessed, and the Anusavana blesses him with cattle. His progeny is as if closed up, for he nourishes with milk at the Sukriya Savana.
18.4.5	One should sacrifice to a Vaishya.
18.4.6	This is the prosperity of a Vaishya, namely cattle. He blesses him with animals.
18.4.7	His Rathantara is Kanva.
18.4.8	The Sadovishaya is the Brahman-sāman.
18.4.9	The Kanvarathantara is cattle, the Sādovishaya is cattle. He places cattle in front of him.
18.4.10	It consists of seventeen verses.
18.4.11	Twelve months, five seasons, that is the year. Cattle are born according to the year. Having obtained them, he binds them.
18.5.1	The Saptadaśa Ukthya.
18.5.2	Indra killed Vritra. He was afflicted with all kinds of diseases. The gods wanted to make atonement for him, but he did not accept anything. He accepted only the Soma-pressing.
18.5.3	One should perform the Soma-pressing for one who has been purified by Soma.
18.5.4	The Soma indeed flows through a hole when it flows beyond. When one performs the Tīvrasomā sacrifice, it is for the purpose of covering the hole.
18.5.5	One should perform the sacrifice for a king who is under siege.
18.5.6	The Soma indeed flows beyond the king who is under a siege. When one performs a Tīvrasoman sacrifice, it is to cover the hole.
18.5.7	He who desires a village should perform the sacrifice.
18.5.8	The village passes over him who, though capable of being a village, does not find a village. When one performs the Tīvra Soma sacrifice, it is for the purpose of covering and making it free from holes.
18.5.9	One who desires offspring should perform the sacrifice. The offspring passes over him who though capable of being offspring, does not find offspring. When one performs a Tīvra Soma rite, it is for covering and making it hole-free.
18.5.10	One desiring cattle should offer a sacrifice. Cattle indeed pass over him who, though capable of having cattle, does not obtain cattle. When one offers a sacrifice with a strong Soma, it is for the purpose of closing up and making whole.
18.5.11	One who is afflicted by disease should offer a sacrifice; the vital airs indeed pass over him. When one offers with a strong Soma it is for the sake of closing up and healing.
18.5.12	They milk a hundred cows, and make him strong.
18.5.13	Those are the gifts.
18.5.14	They carry the Soma-juice again and again. "He makes him strong." Both Adhvaryus and all the Camasādhvaryus chant for the Acchavaka. They make him strong.
18.5.15-16	The priests eat it. They smell the cups. They intensify him. They eat it at the Acchāvāka's Stotra. They intensify him.
18.5.17	The Rathantara is the Sama.
18.5.18	This (earth) is the Rathantara. He who does not stand firm stands on this (earth). He establishes him on this (earth) itself.
18.5.19	The Sraayantiya is the Brahma-Sama. He thus bestows prosperity on him.
18.5.21	The Anushtup is speech. The Yagyayajniya is the essence of speech. He thus places the essence of speech in him.
18.5.22	The Vishovishiyam Agniṣṭoma-sāman is sung; it establishes everything in him.
18.5.23	The Udvashiyam is sung at the end of the Ukthas; it is the form of all the Prsthas; he is established in all forms.
18.5.24	The Ukthya is sung; the Ukthas are cattle; he is established indeed in cattle.
18.6.1	The seventeenfold is the sixteenfold, the seventeenfold.
18.6.2	As great as Prajapati is above, so great is he across.
18.6.3	As great are these worlds above, so great are they across.
18.6.4	One who performs the Vajapeya sacrifice indeed attains Prajapati.
18.6.5	By the seventeenfold hymns, one attains the above; by the entire seventeenfold, one attains the across.
18.6.6	Its Savanas are of various kinds.
18.6.7	The morning Savana is not mentioned, the midday Savana is called Vāja, and the third Savana is called Citra.
18.6.8	What is not-defined is the morning pressing. Prajapati is not-defined. He attains Prajapati. What is the Vaja-pressing is the midday pressing. Food is Vaja. For the attainment of food. What is the Citra-pressing is the third pressing. For the completion of the heavenly world.
18.6.9	The Vājapeya is said to be of a different kind, but when it is of the Prajapati kind, then it is of the same kind as the Nirukta Sāman. The morning pressing is of the unformulated kind, and hence it is of the proper kind.
18.6.10	The Rāthantara Sāman is used, for the purpose of obtaining blessings.
18.6.11	This (earth) is the Rāthantara; he is consecrated on this (earth).
18.6.12	Therefore the performer of the Vājapeya does not fall back.
18.6.13	For it is here that he is consecrated.
18.6.14	The Abhivarta (hymn) is Brahma-sāman; this is the bull of Brahma, he makes him attain the state of a bull.
18.6.15	The Yagyayajniya (hymn) has the Anushtubh metre; the Anushtubb is speech; the Yagyayajniyam is the essence of speech; he places the essence of speech in it.
18.6.16	The Vāravantīya Agniṣṭoma Sāman is sung; for the purpose of acquiring Indra's power.
18.6.17	The Udvaṃśīya is sung at the end of the Uktha hymns; this is the form of all the Pṛṣṭhas, and he stands firm in all forms.
18.6.18	The Gaurivit is sung as the Ṣoḍaśī Sāman.
18.6.19	The Gaurivita is an excess, the Ṣoḷaśī is an excess; he places the excess in the excess.
18.6.20	They say that this is a mistake in the sacrifice, when one praises with the Gaurīvit hymn after the Udbanshiya hymn, saying, "From the Svarat, with the Svarat."
18.6.21	There is no mistake in the sacrifice. It is completed.
18.6.22	The Uktha is praised. The Vasatkara is in between. Thus there is no mistake.
18.6.23	This is as if cutting off a part of the sacrifice, when it is the Sodashi hymn. Thus there is.
18.6.24	They say that it is established in the sacrificial forest, and that it goes beyond the hymns and the sixteen-fold (Sāman). It does not reach the night.
18.6.25	In the Visnu-shipiviṣṭa-sāmans, the Brihat is the last.
18.6.26	This is indeed the most animal-like form of Prajapati, namely, the shipiviṣṭa. The breath is the Brihat. It is indeed established in the animals.
18.6.27	The great ones praise him, he deserves to attain the great world, he attains that very world.
18.7.1	Prajapati desired, 'May I attain the horse-sacrifice and the heavenly world.' He saw this horse-sacrifice. This is indeed the horse-sacrifice. By this one attains the horse and the heavenly world.
18.7.2	Those (verses) which are connected with Shukra (i.e. Venus) and Jyotis (i.e., stars) are recited at the morning pressing. By them one obtains brilliance and lustre.
18.7.3	Those (verses) which have connection with Vaja (i.e, strength) are recited at midday pressing for the attainment of the world of heaven.
18.7.4	Those (verse) which are connected to food, groups and cattle are recited at the third pressing. By them, one attains the earth.
18.7.5	All (the priests) are seventeen. Prajapati is seventeen. He attains Prajapati.
18.7.6	The priests wear golden garlands. That is the form of greatness.
18.7.7	"This light of mine will be in that world."
18.7.8	Gold is light. He places light in him.
18.7.9	They run the race, reciting the Yajamana. They thus lead him to heaven.
18.7.10	He climbs the ladder. He thus climbs heaven.
18.7.11	He mounts the ladder with dust. He thus places him within the human world.
18.7.12	The Brahman recites the Vāja-sāman on the wheel of the chariot. The world of heaven is indeed the Vāja; verily he makes him attain that world of heaven.
18.7.13	In the Viṣṇoḥ Śipiviṣṭavati (sāmans) the Bṛhat is the highest; verily having ascended that world of heaven he passes beyond the expanse of heaven.
18.8.1	He first offers the Agniṣṭoma, because the Agniṣṭomapurīfies the mouth of the sacrifice; he thus begins with the mouth of the sacrificie.
18.8.2	Now this is the consecration.
18.8.3	It has thirty-two Pavamāna verses, because the Anushtubh has thirty-two syllables, and the Anushtubb is speech, and as much as speech, so much does he consecrate.
18.8.4	The Stotras of the Agniṣṭoma are like a bow, because they are uneven and not in the proper order.
18.8.5	The Pāvamānī verses are even, therefore they are not like a bow, therefore they are in the proper order,
18.8.6	One succeeds by oneself with the Agniṣṭomaiṣṭi, one becomes meritorious by oneself. But when there are Upavasathya verses, then animals are Upavasatha verses, the people are Upavasathayas. When there are Upavastyas, it is for continuity.
18.8.7	"O Vayu, the pure, the unlimited" - this is the Vayu-verse. It is the first verse. Vayu is speech. He yokes it to the mouth of sacrifice. By that he is consecrated. He becomes the lord of all speech.
18.8.8	The wives of the sacrificer are the rearers, he yokes them with the rearers. In that they are of different deities, therefore he yokes them. The rearers are strength, he is consecrated with strength.
18.8.9	They say, "Those who make the wives of the sacrificers go (to the sacrifice) go away from the mouth of the sacrifice."
18.8.10	"The Pavamana is the foremost of speech," by this they do not go away from the sacrifice.
18.8.11	"He sprinkles with the verse, 'Thou shinest forth, O shining one.' This is the form of the metres; he yokes the metres at the mouth of the sacrifice. He is sprinkled with them.
18.8.12	'He, the ten-shooter, is this one.' The Adityas are the Adityas; these creatures are the Adityan; he sprinkles from the midst of them.
18.8.13	O Indra, flow on, O bull, with the Soma. The verses become strong. The Tristubh metre is strength. One is consecrated with strength.
18.8.14	"The hot-rays go forth for thee." They become strong. The Anushtubh metre is the Anushtubh. The Anushtup is the king. Therefore they become strong.
18.8.15	"The Pavamāna is your poet" - for the establishment of the vital airs.
18.8.16	"The night is purified" - the Anushtubh is the first and the last; the Anushtubb is speech; they go by speech, they rise by speech.
18.8.17	This is as if cut off, because it is one verse; because there are two verses of Anushtubh in between, there are many leaders in front and many followers behind.
18.8.18	The last verse is in the Anushtubh metre of the Sun, for the attainment of the world of heaven.
18.9.1	When Varuna was performing the Soma-sacrifice, his lustre departed from him. It fell into three parts: one part became Bhrigu, one part became the Sraiyantiya (verse), and one part entered the waters.
18.9.2-3	When the Hotṛ is from the Bhārgava clan, then by that alone he obtains the power and strength and attains it. When the Śrāyanta-sāman is sung, then by that he obtains the power, strength and attains it; when he releases the garland of lotus flowers, then by that indeed he obtains the power of strength and attains it.
18.9.4	Ten pots, ten pot-bearers, ten pots are made for each man, and they proceed after having been announced from the tenth man. For this sacrifice is indeed tenfold. They indeed seek that sacrifice which he who performs it seeks. Having taken this power and strength, he places it in this (sacrifice).
18.9.5	All (the months) are seventeen (in number). The year consists of twelve months and five seasons. He obtains the power and strength of Indra from the year itself.
18.9.6	Indra killed Vritra. This is the variegated form of him. This is the space of the stars. The lotus is born in the space. When one releases the garland of lotuses, it is the form of Vritra. One releases the Kshatra.
18.9.7	There are twelve Pushkaras (sacred places). The year has twelve months. The year is the universe. He makes him prosper with the past and the future.
18.9.8	The garland belongs to the Udgata. The Udgata is the sun. It does not go away from him. It also makes him prosper.
18.9.9	The horse is the Prastotṛ's; the horse is Prajāpati's; the Prastotṛ is Prajāpati. The horse is like the Prastotṛ, and the Prastotṛ praises like the horse.
18.9.10	The horse is the Udgātṛ's;
18.9.11	the horse is Prajāpatī's; the Udgātā is PrajāpatI. The horse is the Udagātṛ, and the Udgātă sings like the horse. The horse is Prajāpater's; the Pratihartā is Prajāpati; the horse is like the Pratihartṛ, and the Pratihartă stops like the horse. 
18.9.12	The cow gives milk to the receiver.
18.9.13	The heifer to the Maitrāvaruṇa, thinking, "May he not lead me away."
18.9.14	The bull to the Brahmanācchaṃsin, thinking, "The bull is strength; he places strength in him."
18.9.15	The garment to the Potri, for purification.
18.9.16	The robe to the Nestr, for it is like a hanging down.
18.9.17-19	The barley-meal of the Acchāvāka is for the Sthūri. For the Sthūra is this office. And for the sake of being free from Varuna. For then the gifts were not given to him. Now he is pleased and satisfied with them.
18.9.20	The bull which is to be led away with the heifer, the bull which is to have three heifers, the bull which has been praised, and the bull which is for mating.
18.9.21	The twelve months of the year are the embryo of Brahman. He stands firm in the year itself. And when (the sacrifice) is performed with pregnant cows, the pregnant cow is speech, and the mantra is the embryo. He places the mantra in speech. He becomes worthy of being addressed. And when (it is performed) with cows that have given birth, the twelve streams of milk are placed in him. Therefore they say, "The king is rich in milk and meritorious."
18.10.1	He who goes to the Savas, the Savas approach him. But he who goes to the Sāmans, the pressing becomes worse.
18.10.2	They become the same. With them he yokes the Prāstāra (verses).
18.10.3	These indeed are the Sāmans which are the Prāstāras.
18.10.4	When they become the same, then he does not go to the Sāman.
18.10.5	The hymns of the divine kings are those by which one prospers in the world of the gods, the hymns of the human kings are those by means of which one prospers here in both worlds, in the world of gods and in the world of men.
18.10.6	One is consecrated with the Tristubh hymn. The Tristubh is power; one is consecrated with power.
18.10.7	There are eleven royal chants. The Tristubh has eleven syllables. The Tristubb is strength and vigour. One is consecrated in strength and vigour.
18.10.8	If they were to perform the Trivṛt at the consecration, they would have taken away the Brahman from the Kshatra. When they take away the Trivṛta, they take away the Brahman from Kshatra. Therefore, the Bharatas are punished by the Brahman, because they do not perform the Trivrt at the consecration.
18.10.9	The twenty-first is the highest of the consecratory (cups). The seventeenth is the tenth (cup). The twenty-first (cup) is the first of the hair-cutting (cups). The twenty-one is the Kshatra, the seventeen is the Vis. He thus encloses his Vis on both sides with the Kshatra. The Vis does not go away from him.
18.10.10	When one is consecrated with the Rajasuya sacrifice, one ascends to heaven. If one does not descend to this world, one goes beyond the people or becomes intoxicated, then this Keśavapaniya Stoma is for the descent of this world, so that one may descend to this world like one descends to a branch from a branch. For stability.
18.11.1	Indra killed Vritra. He was afflicted by the disease of the eyes. He saw this Sraiyantiya (Sastra). By it he united himself with his own self. One who is consecrated with the Rajasuya sacrifice is afflicted by the disease in the eyes and by the disease of strength. Because he kills Vritra. When the Sraiyantiya is the Brahma-sastra, he again unites himself with his own Self.
18.11.2	The Yajñāyajñiya is in the Anushtubh metre. When one is consecrated with the Rajasuya, he is separated from speech, for he slays Vritra. Speech is the Anushtubb. The Yajñayajñiya is the essence of speech. He places the essence of speech in speech.
18.11.3	The Vāravantīya Agniṣṭoma Sāman is sung. He who is consecrated with the Rājasūya rite is deprived of Indra's power and strength, for he slays Vṛtra. In that the Vāravant īya Agniṣṭo ma Sāman is performed, it is for the attainment of Indra's strength and power.
18.11.4	The Āśrayan and Śrāyanta Sāmans are sung. The Vāravantiya is sung. This is the attainment of Indra’s strength and power.
18.11.5	The one who is consecrated with the Rajasūya sacrifice is not firmly established. When one performs this two-day sacrifice, then one is firmly established.
18.11.6	As many days and nights as there are in a year, so many are the Stotriya (verses). One is firmly established in the year itself.
18.11.7	The Agniṣṭoma is the first day, the Atiratra is the second day. One is not firmly established in the different days and nights.
18.11.8	The day before the new moon is considered to be the new moon, and the day after the full moon is considered to the full moon. The day before the vyasthaka is considered to be vyasthaka. The day before and after the new moon and the full moon are not the same. The day before vyasthaka and the day after vyasthaka are not the same, but the month before and after vyasthka are the same. They say that if there are two auspicious days in the same fortnight, then both should be performed for prosperity.
18.11.9	They say that the Apashvya is a two-day sacrifice, for there are two metres, the Gāyatrī and the Tristubh, and the Jagatī is included in them. But the Jagatī was not made at the third pressing.
18.11.10	When this (verse) is sung at the morning pressing of the Ahina sacrifice or at the Savana of the Ahina, then the Jagati is made (to be sung). The Brahma-sâman is sung at the third pressing of the next day. The Vâikhâna-sâman at the Acchâvâka-sâman. When the Shukriya-sâman and the Savana are performed, then the Jagâti is made (tobe sung). Then it is fit for cattle.
18.11.11	This (sacrifice) is the Vyushti (prosperity) of two days; it prospers for him.
19.1.1	Now this is the Rat.
19.1.2-3	He who, desiring sovereignty, does not obtain sovereignty, should offer this sacrifice. The king himself makes him a king. But they would say of him, "He is not a king," if the king were to make him a king. The king himself indeed makes him a king.
19.1.4	The number of the eight is twenty-one. The eight heroes raise up the kingdom, namely, the king's brother, the king' son, the priest, the queen, the charioteer, the village chief, the steward, and the collector. These are the heroes who raise up the kingdom. One is consecrated among them.
19.1.5	The Kṣatra is indeed twenty-one. The Kṣatra becomes manifest like this, and one who knows this attains stability.
19.2.1	Now, he who desires food should offer this sacrifice to Viraj.
19.2.2	Other sacrifices are indirect, but this one is direct.
19.2.3	One who knows this attains food directly and becomes a food-giver.
19.2.4	All (the verses) become tenfold. Viraj has ten syllables. Food is Viraj. For the attainment of food.
19.2.5	They become five by five. The sacrifice is fivefold. Animals are fivefold. One finds support in animals through the sacrifice.
19.2.6	One who desires support should offer with these (verses). Man is supported by ten (verses). He finds support in this (earth).
19.3.1	Now this is the Upaśada.
19.3.2	One desiring offspring should offer this Stoma of Gandharvas and Apsarases. Gandharvas and Apasarasas indeed attend on the offspring of man, whether it is born or not. Their Soma-drinking is here. He pleases them with his own share. They, being satisfied and pleased, bestow offspring on him.
19.3.3	Each Stotriya verse is generated separately. It generates offspring for him.
19.3.4	The Kakubha (the south-east) is the womb; the man is the Kakubha; the embryo is placed in the middle.
19.3.5	And because this Kakubha is made in the world with two feet, it is the embryo that generates it.
19.3.6	The Cyaavana (the south-west) is the generation;
19.3.7	He who knows this is born and becomes many.
19.3.8	Vasishtha saw these two Samans for his mother, Vasishtha, and he was reborn with offspring and cattle. In that these two Samans are (sung), it is for propagation.
19.3.9	Two (verses) of the Stuta-s exceed Viraj, two (verses) are less than a woman, for propagation. That is indeed done for propagation, for propagation.
19.4.1	Now this is the Puna-stoma.
19.4.2	One who, having received much, thinks like a crow, should offer this sacrifice.
19.4.3	The eleventh day is when one receives much in one's earlier years, utters crow-like words, and eats uncooked food. One should offer it for the morning pressing.
19.4.4	The twelfth day is when one recieves much in one' s later years, utters crov-like words, eats uncooked food, and offers it for the third pressing.
19.4.5	The Purusha of the Viraj is impure in the middle; he frees him from sin in the middle.
19.4.6	The two (verses) are for purification and impurity.
19.4.7	Indra gave the ascetics to the Salavrikas; an indecent speech abused him; he thought he was impure; he saw these two (verses) for purification and impurity; by them he became pure.
19.4.8	Whatever he takes in excess, whatever he says in anger, whatever he eats without being pure, whatever he thinks impure, he is purified by these two.
19.4.9	The Gosaṃs and the Aśvasaṃs are recited.
19.4.10	The Gōsaṃs and the Āśvasaṃsa, having taken in excess and spoken in anger, saw these two Sāmans and expelled the anger by them.
19.4.11	Whatever he takes in excess, whatever he says in anger, whatever he eats without being invited, that is removed by these two.
19.4.12	There are fifteen praises, strength and energy are fifteen, he releases him from sin and makes him prosper with strength and energy.
19.5.1	Now this is the four-fold Stoma.
19.5.2	One who desires cattle should offer.
19.5.3	And when the Bahispavamāna is performed with four (verses), then one obtains cattle, for cattle have four feet.
19.5.4	When it is performed with eight (verses), then (one obtains) cattle, for cattle are eight-hoofed.
19.5.5	The Madhyandina Pavamana is twelve-fold. The year has twelve months. Animals are born in accordance with the year. He thus obtains them.
19.5.6	The Prstha-s are sixteen-fold. Animals have sixteen parts. He thus obtains animals.
19.5.7	The Arbhava is twenty-fold. He thus obtains their five-fold nature.
19.5.8	The Agniṣṭoma has twenty-four (verses), the Gāyatrī has twenty-four syllables, the Gāyatrīs is brilliance and spiritual splendour; he thus obtains brilliance and spiritual splendour.
19.5.9	The Gāyatrī is the breath, the Gāyatri is procreation; he is born from the breath, from the Gāyatri.
19.5.10	One (verse) is the Sāman, many are the metres; therefore one nourishes many nourishments.
19.5.11	The Agniṣṭoma is the Self, the Chandas are the animals. He thus establishes the animals in the Self. There is no Uktha, no Agniṣṭoma, for domestic animals are not wild ones.
19.6.1	Now, he who has four Stotras with four, four with eight, four with twelve, and four with sixteen, does not exceed the cow.
19.6.2	The sixteen parts are the animals. He obtains the animals.
19.6.3	The Ukthya is sixteenfold. The Ukthas are animals. The sixteenfold is the thunderbolt. With the thunderbolt he indeed encloses the animals for him. The animals do not go away from him. There is no Uktha, no Atiratra. The domestic animals are not the wild ones.
19.7.1	The Asuras' strength was covered with darkness and was sealed with stone. The cattle were hidden in it. The gods were unable to break it. They said to Brihaspati, "Do not release these." He separated the strength with the Udbhid (stone) and broke it with the Balabhid (stone). He released them only by lifting them up and held them back by pressing them down.
19.7.2	One who desires cattle should offer sacrifice.
19.7.3	If one offers sacrifice with the Udghosa (Sutra), it makes his strength grow. If one offers sacrifice with Balabhi (Sutra), then it breaks his strength.
19.7.4	The Brahma-samanis are the means of growth and restraint. By means of growth, he makes the cattle grow for him, and by means of restraint, he protects them.
19.7.5	"The sacrifice made Indra grow." The Brahma-saman is the form of prosperity.
19.7.6	The Saptasapta (verses) are the sevenfold and seventeenfold (verses). When they praise with seven (verses), it is the seven domestic animals. He wins animals. The Sakvarī (verse) has seven feet. Animals are Sakvarī. He wins animals (by reciting it). And when with seventeen (verses), Prajapati is seventeenfold. He attains Prajapati.
19.7.7	He attains the Gayatri, the radiance, the splendour of Brahman. The Gayatri is indeed radiance and splendour of Brahman. He attains radiance and splendour of the Brahman. The Gayatra is the breath. The Gayatri produces from the breath. One is born from the Gayatri.
19.8.1	Now this is the Apaciti (rite). One who desires Apaciti should offer this sacrifice. He indeed obtains Apaciti.
19.8.2	And the Pavamāna has twenty-four (verses), the Gāyatrī has twenty-four syllables, the Gāyatrīs is splendour and brilliance; he wins for him the fulfilment of splendour and brilliance.
19.8.3	The two are the Brhat and the Rathantara; he wins for himself the fulfilment by means of the two, the Brhat and Rathantara.
19.8.4	The fame of Bhaga is yours, and Bhaga bestows fame on him with fame.
19.8.5	The Stotras are both even and uneven, and he obtains the Apaciti with both.
19.8.6	They say, "The Stotras are reversed, and they are too powerful, for they go beyond the sacrificer."
19.8.7	The Agniṣṭoma with twenty-one Stotras is performed; the twenty-one is indeed stability, and he thus attains stability at the end of the sacrifice.
19.9.1	Now this is the entire Stoma, the Apaciti. One who desires Apaciti should perform it. He obtains Apaciti with all Stotras.
19.9.2	It becomes Viraj. He who is a giver of food is indeed Apaciti. Food is Viraj. He places food in him.
19.9.3	Both are Bṛhat and Rathantara, both are Bhaga and fame. Both are Stoma and Chanda, both are Prstha and Udbhid. He wins the Apaciti for him with both Stoma and Chando.
19.9.4	His (Agni's) hymns are the (twelve) posterior (days), for the hymns are cattle, and the posterior (days) are food; he thus places food and cattle in front of him. By the fact that they are hymns, he obtains the sacrifice of twelve days.
19.9.5	They say that the Stotras, the Chandomas and the Prsthya (Stotras) were united in one sacrifice. The sacrificer is powerful, he is not established.
19.9.6	There is an Ekavimsa Agniṣṭoma. Ekavimsa is indeed establishment. They thus approach establishment.
19.10.1	This is a wing-like Stoma.
19.10.2	It is deposited as a wing.
19.10.3	The bird does not reach the birdless. But when this bird is placed in the birdless, therefore birds fly with their wings.
19.10.4	He who knows this goes to the luminous world of the virtuous.
19.10.5	The two are surrounded by the three-fold. The three-fold is brilliance and brahmic lustre. He obtains brilliance and brahmic luster.
19.10.6	Then the fifteen (verses). The fifteen (verses) are energy. He indeed obtains energy.
19.10.7	Then the seventeen (verses). The seventeen (verses) are cattle. He indeed obtains cattle.
19.10.8	Then the twenty-one (verses). The twenty-one (verse) is indeed stability. He indeed stands in the middle of the sacrifice.
19.10.9	Then the nineteen (verses). These indeed are the worlds, the nineteen (verses) are the worlds. He indeed stands firm in these worlds.
19.10.10	Now the Trayastrimsa (Stoma). The Trayastrimsa is the (highest) measure.
19.10.11	He who knows this becomes the highest measure of his own.
19.10.12	This indeed is the highest point of the universe, that these two Trayastrimsas are joined together in the middle. By that he ascends to the highest point of heaven.
19.10.13	In the middle Agni is the highest. Therefore these Stomas are made the highest in the middle.
19.10.14	He goes with the Trivṛt (Stoma) and comes with the Trivrt. The Trivṛt is indeed the Prāṇa; he goes with the Prāṇa and comes with the Prāṇas.
19.11.1	Now this is the Jyotiṣṭoma.
19.11.2	It has the Trivṛta as the Bahispavamāna, the Pañcadaśa as the Ajyas, the Catuśtrimsa as the Madhyandina Pavamāna, and the Saptadaśa as the Prsthas.
19.11.3	The Trivṛt indeed is the Prāṇa, the Pañcadasa is the Ātman,
19.11.4	The mouth is the Gayatri. Food is the seventeen. He places that food in the mouth itself.
19.11.5	He eats food and becomes the giver of food, he who knows this.
19.11.6	The gods went to heaven by means of the midday Pavamāna (hymn). In that the midday Pavamana is twenty-four verses, it is for the attainment of heaven. The Gāyatrī has twenty-four syllables. The Gāyatri is brilliance and splendour. He obtains brilliance and splendour. The Gāyati is the breath. The Gāyatı is procreation. One is born from the breath, from the Gāyatrī.
19.11.7	Both the Stoma-s are in pairs, the even and the odd. That is the pair. From that pair, offspring is born.
19.11.8	This is the verse of the bird. The one who knows this moves through the auspicious worlds like a bird with light.
19.11.9	In the middle, Agni is the best. Therefore, these Stoma-s in the middle are made the best.
19.11.10	One of the praised ones, exceeding Viraj, makes him the sole ruler of food.
19.11.11	This Agniṣṭoma is indeed light; he who, knowing this, performs this sacrifice, conquers the luminous and auspicious world.
19.12.1	Now this is the bull.
19.12.2	He who knows this becomes the bull among Stotras.
19.12.3	The king is to be sacrificed to. The bull is the lord of cattle, the king is the lord of men.
19.12.4	He who is, is the lord.
19.12.5	He who knows this becomes the lord of equals.
19.12.6	His Sadasvisisya (verse) occurs at the midday pressing. He thus encloses him with the two pressings. His people do not leave him.
19.12.7	It is all-round; he makes the world all-round for him. The world does not depart from him.
19.12.8	The Rathantara and the Brihat are both (used). This world is the Rathantara, the sky is the Brihat. The Gāyatrī indeed stands on both these worlds.
19.12.9	The Anushtubh is the great (metre); the Anushtubh metre is the end of metres, the Brihat (metre) is the end of Sāmans, the Rajanya (caste) is the end among men; he thus establishes himself at the end. Therefore he who falls from the Rajanyas does not again go to the front.
19.13.1	The Vājapeya is the same as the Rājasūya, the Rājasuya is the same as Varūṇasava, and this is the Gosava. This sacrifice is the same as Svarājyam.
19.13.2	One who knows this goes to Svarājyam
19.13.3	Prajapati is Svarājyam, Parameṣṭhin is Svarājy.
19.13.4	One who know this goes to Parameṣṭhin.
19.13.5-7	Both the Brihat and the Rathantara are (used). That is indeed sovereignty, sovereignty he attains who knows thus. The fee is ten thousand (paṇas). That is indeed soverignty, sovereignty he attains, who knows thus. He is consecrated with the Prati-duha (cup). That is indeed sove-reignty, sovereignty he at-tains, who knows thus.
19.13.8	The great praise is sprinkled upon him; he who knows this attains sovereignty.
19.13.9	He is sprinkled on the right side of the Anuddhate (fire), not hidden from it.
19.13.10	The entire (rite) is thirty-sixfold. By that (rite) there is a Go-sacrifice.
19.14.1	Now this is the Marut-stoma. By this the Maruts attained unlimited prosperity; he who knows this attains unlimited prosperity.
19.14.2	Because the Stotras are in groups, therefore it is Marut-stoma; for the Maruts are in groups.
19.14.3	One should perform three sacrifices with this.
19.14.4	Because there are three Trivrit Stotras, they attain different Brahmic glory.
19.14.5	The three fifteen-fold (sacrifices) are of various kinds.
19.14.6	The three seventeen-fold (sacrificial acts) are of various animals.
19.14.7	The three twenty-one-fold (sacrificies) are of various forms.
19.14.8	One who knows this attains stability.
19.15.1	Now, one who desires offspring or cattle should offer this Kulaya sacrifice to Indra-Agni. Kulaya means offspring, cattle, and house. One becomes Kulaya.
19.15.2	One should offer this sacrifice to two deities.
19.15.3	The six Stotras of three verses each are for the attainment of various Brahmic glory. The two of fifteen verses are for the attainment various strength. The two of seventeen verses are for the various cattle. The two of twenty-one verses are for the attain- ment of various stability. He who knows thus attains stability.
19.16.1	Now this is the Pañcadaśa Indra Stoma Uktha.
19.16.2	By this Indra became superior to other deities, and he who knows this becomes superior to other beings.
19.16.3	One should perform a sacrifice for a king.
19.16.4	Everything is fifteenfold. Strength and virility are fifteenfold. He makes him prosperous with strength and virility.
19.16.5	They occur in the Indra-related verses. He makes him prosper with virility.
19.16.6	It becomes a praiseworthy (stotra). The praises are cattle; the praises are the people. He bestows cattle on him, the people do not leave him.
19.16.7	There are fifteen stotras, fifteen (verses) each. Strength and vigour are fifteen. He places strength and vigour in him, increasing.
19.17.1	Now this is the Stoma of Indra and Agni. By this Indra and Agni became superior to other deities. He who knows this becomes superior to other beings.
19.17.2	It is three-fold and fifteen-fold.
19.17.3	Brahma is three-fold, Kshatra is fifteen-fold. For him who knows this, there is light like Brahma and like Kshatra.
19.17.4	If a king and a priest were to offer a sacrifice,
19.18.2	Indra desired, "May I destroy my wicked enemy." He saw this Vihan (destroying) and with it he destroyed his wicked enemy. He who knows this destroys his wicked enemy.
19.18.3	When it is three-fold, then by that he obtains the vital airs. When it is twelve-fold, then it is the year. When it is fifteen-fold, then (it is) valour. When it is seventeen-fold, then food. When it is nineteen-fold, then support. When it is twenty-one-fold, then procreation. When it is forty-fold, then brahmic glory. When it is thirty-nine-fold, then he strikes the thunderbolt at his foe.
19.18.4	One desiring cattle should offer the Brihatī (sacrifice). One attains cattle. The Brihatī is cattle. One obtains cattle.
19.18.5	These are six Brihatī (sacrifices). There are six seasons. The year is the seasons. Cattle are born following the year. Having obtained them, one obtains them.
19.19.1	The goddesses of Indra desired him. He approached Prajapati. From him he received this Vighna. By it he overcame all the enemies. What was overcome, that is the overcoming of Vighna.
19.19.2	All the enemies are overcome by him who, knowing this, offers with Vighna, and by him who, so knowing, offers with Vihna.
19.19.3	One desiring cattle should offer (this sacrifice). The Brihatī (metre) is cattle. One indeed stands firm in cattle.
20.1.1	The Bahispavamāna (Stotra) consists of three verses, the Ajyās (Stotras) consist of fifteen verses, the Madhyamdina Pavamāna (Stotra consists of fifteen verses), the Prsthas (Stotras) consists of seventeen verses, the Arbhava (Stotra) is of seventeen verses, and the Agnistoma with Ukthas is of twenty-one verses. The night is of fifteen verses, and the Sndhi (Stotra) of three verses.
20.1.2	One who desires prosperity should perform the Jyotiṣṭoma and Atiratra sacrifices. This is a progressive sequence of Stotras. By means of the progressive sequence, one attains prosperity in the sacrifice.
20.1.3	This is the Agniṣṭoma, this is the Ukthya, this is the Atiratra. By the Agniṣṭomah the gods conquered this world, by the Ukthya the intermediate world, by the Ratri the world of heaven. By the day and night they turned back.
20.1.4	Or others go away to the east, others to the west. This one indeed goes away to the west, who goes away with the Asvina (sutra). He makes the mornings go away to the west for him.
20.1.5	Two (sutra) exceed the Viraj of the Stuta (sutra). This indeed is the Viraj which gives milk. One should milk her for whatever desire one desires.
20.1.6	He goes with the three-fold (Veda), he comes with the three-folds. The three-fold is the breath; he goes with the breath, he comes with the breath.
20.2.1	The Bahispavamāna is of three stomas, the Ajyas are of fifteen, the Madhyandina Pavamāna is of seventeen, the Prsthas are of twenty-one, the Arbhava is of twenty-nine, the Agnistomas are of thirty-three, the Ukthas are of decreasing number, the first is of twenty-seven, the two are of twenty-five and twenty-one, and the night is of fifteen, the Sandhi is of three.
20.2.2	One who desires to prosper should offer a sacrifice with the Sarvas toma Atiratra. For the attainment of all, for the conquest of all, one attains all, conquers all.
20.2.3	When the Trivṛt is the Bahispavamāna, then one attains the Trivṛta Stoma, the Gāyatrī metre. When the fifteen are the Ajyas, then one attains fifteen Stoma, the Tristubh metre. When the seventeen are the Madhyandina Pavamānas, then one attains seventeen Stoma, the Jagatī metre. When the twenty-one are the Prishthas, then one attains twenty-one Stoma, the Anushtup metre. When the nineteen are the Ārbhavas, then one attains nineteen Stoma, the Pankti metre. When the thirty-three are the Agnishtomas, then one attains thirty-three Stoma, the Viraj metre. When the Ushinikakubhas are performed, then one attains them. When the Ashvins are reaped, then one attains all of them. One conquers all.
20.2.4	The Trayastrimsa (god) takes the sacrifice by the front. The Adhvaryu takes it back with the Ekadasin (oblation). There are eleven ropes, eleven animals, and eleven sacrificial posts. Thus he establishes the Trayastrimsa in the Trayastrimsas.
20.2.5	By that night which is set up, he obtains whatever desire he may desire. He obtains whatever desire he desires. He who knows this.
20.3.1	The Trivṛt is the Bahispavamāna, the Pañcadaśa the Ajyas, the Saptadaśa the Madhyandina Pavamāna, the Ekavimśa the Hotr's Prstha, the other Stotras are the Chandomas, the Trinava the Ārbhava, the Trayastrimsa the Agnistoma, the Ukthas are in descending order, the Trinava is the first, then the Ekavimsa, then the Saptadaśin, the Ekavimsas are the Sodashis, the Pañcadasin is the night, the Trivṛt the Sandhi, the Trivrt is the first, the excess Stotra is then the Pañcadaša, then the Saptadasin, then the Ekāvimsa.
20.3.2	Prajapati created the animals. They, having been created, fled from him. He did not obtain them by the Agniṣṭoma, he did not obtain them with the Uktha, he did not attain them with the Ṣoḍaśa, he did not reach them with the night, he did not get them with the Sanda, he did not gain them with the Aśvinī, he did not win them with the Trivṛt Stoma, with the Jarābādhīya Sāman. He did not win them by the Pañcadaśa Stoma, with Sattrāsāhi Sāman. They did not win them through the Saptadaśa Stoma with the Mārgīṇya Sāman, they did not win them. He said to Vishnu, "Win these for me." Vishnu won them with the Ekavimśa Stoma. He restrained them with the Vāravantīya Sāma. Vishnu wandered thus.
20.3.3	Because the cattle would have fallen down. One who is desirous of cattle should offer this sacrifice.
20.3.4	By means of this sacrifice, the gods, having won, obtained whatever desire they desired. One who desires obtains it by means of this sacrifice.
20.3.5	This is the Aptoryāma-ness of the Aptoryāmas.
20.4.1	The Bahispavamāna is of three stomas, the Hotr's Ajya is of fifteen, the Stotras are of nine and seventeen, the Agnistoma is of twenty-one with Uktha, the night is of fifteen, and the Sanda is of three.
20.4.2	One desiring offspring should perform the sacrifice with the Navasaptadasha Atiratra. The Navasaptadashatra is Prajapati. From the breaths, indeed, the offspring of Prajapati are born.
20.4.3	He places the Kakubha towards the east. The Kakubha is a man. This (Kakubha) is the embryo placed in the middle.
20.4.4	In it is the horse together with the (Kakubha).
20.4.5	Prajapati created the creatures. They did not reproduce. He saw this Sama. Becoming a horse, he sniffed at them. They reproduced. This Sama is indeed reproduction.
20.4.6	One who knows this reproduces and becomes many.
20.4.7	He makes the world of the two-footed the womb. He indeed generates it in the middle.
20.4.8	The Atiratra (sacrifice) is performed. The creatures are born in accordance with the day and night. One is born in accordance with day and night, with offspring and cattle.
20.5.1	The Trivṛt is the Bahispavamāna, the Pañcadaśa are the Ajyas, the Pañcadasha is the Madhyandinas Pavamāna, the Saptadaśa are the Prsthas, the Saptadaša is the Ārbhava, the Ekavimśa is the Agnistoma, the Saptadašas are the Ukthas, the Pañcadishi is the night, the Trivṛt the Sandhi.
20.5.2	One who desires prosperity should offer the Visuvat-Atiratra sacrifice. The Visuvat-Atirātra is the most prosperous of the stomas. By becoming one, he becomes prosperous. The Ekavimsa stoma is the most prosperous. The sun is twenty-one. Twelve months, five seasons, and these three worlds.
20.5.3	The sun is twenty-five. He attains the measure of the sun.
20.5.4	This is the rising of the sun. It is the light of lights. It rises without being risen by another.
20.5.5	He who knows this is not risen by another in his own.
20.6.1	The Bahispavamāna is fifteenfold, the Ajyas are threefold, the Madhyandinasavana is seventeenfold, the Tṛtīyasavana is twenty-onefold, the night is fifteenfold, and the junction is threefold. One who has an enemy should perform the Goṣṭoma Atiratra. The gods drove away the Asuras from these worlds by means of the nights, and conquered them. One who has a brother conquers his brother by driving him away from these worlds and conquering by means of the night.
20.7.1	The Trivṛt is the Bahispavamāna, the Pañcadaśa are the Ajyas, the Saptadaśa is the Madhyandina Savana, the Ekavimśa is the Tṛtīyasavana, the Pañcaviṃśa is the Rātri, the Trivṛt the Sandhi. One who desires heaven should offer the Atyayatra with the Ayusstoma. The Stomas go upwards for non-falling. When there is an Atyayatra, one attains heaven through day and night.
20.8.1	The Trivṛt is the Bahispavamāna, the Pañcadaśa is the Hotr's Ajya, the Saptadaśa is the Maitrāvaruṇa's, the Pañcadasa is the Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin's, the Saptadaša is the Acchāvāka's, the Ekavimśa is the Madhyandina Pavamāna, the Saptadaça is the Hotr’s Prstha, the Ekavinsa is the Maitrāvaruna's, the Trinava is the Brāhmanācchaṃsins, the Ekavimsā is the Acchāvaka's, the Trina va is the Ārbhava, the Trayastrimsa is the Agnistoma, the Ukthas are in descending order, the first is Trinava, the two Ekavimsa are with sixteen, the Pañcadasa is the night, the Trivṛt the Sanda, one should perform the Abhijit Atirātra against an enemy. The gods conquered the Asuras and conquered these worlds, and conquered the nights, and conquered the Apājayya. One conquers one's enemy and conquers these worlds, and conquers the nights, and conquers Apājayya.
20.9.1	The Trivṛt is the Bahispavamāna, the Pañcadaśa is the Hotr's Ajya, the Saptadaśa is the Maitrāvaruṇa's, the Ekavimśa is the Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin's, the Pañca-daśa is the Acchāvāka's, the Saptada-śa is the Madhyandina Pavamāna, the Ekavimsati is the Hotr’s Prstha, the Trinava is the Maitrā-varuṇa’s.
20.9.1	The Brahmana-samsa is of seventeen verses, the Acchhavasa of twenty-one, the Arbhava of twenty-nine, the Agnishtoma of thirty-three. The Ukthas are in descending order. The first is of twenty-nine verses, two of twenty-one verses each, one of sixteen verses, and the night of fifteen verses. The Sandhi is of three verses. One desiring cattle should perform the Visvajit with the Atiratra.
20.9.2	The Retas is the Naabhanedisthiyam, the animals are the Valakhilyas. When the Naabhanedi sthiyam is mentioned first, and the Valakhilyam afterwards, then the animals are born from the Retas. When the Varshakapam is mentioned, it is the forms that are mentioned. When the Evyayamaru is mentioned, it means the seasons.
20.10.1	One desiring brilliance should offer the Trivṛt Atiratra sacrifice. The Trivṛt is brilliance, brilliance is indeed the Trivṛta. He obtains brilliance, he stands in brilliance. One desiring strength should offer the Pañcadaśa Atiratra sacrifice, strength is the Pañcadaša, strength is indeed the Pañcadašā. He obtains strength, he stands in strength. One desiring food should offer the Saptadaša Atiratra sacrifice; food is the Saptadaša, food is indeed the Saptadaša. He obtains food, he stands in food. One desiring stability should offer the Ekavimša Atiratra; stability is the Ekavimsa. When there is an Atiratra, one stands in day and night.
20.11.1	The Jyotiṣṭoma and the Agniṣṭoma are the two preceding days, and the Sarvas-toman Atiratra is the subsequent day.
20.11.2	Its Bahispavamāna is twenty-four, the Ajyas are fifteen, the Madhyandine Pavamāna is seventeen, the Prsthas are twenty-one, the Arbhava is twenty-nine, the Agnistomas are thirty-three, the Ukthas are in reverse order, the first is twenty-nine then twenty-one then seventeen, the Sodasi is twenty-one, and the night is fifteen, the Sandhi is three.
20.11.3	The Angirases went to the heavenly world. Among them, Havishmas and Havikritsa Angirases were left behind. They came to the place where the Angirases had gone to the heavenly world, and they practised austerities. They saw these two Samas and composed the Dviatra (Samiti) with them. By that they went to the heavenly
20.11.4	One who is poor and feels himself to be inferior should offer this sacrifice. He attains the former state. The Angirasas attained it.
20.11.5	One who desires offspring should offer this sacrifice, for offspring is the second.
20.11.6	One who desires heaven should perform the sacrifice, for the world beyond the second is far away. The two-day sacrifice is called the Dvādaśāha. If the Agniṣṭoma is the first day, then the Ukthya is included. If the Ukthya were to be the first day, the Agniṣṭomas would be included.
20.11.7	If the Jyotiṣṭoma is performed as the first day, it is not included in the Agniṣṭomais. The Ukthya is not included.
20.11.8	They say, "This indeed is the measure of the sacrifice, namely, the Agniṣṭoma. When the Agniṣṭomapurvī (Agniṣṭoma) comes first, one does not exceed the measure of the sacrifiice. And they attain the night beyond the Utkhas of the next day. Thus the Utkhas are not interrupted.
20.11.9	The Bahispavamāna has twenty-four verses. The day has twenty-four syllables. The Gāyatrī is the begetter. The Gāyatri is the begetter of offspring. For the sake of offspring.
20.11.10	The Stoma is both even and uneven. That is the pair. From that pair, one is born.
20.11.11	The Atiratra with all Stotras comes next. It is for the attainment of all, for the conquest of all; verily by it he attains all, conquers all.
20.12.1	Now if the Jyotis Ukthya comes first, the Ayus Atiratra comes next.
20.12.2	Three exceed the Viraj of the former day, and the Viraj of two is deficient. The offspring are born deficient or in excess.
20.12.3	He who knows this is born with offspring and cattle.
20.12.4	One of the praised ones surpasses the Viraj. He makes him the sole overlord of food.
20.12.5	By this sacrifice the Kapis of Citraratha performed the sacrifice. They made him the sole overseer of food. Therefore, from among the Citrarathis, one becomes the lord of the kingdom, and the second is like a pendant.
20.13.1	Now, if the Agniṣṭoma with three and fifteen (Stotriyas) is the first day, and the Āyus and Atiratra are the second.
20.13.2-3	The two sets of Mitra and Varuna stomas generate the subsequent day. They begin the next day with the progeny thus generated. The two sets of stomas Mitra and Varuna are like a wheel. One obtains the desired object by means of this wheel. One obtains whatever one desires by means of the wheel.
20.13.4	By means of this (rite) Kapivana Bauvaayana became free from roughness.
20.13.5	He who, knowing this, performs this sacrifice, becomes free from roughness.
20.14.1	The morning pressing is of three stomas, the midday pressing of fifteen, the third pressing of seventeen. The morning pressing is fifteen, the midday pressing seventeen, the third pressing twenty-one. The morning pressing has twenty-one stomas, the noon pressing twenty-seven, the third pressing thirty-three. The Agniṣṭoma has thirty-four stomas, the Ukthas have twenty-one stoma with sixteen stomas. The first night has sixteen stomas, the night fifteen stomas, the junction three stomas.
20.14.2	Prajapati was alone here. His own was speech. Speech was the second. He thought, "I will release this speech. This will be able to pervade all this." He released speech. It pervaded all this. It flowed upward like a stream of water. It went to the third heaven. It became the earth. "This is like the earth," it became the earth. It cut off the third heaven. That became the sky. "This is within," it became the sky. It cut off a third heaven above. That became the heaven. "This shines," it became the heaven.
20.14.3	This indeed is the actual speech, when it speaks with the tip of the tongue, when it speaks in the middle, when it speaks at the end, all this is the essence of speech. It goes upwards, as it were, when it says 'Ho'.
20.14.4	When these forms are manifested every day, they release speech from the mouth. The sacrificial act is performed from the mouth.
20.14.5	Prajapati, having made the one-syllabled speech true, divided it into three parts. These became the worlds, rough and not fit for sustenance. He thought, "How can these worlds be covered with hair? How can they become fit for sustenance?" He saw this three-day sacrifice and performed it. By that he extended these worlds. Then these worlds were covered with hair, and then they became fit for sustenance. The nourishment of the three-day sacrifice is the nourishment of the three worlds, and the crossing of the three-days is the crossing of these worlds.
20.14.6	He goes to the world of animals, of bipeds and quadrupeds, he who knows this.
20.14.7	When Prajapati uttered speech, it sounded as 'kṣe' first, 're' second, 'ye' third. Whatever form Prajapati uttered in, in that form the oblations and days are concluded.
20.13.8	The Brahmanas say, "He who knows the three-night sacrifice knows the imperishable." The speech is one-syllabled, the imperishable is three-syllabled. The man is three-syllabic. They say, "He knows him who is equal to a man."
20.15.1	By this, the gods attained these worlds, and by this they went to heaven.
20.15.2	Speech is the three-night (rite). The days of the three-night rite are divided according to the form of speech. Speech is one-syllabled. The syllables are divided according to their form. There are three Gandharvas. This is their share: Earth is Agni's, space is Vayu's, heaven is Aditya's. Three Gandharvas attend on Ushas.
20.15.3	Agni is united with the dawn, Vayu is united with the Dawn, and that Aditya is united with the dawning.
20.15.4	These are the three pairs.
20.15.5	The two that are born together are a pair, and what is born from the pair is the third.
20.15.6	Indra took up the thunderbolt against Vritra. He said, "Do not strike me. There is this power in me, I shall give it to you." He gave it to him. Vishnu accepted it. He took up the second one. He took up a third one. He said the same thing. He gave it to Vishnu. This is what is said about speech.
20.15.7	Both of you conquered, neither of you was defeated. Neither of you was defeated, which of you did not conquer? When Indra and Vishnu competed, you divided the thousand into three parts and gave it to them.
20.15.8	This is what they gave to them.
20.15.9	This is his devotion. To the one who is learned in the Vedic, it should be given on the first day. As this is, so he is established. He is established.
20.15.10	To the one who is not learned in the Vedic but knows it, it should be offered on the second day. As this (earth) is, so he (is). The sky is known as the sky. They know the Veda.
20.15.11	The learned one who is a member of the family, to him should be given on the third day. As the heaven is, so is that heaven. They know heaven as the relation of that.
20.15.12-13	Every day a hundred (cows) are given. This indeed is the measure of the sacrifice, that it is a hundred. It is given uninterruptedly. Every day ten (cows) are to be given. The Viraj has ten syllables. The sacrifice is Viraj. It is given without interruption.
20.15.14	Now this is the two-deity, three-formed, of Brahma. Two are his, the third is the third.
20.15.15	O Goddess, you are desirable, you are dear, you are worthy of sacrifice. O Sarasvati, you are the beloved, you are the great, you are the famous. These are your names, O Goddess, among the gods. Let the well-doers tell us.
20.16.1	This indeed he accomplished on the first day, what is here in this world; the root of that he accomplished on the second day, what is there in the breath; the rain that falls, the stars, and the world beyond.
20.16.2	The Brahma-vādins say that this is the great vow, that this is the three-day (rite). That is its mouth, which is the Bahispavamāna of these days. The two days on either side are the two wings. The middle day is the body. The Agniṣṭoma Sāmans are the tail.
20.16.3	The rising sun is the mouth, the two days on either side are the two wings, the middle day is the body, the fire is the tail.
20.16.4	The rising sun is the month, the two days are the two wings; the middle day is its body; the setting sun is the tail.
20.16.5	This is the extent of the Trirātra. The Gāyatrī is the breath, the Trisṭubh is the eye, the Jagatī is the ear. He who knows this attains the entire life.
20.16.6	The Brahmanas say: "How many nights are there?" One should say: "As many as the horse has." One should say: "As many as the cow has." One should say: "As many as the man has." One should also say: "As much as the horse has." One should further say: "As long as the cow has, and as much as the man has." One should say: “As many as the sheep have.” One should say: ”As many as the goats have.” One should also say, “As many as one has.” One should say, “As much as one has.” They say: “As much as the sheep have, and as much the goats have.” They say: ”As much as one’s own self has.” One should also further say: “As long as one’s self has.” They say, “As long as the sheep have and as long as the goats have, and as long as one’ own self has.” They also say: “As far as the sheep go, and as far as the goats go, and as long one’s own-self goes.” They say: "As far as the horse goes, and as far the cow goes, and as long the man goes, and as much one’s own -self goes.” They also say, “One should say: ‘As far as the man goes, as far as the horse and the cow go, and as much his own self goes.’ They also say: ‘As long as the man goes and as long as his own self goes, and as many as the horse and cow go.’ They also say, ‘As long as one goes, and as little as one’s horse and cow go, and how much one’s self goes.’ They say: ‘As many as the men go, and as many the horses and cows go, and as little one’s own goes.’ They also further say: ‘As much as the men go and as much the horses and cows, and as little his own self goes.’” They say: “One should say, ‘As many as one goes, as many the men go, as many the horses, and as many cows go, and how little one’s self.’ They also say ‘As many as men go, as much the horses, and how much the cows go, and one’s own little self.’ They also further state: ‘As many men go, as little the horses, and one’ own self.’ They also state: ‘As much the men go, how little the horses, how little the cows, and one’ s own self.’ They say: “How many men go, how much the horses, how much the cows, and how little the self.” They also say ‘How many men go and how little the horses and
20.16.7	Whatever is the reverse of the three-day sacrifice, that is his reverse; whatever is his reverse, that is his three-day sacrifice. Whatever is the superior day, that is made inferior. He thus takes possession of the animals for the sacrificer for propagation, for in the other world animals are not propagated.
20.16.8	These two are the most vigorous of the metres, the Gāyatrī and the Tristubh. When they are placed on either side, the Jagatī is in the middle. By these two metres he encloses the cattle for propagation, for in this world cattle are propagated.
20.16.9	This very Trirātra is like the rising of the sun, so the first day; like midday, so the second; like setting, so the third. He goes to the union with the Unseen, to the union with him who knows this.
21.1.1	Indra, the Maruts, having won a thousand, told their own clan to Soma, the king. Having told the king, they won twenty. Yama heard that the Maruts had won a thousand. He came and said, "Call me in this thousand." They called him. Yama saw that one-limbed one, carrying the milk of a thousand, in the thousand. He said, "Let this one be my thousand. You two can choose." They said, "Just as you see this one, we see this one.
21.1.2	"Let us divide this thousand among ourselves." They said this and threw her into the water. They said, "We will not bring the Shahana (Soma) for him to whom she will go first." They brought the portions of Soma. She went first to Soma, then to Indra, then to Yama.
21.1.3	They said, "O Soma, the king, come forth with the third part of yourself and the third part of the thousand." She was a tawny-coloured cow with red eyes, giving milk for one year, with the third part and the third part. She who is the Soma-purchasing cow, she is the same.
21.1.4	And when he buys Soma, knowing this, he buys it with the third part of his own self and with the third part (of the price) of a thousand cows. He who buys Soma, knowing thus, buys it with the part of his own Self and with the part of the price of a thousand cows.
21.1.5	They said, "Give to Indra, with the third part of yourself and with the third part (of the milk) of a thousand cows." That Shabali went up with the third part and with the third (part) of the milk of a thousand cows. She is the same as the one who is endowed with power.
21.1.6	And by the third (verse) he gives to him, to that self, and to the third (verse), the gift of strength, of the thousand (verses) of milk. He who, knowing thus, gives the gift of strength gives it to him who knows thus.
21.1.7	They said, "Give us the third part of the cow and the third part of a thousand of milk." She became the one with the third part of herself and the third part (of the cow). She became the one who is with the third part (herself) and the third part. She became the one whose name is the third part. That is the same one.
21.1.8	And by the third (verse) he has made the third thousand of his own self to be covered by the covering. He who, knowing thus, makes the covering, and they who make the covering for him who knows thus, do not think that he is a doer.
21.1.9	The Brahmanas say, "There is no world beyond this, where the thousand-sacrificer has a place." As far as a cow from here is established in another cow, so far is this world from the other world. The thousand-sacrificer fills these worlds. As far as a thousand yojanas, as far as a thousand Aśvinis, as far as the thousand days, so far does the cow reach for the purpose of touching. These are given for the purpose of reaching.
21.1.10	The thousand which he created, the Tarpya was its source. When he directs it to the Tarpya, it is for the sake of its having a source.
21.2.1	Prajapati created the creatures. They, being created by him, went away from him, fearing, "He will kill us." He said, "Come near me. I will do such that you will be born more and more than you are now." They said to him, "Tell us the truth." He told them the truth by means of the Rtanidhane (verse). By means of the Etanidhane (verses) he gave life. By means of the Trinidhane (verses), he generated. By means of these Sama (verses), indeed, Death eats and generates the creatures.
21.2.2	He who knows this, becomes more and more.
21.2.3	These are the Sama-s of the eldest, the best, of Prajapati.
21.2.4	He who knows this, goes to the state of the eldest, of the best.
21.2.5	By these Sama-s, Prajapati milked all these worlds and all desires. What he milked by means of the Acya, that is the milking of the Acyas, the milking of the milking.
21.2.6	He who, knowing this, praises these worlds and desires with these Sāmans, he milks all these worlds.
21.2.7	These are the worlds, these are the Sāmans, this is the Rtanidhana (the world of the dead), the Iṇidhana (the sky) and the Trinidhana (heaven).
21.2.8	Just as a landowner moves from one field to another, so does he move from one world to another who knows this.
21.2.9	These are the Sāmans of Agni Vaisvānara. If they chant with these not being peaceful, then the people become the victim of the god Ghātaukā. Having placed Agni, they chant. They chant with the peaceful ones.
21.3.1	Speech is the cow. Its calf is three nights. He gives her three nights.
21.3.2	He who knows this, therefore she is given.
21.3.3	He who is able to eat food but does not eat food,
21.3.4	Having put on a garment, drinking hot water, he should lie down for twelve nights.
21.3.5	If it is the twelfth day, having performed the Shabali Homa on the previous day, one should go to a forest where one does not hear the sound of a domestic animal and offer a Darbha grass bundle, calling out "Shabali! Shabali!" three times. Whatever is excluded from dogs and donkeys is considered successful.
21.3.6	If he is not able to pay, he should be summoned again after a year.
21.3.7	You are the variegated ocean, the universal expanse. The Brahman is the firstborn of the gods, the food of truth. You are the bright one, you are the splendor, you are the immortal. We know you, O variegated one, shining among the shining ones. That earth is your foot, the sky is your foot, heaven is your foot, ocean is your foot. You are this variegated one. We know you. Do you bestow us with nourishment, the stream of wealth, O variegated one. The most illustrious one among creatures, following the vow, svāhā.
21.4.1	The Agniṣṭoma with four Stotras, the Ukthya with twenty-one Stotras, the Atiratra with all Stotras.
21.4.2	Prajapati's eye fell down as a horse. That became a horse. That is the horsehood of the horse. The gods established it by the horse sacrifice. He who performs the horse sacrifice makes Prajapati whole.
21.4.3	This indeed is the one who is born with a body for that world. This is the horse sacrifice.
21.4.4	Saragha (a kind of grass) grew on the thigh of the horse. The gods placed it back with the four-stoma (Stoma). When there is the four-stoma, it is for the completeness of the horse.
21.4.5	When he makes three Anushtubh verses and four Gāyatrī verses, then one stands on three feet and stands firm. One who is fleeing from all (enemies) gives them back.
21.4.6	The horse is the end of animals, the Anushtubh is the end of metres, Vishnu is the end of deities, the Catuṣṭoma is the end of Stomas, the Trirātra is the end of sacrifices. The Anushtubh verses are the end of the Catuṣtoma, the Trirātrā is the end of the sacrifice. He establishes it at the end.
21.4.7	It is the twenty-first day on which the horse is offered. The sun here is twenty-one-fold: twelve months, five seasons, these three worlds, and the sun. He makes it reach the measure of the sun.
21.4.8	Its back is the great names.
21.4.9	The other verses are of other metres, and the animals are of other kinds. They attain him (Agni) in the form of the Mahānāmnī verses. The Pṛṣṭha is of the horse, for the sake of all-pervasiveness.
21.4.10	The Brahma-sāman is of the Pārthuraśmi metre.
21.4.11	This is indeed the lord, who is held by the one who is not held. The horse is held by the ray, as it is held by the supreme and supreme. When the Brahma-sāman is of the Pārthuraśmi, it is for the sake of the horse.
21.4.12	There is an Atiratra with all stomas. For the attainment of all, for the conquest of all, one attains everything, conquers everything.
21.4.13	The sacrificial post is one cubit high for other sacrifices, but for the horse sacrifice it is twenty-one cubits high. The sacrificial post is made of khadira, bilva or palāśa wood for other sacrifices, and of ne'cudara wood for the horse sacrifice. The sacrificial post for other animals is twenty-one spans high, but for the sacrifice of the horse it is twenty-seven spans high. The sacrificial posts for other animals are smeared with butter on the right side, but for the Asvamedha sacrifice they are smeared on the left side. The sacrificial posts of other animals are smeared on the branches of the plaksha tree, but for the Aśvamedha sacrifice on the branches of vetasa. They yoke the domestic animals to the sacrificial post and the wild animals to the stakes. They obtain the domestic animals and release the wild ones.
21.5.1	There are three Atiratra sacrifices with three Vatsa animals, all having sixteen Stoma.
21.5.2	One who aspires for a kingdom should perform this sacrifice.
21.5.3	This is indeed the king of Stoma sacrifices; he indeed establishes the kingdom in him.
21.5.4	When the syllables are divided into the first day, it is for non-excess of speech, for speech has one syllable.
21.5.5	Now, when the offering of clarified butter is made with two syllables, it is for the continuity of the two days. The offerings of clarified butter are made daily, and they make him prosper daily with animals.
21.5.6	All of them have sixteen syllables. Sixteen is Indra's strength. He makes them prosper with Indra's strength.
21.6.1	The Pavamānas are twenty-four, the Ajyās are three-fold, the Prsthas are fifteen, the Agnistoma is seventeen, the Pavamānas forty-four, the Ajjās fifteen, the Prsthās seventeen, the Agnistomah twenty-one, the Ukthas eight, the Pavamānās forty-eight, the Ajyäs twenty-one, and the Prsthāsa thirty-three, the Agnistomaha thirty-three, and the Ukthas twenty-one, with sixteen, the night is fifteen, the junction is three-fold, and the Chandomā is Pavamāna.
21.6.2	One who desires cattle should offer.
21.6.3	The Chandomas are cattle. Since the Pavamānas are Chandomas, one obtains cattle.
21.6.4	The Stotras are both even and odd. That is a pair. From that pair, offspring are born.
21.7.1	The morning pressing is of three stomas, the midday pressing of fifteen, the third pressing of seventeen, the morning pressing of twenty-four, the midday pressing is of forty-four, the third pressing is of forty eight, the morning pressing is of twenty-one, the midday pressing has twenty-nine stomas, the third pressing has thirty-three stomas, the morning pressing has twenty-one, fifteen, the night has sixteen, the morning pressing consists of three stomas. The junction is of twenty-four stomas.
21.7.2	These are the three worlds.
21.7.3	This world is like a shadow, and that world is like a hole, and the space between is like a hole.
21.7.4	The first day of the three-day ritual is like a shadow and the last day is like a hole and the middle is like a hole in between.
21.7.5	The Chandomas are animals. When they are in the middle, it is for the purpose of covering and not having holes.
21.8.1	The morning pressing is of three stomas, the midday pressing of fifteen, the third pressing of seventeen, the morning pressing of twenty-one, the midday pressing is of twenty-three, the third pressing is of thirty-three, the morning pressing is of twentyfour with a Stoma, the midday pressing with thirty-four, the third pressing with forty-eight with a Stoma. The twenty-one, sixteen, fifteen, night, three-fold, junction, Paraka.
21.8.2	The gods, going to the heavenly world by means of the Paraka (rite), one who desires heaven should offer. By means of this (rite) one indeed goes to the heavenly world.
21.8.3	What is beyond this is his Paraka. That is the Paraka-ness of Paraka.
21.8.4	For one who goes there, there is nothing beyond.
21.8.5	One who knows this does not have anything beyond.
21.8.6	But for the offspring, for he who performs this rite steps over to the heavenly world. In that it is of twenty-one (verses), and is of sixteen (verses), and the night is of fifteen (verses), and there is a three-fold junction, therefore he stands firm in this world.
21.9.1	The Pavamānas are twenty-four, the Ajyās are three-fold, the Prsthas are fifteen, the Agnistoma is seventeen, the Pavamānas twenty-four, Ajyās fifteen, Prsthas seventeen, the Agnistomah is twenty-one, the Uktha is twenty-four, Pavamānas seventeen, Ajyās twenty-one, Prsthas twenty-one, Agnistoma twenty-nine, Uktha twenty-one, Ajyās thirty-three, Prsthas thirty-three, Agnistoma thirty-three, Ukthas thirty-three. The night is fifteen, the Sāmnidhī is three-fold.
21.9.2	Here Atri desired, "May four heroes be born to me." He saw this. Four heroes were born to him. Four heroes are born to him who knows this.
21.9.3	Having abandoned one Stoma, he begins another. The Stoma is the begetter of heroes. He thus begets a hero for him.
21.9.4	The Pavamānas are twenty-four in number, the Gāyatrī metre has twenty-four syllables, the Gāyatra is productive, for propagation.
21.9.5	The Stotras are both even and uneven, that is the pair, from that pair is born.
21.9.6	The Agniṣṭoma is the first day, the Uktha the second, the Ṣoḍaśī the third, the Atiratra the fourth, for the sake of diversity of power.
21.9.7	The days have different powers.
21.9.8	The first day is Gāyatrī, the second is Trisṭubh, the third is Jagatī, and the fourth is Anuṣṭubh.
21.9.9-11	They say, "If they were to take the Sodasi on the third day, they would attain the Anushtubh on the third day. The fourth day would be without a metre. The Sodasi is Anushtubh." On the fourth day, the Sodasi should be taken in its own place. The Sodasi should be grasped in its own place.
21.9.12	The Brahma-sāman of the first day, the Śyait of the second, the Śrāyanta of the third, and the Traiśoka of the fourth.
21.9.13	They say, "This is indeed a falling off, when one approaches a lesser metre after a greater one."
21.9.14	Therefore, when the Atijagati is performed on the fourth day, it is for non-falling off.
21.9.15	This is the first day of the month. The second day is the Raurava, the third day is the Samanta, and the fourth day is the day of diversity. He makes the days diverse for the sake of diversity.
21.9.16	The third day is the Rathantara, the fourth the Brihat. The fifth is the Vamadevya, the sixth the Vamadevyal, the seventh the Brihat. Thus the days are of different strength, for the purpose of the different strengths of the metres. He makes the days of different strength.
21.10.1	The Agniṣṭoma sacrifice with three and fifteen (verses) is the first day.
21.10.2	Then the twenty-four Savanīya verses of the northern day, three Ajyas with fifteen verses, the seventeen verses of the Acchāvāka, the twenty-one verses of the Madhyāndina Pavamāna, the two Stomas with seventeen verses, the twenty-first verses of the third pressing with Stotras.
21.10.3	The Bahispavamāna of the third pressing is of twenty-one verses, three Ajya verses, and the Acchāvāka verse of fifteen verses. The Madhyandina Pavamāna is of twenty-four verses, the Prsthas are of twenty-one each, the third pressing is in three groups, two Uktha verses, and the Acchavasya verse is of twenty- one.
21.10.4	The Pavamānas of the fourth day are of four kinds, the Hotr's Ajya is of fifteen, the three Prsthas are of seventeen, twenty-one, and thirty-three, the Agnistoma is of thirty-three, and the Ukthas are of twenty-one with sixteen, the night is of fifteen, and the Sanda is of three.
21.10.5	Jamadagni, desiring prosperity, brought this (verse). He prospered these prosperities.
21.10.6	What they say, 'The two gray-haired ones know the nine (verses) in the Urvaśī (metre)',
21.10.7	he prospers all these prosperities by this (verse).
21.10.8	It is accomplished with the Jagatī metre.
21.10.9	The Jagatī metre is the supreme prosperity of the metres. He prospers the supreme prosperity.
21.10.10	The Upavasatha rites are performed with Puronuvākyās. The Puronuvākyat are animals. They are established in animals.
21.10.11	O Agni, the Hotr, the Adhvara, the Apitara, the Vaishvānara, I have offered the oblation to Indra and the gods. Svāhā.
21.10.12	The two divine Asvins, Madhu and Kshaya, have mixed this sacrifice for the sacrificer. Offer the oblation to Indra and the gods. Svāhā.
21.10.13	O divine Viṣṇu, today, in this sacrifice, advance for the sacrificer's sake. Offer the oblations to Indra and the Gods. Svāhā.
21.10.14	O Soma, the god, the bearer of semen, today at this sacrifice, I offer oblations to Indra, the god, and to the gods. Svāhā!
21.10.15	O Savitar, the god, today at this rite, I offer oblation to Indra, the lord, and to the god Savitar. Svāhā.
21.10.16	O Dhātar, the god, who bestows good gifts, today at this ritual, I offer oblatioṇs to Indra, the deity, and to the deities. Svāhā.
21.10.17	The Gravas, the gods, today speak the sweet-sounding speech to the sacrificer at this sacrifice. To Indra and the gods, the oblation is offered. Svāhā.
21.10.18	O divine Anumati, today accept this sacrifice for the sacrificer. To Indra and to the gods, the offering is made. Svāhā.
21.10.19	O divine Aditi, today at this sacrifice, for the sacrificer, for Indra, for the gods, may the oblation be offered. Svāhā.
21.10.20	O divine waters, today at this rite, for the sacrificers, for Indra, and for the gods, let the oblation be poured out. Svāhā
21.10.21	The seat, the seat, the one with offspring, the one with wealth, the one who enjoys, for Indra, the god, for the gods may the oblation offered. Svāha.
21.10.22	O god Tvashtra, the nourisher of the gods, today at this sacrifice, I offer oblations to Indra, the god, and to the gods. Svāhā!
21.10.23	The Agniya is one-kumbha, the Asvin is two-kumbha; the Visnu is three-kumbha. The Soma is four-kumbha and the Savitar is five-kumbha: the Dhatri is six-kumbha the Marut is seven-kumbha The Brhaspati is eight-kumbha ; the Mitra is nine-kumbha : the Varuna is ten-kumbha . The Indra is eleven-kumbha , and the Visvedeva is twelve-kumbha.
21.11.1	The morning pressing is of three stomas, the midday pressing of fifteen, the third pressing of seventeen. The morning pressing is fifteen, the midday pressing seventeen, the third pressing twenty-one. The morning pressing has a Suktha of seventeen, the midday pressing twenty-one, the third pressing thirty-three. The morning pressing of seventeen, the noon pressing of twenty-one, and the third pressing of thirty-three. There are Sukthas in reverse order, the first is of thirty-three, two of twenty-one with sixteen, the night is of fifteen, the junction is of three.
21.11.2	Vasishtha, having been deprived of his son, felt as if he were inferior. He saw this (rite). It went to the beginning. One who feels as if he were deprived should offer this sacrifice.
21.11.3	When one moves from one Stoma to another, one rises from the beginning to the beginning. They belong to Vasishtha's mother for the sake of progeny.
21.11.4	The praises of the last day are descending, for stability.
21.12.1	The Trivṛt Agniṣṭoma, the Pañcadaśa Uktha, the Saptadaśa Uktha and the Ekavimśa Atiratra are the Sāṁjaya of Viśvāmitra.
21.12.2	Those who have the Jaṃhuvṛci-mantras conquer the kingdom. Viśvāmitrā saw this king of the Jaṃhu river. He became the king and the others became non-kings.
21.12.3	One should perform this sacrifice if one has an enemy.
21.12.4	He who knows this becomes the conqueror of his own self and of his enemies.
21.12.5	This is indeed the light that has been moved.
21.12.6	He who knows this becomes a light to the people.
21.12.7	This is the four-stoma (hymn). Animals have four feet. He indeed stands firm in animals.
21.12.8	The Stotras do not exceed twenty-one. The twenty-one is indeed firm. He indeed stands firmly at the end of the sacrifice.
21.13.1	Two Trivṛt (Stotras) at the Savanīya (Sāmans), one Pañcadaśa, two Pañcadaśas at the Savanīs, one Saptadaśa, two Saptadaśas at the Sāvanīs, one Ekavimśa, two Ekavimśas at the savanīs, one Trinava, two Trinavas at the Savanys, one Trayastrimsa, the Ukthas are in reverse order, the Trinava is the first, two Ekavimsas with sixteen, the night is Pañcadaśin, the junction is Trivṛt.
21.13.2	The gods and the Asuras were contending. They did not win. They said, "We shall win by means of the union of speech. He who will not find the union of speech of us, he will be defeated." The gods said, "One." The Asuras said, "One". The union of speech was found by the Asuras. The gods said, "Two" The Asuras said "Two". The union of speech of the Asuras was found. The gods said "Three" The Asuras "Three". The union of the speech of the Asura was found. The Gods said "Four" The Asuras "Four". The union of their speech was found. The Asuras said "Five". The gods did not find. Then the gods became victorious.
21.13.3-6	He who knows this becomes the conqueror of his own self and of his enemies. For a year they obtained the food and strength of their enemies. He who knows this conquers the food and strength for a year of his enemies. The five-day sacrifice is for the five-fold man, the five-fold cattle. By it he obtains man and cattle.
21.13.7	This is the continuous sacrifice. Two Stotras are offered on each day. One attains the desired object by this.
21.13.8	One attains whatever one desires.
21.13.9	The sacrifice is of five days for continuity.
21.13.10	The Stotras of the last day are in reverse order for stability.
21.14.1	The Agniṣṭoma with three stomas, the Ukthya with fifteen stomas, the Atirātra with seventeen stomas, the Pañcaśāradīya Marut-stoma, the Atirätra with seventeen stoma.
21.14.2	One who desires, "May I be many," should offer this sacrifice.
21.14.3	The Maruts are the most numerous among the gods. One becomes many.
21.14.4	The Stotras do not exceed seventeen. Prajapati is seventeen. He attains Prajapati.
21.14.5	Agastya threw the Maruts at Indra. They took up the thunderbolt and attacked him. He saw this Kayasubhi hymn and pacified them with it.
21.14.6	When the Kayasubhi is recited, it is for peace.
21.14.7	The seventeen cows with seven calves, the five-year-old cows, the seventeen cows with three calves, the unyolked cows, they set them on fire, sprinkle them, and then the others take them, and they let go the others.
21.14.8	Then in the second year they bring in tawny cows, and the same as before. Then in the third year they bring in red cows, and the rest as before. Then they bring in black cows, and the others as before. Then white cows, and the other as before. Then yellow cows, and the remaining as before. Then tawny cows, and as before. Then red cows, and as above. Then yellow cows. Then black cows. Then white cows. Then yellow cows.
21.14.9	Then in the year Soma-offerings are made.
21.14.10	They offer three each day, five on the last day.
21.14.11	The goat is for Agni-Soma.
21.14.12	The bull is for Indra-Maruts, the calves are for Maruts.
21.14.13	If Rudra is angry, having offered a cake on eight potshers to Agni-Rudra, one should offer another.
21.14.14	If he dies in the earth, then he should offer a cake on one potsherd to Yama and then offer another.
21.14.15	If he dies in water, then he should make an offering of rice-gruel to the Nirrti and then offer another; if he dies in water then he should make a cake on one pothsed to the Apas and then offer another, if he dies in the sky then he should make rice-gruel for the Maruts and then offer another;
21.14.16	If the animal is a bull or a he-goat, one should offer a cake on eleven potshards to Brhaspati and then offer another animal.
21.14.17	If the animal flees, one should offer an oblation to Vayu and then offer another.
21.14.18	If they are defeated in battle, one should offer to Indra a cake on eleven potshards for victory and then offer another.
21.14.19	If he were to die by another death, he should offer a cake on twelve potsherds to Prajapati and then offer another animal.
21.14.20	Gandamo Vetasvati obtained all prosperity by this (rite).
21.14.21	He who knows this obtains all prosperity.
21.15.1	Jyotisṭoma, Agnistoma, Gauri, Ukthya, Mahāvrata, Gauri, Uthyā, Ayus, Atiratra.
21.15.2	The year is the vow. Its mouth is the spring season, its two wings are summer and the rainy season, autumn is the middle, and winter is the tail.
21.15.3	Therefore, in autumn, plants ripen. Because autumn is the middle of the year.
21.15.4	Those who undertake the vow before a year is completed, they do what has not been done.
21.15.5	This is the approved vow, that which is for five nights, for there are five seasons.
21.15.6	He who knows this attains the entire span of life with the approved vow.
22.1.1	The six-day ritual is the back-bone.
22.1.2	The seasons did not stand firm; they stood firm by this (rite). One who desires stability should perform this (rite); he indeed stands firm.
22.1.3	There are six seasons; one stands firm in the seasons by this (rite); it is a six-day rite; for direct success.
22.1.4	For they succeeded in the seasons by means of this (rite); one succeeds indeed.
22.2.1	The Agniṣṭoma with three stomas, the Ukthya with fifteen stomas, the Jyotiṣṭoma with seventeen stomas, the Gauḥ, the Āyuḥ, and the Atiratra are the Stomas.
22.2.2	One who desires to live the entire life should perform this sacrifice.
22.2.3	When it is three days before, the three breaths, the exhalation, inhalation and suspension, are united.
22.2.4	Now, when the Jyotiṣṭoma, Gauriṣṭoma, Ayustisṭoma and Atiratra are performed, it is for stability.
22.3.1	The five-day Abhiṣaṅga sacrifice and the Viśvajit Atiratra are
22.3.2	performed for another purpose. The sacrifice is for one purpose, the Sattra for another. One does not attain that for which the sacrifice is performed by means of the Sattra, nor does one attain that for which a Sattra is performed by means
22.3.3	The Anuloma is like a sacrifice. When the Prsthastomas are of one kind, then he places in him one kind of strength and vigour.
22.3.4	The Prsthastoma is food. He places food in him.
22.3.5	The Pṛṣṭhas are cattle. He stands firm in cattle.
22.3.6	The five-day Abhiyasanga rite is for continuity.
22.3.7	The Vishvajit sacrifice is performed for the sake of victory over the entire universe.
22.4.1	The six-day sacrifice with the Mahavrata and Atiratra sacrifices is performed.
22.4.2	The seven sages attained success through this sacrifice, and hence one performs this sacrifice for the sake of success.
22.4.3	The seven vital airs are in the head, and the vital airs are the senses. One attains the senses through this.
22.4.4	The seven domestic animals are attained through this.
22.4.5	The Vrata-sacrifice is the seventh day, because it is not yet accomplished. Food is Vrata; by it he obtains food.
22.4.6	The six days are the Prstha-days, for direct success.
22.4.7	For the seven sages succeeded directly by it. By it one succeeds.
22.5.1	The six-day Prstha-rite, the Mahavrata and the Atiratra are the seventeenth day.
22.5.2	His head is three-fold, his wings are fifteen-fold, his body is seventeen-fold, and his tail is twenty-one-fold.
22.5.3	By this Prajapati created beings.
22.5.4	He who knows this is born with offspring and cattle.
22.5.5	Prajapati is seventeen-fold. When the vow is seventeen-fold one attains Prajapati.
22.5.6	The Trivṛt (Stoma) is the head; it is indeed the nine breaths, he finds support in the breaths.
22.5.7	The fifteen (Stoma) are the wings, for the purpose of striking.
22.5.8	The seventeen (Stoma) becomes the self, Prajapati is indeed seventeen, he attains Prajapati.
22.5.9	The twenty-one (Stoma) become the tail, for support.
22.6.1	The six days of the back, the Chandomas, the Pavamāna, the Mahāvrata, and the Atiratra.
22.6.2	One who desires cattle should offer sacrifice.
22.6.3	Cattle are the Stomas.
22.6.4	When the Pavamana Stotras of the Mahavrata are in the form of Stomas, one obtains cattle.
22.6.5	The Stotras are both in pairs and in groups. That is the union. From that union, offspring are born.
22.7.1	The Abhiṣaṅga sacrifice is of five days, the Trayastriṃśa sacrifice is of thirty-three days, the Agniṣṭoma sacrifice is of thirtyfour days, the Mahāvrata sacrifice is of seventeen days, the Atiratra sacrifice is of twenty-four days, the Bahispavamāna sacrifice is of twentyfour days, the head is of three, the wings are of fifteen, the body is of seventeen, the tail is of twenty-one.
22.7.2	By this very (rite) Jamadagni nourished all his cattle. By this very (ritual) one nourishes all cattle.
22.7.3	When the five-day Abhiasaṅgya rite is performed before (the main rite), it is done continuously.
22.7.4	This is the thirty-third day. The thirty-three deities are attained.
22.7.5	And his Agniṣṭoma has thirty-four (Stotras). Prajapati is the thirty-fourth of the deities. He attains Prajapati.
22.7.6	The Bahispavamāna has twenty-four (Stotra). The Mahāvrata has twenty-four syllables. The Gāyatrī is the begetter. The Gāyatra is for propagation.
22.7.7	Both the Stoma and the Yugma are united, and the Ayuga is united. That is the pair. From that pair is born.
22.7.8	The head is three-fold, the breaths are nine, he is established in the breaths. The wings are fifteen, for the purpose of the sacrifice. The body is seventeen, Prajapati is seventeen, he attains Prajapati. The tail is twenty-one, for stability.
22.8.1	Jyotiṣṭoma, Agniṣṭoma, Gauḥ, Ukthya, Ayus, Ukthya Abhijit, Agniṣṭomā, Viśvajit, Agniṣtomā, Sarvajit, Agniștomā, Sarvasstoma, Atiratra.
22.8.2	By this (rite) Indra became superior to other deities; he who knows this becomes superior to other beings.
22.8.3	The three days of the Jyotiṣṭoma, Gauṣṭoma and Ayusṭoma are in front. He attains the known Stotras. He stands firm in these worlds, in these worlds.
22.8.4	Then the Abhijit. The gods conquered these worlds by the Abhijit, the whole by the Vishvajit, the entire by the Sarvajit.
22.8.5	There is a Sarvas toma Atiratra (Sacrifice) - for the attainment of all, for the conquest of all; verily by it he attains all, conquers all.
22.9.1	There are four Trivrt (sacrifices) with the Agniṣṭoma as the first, the Viśvajit, the Mahāvrata, the Jyotiṣṭoma and the Atiratra.
22.9.2	By this Prajapati created man, he attained lordship over all food.
22.9.3	He who knows this becomes the lord of all food.
22.9.4	The head is the first to be formed and is formed in four ways. The head is the life, the eye, the ear, and the self. The back is the self. When one approaches the back, one unites with the self.
22.9.5	This is the person who was created. Therefore, one establishes the vow of food.
22.9.6	Now, as to why the Jyotiṣṭoma and Atiratra are performed, it is for the purpose of making the unestablished established.
22.10.1	The Stoma of the Prstha-s is sixfold, the Atiratra is the Vishvajit.
22.10.2	The sacrifice is for another desire, the Sattra for another. One does not obtain that for which the sacrifice is performed by means of the Sattra, nor does one obtain that for which a Sattra is performed by means means of the sacrifice. The Sattra is like the Anuloma (verses) because the Anuloma verses are like the Sattra. When the Anuloma is performed in one way, it places one kind of energy and strength in it. The Anuloma verses mean food. It places food in it. The (verses) are animals. It stands firm in animals.
22.10.3	What is directly perceived by men is indirectly perceived by the gods, and what is indirectly perceived by men is directly perceived by the gods.
22.10.4	This is the indirect vow, namely, the Viśvajit. By this he directly obtains food.
22.11.1	The six-day Prsthya, the Mahāvrata, the Jyotiṣṭoma, and the Atiratra.
22.11.2	By this the gods went to heaven.
22.11.3	He who knows this goes to heaven.
22.11.4	This is the prescribed vow, namely, the eight-night (rite). The Agniṣṭoma indeed becomes the prescribed vow.
22.11.5	And when the Jyotiṣṭoma Atiratra becomes (a part of the rite), it is for the purpose of making the unestablished established.
22.11.6	By the eight-night rite, indeed, the gods attained everything.
22.11.7	He who knows this attains everything.
22.12.1	The six-day Parīṣṭi, the Jyotiṣṭoma, the Gauriṣṭoma, and the Atiratra are the gods who were afraid of death. They approached Prajapati. He gave them immortality through this nine-day (rite).
22.12.2	This indeed is the immortality of man, that he attains all his life and becomes more powerful.
22.12.3	He attains all his life, becomes more powerful, he who knows this.
22.12.4	This is the nine-night sacrifice. The nine breaths are indeed the breaths. He finds support in the breaths.
22.12.5	The six-day sacrifice is the back. The prosperity is visible. Then the Jyotiṣṭoma, Gauri, and Ayus are the additional nights. It is for stability.
22.13.1	One desiring cattle should offer the Jyotiṣṭoma, Agnisthama, Gauḥ, Ukthya, Āyuḥ, Ukthyo, Abhyāsangya, Pañcāha, Viśvajit and Atiratra sacrifices.
22.13.2	When the Jyotiṣtoma, Gauḥ, Āyuḥ and Ukthya are performed for three days, one attains the known Stotras and attains stability in these worlds.
22.13.3	Now, when the five-day Abhiasaṅgya comes in the middle, then one becomes a member of the five-fold group, and the animals are five-fold; thus one obtains men and animals.
22.13.4	The Vishvajit Atiratra comes (next); for the conquest of the universe.
22.14.1	The Trivṛt Agniṣṭoma, the Pañcadaśa Ukthya, the Trivṛt Agnistoma, the Saptadaśa Agnistoma, and the Ekavimśa Ukthhya, the Saptadaša Agnistoma, Triṇava Agnistoma, Trayastrimsa Ukthya, Triṇava Agniṣṭoma and Viśvajit Ātiratra.
22.14.2	Indra, having slain the Asuras, thought that he had done wrong. The gods then worshipped him with this Stoma. He went to the state of being free from sin.
22.14.3	Therefore, one who is struck by an arrow or a stick goes to the state of freedom from sin on the tenth day.
22.14.4	This is the tenth of the Viraj, and the Viraj is food. He places food in him.
22.14.5	The gods, having conquered the Asuras by means of the Agniṣṭoma, and having won progeny and cattle by means of the Ukthas, were born in the middle. By means of the Agnișṭoma, one conquers one's enemy, and by means of the Uthyas, one is born in the middle with progeny and cattle.
22.14.6	This sacrifice is threefold.
22.14.7	One who knows this becomes equal to all beings and progeny.
22.15.1	The three Agniṣṭomas are of three stomas, the three Ukthas are of fifteen stomas, the one Uktha is of seventeen stomas, the Atiratra is of twenty-one stomas, the Kusuruviṇḍa is of ten stomas.
22.15.2	He who desires, "May I be many," should offer this sacrifice.
22.15.3	Since the Stomas are many in groups, he becomes many.
22.15.4	The three, the three, the three; the fifteen, the fifteen, the seventeens;
22.15.5	It is the Ekavimsa (Stoma) that is performed for stability.
22.15.6	This is indeed the light of the gods.
22.15.7	He who knows this becomes the light of beings.
22.15.8	This is the Catuṣṭoma (Stoma). Animals have four feet. He indeed stands in animals.
22.15.9	The Ekavimsa Stoma does not exceed. The Ekavimsa is indeed stability. He indeed stands firm.
22.15.10	By this very (rite) Kusuruviṇḍa Auddālaka having performed the sacrifice, obtained the earth.
22.15.11	He who knows thus, obtains the earth.
22.16.1	One desiring cattle should offer the Abhiasaṅgya sacrifice, the Pañcaha sacrifice, the Catvāraha sacrifice, the Chāndomā sacrifice, the Viśvajit sacrifice and the Atiratra sacrifice.
22.16.2	The five-day ritual is performed before the sacrifice. The man is five-fold, the animals are five-fold, thus he obtains the man and the animals.
22.16.3	The Chandomas are performed in the middle. The Chandomas are animals, for the attainment of animals.
22.16.4	The Vishvajit Atiratra is performed for the attainment of all.
22.17.1	The Triṣṭoma Agniṣṭoma, the Jyotiṣṭoma Ukthya, the Triṣṭoma Agnistoma, the Gaura Ukthya, and the Abhijit Agnistoma, then the Gaura Ukthyā, the Viśvajit Agnistoma and the Ukthya, then the Viśva-jit Agnistoma with the Āyuṣ Ukthya, all the Stotras of the Viśva jit Agnistoma, and the Atiratra.
22.17.2	The gods, being slain by the Asuras, ran to Prajapati. He gave them this Devapura. They entered it.
22.17.3	One should sacrifice to one who is being bewitched, entering this very Devapura for safety.
22.18.1	The Abhiasaṅgya sacrifice consists of six days, three Chāndogya days, a four-stoma Agniṣṭoma, a Viśvajit and an Atiratra.
22.18.2-5	This sacrifice is indeed the sovereignty of oneself. One who knows this goes to the sovereignty of oneself.
22.18.6	The two Stotras are Bṛhat and Rathantara, for that is the sovereignty. The Dakṣiṇās are ten thousand. That is the sovereignty. There is a twenty-six-fold Stoma, for that is sovereignty. The Stoma is four-fold, for that is indeed the end. He who knows this goes to the end with prosperity.
22.18.7	By this very one, Kṣema Dhṛtvā, having performed the Pauṇḍarīka sacrifice, went to the northern bank of the river Sudāma.
22.18.8	He who knows this obtains all prosperity, and obtains all prosperity.
23.1.1	The Atiratra, the Prsthya, the six-day (rite) with all Stoma, the Atiratra, four Chandomas, and the Atiratra.
23.1.2	This indeed is the perfected twelve-day (rite), namely the thirteen-night (rite).
23.1.3	The Prayaṇīya and Udayaṇīya are the same, and they desire to have the same; they obtain it by these (verses).
23.1.4	But the householder's speech becomes weak; when there is the Sarvas toma Atiratra in the middle, then the householder's weak speech becomes strong.
23.2.2	This twelve-day sacrifice is indeed a speech that spreads out. They would cut off that speech if they were to perform the Atiratra in the middle.
23.2.3	If they perform the vow above, they do not cut off speech and attain the thirteenth month.
23.2.4	These are indeed the established thirteen nights. Those who perform them attain stability.
23.3.1	The Atiratra, the Prsthya, the six-day Prsthya and the Trimsad-day sacrifice are the beginning.
23.3.2	These nights are for the sake of desire.
23.3.3	The Viraj, the Dhi, the Ekadashi, the Praja, the Dva-dashi, the Pashus, the Trayodashi and the Kama are the fourteen.
23.3.4	They attain all these desires.
23.3.5	These indeed are the extent of the Brahman, when these two (verses) are inserted in the middle of the thirty-three (verses). By that they ascend the extent of the heaven.
23.3.6	They perform the Prstha verses twice, thus they provide food with them in abundance.
23.4.1	The Atiratra, Jyoti, Gauri, Ayus, the three-day, the six-day Prstha, Ayus, Gauri, Jyoti, and the Atiratra.
23.4.2	Those who would examine them on a bed, in water, or at a marriage, should approach them.
23.4.3	They approach the Stotras of the Jyotis, Gauri, Ayus, and Tryah, which are well-known.
23.4.4	They stand firm in these worlds, in these worlds.
23.4.5	Now when the six-day Pañcadaśa comes in the middle, it is indeed the bed of the gods; they ascend that bed of the gods, they become worthy of the bed.
23.4.6	They attain the bed of the Pravāsiyas.
23.4.7	Now when the Ayus, Gauri, and Jyotiṣṭoma Atiratra come, they go by that way and return by that way.
23.5.1	The two days of Gau and Ayus are the two Atiratras at the end of the twelve-day Soma sacrifice.
23.5.2	The two days of Gauś and Ayus are for begetting offspring.
23.5.3	The ten days of the twelve-days Soma sacrifice are for begetting.
23.5.4	These fourteen nights are indeed established. Those who perform these rites are established.
23.6.1	The Atiratra, the six-day Prastara, the Mahavrata, the six-days Prastara, and the Trimsat-day, with the Atiratra as the beginning.
23.6.2	By means of these rites, the gods attained divinity. Those who perform them attain divinity.
23.6.3	This is the sacrifice of the gods, and even today the gods are performing this sacrifice.
23.6.4	The full-moon sacrifice, the Atiratra, then the six days with the Prsthastomas, the single day with the Ekastoma, the Mahavrata, then the six with the Prstha stomas, the six days with Prsthastoma, the new-moon sacrifice and the Atiratra.
23.6.5	Therefore, indeed, the sons of men are not (the sons of) the gods. The gods are the sons of the gods. They ascend to the gods by these (sacrifices).
23.6.6	But one who is afraid should not be excluded. One who is not afraid should be initiated.
23.7.1	The Atiratra (Satra) has three days, the Agniṣṭoma, the Agniṣvātta, the Jyotiṣṭoma, and the Ayus, the Prsthya (Satra) of six days, the Ayus, Jyotiṣṭo ma, and the Atiratra.
23.7.2	These are the nights which are the most important.
23.7.3	One who desires Brahmic glory should perform them.
23.7.4	When the Agniṣṭūma and the Agniṣṭo ma have three days, then one unites Brahmic glory with fame.
23.7.5	Brahma is indeed threefold.
23.7.6	The Jyotis, Gauri, Tryah and Prajnatas are the Stotras which are used in the sacrifice. They are used to attain these worlds and they are established in these worlds. Then the Prsthas are the six days in the middle. The Prsthas are food. That food is placed in the middle. Therefore, one who is in the middle eats food. Then the Ayus, Gauri and Jyotis are the Atiratras. They go by that way and return by that way.
23.8.1	The Trivṛt Agniṣṭoma, the Agniṣṭoma with Jyotiṣṭoma, Gauḥ, Āyuḥ, the three-day (rite), the twelve-day (rite) with ten days and the Atiratra.
23.8.2	One sacrifice is for one desire, another for another. One does not obtain that for which one sacrifices by means of a sacrifice, nor does one obtain that for which there is a sacrifice by means of a sacrificial session.
23.8.3	The Atiratra sacrifices are for the purpose of attaining the other world, and the twelve-day sacrifice is for the purpose of performing a Sattra.
23.8.4	They attain both these desires by means of these (sacrifices).
23.9.1	One should perform the Atiratra, Jyotiṣṭoma, Gauriṣṭoma, Ayustisṭoma, Tri-stoma, and the twelve days of the twelve-day Sattra. Those who desire offspring should perform.
23.9.2	By these (verses) Prajapati created the creatures. Those who perform these (verses) are born with offspring and cattle.
23.9.3	The verses Jyoti, Gau, Ayus, and the three-day Stoma, when performed, establish these worlds in these worlds.
23.9.4	And those who perform the twelve-day sacrifice with uninterrupted speech, it is for procreation.
23.9.5	These fifteen nights are indeed established. Those who perform these rites are established.
23.10.1	These are indeed the great vows.
23.10.2	By these Indra won the greatest victory. By these they win the greatest victory.
23.10.3	The fifteen-day Vājapeya is the thunderbolt. One does not perform the Vājapeya without holding the thunderbolt. The sixteenth day is the grasping. One performs the Vājapeyas with the held thunderbolt.
23.11.1	The Atiratra, Jyotiṣṭoma, Gauri, Ayus, Gauri, and Ayus are the five-day sacrifices. The twelve-day sacrifice has ten days and an Atiratra.
23.11.2	By these (rites) Prajapati won the endless glory. The five-day rites are endless.
23.11.3	By the five-day rite, they are born from the endless (world).
23.11.4	Then the twelve-day rites, which are the ten days, are performed without interruption for the purpose of reproduction.
23.11.5	These are the established seventeen nights. Those who perform these rites are established.
23.12.1-3	The Atiratra is the Abhijit, the six-day sacrifice. The Dasahā is the Atiratra of the twelve-day sacrifice. The gods were afraid of death. They approached Prajapati. He gave them immortality with this eighteen-day sacrifice. This is indeed the immortality of man, that he lives his entire life and becomes more powerful.
23.12.4	All their lives they live, and become masters of all, who perform these (rites).
23.12.5	These (rites) are performed twice, nine times each; they thus bestow life in the right order.
23.13.1	These (rites), indeed, are the great vows.
23.13.2	Those who perform these ( rites) obtain the lordship over the wild animals of Vayu.
23.13.3	This is the sacrifice of the deer.
23.13.4	By these (verses) the wild animals are born without being created.
23.13.5	Those who perform these (rites) are born without being (consciously) created.
23.14.1	The Atri-night, the Abhijit and the Vishvajiti, two days, the twelve days of the Dvādaśāha, the Dasahā and the Atiratra.
23.14.2	Those who desire prosperity should perform these (rites). By these (verses), indeed, Prajapati created the man.
23.14.3-6	He attained lordship over all food. Those who perform these attain lordship over all food.
23.14.7	These twenty nights are indeed established. Those who perform these (rites) are established.
23.15.1	The Atiratra, the Abhijit, the six-day Abhijit, the Abhijit and the Atiratra at the end - those who desire cattle should perform these.
23.15.2	With these (verses) the seven Adityas let loose the domestic animals. With these (verses), they let loose the animals.
23.15.3	The seven Saptas are three times.
23.15.4	The animals are the Adityas.
23.15.5	The Adityas are prosperous in this world, the Adityas are in the other world.
23.15.6	The animals (are) in this (world), the seasons (are) in the other.
23.15.7	Those who perform these attain both worlds, the world of gods and the world of men.
23.16.1	The Atiratra, the Prastara, the six-day Prastara, three Svarasama, the Divakīrtiya day, three Svarasamas, the six-days Prastara, and the three-day Prastāra, the thirty-three-day Atiratra, those desiring Brahmic glory should perform.
23.16.2	Svabhanu, the Asura, covered the sun with darkness. The gods wanted to perform an atonement for him. They found these (verses). With them they removed the darkness from him.
23.16.3	Those who perform these (verses) remove darkness.
23.16.4	One should offer a Soma-and-Pusha animal to be offered in the Upakalpa rite.
23.16.5	Soma is the Brahman, Pūṣa is the cattle. They make their own deity prosper with cattle. They made the skin.
23.16.6	The Sāmidhenya verses are of Manu.
23.16.7	Whatever Manu said was a remedy for healing.
23.16.8	They should go to Nidaghīya.
23.16.9	For that is the most radiant light.
23.16.10	But because of laziness, there is fear, for they indeed remove great fear.
23.16.11	These are the fierce deities that approached the king. He became lazy.
23.16.12	One becomes free from laziness who, knowing this, approaches them.
23.17.1	The Atiratra, Jyotiṣṭoma, Gauriṣṭoma, Ayus, Tryah, Abhijit, Sadah, Dvādaśāha, Dasāha, Mahāvrata and Atiratra are to be performed by those who desire food.
23.17.2	The five seasons, the twelve months, these three worlds, this sun, the twenty-one, and the food, the twenty-two, from these worlds, from the year, from this sun, they obtain food, those who perform these rites.
23.18.1	The Atiratra, Jyotiṣṭoma, Gauriṣṭoma, Ayuryṣṭoma, Pañcaha, Abhijit, Ṣaḍaha, the Daśaha of the Dvādaśāha, and the Atiratra at the end - those who desire prosperity should perform these.
23.18.2	For by these Prajapati was established in these worlds.
23.18.3	These are the twenty-three nights. These are the three worlds. In these worlds they are established.
23.18.4	These are the twenty- three nights which are established. Those who perform these rites are established.
23.19.1	The Atiratra, the Prsthya Stoma, the Trishtuk, the Trimsat, the Anirukta, the Upasad, the Kanva-Rathantara in the middle of the day, the Trishtuka, the Trimsad, the Anirukt, the Trishtukas, the Ekavimsa, the Trishtuga, the Trimshat, the Anirukat, the Prstha Stoma, the Sadahas, the Pratyag, the Trivrt, the Anirudta, the Jyotistoma, the Agnistoma, the Atiratra.
23.19.2	By these indeed the gods settled in the heavenly world. "Let us settle in the heavenly world" - thus they are (sung).
23.19.3	These indeed are the expanse of the Brahman. When these thirty-three are joined together in the middle, then they ascend the expanse of the Brahmn.
23.19.4	They offer the Prastara in the middle. The Prastara is food. Food is indeed offered in the middle. Therefore, one who is in the middle eats food.
23.19.5	These are seven days.
23.19.6	From this the creatures are born.
23.19.7	Those who perform these (sacrifices) are born with offspring and cattle.
23.19.8	This sacrifice is without (the recitation of) hymns, and is without cattle. But since there are seven days, they are with hymns and with cattle.
23.19.9	The thirty-three follows the thirty-three, the three-fold follows the three-fold. They ascend from the topmost. When the thirty-three follows thirty-three, they stand in the vital breaths from the vital breaths.
23.19.10	When the three-fold (verse) follows the three-folds.
23.19.11	The nights are in the reverse order, because the Jyotiṣṭoma is the Agniṣṭoma, and the Udanīya day is the one that is not fixed.
23.20.1	The Atirātra, two Abhijit, six days, twelve days, the Atirātra - those who desire offspring or cattle should perform this.
23.20.2	From the well-established source are born the creatures, the animals. When they perform the six-day rites in the well-established (ritual), they are born with offspring and animals from the well-established ritual.
23.20.3	Then the twelve days of the twelve-day rite, they perform without interruption for the purpose of reproduction.
23.20.4	These twenty-four nights are indeed established. Those who perform these rites are established.
23.21.1	These are indeed the great vows.
23.21.2	By these rites Prajapati obtained all food.
23.21.3	The twenty-four half-months make a year. The year is the twenty-fifth. Food is the vow. By these (rites) they obtain food. Those who perform these (rites) obtain food.
23.22.1	The Atiratra, Gauh and Ayuh are two days. Two Abhipavas. Six days. Twelve days. Ten days of the twelve-day (rite) and the Atiratra.
23.22.2	The seasons did not stand firm; they stood firm with these (verses). Those who desire stability should recite them; they indeed stand firm.
23.22.3	There are six seasons; they stand firm in the seasons.
23.22.4	When the two days are Gau and Ayus, they recite the two Stotras as a pair for propagation.
23.22.5	When they perform the six-day rites in the prescribed manner, it is indeed in the prescribed manner.
23.22.6	When they perform the twelve-day rites with uninterrupted speech, it is for procreation.
23.22.7	These are indeed the twenty-six established nights. Those who perform these rites indeed become established.
23.23.1	The Atiratra, Jyotiṣṭoma, Gauriṣṭoma, Ayus, three days, two Abhijit, six-day, twelve-day, ten days, and Atiratra - those who desire prosperity should perform this.
23.23.2	The stars attained all prosperity through these (sacrifices). Those who perform these attain all prosperity.
23.23.3	The reason why there are twenty-seven nights is that there are twenty- seven stars, and these nights are in accordance with the stars. They obtain the prosperity of the stars.
23.24.1	Those who desire cattle should perform these very same great vows. Since there are twenty-eight nights, and cattle have eight parts, they bind cattle by means of these (rites).
23.25.1	The Atiratra, Jyotiṣṭoma, Gauri, Ayus, Ayus, Pañcaha, two Abhijit, two Saptadaha, twelve Dasahā, and Atiratra.
23.25.2	By these (verses) indeed Prajapati conquered the endless glory.
23.25.3	These (verses) are endless, for one goes beyond thirty (verses). The endless is the speech.
23.25.4	When these (verses) are thirty-one nights, they conquer the endless glory by these.
23.26.1	The Atiratra (sacrifices) are the three Abhijit (sacrifices), the six-day (sacrifices), and the twelve-day (sacrifical session). Those who desire food should perform these.
23.26.2	The other sacrificial sessions lead to Viraj indirectly, but these lead to Viraj directly.
23.26.3	Those who perform these attain food directly.
23.27.1	These are the great vows. By these Prajapati obtained food in succession.
23.27.2	Food is Viraj, food is the vow.
23.27.3	By these they obtain food in succession.
23.28.1	The two Atirātras, the Go and Ayus, three Abhijit days, six days, twelve days, ten days and the Atirātra at the end - those who desire cattle should perform this.
23.28.2	These nights are Anushtubh.
23.28.3	Anushtubh has thirty-two syllables.
23.28.4	Speech is Anushtubh
23.28.5	Cattle have four feet.
23.28.6	Speech supports cattle.
23.28.7	By these nights,
23.28.8	Therefore, they are called by speech and come to it.
24.1.1	The Atiratra (rite) is performed for three days, the Visvajit for five days, the Atiratra for one day, the twelve-day rite for twelve days, and the Atiratra at the end.
24.1.2	Prajapati created the creatures. They did not stand firm. They stood firm by these (verses). The worlds did not stand firm; they stood firm by these. Those who desire stability should recite them. They stand firm.
24.1.3	These worlds are of the same form as the formless. When the Rathantara enters the world of the Brihat, the Brihat enters the world of Rathantara. By the formless they generate the same form for them.
24.1.4	The sixth day is lost when one performs the five-day sacrifice. The seasons are not completed. When the six-day sacrifice is performed as the Prsthya, then the sixth day is not lost and the seasons are completed.
24.1.5	And when the twelve-day sacrifice is completed with ten days, then one does not go beyond the five-day sacrifices.
24.1.6	The sky is the udder, the two worlds are the two breasts. With this one he milks for the gods, with that one for the creatures.
24.1.7	This is the sky, the world, these are the two breasts on both sides.
24.1.8	This is said in the Veda:
24.1.9	"The thirty-three, the three, the supreme gods who sit on the sacrificial grass, the two, the one, the two."
24.1.10	The middle Atiratra is the udder; the two worlds are on both sides.
24.1.11	If this were the Anatiraatra, one would have to offer the Udavasas.
24.1.12	Therefore one should perform the Atiraatra, to avoid the Udavasas being offered.
24.1.13	The thirty-three gods attained success through these (sacrifices). Therefore one performs these sacrifices for success.
24.2.2	The Adityas and the Angiras performed a sacrifice. The Adityas had twenty-one (priests), the Angiras twelve. The Adity as prospered in this world, the Angiras in the other world. The Angiras in this world, and the Angiras in that world. The sacrifice is twofold, as far as the sacrifice is twofold, so far is their prosperity.
24.3.1	The three five-day sessions of the Atiratra, the Vishvajit, the three five-day session of the Atiratras.
24.3.2	This sacrifice is without animals. When they perform the Vishvajit sacrifice, it becomes with animals.
24.3.3	These are the nights of the birds. One who desires anything, he attains it by these (nights). Wherever the bird desires, he attains it.
24.3.4	They go with the three-fold (stoma) and rise with the three-folds. The three-fold is the vital airs. They go with the vital airs and stand in the vital airs.
24.4.1	The Atiratra, Jyotiṣṭoma, Gauriṣṭoma, Ayustisṭoma, three days, three Abhijit, six days, twelve days, ten days, Mahāvrata and Atiratra are the rites for the one who desires to go to heaven.
24.4.2	By these rites Prajapati attained all prosperity. Those who perform these rites attain all prosperity.
24.4.3	Now, these thirty-four nights are the thirty-three deities and Prajapati as the thirty-fourth. They prosper by the prosperity of Prajapati.
24.5.1	The Atiratra, Jyotiṣṭoma, Gauri, Ayus, Pañcaha, three Abhijit, six-day, twelve-day, Dasahā, and Atiratra - those desiring cattle should perform.
24.5.2	Now, these thirty-five nights are of the same number as the animals. By these they obtain animals.
24.6.1	The Atiratra, four Abhijit, six days, twelve days, the Dasahina, and the Atiratra, those who desire cattle should perform.
24.6.2	The gods, by means of these (verses), attained the sun; those who perform these (verses) attain the world of the sun.
24.6.3	These (verses) are the Brihatī (verses); the Brihatī is the sovereignty of the metres; he who goes to the extent of cattle goes to sovereignty; they attain sovereignty who perform these (rites).
24.7.1	These (verses), indeed, are the great vows.
24.7.2	By these (verses) Prajapati attained both his desires, food and cattle. By these (verses), one attains both desires.
24.8.1	The Atirātra, the two days of Gau and Ayus, the four Abhijit days, the six days, the twelve days, the ten days of the Dasahina and the Atirātra at the end - those who desire cattle should perform this. The meaning is clear.
24.9.2	By these (verses) Prajapati won the endless glory. These (verses) are endless, for there is no end to speech.
24.9.3	When these (verses) are forty-one nights, they win endless glory by them.
24.10.1	These (verses) are the Great Vratas.
24.10.2	All these are the Viraj (the Supreme Goddess) - the first one has ten, the second twenty, the third thirty. This is the supreme Viraj, as it has forty nights. The supreme Viraj is the Panka (the five-fold).
24.10.3	They establish themselves in the supreme Viraj.
24.11.1	The Atiratra (Satra) consists of three Trivṛt days, with the Agniṣṭoma as the opening and the Atiratra as the concluding day. There are ten Pañcadaśa days, the tenth day being the Ṣoḍaśin, and the Atiratras. There are twelve Saptadaśa days, and the Atira-tra. There are the Prsthya (days), the six days, and the Atirātra. There are twelve Ekavimśa days, with the Atiratra.
24.11.2	Prajapati created the creatures. They were not held together, and did not know each other. By that Prajapati was grieved. He saw these (verses). From that this (world) turned away. Cows became cows, horses horses, men men, beasts beasts.
24.11.3	Those who use them turn away from sin.
24.11.4	Because the Atiratra is placed in between, therefore one does not deposit semen in the other.
24.11.5	Because the Prsthya Stoma is created, therefore goats and sheep graze together with cattle. Therefore the donkey deposits semen in the mare.
24.11.6	The sacrifice is without animals, because it is without the Chandomas. When they perform the Chandomas at the junctions, then it becomes with the Chandomas, then it becomes having animals.
24.11.7	In the Gāyatrī verses, the Jarābodhiya; in the Uṣṇīṣa verses, the Śruḍhya; in the Anushtup verses, the Nānada; in the Brihatī verses, the Rathantara; in the Paṅkti verses, the Rāyovājiya; in the Tristup verses, the Ausha; in the Jagatī verses, the Kāva.
24.11.8	The higher metres are taken up for the purpose of non-deterioration.
24.11.9	The voice is the breath. Since the voice is at the end, therefore the two breaths are at the end.
24.12.1	The two Atirātra-sacrifices are the two Abhipavas-sacrifices of six days each, the Gau and Ayus. The two Atirătra-sacrifices, the two Abhipava-sacrifices of the six days each, Abhijit and Visvajiti. The Atirātra sacrifice is the single Abhipava-sacrifice of six days, the Sarvasloma and the Navasaptadasa. The twelve-day sacrifice has ten days, the Mahavrata and the Atirātra.
24.12.2	The rites of Yama are for the Adityas.
24.12.3	Those who perform these rites attain the prosperity of Yama.
24.12.4	The Adityas attained supremacy through these rites. Mitra and Varuna, Dhata and Aryaman, Amsha and Bhaga, Indra and Vivasvan - those who perform these rites gain the prosperity of these deities.
24.12.5	This is the same as the above.
24.12.6	The eight sons of Aditi, who were born, have approached her body. The seven have gone beyond the sun.
24.12.7	The Adityas are prosperous in this world, the Adityas are prospering in the other world, they prosper in both these worlds, in the world of the gods and the world of men, those who perform these rites.
24.13.1-2	The Atiratra (sacrifice) has four Abhijit (sacrifices) of six days each, the Sarvasvamā (sacrifice), the Atiratra, two Abhijit (sacrificial sessions) of six days, and the Dasahā (sacrifice) of twelve days and the Atiratra.
24.13.3	Those who do not know the Self, they may come to this. When they are anointed and anointed, they place good in the Self. They know them.
24.13.4	With guggula at the morning pressing, with saugandhika at the midday pressing, and with paitodaraka at the third pressing.
24.13.5	Agni, while about to officiate as the priest of the gods, cut off his body. The flesh that fell off became guggula, the sinews became sugandhitejana, and the bones became potudariva. These are the divine perfumes; they anoint with divine perfumes.
24.14.1	The Atiratra is the twenty-fourth day, the Prayaniya is the first day, three Abhiplva six-day periods, three Abhijit six-day periods (with the Svarasama), the Divakirttiya day, three Svarasama days, the Visvajitya day, one Abhiplva six day period, the Ayus and the Gauh are two days, the twelve days of the twelve-day Soma ritual, the Mahavrata and the Atiratra are the end. The prosperity of these is as much as the prosperity of the year.
24.14.2	They say, "If one were to perform the twenty-four day Pravargya rite, beginning with the year, one would not complete it." One should perform the three-fold rite. The three-fold is the vital breaths. One attains the vital breaths.
24.14.3	But they also say, "One should perform the twenty- four rite for prosperity."
24.14.4	Now these Svarasāmans are the vital airs, and the Divākirti is the head. The Svarasāmans surround the Divākirtin; thus the vital airs are placed around the head.
24.14.5	Now the two stomas, Viśvajit and Abhijit, are the two vital airs. Then they take up the two stomas of Goāyuṣī, the two stomas being the pair. For propagation.
24.14.6	Then they perform the twelve days of the twelve-day sacrifice, with uninterrupted speech, for the purpose of reproduction.
24.14.7	Then this is the vow: Food is the vow. Food is not placed anywhere else except in the mouth. When they perform the vow above, food is placed in the mouth itself. Therefore, when food is placed in one's mouth, it is placed there.
24.14.8	Now these two Atiratras, the Prāyaniya and the Udayaniya, are the two breaths by which they go and return.
24.15.1	The Atiratra is the ninth day. The three days beginning with the Agniṣṭoma are the six days. The three days ending with the Agniṣțoma are the six. The Uktha in between is the ninth. The three days starting with the Agniṣtoma are the six. Then the three days ending with Agniṣṭoma. The Uktha is the ninth. Then the three beginning with the Agniștoma are the six, and the Uktha is the middle one. The three days commencing with the Agniṣtoman are the six. There are three days ending with Agnistoma. The Uktha comes in between. The three days that begin with the Agniṣtomān are the six. They are followed by three days ending with Uktha. The three days which begin with the Agniștomān are the seven. They are followed by three days ending with Uktba. The three days, which begin with the Agnistoma, are the six. These are followed by three ending with the Agnistomam. The Uktha lies in between. The twelve days of the twelve-day sacrifice are followed by the Mahāvrata and the Atiratra.
24.15.2	By these (verses) Savitar attained the creation of all.
24.15.3	Those who perform these (verses) attain the creation of all things.
24.15.4	Since the Stotras are many in groups, they are together of three, five, seven, and eleven (verses). These are the directions of Savitar.
24.15.5	Those who offer these (verses) become the directions of the equal and the progeny.
24.16.1	The Atiratra, four Abhijit-sacrifices, the six-day Mahavrata, two Abhijit-sacrificas, the six-days, the twelve-day, the ten-days, and the Atiratra.
24.16.2	The seasons did not stand firm. They stood firm by these (sacrifices). Those who desire stability should perform them.
24.16.3	The six seasons indeed stand firm; in the seasons they stand firm. When they perform the six days of the Klitpa, it is by means of the Klitpas.
24.16.4	Now this is the vow. The vow is food. Food is not eaten anywhere else except in the middle. When one takes up the vow in the middle, then food is deposited in the middle itself. Therefore, when one is in the middle, one eats food.
24.16.5	When one takes up the six-day vow in the middle of the month, it is by means of the vow.
24.16.6	Then they perform the twelve-day sacrifice with the ten days of speech uninterrupted, for procreation. Then the Prāyaniya and Udayaniya Atiratras, by which breath they go forth, they ascend it.
24.17.1	An Atiratra, six Abhijit days, six days, the ten days of the twelve-day, the Mahāvrata and the Atiratra.
24.17.2	By these (bricks) Indra and Agni became superior to other deities; those who offer these (bricks) become superior to other beings.
24.17.3	Indra and Agni are the most powerful among the gods; those who offer them become the most powerful.
24.17.4	They perform the six days of the Kṛṣṇāyasa sacrifice, which are duly arranged. Then they perform the twelve days of the Dvādaśāha sacrifice, which are not interrupted by speech, for the purpose of procreation. Then there is this vow, and then there are the Prāyaṇīya and Udayanīya Ātirātras. By which breath they depart, they attain it.
24.18.1	The Atiratra is the twenty-fourth day, the Prayaniya is the first day, three Abhijit days, six days of the Prsthya, the Abhijit, three days of the Svarasama, the Divakirttiya, three days of Svarasama, Visvajit, six days of Prsthya. The thirty-three days, one Abhijit day, the Ayus and the Gauh are two days, the twelve days, the Dasahina, the Mahavrata and the Atiratra. This is the sixty-one days of the divine Vratyas.
24.18.2	The Vratyas, by chance, were performing a Sattra sacrifice with Budha as their chief priest. They, without requesting the king Varuna, who was the presiding deity of the sacrifice, initiated themselves. Varuna, the king, then told them, "I will enter among you. You will not know the path leading to the divine world and your share in the sacrifice." Therefore, they do not receive oblations or Grahas.
24.18.3	Now at that time there was no milk in the plants, no butter in the milk, no fat in the flesh, no hair in the skin, no leaves in the trees. When the divine Vrātyas came to this one-sixty-night (sacrifice), then those beings were created with these powers, and became bright and milky.
24.18.4	This is the verse that is recited:
24.18.5	"What did he not do?" Thus he repeatedly asked his sons, and the earth had a consecration. He brought ghee from milk.
24.18.6	"Budha, the son of Soma, had a consecration. When he obtained it, he rejoiced. He obtained everything. The fat was in my flesh."
24.18.7	The cattle were poor and emaciated. They were placed in the Soma-sacrifice of Saumayan. They were mixed with fat.
24.18.8	Those who perform this sixty-one-night sacrifice, having decided to attend the divine sacrifice, offer a libation to the Garhapatya fire, saying, "O god Varuna, give us the divine sacrifice. Svāhā!" They perform the sacrifice when the divine sacrifice is given.
24.18.9	They have attained all prosperity, they attain all prosperity, those who perform this (sacrifice).
24.19.1	The Atiratra, Jyotiṣṭoma, Gauriṣṭoma, Ayustisṭoma, three days, fourteen Abhijit-days, six days, twelve days, the Dasahā, the Mahāvrata and the Atiratra.
24.19.2	The gods were afraid of death. They approached Prajapati. He gave them immortality through this hundred-night ritual. This is indeed the immortality of man, that he lives his entire life and becomes more powerful. Those who perform this ritual live their entire life and become more powerful.
24.19.3	They sprinkle the going forward, for going forward. They sprinkle the going across, for going across. They sprinkle the standing, for standing.
24.20.1	The Atiratra is the twenty-fourth day. The Pravargya day is the fourth. There are four Abhijit days, six days, the Prsthya six days, that is the first month, the second, the third, the fourth, the fifth, three Abhijit days, the Pṛṣṭhya six days, the Abhijit, three Svarasāman days, the Divākirtya day, three Svarasaman days, the Viśvajit, the Prsthyas six days, the Tryāṃśa, three Abhijit six days, the Prṣṭhya six day, the Tryāmsa, four Abhijit six days. That is the first month. The second, the third. The fourth. Three Abhijit six days and the Ayus and the Gauh are the two days. The twelve days of the Dvādaśāha are the Mahāvrata and the Atiratra.
24.20.2	The Brāhmaṇa of the year is the Brāhmaṇa.
25.1.1	The Atiratra is the twenty-fourth day. Two Trivṛt and Pañcadaśa are the two six-day-rites. The six-day-rite is the Pratiṣṭha. The six-days are the three Trivṛt, Pañcadaśas. The six-month-rite is the first, the second, the third, the fourth, the fifth, the three Trivrt, Pañcadašas, the six-day-Pratiṣṭha, the Trivṛt Brihaspatistoma, the three Svarasāman, the Divākirti, the three Svarasa-mans, the Pañcadaśin, the Indrastoma, the Ukthya, the three six-day-Prsthyas, the Triṃśarambhaṇa, the Ekādaśin, the Pañcaviṃśa, the Caturviṃśa. The six-months are the first, the two, the three, the four, the five, the three Trivrts, Pañcadašas, the six-days, the Pratiṣtha, the Trivrt, the Brihaspatistoma. The two days are the Gau and Ayus. The Chāndogya Dasāha is the first day of forty-four, then forty-four, forty, thirty-six, thirty-two, thirty, two twenty-eight, twenty-five, twenty-four, the Mahāvrata and the Atiratra.
25.1.2	In the middle of the Adityas, the Prsthya (Sutra).
25.1.3	The Adityas ascended to heaven by the Prsthyas in the middle. When they perform the Prsthyalas in the middle, it is for the ascent of the heavenly world.
25.1.4	The Prsthyalasas are food; it is indeed placed in the middle. Therefore, one who is in the middle enjoys food.
25.1.5	The Pṛṣṭhyas are cattle; they indeed stand in cattle.
25.1.6	These two Stomas, the Trivrt and the Pañcadaśa, are the same as the Sakamvriti. The one who desires a particular thing attains it by means of these two. Wherever the one who desires a thing desires, he attains it.
25.1.7	Now this is the Trivrt Stoma of Brihaspati. By this Brihaspati attained the office of the priest of the gods. Those who desire the office of the priests should approach with it. They attain the office of the priesthood. It places them in the front.
25.1.8	Now these are the Svarasama stomas. The head is the Divakirti, the Svarasama are the vital airs. When the Divakirti is surrounded by the Svarasama, then the vital airs are placed as if in a safe place.
25.1.9	Now this is the fifteen-Indra-stotra hymn. By this Indra became superior to other deities, and those who perform this (rite) become superior to other beings.
25.1.10	Now these twelve days of the Dvādaśāha are the Agniṣṭomas, with three-fold (Stoma), in the middle, they are freed from sin. This indeed is the bed of the gods; they ascend that bed of the gods. They become fit for the bed, they attain the bed of the wanderer.
25.1.11	Then these two, Udbhid and Balabhid, for by these two Brihaspati released the cattle to the gods; they release cattle by these two.
25.1.12	Then they take up the two Stotras of Go Ayushi, the two Stotras being in the form of a pair, for the sake of propagation.
25.1.13	Now this is the sacrifice of the Chandomas, the sacrifice of the Vedas. They perform the Vedas in the reverse order. Therefore, the animals, while eating, stand in the reverse order.
25.1.14	Now this is the vow. Food is the vow. One does not eat food anywhere else except from the mouth. When they perform the vow above, then indeed food is deposited in the mouth itself. Therefore, when food is in the mouth, one eats it.
25.1.15	Now these two Atiratras, the Prāyaniya and the Udayaniya, by which very breath one departs, by that one rises up.
25.2.1	The Atiratra is the twenty-fourth day. The Pravargya day is the sixth day. There are four Trivṛt and Abhijit six-day periods. That is the first month, the second, the third, the fourth, the fifth, three Trivṛt Abhijit six-days, the sixth day is the Brihaspatistoma, three Svarasāman days, the Divākirti day, three Svarasaman days, the Pañcadaśa Indrastoma, the Ukthya, three six-day periods, the Triṃśarambhaṇa, one Trivṛt, Abhijit six- day period, the Dasāha has ten days, the Agniṣṭomas are Trivṛt. The Udbhi and Balabhi are two days. There are four Abhijit six- days, two six-day periods are the sixth day. That is the second month, the third, and the fourth. There are two Trivṛt six-day periods and the sixth day is Āyu and Gau. The Chāndogya Dasāha has the twenty-fourth as the first day, two twenty-eighth, thirty, thirty-two, thirty-six, forty, forty-four, forty-eight, twenty-four, the Mahāvrata and the Atiratra. The Angirasas have the sixth day.
25.2.2	The Angirases ascended to heaven by means of the Prsthas in front. In that they offer the Prsthas at the beginning, it is for the ascent of heaven.
25.2.3	The Prsthas are food, and food is placed at the mouth. Therefore, when food is placed at his mouth, he eats it. The Prsthas are cattle, and they stand in cattle.
25.2.4	Whatever is not included in the two wheels and the Sākavarītiṣṭha, that is common up to the Dasahā of Chandomas.
25.2.5	Now this Dasahā of chandomas is the milking of the chandas. They undertake the chandas in the upward direction for non-deterioration. This indeed is the path of the gods. Those who undertake this attain the path of the divine. This is the vow.
25.2.6	Now these two Atiratras, the Prāyaniya and the Udayaniya, are the two ends of the life-breath; they go to the end of the life- breath.
25.3.1	The Atiratra is performed with the Trivṛt Stoma, then with the Pañcadaśa Stoma, then the Saptadaśa Stoma; then the Ekavimśa Stoma and then the Trinava Stoma; then with the Trayastrimsa Stoma, then again with the Trinava Stomas, then with the Ekavimsa Stoma, then Trayastrimsa, then Trinava, then Ekavimsa, then Saptadaśa, then Pañcadaśā, then Trivṛt and then again the Atiratra.
25.3.2	The seasons did not stand firm; they stood firm by this (rite). Those who desire stability should perform it; they indeed stand firm. There are six seasons; they stand firm in the seasons.
25.3.3	When they perform the rite in the middle of the gone, then the food is deposited in the middle; therefore one deposits it in the middle.
25.3.4	This is the bird's means of escape, by which they attain whatever desire they may have. For wherever the bird desires, it attains that.
25.3.5	They go forth with the three-fold (Stoma) and rise with the three-folds. The three-fold is the breath; with the breath they go forth, they stand in the breath.
25.3.6	Now, at the time of the equinox, the Vātavant wind blows and the Dṛti wind ceases. Therefore, the Vātavantas are smaller and the Dṛtis are larger.
25.4.1	They are initiated for a month. They buy Soma for a month. Having performed the Upasads for twelve days, they hang up the Soma for a month, offer Agnihotra for a month, perform the Darsa-Paurnamasa sacrifices for a month, the Vaisvadeva sacrifice for a month, Varunapraghasa sacrifices for a month. The Sâkamedha sacrifices for a month; the Suna-Siryâ sacrifice for a month; for a month the Trivrit; for a month, Pañcadaça; for a month Saptadaça; for a moon Ekavimsa; for a month Trinava; for a month Aṣṭādaça; for a period of thirty-three days; for ten days of the Dvādaśāha; the Mahâvrata and the Atiratra.
25.4.2	Agnihotra is the ten-hotr, Darsha-Paurnamasa is the four-hotr, Catu-r-masya is the five-hotr, Soma-adhwara is the seven-hotr.
25.4.3	Those who perform these rites with the entire sacrifice become all-pervading.
25.4.4	All of them partake of the oblations with Kundapāyin and Atasaruka vessels.
25.4.5	The Hotṛ is the Adhvaryu, the Potr, the Udgātṛ, the Nestr, the Acchavaka, the Maitrāvaruṇa, the Brahman, the Pratihartṛ, the Prastôtṛ, the Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin, the Gravastut, the Pratiprasthātṛ, the Agnīdhra, the Unnetr, the householder, the householder, Subrahmaṇya, Subrahmaṇaṇya.
25.5.1	They remain initiated for a year, they perform the Upasads for a year, and they become purified for a year.
25.5.2	They remain initiated for a whole year, they perform penance through that, they perform the upasads for a whole year and they perform penance through it again, they become purified for one year and they go to the world of gods through it.
25.5.3	By this very sacrifice the gods attained all prosperity, and those who perform this sacrifice attain all prosperity.
25.6.1	The three years of thirty days, the three of fifteen, the three of seventeen, the three of nineteen, and the twelve years of Prajapati.
25.6.2	By this indeed Prajapati attained the creation of all; those who perform this attain the creation of all.
25.6.3	When there are three Trivṛt (sacrifices), then the three Trivṛts are the lustre and Brahmanic splendour. They obtain the lustre and Brahmanical splendour. When there are three Pañcadaśas, then the five Pañcadaśa are the strength and vigour. They obtain the strength and vigour, when there are three Saptadaśas, then Saptadaśa is food. They obtain food. When there are the three Ekavimśas, then Ekavimśa is the foundation. They attain the foundation at the end of the sacrifice.
25.6.4	By this very rite the people of Naimisha attained all prosperity, and those who perform this rite attain all prosperity.
25.6.5	They remained in the Sattr for seventeen days. They said, "He who will prosper us in progeny, let him conclude this Sattr." The Brahmanas are now performing the Sattr with this object.
25.7.1	Nine Trivṛt, nine Pañcadaśa, nine Saptadaśa, nine Ekavimśa, thirty-six Śāktīya years.
25.7.2	By this Gaurīvati Śākta obtained all prosperity in the Yavyāvatī sacrifice. Those who perform this obtain all prosperity.
25.7.3	This is the great sacrifice, the great sovereignty of the metres. Those who perform this attain the great sovereignty of metres.
25.7.4	This is the ten-heroic (rite) of the Shaktyas. Those who perform it have ten heroes born.
25.8.1	The twenty-five Trivṛt, the twenty-five Pañcadaśa, the twenty- five Saptadaśa, the twentv-five Ekavimśa, the Sādhyas' hundred years.
25.8.2	The gods, formerly called the Sadhyas, performed this sacrifice for attaining heaven. They attained heaven with their cattle and men. All of them went to heaven together. Those who perform this sacrifice go to heaven together.
25.8.3	This is the life-prolonging sacrifice. Man has a life of a hundred years. They attain as much as the life-span. There is no sacrifice for one who has a life beyond a hundred years.
25.8.4	This was said by him: Those days were many which were before the rising of the sun, from where they went like a thief, and the dawn was seen no more.
25.9.2	By this Agni went to the birth of Savitar; those who offer this go to the birth of all.
25.9.3	Agni's is all the first; theirs becomes all the first who offer this.
25.9.4	And when it is a thousand-cow (gift), the highest Viraj consists of a thousand syllables; they stand in the highest Viraj.
25.10.1	They initiate at the time of Sarasvati's destruction.
25.10.2	They have twelve consecratory rites and twelve rites of initiation.
25.10.3	On the day when the Atiratra is performed, they separate the calves from their mothers. When the Atiratra has been completed, they perform the sacrifice with the Saṁnāyya (milk).
25.10.4	Having offered the Sannāyya oblation, the Adhvaryu throws the dice. Where they fall, there is the Garhapatya. From there he proceeds thirty-six steps, that is the Ahavaniya.
25.10.5	The sacrificial post is like a wheel, the Havirdhana shed is like a wheel. The Agnidhra shed is like a wheell. The mortar is like a wheel and the pestle is like a wheel.
25.10.6	They proceed with it being filled with the Āvāsya.
25.10.7	For them, on the full moon day, there is a Goshtoma Stoma, with Uktha and Brihat Sāman.
25.10.8	When the Goshtoma is completed, they offer the full moon sacrifice. They proceed with it decreasing with the full moon. For them, on the new moon day, there are Ayus Stoma, with uktha and Rathantara Sāman.
25.10.9	The path of Mitra and Varuna.
25.10.10	By this (verse) Mitra and Varuna conquered these worlds. Mitra and Varuna are the day and night. Mitra is the day, Varuna is the night. Mitra and Varune are the half-months. He who waxes is Mitra, he who wanes is Varuna. This Mitra pours the seed into Varuna.
25.10.11	The gods, by means of Sarasvati, established the sun. She did not succeed. She was bent. Therefore, she is bent. They established him by means of Brihatī. She succeeded. Therefore, Brihatī is the most powerful of the metres. They established the sun by means of that.
25.10.12	They go in the opposite direction, not in the same direction. Eight go in the opposite way to the previous fortnight.
25.10.13	For it is said, "For every one of them."
25.10.14	At Drishadvat only.
25.10.15	Having offered the cake to Apamnaptrya at the exhaustion of Drishadvat, they proceed.
25.10.16	The heaven world is as much distant from this as the heaven world is from the Sarasvati river. They proceed to the heaven world by the distance of the Sarasvati river.
25.10.17	By this (rite) the king of Videha, Nimi, attained heaven by a direct path. This is the reason why the Anjaskiyas are called Anjaskiyas.
25.10.18	He entered the Avabhrtha rite. That lake which is to the north of Sthula-arman, there his hundred cows and a thousand cattle would have met.
25.10.19	When a hundred cows are lost, they are looked for in the bull. When they are found in a thousand, then they are looked for.
25.10.20	When all the cattle are lost, then they are sought. When the householder dies, then they are found.
25.10.21	When they come to the river of the Plakṣa tree, then they are searched for.
25.10.22	Having reached Prāsravana on the Plakṣa, they offer an Isti to Agni Kama. Having given a cow and a human female as Dakṣiṇā in that,
25.10.23	they enter the waters of Yamuna at Karapachava for the Avabhrtha.
25.11.1	The Atiratra, the Trivrt, the Pañcadaśa, the Indra-Agni Ayana, the Go Ayushi, the Indra Kuksi Atiratra.
25.11.2	By this Indra and Agni became superior to other deities, and those who perform this (sacrifice) become superior to other beings.
25.11.3	Indra and Agni are the most powerful among the gods, and those who offer this (sacrifice) are the most powerful.
25.11.4	And why the Trivrt and Pañcadaśa are the path of Indra and Agni, the Goāyusī and Indrakuksī are for non-injury.
25.12.1	The Atiratra, the Jyotiṣṭoma, the Gauriṣṭoma, Āyuṣṭoma, Trīṇācakraṇa, Viśvajit, Abhijit, Indrakukṣi and Atiratra.
25.12.2	By this one conquers the world of Aryaman.
25.12.3	What is said as the path of Aryaman, this is indeed the path of the gods.
25.12.4	Those who perform this sacrifice attain the path of the divine.
25.12.5	Therefore he appeared like the dawn, for the path is like the dawn.
25.12.6	And as for the Jyotis, Gauri, Ayus, Tryah, Visvavaj, Abhijita, and Indrakuksi, they are for non-injury.
25.13.1	A Brahman should protect the cow for a year. For a year he should not kindle the fire in the ashes. He should kindle the fires at the end of a year.
25.13.2	He should offer the oblation on the southern bank of the Drishadvati with the Agniyeष्टाकपाल (Agniyeष्टाकपाला) formula.
25.13.3	Indra and Rusama both cast their dice, saying, "He who goes first over the earth wins." Indra went over the Kuru country, and Rusama said, "I have won, for I have gone first." Indra said, "I won, for I went first." They asked the gods, and the gods said, "The extent of Prajapati's knowledge is only as far as the Kuru country." They did not win.
25.13.4	He who, having performed the Agniṣṭoma sacrifice with eight pot-shaped oblations to Agni, and having crossed the river Dṛṣṭā on the southern bank, goes to the Tri-Plaksa region on the other side of Yamunā for the Avabhrtha rite, that becomes hidden from men.
25.14.1	The Agniṣṭoma is performed with eight pot- shaped oblations to Agni; the Indra-sacrifice with eleven pot-shaped oblatioṇs; the Vaiśvadeva rite with rice-gruel.
25.14.2	If an uninitiated person releases a black antelope skin, he releases the human power.
25.14.3	And whatever austerity is performed, that divine power is obtained by it.
25.14.4	When there is the Agniyesti with eight potsherds, it is the Agni-faced deities; indeed, he prospers through the mouth of the deities. And when there is the Prātahsavana, he prospers thereby. And when there are eleven potsherds for Indra, it is the Madhyamdina Sāvana for Indra; indeed, he prosperes thereby. And when the Visvedeva oblation is offered, it is the Visvedeva Sāvana; indeed, he prospares thereby.
25.14.5	By this very (rite) the ancient sage Purorishi attained all prosperity; he who approaches this (rite) attains all prosperity.
25.15.1	The two Atiratras (are performed) on either side of the Agnishtoma in the middle, the entire Dasahasti (rite) is the year, the Visuva (rite) is twelvefold, the Serpent-Samans are performed at the Visuva.
25.15.2	By this the serpents were established in these worlds. Those who perform this rite are established in these worlds.
25.15.3	The householder Jarvasa, Dhritarastra, Airavata, Brahma, Prithushvara, Daureshravas, the Udgata, Glava and Ajagava, the Prastotar and Pratihartar, Datta and Tasta, the Hotar, Shiti-pashta, the Maitravaruna, Takshaka, the Vaishaleya, the Brahmanachashni, Shikhin and Anushikhin, the Neshtar and Apota, Arun, Atochshava, Timirghosha, Daureshruta, the Agnid, Kautasta, the Adhvaryus, Arimejaya and Janamejaya, Arbuda, Gravas, Tu Dajiras, Subrahmanya, Chakkapishanga, the Unnetar, Shanda and Kushanda, the Abhigar and Apagar.
25.15.4	By this the serpents conquered death; those who perform this conquer death. Therefore they shed their old skin and go beyond. They have conquered death. The serpents are the Ādityas. For those who perform this, there is illumination like that of the Ādityās.
25.16.1	The first year is the course of the cows, then of the Adityas, then of the Angiras.
25.16.2	By this the cows attained the earth and propagation. Those who perform this attain many offspring. By this the Adityas established themselves in these worlds. Those who perform it attain stability. By this the Angiras went to heaven. Those who perform attain heaven.
25.16.3	Parāṇāra, Trasadasyu, Paurakuṭsa, Vītahavya, Śrāyasa, Kakṣīva, and Auśija, these, desiring progeny, performed the Sattrāyṇa sacrifice. They obtained a thousand sons each. Those who perform this sacrifice also obtain a thousand sons each.
25.17.1	The Atiratra (sacrifice) is a thousandfold, the Trivrt (stoma) is a year, the Atiratra is the thousandfold year of Prajapati.
25.17.2	By this Prajapati attained the creation of all, those who perform this attain the creation of all.
25.17.3	This is the sacrifice of Prajapati when he was old, by it he removed old age, those who perform it remove old age.
25.17.4	This is the thousand-year-long year of Prajapati. By this Prajapati attained all prosperity. Those who undertake this attain all prosperity.
25.18.1	The five hundred and fifty are the Trivṛt years, the five hundred and fifty the Pañcadaśa, the five hundred fifty the Saptadaśa, the twenty-five the Ekavimśa, the thousand years of the Viśvasṛj.
25.18.2	By this the Viśvasrjs created this world. Because they created the world, they are the Viśvasrj.
25.18.3	Those who perform this (sacrifice) follow the world.
25.18.4	Tapas is the householder, Brahman is the Brahman, the wife is the immortal, the Udgata is the past, the Prastotar is the future, the Pratihartar is the present, the seasons are the Upagatar, the seasons are members, truth is the Hotar, the Maitravaruna is strength, the Brahmanasci is lustre, the Acchashi and the Apota are the Apchitti, fame is the Acchavasaka, Agni is the Agnid, Bhaga is the Gravastut, energy is the Unneta, speech is the Subrahmanya, the breath is the Adhvaryu, the out-breath is the Pratiprasthata, the Diti is the Vishastata, strength is the Dhruvagop, the desire is the Havishya, the day and night are the Idhmavaha, death is the Samit, they are initiated.
25.18.5	This is the verse of the Creator: "In the first sacrifice, they sat for a thousand years, moving with the offspring. They are the guardians of the universe in the sacrifice. The golden bird goes by the name of Brahman."
25.18.6	Those who perform this sacrifice go to the world, the creation, and the union with Brahman. This is the thousand-year sacrifice of the creators. By this, the creators attained all prosperity. Those who perform this attain all prosperity.
