1.1.1	Brahma indeed was here at first.
1.1.2	The meaning of the words is explained.
1.1.3	His lustre and essence overflowed, and he became Brahma.
1.1.4	He meditated silently with his mind. What was his mind became Prajapati.
1.1.5	Therefore they offer silently with the mind to Prajapati, for the mind is Prajapati.
1.1.6	His head was heaven, his chest the atmosphere, his middle the ocean, and his feet the earth.
1.1.7	He created this entire universe. He gave the Sama Veda as a means of livelihood.
1.1.8	One who knows this becomes one who is to be supported.
1.1.9	The sound of the Sama Veda is like the best of sounds. The gods support it.
1.1.10	The first of the lower worlds is for men, the second for Gandharvas and Apsarases, the third for animals, the fourth for the Pitrs who dwell in the Ancestral Regions, the fifth for Asuras and Rakshasas, the last for plants and trees. Whatever else there is in the world, they say that it is food, for this is their means of subsistence.
1.1.11	He who knows this, becomes one who is to be supported.
1.1.12	Now, of this Sama, the verses are the bones, the tone is the flesh, and the praises are the hair.
1.1.13	He who knows the true nature of the Sama, and the gold, indeed, has the true nature and the gold of the Sama. The tone is the true nature of Sama, and that itself is the gold.
1.1.14	He who knows the support of the Sama Veda, indeed, stands firm in this world and the other world. The Sama Veda is indeed the support of the Veda. What is called the Veda is indeed the Sama Veda.
1.1.15	When he sings the Gayatra in the Brihatī, the Bṛhat in the Jagatī, and the Jagatī in the Tristubh, then he attains equality. Therefore it is said to be Sama. The metres are equal in this (Sama). Because of equality. That is the nature of Sama.
1.1.16	The first is the Prajapati, the second is the Brahmana, the third is the Vaishvadeva, the fourth is the Aditya, the fifth is the Sadhya, the sixth is the Agni, the seventh is the Vayu, the eighth is the Soma, the ninth is the Mandra, the tenth is the Mitravaruna, the eleventh is the Ati-svara.
1.1.17	The gods approached Prajapati and said, "How can we go to the heavenly world?" He gave them these sacrificial rites, saying, "By these you will go to the world." They went to the heavenly world by them.
1.1.18	He who knows this goes to the heavenly world.
1.1.19	Those who are not pure, those who desire sensual pleasures, they said, “How can we go to the heavenly world?” To them he gave this study of the Vedas and austerities, saying, “By these you will go to the heavenly worlds.” By these they went to the heavenly worlds.
1.1.20	He who knows this goes to the heavenly world. He who knows this goes.
1.2.1	Now, we shall explain the three Kṛcchra penances.
1.2.2	Having eaten the sacrificial food in the morning, one should not eat for three nights.
1.2.3	Then for another three days, one should eat at night.
1.2.4	Then for three more days, one should not beg from anyone.
1.2.5	Then for the next three days, one fasts.
1.2.6	One should stand during the day and sit at night, desiring to be quick.
1.2.7	He should speak the truth. He should not converse with the unrighteous. He should always use the Raurava and Yaudhajayas. He should perform the ritual of sprinkling water. He should recite the Aphiṣṭīya verses.
1.2.8	Then the water offering. Salutations to the one who is the source of delusion, the one who is deluded, the one who deludes, the one who shakes, the one who burns, the one who revives, the one who has the crescent moon, salutations to the one with the staff, the one with the rope, the one with good fortune, the one with peace, the one who brings peace, salutations to Brahma, the one who saves, the one who protects well, the one who provides great protection, the one who gives protection, the one with lotus-like eyes, salutations to him. Salutations again and again to the one who has a good form, the one who possesses a great form, the one with a middle form, the one possessing the supreme form, the one engaged in celibacy, salutations again and again. This is the same as the worship of the sun, and these are the oblations offered in ghee. At the end of twelve nights, having cooked a pot of rice, one should offer oblations to those deities: "Salutations to Agni, salutations to Soma, salutations to Agni and Soma, salutations Indra and Agni, salutations Indra, salutations to all the gods, salutations to Brahmā, salutations to Prajāpati, salutations to Svishtakṛt Agni." Then the offering to the Brahmins.
1.2.9	This is the Ati-kriyâ-kriyâ.
1.2.10	One should eat as much as one takes at a time.
1.2.11	The third is the water-eater. This is the Atiâti-kriyâ.
1.2.12	Having performed the first, one becomes pure, clean, and fit for ritual acts. Having performed the second, one is freed from whatever sin one may have committed except the great sins. Having performed the third, one is freed of all sins.
1.2.13	Then, having performed these three austerities, one becomes purified in all the Vedas, known to all the gods, and one who knows this and one who knows thus.
1.3.1	Now, then, about the study of one's own sacred texts:
1.3.2	Having spoken the truth, one should commence. Having performed three Kṛcchra rites at the end, one becomes pure. Having established the fire, or having resorted to water or the sun, having spread Kuśa grass, sitting on the Kuśa grass facing east or north, holding a handful of Kuśa grass with the right hand,
1.3.3	First, one should chant the Trivṛt (Stoma) nine times.
1.3.4	One who always recites this attains the Agnihotra.
1.3.5	"The Pavamāna oblations are offered to Indra with the verse, "O Indra, the Soma flows for you."
1.3.6	The Darsha and Pūrnamāsa sacrifices are performed with the verses, "O Suvarma, O Suvarmaya," according to this same procedure."
1.3.7	One should eat the food left over by servants and guests, and at the proper time one should take a wife. One should also give water to guests, even if only a little. One should always use these words: "I am Indra, just as you are." One should also use these words: "May you be protected by Suvarma." On a festival day, one should always offer the Agnihotra without interruption. Then the Darśa and Pūrṇamāsa sacrifices are performed.
1.3.8	Having established the fire at the end of the ritual, having thrice washed the rice, barley, and grains, one should offer oblations: "Svāhā to Agni, Svāhā to Soma, the purifier, Svāhā Varuna, the healer, Svāhā Prajapatī, Svāhā Brahma, Svāhā Agni, the well-done."
1.3.9	Now, the Pancharatrikas eat rice and barley. The Agnihotra is prescribed at the end. The rites for the Kamyas are not prohibited. "One obtains the Caturmasyas by reciting the four-verse hymn, "Indra, you are the one who makes us prosper." The animal sacrifice is performed with the verse, "He who sends forth."
1.3.10	The animal sacrifice is performed by reciting the verses, "We worship Indra, the protector," and "He who sends."
1.3.11	With the vow of drinking milk, he sings to Indra in the manner of the Brihatī verse. With the four-verse Sāman, he sings the Sāman verses.
1.4.1	Now, the rules for the Sapta-ratra-vrata. Some observe the vow of eating almsfood or milk. One should enter the village only for the purpose of alms, and not for any other purpose except for reciting one's own sacred texts. One should lie down on the ground, and not go near water. At the end, the rules for Agnihotra and other rites are mentioned, and the performance of rites for desired objectives is not prohibited.
1.4.2	One who recites the ten verses beginning with "Eṅkhayantīr" and then recites the Rathantara and Vamadevya verses in succession, attains the Agniṣṭoma sacrifice.
1.4.3	"O Agni, the sacrifices, the sacrifices, yours are the fires" with the four-verse (hymn) he goes beyond the Agnistoma. "O Agni, I bow to your strength" with the ten-verse (hymns) he goes beyond Stotra. "Purifying, O Soma, you hold" with the verse he goes beyond the Sodashin. "Pouring out the pressed (Soma) that has been purified" with the verse (he goes beyond) the Atiratra.
1.4.4	"He who is on the vow of milk, with this rite, the three voices rise up" with the verse, he goes beyond the Vajapeya.
1.4.5	"For a month, with this rite, they worship Indra, the giver of wealth, as he is described. The one who has attained the tenth day of the month should perform the sacrifice."
1.4.6	"In the fourth month, eating and offering oblations, one should purify oneself. The one who performs the twelve-day sacrifice should do so."
1.4.7	He who performs the Gavāmayana sacrifice with these hymns for a year, attains the Gavāmayani sacrifice.
1.4.8	The Rajana and Rauhina hymns are for Tapasci.
1.4.9	Soma, the progenitor of thoughts, flows by this rite. By the four-fold verse, one attains the Cāturmāsya rites of Soma.
1.4.10	Eating village food at the eighth time for a year, reciting the Pra Tu Drave verse ten times, one attains the Naimisha rite for twelve years.
1.4.11	One who recites the four verses beginning with "Agneya" in the prescribed manner for four years attains a life of a hundred years.
1.4.12	One who recites all the verses attains a life of one thousand years. One who fasts attains a life of ten thousand years by reciting the Sahasra-samhita or the Sahasra Prsthopatapa.
1.4.13	The first three verses are Savitri, Gayatri, and Maha-namani. The name of this collection is "Amrita". By this collection, the gods attained immortality.
1.4.14	He who knows this attains immortality.
1.4.15	This is your praise. The first and the best, you, O man, are the former of the great ones. The young, the wise, the giver of honey, the flowing, the Soma, the giver of sweetness, the giver of good form, the giver of delight, the giver of the Madhucchada metre. This is the Madhucchadā metre. By this metre the gods attained heaven.
1.4.16	He who knows this attains heaven.
1.4.17	The king of you all, the class of you all, and the offerings of ghee, and the divine vows, this is called the Rudra Samhita. One who recites this pleases Rudra.
1.4.18	"This is Vishnu, the Prakshya, the Prakshi of Vishnu, speaking like a sage. This is the last verse in the Purusha Vrata. This is called the Vaishnavi Samhita. One reciting this pleases Vishnu."
1.4.19	The verse beginning with "Adardah" and ending with "Suhaste" is the first and sixth. This is called the Vighnesa Samhita. By reciting this, one pleases Vighnesa.
1.4.20	O Indra, come with your gentle steeds. Come to us in all places. The leader of the army. The filter. These are the verses of Skanda. One who recites this pleases Skanda.
1.4.21	Or, "Agni, the lord of the house, has settled down from the beginning, for they have praised the three-backed one." The two verses are called "Pitrya" (Pitṛ-related). One who recites these verses pleases the Pitṛs.
1.4.22	Standing in water up to the mouth, one should recite the Akya mantra three times seven times. This is the extent of all speech. By this, one attains all desires.
1.4.23	He who knows this and he who knows this.
1.5.1	Now, then, of the expiations.
1.5.2	In the absence of a teacher, mantras become powerful, endowed with austerity, and purifying.
1.5.3	If he has committed a sin, he should perform the expiation.
1.5.4	The practice of the Sama hymns is one hundred and ten.
1.5.5	Having spoken Kaha, one should sing this: "I have done the work of Dadhikravan."
1.5.6	Having spoken Parusha, one should say this: "Vishnu has wandered."
1.5.7	Having spoken Brahmana, three times.
1.5.8	Having propitiated the elders of his family, such as his brother, maternal uncle, and father’s brother, and having fasted for one night, he should recite the verse “O Soma, I am your friend” twenty-one times.
1.5.9	He should fast for three nights for his preceptor, mother, and father, but not for anyone else.
1.5.10	One who has taught without being authorized to do so should fast for seven nights and always recite the verse "The cows are pure, the universal sustainers."
1.5.11	One who has performed a sacrifice without being authorized to perform it should give away his sacrificial fees and eat after a month, reciting the verse "The Kaniyas."
1.5.12	When seeing something unclean, one should recite the verse "Those paths are below, in the sky." Similarly, when smelling something unclean.
1.5.13	If one eats what is not fit to be eaten or eats impure food, one becomes free from excrement. One should observe a fast for three nights at least. One should recite the hymn "We praise Indra, the pure one" at the beginning, repeating it a thousand times.
1.5.14	Even if one commits many offenses, one becomes purified by reciting the three Anashnaparyaṇas.
1.5.15	Having drunk liquor, he should eat at the eighth time during the year, with his hands, whatever comes to him, facing downwards from the navel, upwards from the knees, wearing three garments, touching water thrice a day and at night, and reciting the purifying mantra. He should stay at places where he gets food and shelter at the village gate, and not move around. He should not speak his own duties in front of the four Brahmanas. He should eat before the village gate. He should go for necessities before the village gate only. If he does otherwise, it is suspect. At the end of the year, the Brahmanas should give him oil, salt, a razor, fire, a cow, and seeds, and ask him, "Have you performed your duties?" He should reply, "Yes, I have." They should say, "You have committed seven sins and seven others. Your conduct was false." He should reply, "Yes, I have." From then on, having shaved his head, beard, hair, and nails, and wearing a new garment, he should recite the benedictory verses for the Brahmanas and become purified.
1.5.16	By this rule, one who has killed a foetus, by this rule, one has killed a brahmin, by this rule one who has stolen gold, by this rule the one with three backs.
1.6.1	Having stolen brahmin's wealth, one should live in water for a month, and eat at the fourth time during the day outside. At the end of the vow, one should sing, "Your semen is one thing, your sacrifice is another."
1.6.2	Having stolen from another, one should perform the Kṛcchra and then recite this verse: "This man has committed a thousand offenses." This is the second verse.
1.6.3	Having killed the wife of one's teacher, one should recite this verse:
1.6.4	Having approached the wife of a brahmin, one should perform three Kṛcchra rites and then recite this first verse: "Brahma was born..."
1.6.5	Having approached the wives of others, one should perform Kṛcchra, and then recite this: "From the two fires..."
1.6.6	Having gone to a Śūdra woman, he should fast for three nights and recite the verse "O Agni, O Ida."
1.6.7	Having taken a wife out of season, he should control his breath three times and recite the verse beginning with "Kayanīya" twice.
1.6.8	Having stolen a cow from a Brāhmaṇa, he should perform three Kṛcchra rites and recite the verse starting with "Brahma, the born one".
1.6.9	Having taken from another, one should perform the Kṛcchra penance, reciting the verse, "O Soma, I follow your son." One should recite, "O Soma! I follow your son!"
1.7.1	Having accepted from a king, one should dwell in water for a month, eating during the day. One should recite, "Soma and Mahiṣa did this great deed."
1.7.2	Performing the Kṛcchhra penance for one who is not eligible to receive, one should recite, "In the Trikardrukas."
1.7.3	Stealing, one should fast for one night, reciting the verse "Agni is sharp..." as the second.
1.7.4	Having killed the life-force of a brahmin, one should recite the verse "O Soma, the god of sacrifice..." as the second, when blood flows from the throat.
1.7.5	Having killed a king or a vaishya who has gone to the Soma-pressing ceremony, one should recite "The brahmin's own ritual..." as the second to determine purity or impurity.
1.7.6	Having killed a Śūdra, one should fast for twelve nights and wear a garment of water. This is the second verse: "O Indra, this Soma is yours."
1.7.7	Having killed a cow, one should fast twelve nights and wear water garments. The second verse is: "We are the drinkers of your Soma."
1.7.8	Having killed any animal, one should fast one night and recite: "Agni with sharp teeth." The second verse is:
1.7.9	The Avakīrṇī, performing the three Kṛcchra rites, should recite the fourth verse, "May my son be sprinkled with water."
1.7.10	According to this method, the Parivitta and Parivinda should recite the verse, "Soma, the king, Varuna."
1.7.11	"If semen is emitted outside the proper place, the head is Agni, the womb is Ghrtavatī. The second body from here, mine."
1.7.12	Having served the livelihood of a Śūdra, one should perform three Kṛcchra penances and recite this verse: "The wheel."
1.7.13	In the livelihood of a Vaiśya, one should recite this verse: "The youth of Suparna." In the livelihood of a Kṣatriya, one should chant this verse: "Flow, O Soma, with honey for truth." Or this verse: "You have approached the ram."
1.7.14	This is always to be used.
1.7.15	The brahmin who curses falsely incurs the sin. One who reveals a secret becomes half-owner.
1.7.16	One who uses the verse "Agni is sharp" crosses it by that, and crosses it by that.
1.8.1	Having sold herbs, one should perform the Kṛcchra. Having sold cows, one should perform two Kṛcchra-s.
1.8.2	Having sold animals with teeth on both sides, one should perform Kṛcchra, reciting the verse "Who yokes today?"
1.8.3	Having received them, he should recite this verse: "May there be peace in the abode."
1.8.4	If one is performing the Kṛcchra penance for a maiden who has not been given away, and one has no brother, one should recite this verse.
1.8.5	Having received her, one should recite the same verse: "May peace be in the abode."
1.8.6	"The auspicious Agni has risen, he is offered oblations" - one should sing this. "He who has set, his magic does not work."
1.8.7	"O god Savitar, today do not let us have bad dreams." The second verse.
1.8.8	In the case of someone unknown, one should repeat the second verse.
1.8.9-11	He should offer barley grains smeared with ghee to Agni, saying, "May I be born with the next Dharma" and "To Agni Svāhā." He should offer sesame seeds to Agni, saying "May the gods not lead me away" and "To Indra Svāhā." He should observe a fast for one night. "Agni with sharp heat" is the second verse.
1.8.12	In the case of another, when unknown, the second is "Vritteshu".
1.8.13	Among men, in the direction of the wind, one should offer a measure of barley smeared with ghee, reciting the four-verse hymn beginning with "O Agni, you are our last resort" and ending with "Svāhā to Agni, Svāhā to Vāyu, Svāhā Surya, Svāhā Chandra." Having fed Brahmins with oily food without meat, and having recited the benediction, they will have well-being.
1.8.14	If cows are afflicted by wind, one should offer a ladleful of barley mixed with ghee, reciting the verse "O ye kings" and "Svāhā to Rudra". As long as the smoke reaches, there will be well-being.
1.8.15	If one wants to obtain horses, one should offer a handful of barley mixed with ghee in the direction of the horses. One should say, "May I obtain horses and chariots. Svāhā to the Ashvins." As long as the smoke reaches, one will obtain well-being. One will obtain well-beings.
2.1.1	Now, here are the rites for obtaining desires.
2.1.2	If one is not authorized, one should fast for three nights and begin with the Pushya constellation.
2.1.3	The first rites are for longevity.
2.1.4	"Then he should recite the two verses, "Agni has awakened, the great one of the three," and "O Indra, the men have come to the village, the song, and the life," and should conclude with "O Indra the protector, the offering. " "May there be welfare for you. " "Soma purifies, the best, the most excellent, the one who shines everywhere," and "The highest Varuna-noose," these are the verses of the auspicious group. One who recites any one, many, or all of these lives for a hundred years, and dies only through old age.
2.1.5	The two verses beginning with "Bhrajābhrajā" and ending with "Ha ū svartā" are the four verses of the Setuṣām. One who recites any one, many or all of these verses becomes purified.
2.1.6	Having received much, having performed the sacrifice, considering himself to be near, he who recites the verses on cows and horses, the verses on purity and impurity, and the verses on the slow one, becomes purified.
2.1.7	He who recites the verse "I have heard from you" becomes pure and attains the world of Brahma and does not return.
2.1.8	One who always uses the mantra "Udd uttama varunapāśam" does not get entangled in obstacles and is released from them.
2.1.9	One should eat with the mantra "Gauranta sarsapāṃstuce tunāy tat su na". One becomes long-lived.
2.1.10	He should always sip three mouthfuls of water, saying, "May Soma delight in me." By this he becomes long-lived.
2.2.1	Now, if the foetus of one who has conceived is destroyed, then having taken up the seed of the banyan tree and the root of the reed, one should make a three-stranded thread on that day, establish the fire, offer oblations while covered, deposit the gem, and offer oblations with the mantra "May the fire be awakened." One should offer oblations a thousand times. In the third month of pregnancy, one should deposit the remaining ghee. One should wear the gem in the girdle. It generates a male child. One should anoint the neck of the newborn child. One should make the young boy eat the remaining ghee. All the channels should be satisfied. One should anointevery day thereafter. If used again, one lives for a hundred years and dies only of old age.
2.2.2	Now, if one is seized by a demon, the wood of a tree struck by lightning, the butter of a white cow with a calf of the same color, or another, and a Bilva gem, having raised it, one should perform the Trivrit sacrifice on that day. Having established the gem in the fire and offered oblations, having placed the gem, one should offer with this mantra: "O Indra, the gem is the refuge in three forms." One should offer it a thousand times, and the gem should be worn on the neck or head. One who is released from the demon should always recite this mantra: "May there be well-being for him."
2.2.3	One who is afflicted by disease should offer this oblation a thousand times, and should conclude with the words "May he live for a hundred years." One should always eat with this mantra. One who is afflicted with disease is freed. One should always recite this mantra, "May Mitra-Varuna protect us." One attains well-being.
2.3.1	If he should have pain, he should anoint it with ghee, reciting the secret verse. He becomes well.
2.3.2	He should make him drink water with the two-verse formula. He should sprinkle him with cold water. He should recite these verses to him: "Soma, the king, from the beginning, Agni, Agni, the Hotar." He becomes well.
2.3.3	Having raised the Śaṅkhapuṣpī and the Sarpasugandhā, he should make the Trivṛt Agni. Having established the Agni and having offered the Agnihotra, he should place the gem and offer it with the verse "May the gem be protected by the leaders." He should offer it a thousand times. The gem worn around the neck or head does not cause fear from snakes. And in the Kāyaniya Sāman, one should always recite the Sarpasāman. One will have well-being.
2.3.4	Having raised the white-flowered Bṛhatī, one should perform the Trivṛt rite on that day. Having established the Agni and having offered the oblation, one should place the gem and offer it with the verse, "O gem, may you protect me from the wicked." One should offer it a thousand times, and the gem becomes a hundred times more powerful. For one who wears the gem around the neck or head, there is no fear from weapons. One should always recite the verse, "We are afraid of you, O Indra." One will have well-being.
2.3.5	Having raised the white-flowered Arka plant, one should perform the Trivrit rite on that day. Having established the Agni and having offered oblations, one should place the gem and offer oblations with the Arka plant. One should offer a thousand times. The gem, worn around the neck or on the head, makes one wealthy.
2.3.6	One who uses the names of the sun, such as Dīrghatamas, Arkashira, and Arkagrīva, obtains food everywhere.
2.3.7	One who uses the name of the fire god, Sam, obtains food everywhere and does not die of thirst.
2.3.8	One who recites the name of the sun god, Ishtahotri, does not die in water.
2.3.9	One should recite the third name, Achodas, so that the sun god does not afflict one with consumption.
2.3.10	"You are these plants" - one who always uses this, does not die with a sore.
2.3.11	"May your milk be" - one should eat the first morsel with the former verse, and swallow the poison with the latter. His food becomes poison, it does not harm him, it does not hurt him.
2.4.1	Having raised the Karavīra staff, one should offer oblations with the Anugaṇa mantra, holding it in one's hand wherever one goes, one will have good fortune everywhere.
2.4.2	By mentally contemplating and drawing around a city, village, house, or cowpen, no undesirable ones will enter there.
2.4.3-5	When he sees his enemies with uplifted weapons, he should mentally recite the Devavratas. They do not harm him. When there is danger from non-human beings, he should recite the Kyaniyatritaya. They do not hurt him.
2.4.6	Having risen from the path, he should go to the group, singing the verses, without any expectation. Having gone half the way, he returns. He is not harmed on the path.
2.4.7	No one else should sing it. He should be addressed with the words "You are a sage." He should turn to the right at the end of the half-verse and go away, looking back. Having returned safely, he comes back, not dying on the way.
2.4.8	"This is the new dawn." One should always recite this at the time of going to bed. "What has been done today, O Indra, the slayer of Vrtra?" One should recite this at the wrong time for going to bed.
2.4.9	Having fasted on roots and fruits for a month in the forest, he should stand before the rising sun on the full moon day of Rohini or Pushya, saying, "I have overcome darkness." From then on, he should practice that vow and eat that food for four years, and he abandons old age and death. He abandons old age.
2.5.1	Then there is one turn of human beings, whether women or men.
2.5.2	Having undertaken the vow by hearing.
2.5.3	Having made an effigy of the deceased with the sand of the preceding Pratipat, with the head towards the east in the morning, with the head to the south at midday, with the head westwards in the afternoon, with the head northwards at midnight, having occupied the heart region of that, one should recite this Brāhmaṇa: "This is the one" for a Brāhmaṇa, "This is the sheath" for a Kṣatriya, "This is Vibhūṣaṇ" for a Vaiśya, "This Indra is the giver" for a Śūdra, "We have gone beyond darkness" for all. One should make a golden effigy for a Brāhamaṇa, a silver one for a Kṣatra, a Udumbara one for a Vaiśa, an iron one for a Śūḍra, or an Udumbara one (for all). Having placed the effigy with the head towards east in the fire, one should offer ghee with the Udumbara ladle, reciting "This is the Savi" and "This is the Guṇī".
2.5.4	Having made an effigy of the crushed wheat, which has been broken with the nails, and having sweated it in the paste, having anointed it with mustard oil, having shaved off the limbs with a razor, one should offer it into the fire with the verse "May the weak ones" and should eat the remaining himself. If not, one would die.
2.5.5	Now, he who desires to make a family member turn back, should stand for one night with a razor attached to him, reciting the verses beginning with "The sweet-intoxicated ones" and ending with "The most sweet-intoxicated". One who recites these verses, either one by one or all of them, can make a family member return in one night.
2.5.6	In two nights he becomes the attendant of a king, in three nights a king, in four nights a village, in five nights a city, in six nights a country, in seven nights the Asuras and Rakshasas, in eight nights the Pitrs and Pisachas, in nine nights the Yakshas, in ten nights the Gandharvas and Apsarases, in half a month Vaishravana, in a month Indra, in four months Prajapati, and in a year whatever there is in the world, all that becomes his.
2.6.1-3	Now, then, of the auspicious ones. "He who Indra brought up high, that is your birth, O Soma." One who uses these nine or ten verses, either one or all, becomes auspicious. "One who always propitiates Indrani with the seven and eight verses beginning with "duandva". becomes auspicious.
2.6.4	One who eats for a year, without spitting, the Apamārga plant smeared with ghee and honey, with the verse, "May the auspicious Agni be offered to us," becomes fortunate.
2.6.5	One who conquers with these two verses, "The auspicious one is variegated," becomes fortunate. Here is the corrected and aligned text:
2.6.6	One who recites the verse "This Indra" becomes dear to all people.
2.6.7	"He who is dear to heaven, the wise one" - one should recite these verses to the one whom he desires. The one desired by him is the one who desires him.
2.6.8	One should recite these two verses to the one who is not his equal: "Indra, the king of the universe, is reciting." One should recite these two.
2.6.9	One should offer the foot-dust of her in the fire with these two verses: "These are the paths below heaven."
2.6.10	Having requested oil, he should rub his hands and heat it in the fire, saying, "O Agni, come! O Agni, come!" With the second verse, he should stop when the oil has been heated.
2.6.11	Having dried the Priyanguka, Sahā, Sahādeva, Adhyanda, Bhūmipāśaka, Sañcāñcapuspi, and Gojarayuka, which are not touched by the hand, he should make a powder of them on that day. Having mixed them with water three times with the mantra "Agni āyāhi vītayā," he should not see or touch them with impurity. That unguent is applied with it. Whichever one he touches, she desires him.
2.6.12	One should not touch a woman who is not bathed.
2.6.13	When the leaves of the lotus are gathered, then one should raise it and cut it off four fingers on both sides, and remove the middle. With that one should anoint oneself, and also the lower part. With the verse "May your wealth be in the lower part, O Lord of the World," those who are in the house and those who have renounced the world become obedient.
2.6.14	One who has fasted for one night should recite the verse "Come, O Soma, to us" at night on the new moon day at a crossroads and sprinkle with it. The one who is sprinkled three times is given.
2.6.15	"Your calves" is for a male.
2.6.16	Having fasted for three nights, on the fourteenth day of the dark fortnight, having brought charcoal from a corpse, having arranged a burning wood in the crossroads, one should offer oblations to Matsya and Krikara with the verses "O Agni, you are the great one" and "Agni is the Vritra". Having offered these two oblations, one should apply them with green vitriol and cow heart blood. One should apply them to the north, to the one whom one hates. One should scatter the bed of the one whom one dislikes with the verse "May he be the most afflicted". One should scatter the house with ashes. One should not reside in a single village.
2.6.17	Now, then, of those who are famous, you are Indra, the famous one. The famous one is purifying the famous one. These are one or many, or all. One who uses them becomes famous.
2.6.18	One should offer with Priyanguka in the Pushya constellation, saying, "May I be famous." That is an unguent. One should anoint oneself with it. For a year one becomes famous. One becomes famous.
2.7.1	Now, then, of those who desire Brahmic glory. One who recites the Rathantara, Vamadevya, Shyaita, Mahanama, and Yagyaya-jya hymns, either one or many or all, becomes one who possesses Brahmic glory.
2.7.2	One who recites the hymn "Who is that Indra?" twice becomes one who possesses brahmic glory and has faith.
2.7.3	One who recites the six-fold mantra becomes endowed with brahmic lustre.
2.7.4	One who fasts for eight nights and recites the heart of Prajapati after reciting the Brahmi mantra a thousand times, becomes endowed with the Vedas.
2.7.5	One who eats flowers and water mixed with honey for a year becomes endowed with the knowledge of the Vedas.
2.7.6	He should eat Soma for a month. The Sadaspati is wonderful. With this, one becomes a reciter of the Veda.
2.7.7	One should always recite this. One becomes a reciter and a compiler of the Veda.
2.7.8	Having raised the tongue of Bharadvaja's daughter, and having made it into powder on that day, one should mix it with honey and ghee and make the boy eat it before eating. With the verse "Indra is the singer, the great one," he becomes the reciter of the Veda.
2.7.9	One should eat for a year with the powder of half the weight of turmeric, following this method. One becomes eloquent.
2.7.10	One should eat with the powder of vacā, following this method, with the vow of speech, as before. One becomes eloquent.
2.7.11	He should offer a thousand times the fish, the eyes of fish, the conch, the flowers, the pearls, the oysters, and the ghee, with the Barhadgirena mantra. He should eat with this mantra. He becomes one who recites the Vedas.
2.7.12	He should make a gem of three parts of Vaca, having established the fire in a covered place, and having placed the gem, he should offer it with the Vratas of speech, a hundred times. He who wears that gem on his neck or head becomes the best in debates.
2.8.2	But not thee, O Agni, not thee, O lord of wealth, this Agni is born for great prosperity. The Soma flows not for the one who is beyond and the one who is below. The creator of thoughts. All these are his constant offspring. The Rathantara is the group of Vyahrtis. The two of them are one or many. One who employs all of them obtains handsome and long-lived sons.
2.8.3	Having cooked red rice in the milk of a cow having a calf of similar colour, one should offer it to Prajapati Parameṣṭhin in a thousand oblations. Having taken it back with this very (oblation), one should eat it along with one's wife. One obtains handsome and long-lived sons.
2.8.4	Having cooked a potful of black sesamum seeds in the milk of a black cow with a black calf, one should offer it on the fifth day of the dark fortnight when the moon has risen, reciting the verse "These plants are yours, O Soma." One should offer it a thousand times. Having taken it back with the same verse, one should eat it together with one's wife. One obtains handsome and long-lived sons.
2.8.5	One should offer ghee in the Kumbhya rite with the Purushavrata rite, eating it successively in the north. One obtains handsome and long-lived sons.
2.8.6	He who goes in front of the Uḍaṅga-vāsins, having taken him, should make a three-fold (rite) on that day. Having established the Agni and having offered the Avṛta, having placed the gem, he should offer with the third verse, "The thousand times born gem, the gem that is born with the sun." He who wears that gem around his neck or on his head becomes one who is followed by a hundred followers. He becomes one who is attended by a hundred followers.
3.1.1	Now, then, about grains.
3.1.2	The use of white garments, bathing, anointing, not spitting, always applying collyrium, speaking the truth, keeping a good mind, and shaving the hair, beard, body hair, and nails, except on the occasion of a vow, one should approach one's wife only at the proper time. One who observes this vow becomes prosperous, glorious, nourished, and blessed. One who uses any one, many, or all of these groups becomes prosperous, glorious and nourished.
3.1.3	And he should always recite this verse: "May the mountain protect our son." And he should conclude with this verse: "Let there be prosperity in me." He becomes prosperous.
3.1.4	He should always sip three mouthfuls of water, reciting these two verses: "This is the thousand-fold man" and "Let there be Prosperity." And he should conlude with this verse: "Let there be prosperity." He becomes prosperous.
3.1.5	He should offer the mixture of barley flour, curd, honey and ghee with the verse, "May the drops enter you." He should drink it with the verse, “May the drops enter me, may I not exceed Indra.” He removes misfortune.
3.1.6	One should buy ghee with the verse "Come, for you are very beautiful." One should drink it with this verse. One removes misfortune.
3.1.7	Having ground mustard seeds with the verse "Indra, with the fish-fat, etc." and mixed them with the verse "O Indra, with the fish fat", he removes all the bad luck by applying it to his face, hands, and all the limbs.
3.1.8	He should offer mustard seeds into the fire with the verse, "O Indra, whatever is firm and whatever is not firm," thereby he obtains gold.
3.1.9	He should offer rice and barley into the fire with this verse, "The sun shines, the sun sets," thereby he obtains grain.
3.1.10-11	Having placed a mixture of rice and barley with ghee and honey in his mouth, he should recite the following mantra with mental concentration and conclude with the word "svāhā": "May the great one be in the east." One who always recites this mantra will obtain a thousand. One should offer a thousand oblations with the mantra "These indeed see you." One will obtain a thousand.
3.1.12	One who has fasted for a month should offer oblations of Bilva leaves smeared with curd, honey and ghee, eight thousand times with the Śrāyantaīya mantra. If successful, they should be made of gold, if unsuccessful, of silver.
3.1.13	One should chew the betel nut smeared with ghee and honey, reciting the two mantras "Gavyā" and "Oṣu". One who does not spit and chews it for a year, obtains a thousand (cows). One obtains a thousand.
3.2.1	One who has fasted for three nights should offer a thousand oblations with the mantra, "May Agni, the auspicious one, not be offered." One obtains a thousand.
3.2.2	One should offer a thousand times with the oblations of Ficus glomerata wood smeared with ghee. One obtains cows.
3.2.3	One should make oblations of rice and barley into the fire. One obtains grain.
3.2.4	One who has fasted for twelve nights should offer a thousand oblations with the mantra, "O Vīrayu, you are indeed fasting." One attains a village and all these desires.
3.2.5	One who recites the eight hymns attains gold by the first, grain by the second, cattle by the third, sons by the fourth, villages by the fifth, fame by the sixth, brahminical lustre by the seventh, and heaven by the eighth.
3.2.6	One should offer a cow's mouthful for a year, saying, "The cows are indeed the same as the people." By this one attains the end and prosperity.
3.2.7	One who constantly recites the eight verses on beauty enjoys Lakshmi.
3.2.8	Standing in water up to the knees, or up to the navel, or up to one's waist, or up to mouth.
3.2.9	Up to the navel, one obtains grain; up to the waist, cattle; up to the mouth, sons and a village.
3.2.10	One who has not been expected, one who has made a dwelling, one who has sung, and one who has crossed over, obtains a thousand.
3.2.11	One should offer a thousand oblations with the ending "svāhā."
3.2.12	Among these methods, the more there are, the better it is.
3.3.1	When the cows are being driven out and brought in, he should stand at the door reciting the verses, "O Agni, the giver of wealth, O Agni, the giver..." They become many.
3.3.2	When food is served, he should offer the first portion into the fire with the verse, "O Agni of the shining sun, O Agni..." He should offer oblations with the verse beginning with "O Agni of shining sun..." and the verse beginning with "O Agni..." He becomes one who has many cattle, wealth, and grain.
3.3.3	One who has fasted for eight nights should offer a well-prepared meat dish to Maṇibhadra under a single tree in a forest, with milk, on the new moon day. This is the offering of honey for you, O Indra. With this, one obtains a golden pot.
3.3.4	One who has fasted for three nights should offer the meat of a black antelope or milk pudding on the fourteenth day of the bright fortnight. "He prospers through these divine nourishments, and his activities become many."
3.3.5	One who has fasted for three nights should offer fish on the fourteenth day of Krishna to the great king, with the verse "May the Asuras flourish with the verse "Sanśravas". His work becomes very extensive and he performs rites with it.
3.3.6	Now, then, the pacification of Vastu.
3.3.7	He should offer oblations to the directions, and also in the intermediate directions where the threads meet. He should smear the places where the threads meet with the leaves of Sami, Palasha, and Shriparni. He should sprinkle the places where the lines meet with unbroken rice, flowers, and the eastern Proshthapada constellation. Having established the fire in the house, he should sing the song "Dhanavantam karambhinam" and offer cooked rice to the fire. The offerings to the directions should be placed in the middle of Palasha leaves, with the mantra "To Prajapati, svāhā." The offerings to the intermediate directions should be placed with the mantras "To Indra," "To Vayu," "To Varuna," "To the Great King," "To Soma," "To Mahendra," "To Vasuki," and "To the sky." The auspicious and meritorious house becomes one with many cattle, wealth, grain, gold, long-lived men, heroic sons, well-favored women, and no widows. The rite should be performed for four months or again for a year.
3.4.1	Now, then, the unseen vision.
3.4.2	Having brought the grass from a place where there is a mixture of species, having placed the unbroken grains, perfumes, and flowers in a basket, having sat down facing east in a clean place, having placed the head towards the east, having sung this (verse), "Who has invoked this one?" one should sleep with restrained speech. One sees.
3.4.3	Or, having placed a mirror in a hollow, one should recite this: "May you come with good fortune." Having recited this, one should sleep with controlled speech. One sees.
3.4.4	One should make a virgin observe a fast and not see menstrual blood. "This mirror is the best fire." Having recited this at dawn, having wiped it with this, one should say, "Look." One sees.
3.4.5	He should make the people observe fast for eleven days. When the night has dawned, he should recite the verse, "To Mitra, to Aryaman" and then wipe (the face) and say, "Look." He sees.
3.4.6	Or, having smeared two bamboo-sticks with perfumes, he should keep them in the middle of the night, and having sung with this (verse) and wiped them, he should say to the two Brahmachari-s, "Hold them", and knowing their success by bowing down.
3.4.7	Having made the stick four inches long with the last (finger), one should keep it fasting. When the night has passed, having wiped it with this (stick) and having rubbed it, one should measure it with the joints of the fingers. When they are filled, it succeeds.
3.4.8	On the full moon day of Āṣāḍha, having kept the seeds, one should observe fasting. One should recite the verse "Indra is the deity of the scales" at dusk and then recite it again, wiping and sprinkling the seeds. The heavier ones will succeed.
3.4.9	He should make two heaps of the unhusked grains for the presence and absence of the sacrifice. When the night has dawned, he should sprinkle with the verse, "We have faith in the oblation to the gods," and then recite, "Do you partake." When one partakes of the presence, it is accomplished.
3.4.10	He should make two heaps of glowing coals without smoke, as many as are required, and should sprinkle them simultaneously with ghee with this verse: "O Agni, may I be the first to obtain the nine." The one that blazes first, moving clockwise with a smokeless flame, should be known as the victor.
3.4.11	He should make the Jyotishkas with human fat, freshly churned out, and should light them with this verse: "O Soma, the god-invoker!" The one who goes out last lives long. The one who goes last lives long.
3.5.1	One should consecrate a king on Pushya or Shravana.
3.5.2	Having brought water from the rivers, the oceans, and from the plants of Vrīhi, Yava, Tila, and Māṣa, and from the fragrant flowers, he should anoint himself on the auspicious seat of Udumbara, on the skin of a tiger with the hair pointing upwards, while seated, with the horns of living cows, saying, "May I be without enemies." This is the secret.
3.5.3	If one wishes that he should be the sole king and his army should not be defeated, one should consecrate him with a single bull.
3.5.4	One should give a village, a hundred female slaves, and a thousand (cows) to the consecrator, and he should be under his control.
3.5.5	If there is a miracle, one should offer a heap of barley with the mantra "May the wind blow as a remedy." It is pacified by this.
3.5.6	He should offer black sesamum seeds into fire with the mantra, "Agni is the giver of wealth." The rites do not harm him. They return to him.
3.5.7	He should offer rice and barley into fire with the five-fold Agnihotra mantra. The rites do not hurt him. They return.
3.5.8	Having made a seal of copper, silver, gold, or iron, one should offer the fourth oblation with the formula, "May the oblations be successful." One should hold the seal with the right hand. The oblations do not harm him, they return to him, they return.
3.6.1	One who is about to fight should offer water with the formula, "Soma, the king, Varuna." Then he should make him drink with the formula, "He who is the king of the people." If there are important ones among them, one should consecrate them with the eastern formula.
3.6.2	Then one should arm him with the verse, "The commander-in-chief."
3.6.3	Then he should yoke his chariot with the verse, "May a thousand, may a hundred come to you."
3.6.4	With the verses "Brihat" and "Rathantara," he should perform the consecration with the Vamadevya verse.
3.6.5	He should perform the consecration of the chariot with the verse "That bull of a chariot," and should sing along with him as he departs, starting with the verse "Indra's heroic deeds."
3.6.6	Having gone to the head, one should offer three arrows with the verse, "May Soma press you." One wins with this and does not lose.
3.6.7	One should offer a pot of ghee to a cow with a calf of similar color, in the presence of Dhūmrā. One wins with the secret verse, "Truth is thus" and does not lose.
3.6.8	He should offer a thousand oblations of twigs with ghee, saying, "May those who have drunk you before," and make the Vasat-call his final offering. He conquers and is not conquered.
3.6.9	He should offer a thousand oblations of sticks made of iron, smeared with ghee, reciting the verse "May I conquer like Indra, crushing the Dasyus." He should conclude with the verse "May he conquer and not be defeated."
3.6.10	One who has fasted for seven nights, with the intention of the seven principal ones, should offer one thousand oblations with mustard oil for seven days. They will not be there for seven nights.
3.6.11	Having made effigies of elephants, horses, chariots, and foot-soldiers out of flour, having sweated them in flour, having anointed them with mustard oil, having shaved off their limbs with a razor, one should offer them into the fire with the secret mantra "O hero, I praise you." If the word "hi" is used, then all become (affected) by the offering.
3.6.12	Having fasted for three nights, on the fourteenth day of Krishna (the dark fortnight), having brought charcoal from a corpse, having arranged a sacrificial wood in a crossroad, having offered a thousand oblations with a ladle made of Vibhitaka wood and mustard oil, where there is the sound of a buzzing, a man with a spear in his hand stands up. He should say, "Kill him!" He kills him.
3.6.13	Or, having cut off the limbs of the embryo with a razor, one should offer it into fire, while mentally contemplating the enemy with the four classes of Kshakas, he becomes immediately nonexistent. He becomes immediately nonexistent.
3.7.1	Now he who would like to wander around all the places of birth without being confused, should always use this (verse) at the time of dawn and remember it at the end of the day. He wanders around all the places without being confused.
3.7.2	Now he who desires, "May fire blaze everywhere for me," should carry fire on his head for a year. He should stand with the first (verse), "O Agni, come, O Vītayas!" He should go around with the second, and attend with the third. It blazes everywhere for him, and burns whatever he desires.
3.7.3	Now, he who desires to see the Pisācas as his own kinsmen, should eat at the fourth time of the day for a year, wandering for alms with a skull, and reciting the mantra "The child is the life-force" a thousand times at the end.
3.7.4	By using this method without begging, one can see the ancestors.
3.7.5	One who eats for a year, using his hands for the purpose of a vessel, and reciting these two verses, "O Vritra, I am seeking your abode" and "I am seeking your abode", a thousand times each, sees Gandharvas and Apsaras.
3.7.6	One who uses this method without begging, sees the gods.
3.7.7	The one who recites "May there be radiance" should recite this for four years according to this method. The treasures that belong to the gods become revealed to him.
3.7.8	One should fast for one month and eat only what is begged. Reciting "May there be brilliance in me," one should recite this for three years according to this rule. The treasures that are on the earth become revealed to him.
3.7.9	One who has fasted for eight nights should offer ghee in the mouth on the new moon day, reciting the two mantras "Agniṃ nara" and "Agniṃ naram" with mental recitation at the end, and offer it into the fire with the word "svāhā". When the night has passed, he will have five paṇas. Those spent will return again. One should not let the original amount become depleted.
3.7.10	The one who is at the rear of the cows entering, having wiped her head and tail, having withdrawn her hands, standing without moving, repeating the entire night, the second time, the Jāmbhakas become desirous of all desires, they become desirous of all.
3.8.1	Now he who desires, "May I not be reborn again,"
3.8.2	I take refuge in the night, in the earth, in Maya, in the maiden with the crest of hair, in the one with the noose in her hand, in the young woman, in the unmarried girl. The sun for the eyes, the wind for the breath, Soma for smell, water for affection, the mind for permission, the body for the earth.
3.8.3	She said to him, "You will die in this year, in this half-year, in this season, in this month, in this fortnight, in this twelve-day period, in this six-day period, this three-day period, two-day period, day and night, this day, this night, this time, this hour. Come, go to the heavenly world, to the world of gods, to the world Brahma, to the world Kshatra. Stand shining. Enter the womb of the shining one.
3.8.4	I shall not enter the womb of the supreme being, the daughter of Brahma, who is clothed in passion. One is born, dies and is bound.
3.8.5	May the night protect me. The night is the sky, the limit of flowers. The ancient space is there. May my place be there for non-return, for non-rebirth. This much is the vow of the night and the vow of the day.
3.9.1	Having eaten milk for four months, having followed the cows to the forest, having made a hut in a pure place in the forest, he should enter it, taking a water pot for sprinkling water. Having fasted for three or seven nights without water, reciting the two verses "I praise the Rg and the Sama" a thousand times each, if he sees the deities, it is accomplished. Then he should rise. The deities of the atmosphere become accomplished for him, and he can travel through the atmosphere. His doors also become opened.
3.9.2	One who recites this mantra with the second method becomes a lover of sensual pleasures and attains the speed of mind.
3.9.3	One should observe all the bright days, being pure, wearing white clothes, anointed with sandalwood paste, holding auspicious flowers, and reciting the mantra one thousand times before each day. One attains the sensual pleasures of humans.
3.9.4	One who uses this method for the second time goes to those gods.
3.9.5	One who uses this method of fasting for one month, eating only what is begged, and reciting "May I have radiance" for four years goes to the lordship of the three worlds, and even his old age is like that of one.
3.9.6	Now, those whose desires are not mentioned, their desires are to be known by the Smṛtis and the signs as mentioned in the scriptures.
3.9.7	The act is intentional.
3.9.8	This is the Prajapati-vidhi. Prajapati taught it to Brihaspati, Brihaspati to Narada, Narada to Visvaksena, Visvaksena to Vyasa, Vyasa to Jaimini, Jaimini to Pausijya, Pausijya to Parasarayan, Parasarayan to Badarayan, Badarayan to Tandisha and Satyayani, and they to many.
3.9.9	This should be told to a student who is returning after completing his studies.
3.9.10	Having given a village, a thousand cows, and a white horse to the preceptor, and having obtained permission, he obtains whatever he desires.
3.9.11	Vidyatirtha Maheshvara, by dispelling the darkness of the heart with the illumination of the meaning of the Vedas, has given the four goals of man.
