1.1.1	Brahma and Subrahma were indeed in the beginning.
1.1.2	Then Subrahma departed.
1.1.3	Then the gods took Brahma with the sacrifice.
1.1.4	Agni is Brahma, that Aditya is Subrahma.
1.1.5	The gods sought the union of the sacrifice.
1.1.6	This is indeed the union of the sacrfice, where this heap of ashes is.
1.1.7	Therefore, standing on the heap of earth, Subrahmanya calls out to Subrahmanya.
1.1.8	He says "Subrahmanya" three times, like calling out to a woman.
1.1.9	The gods are indeed three times.
1.1.10	"O Indra, come!"
1.1.11	When he says "O Indra, come!", this is his actual name. He calls him by that name.
1.1.12	Come, O Hari!
1.1.13	Hari is the name of Indra's two horses, by them he carries all this.
1.1.14	Of Medhatithi, the sheep.
1.1.15	Medhatithi was carried off by a sheep.
1.1.16	Of Vrusanasva, the ass.
1.1.17	Vrusanasva had a daughter named Menaka, whom Indra desired.
1.1.18	Of Gauravaskandin.
1.1.19	Having become a deer, he drinks the king from the forest.
1.1.20	"To Ahalya, the husband."
1.1.21	Ahalya, the wife of Maitreya, had a lover.
1.1.22	"To the Brahman Koushika."
1.1.23	Kaushika, the Brahman, approached her.
1.1.24	"To Gautama, the speaker."
1.1.25	The gods and the Asuras were engaged in a battle. Gautama was resting in between them. Indra approached him and said, "You should act as our spy." He replied, "I am not willing." Then he said, "I will act in your form." He said, "As you think." Whatever Gautama said, he acted in the form of Gautama. This is why it is said, "Gautama."
1.1.26	"Thus, O Maghavan, come to the Sutiya."
1.1.27	Just as one would say, "I am the cook for you all," so he said to the gods, "Come to the Sutiyas."
1.1.28	"The gods are the Brahmanas."
1.1.29	The gods are indeed the gods. But these human gods are the Brahmins who are obedient and listen.
1.1.30	The oblations are the share of the gods, the Dakṣiṇās are the share of human beings. By oblations he pleases the gods, by Dakṣiṇā the human beings. He pleases the Brahmanas who listen and recite.
1.2.1	Then when Subrahmaṇya calls out to Subrahmaṇyā, at that time the Asuras and Rakṣas tried to destroy the sacrifice of the gods.
1.2.2	The gods cried out, "Brahma! Subrahma!"
1.2.3	Then Aditya, as Parjanya, the leader, advanced against them and struck them with rain, lightning, and thunder.
1.2.4	They say that the female is the most excellent, the male is the second, and the neuter is the third.
1.2.5	One should say that everything is so.
1.2.6	When Parjanya went forth as the cloud in front, that is the male; when it rains and when it thunders, that is the female; when it is lightning, that is the neuter. Therefore one should say that everything exists.
1.2.7	They say that the Rk is the Subrahmaṇya, the Yajus is the Sama. One should say that it is all. The name of this is like the Rk, Subrahmaṇyā. Therefore, the Rk is a mantra. Thus, this becomes a statement. Therefore, those who perform the Sama perform it as others do with the Sāmas. Therefore, the Sama. Therefore, one should say that it all.
1.2.8	Then, having called out to Subrahmaṇyā, he makes the sacrificer recite (the verse) for the removal of Rakṣas.
1.2.9	"He says, 'May the earth be your foot.' He says, 'May heaven be your foot.' The demons and Raksases that are in heaven, he strikes them down with that. He says, 'The directions be your foot.' Those demons and Raksasas that are in the directions, he strikes them with that. He then says, 'The supreme region of Brahman be your fifth foot.' The supreme region of Brahman is indeed the fifth foot. He then says this, 'May you milk the nourishment and strength.' He milks the nourishment and strength for him. He then says 'May you obtain the food and nourishment.' He obtains the food and nourishment for him.
1.2.10	This is the name of the Brahmanical hymn, and this is the hymn of the Brahmanical student. Therefore, when the morning recitation is performed and the sacrifice is concluded, the Brahmanical student invites the Brahmanical student to recite the Brahmanical hymn.
1.2.11	He who gives the Brahmanical hymn to the Brahmanical student who is united with it, attains the Brahman and the Brahmanical student (himself).
1.2.12	He who knows this, prospers his sacrifice with Brahman and prosperity.
1.2.13	Now they say that this is the atonement for what is known and what is not known. Therefore one should do this with one who knows, not with one who does not know.
1.3.1	The morning pressing has one metre. Therefore a man takes another with one foot and stands with another.
1.3.2	The Pavamāna (hymn) has three Gāyatrī verses; hence the three lower Prāṇas.
1.3.3	There are two Gāyatrī Sāmans; hence one does it with the lower Prāṇa.
1.3.4	There are also two Brhatī Sāmans; therefore with the upper Prāṇa. 
1.3.5	There is one Trisṭubh Sāman; therefore there is only one navel.
1.3.6	The Prāṇas are like the support.
1.3.7	Now, as for the subsequent (verses), they are the (verses) of the back.
1.3.8	The (verses) of Brihatī (metre) are one Gāyatrī (verse). Therefore, the shoulders are of Brihatī metre, and the hips are of Brihaty metre. They approach the back.
1.3.9	Now, as for the (verses) subsequent to that, they are the (verse) of the Pavamāna (Stotra).
1.3.10	The breath is Gāyatrī, the ear is Uṣṇīka, the Kakubha, the speech is Anushtup, the eye is Jagatī.
1.3.11	What is not nourishment is nourishment.
1.3.12	Two Gāyatrī verses are the two Sāmans. Therefore, he makes two things with Prāṇa: he breathes in and he breathes out. One metre, Kakub and Uṣṇih. Two Sāmans are there. Therefore, the hearing organ, though one, hears in two ways. Two Anushtup verses are the two Samans. Therefore, he does two things with speech: he speaks truth and falsehood. One verse is the Jagatī verse. Therefore, the two eyes, though one, see two things. He does not see what comes from behind.
1.3.13	Now, what is above that, is the Yajñāyajñiya.
1.3.14	He who knows this becomes the head of his own people.
1.3.15	Other limbs are like below, and the head is like above. Other people are like below him, and he is like above his own people. He who knows this becomes head of his own.
1.3.16	They say, "The sacrifice was born, and then it was born." This one is born, this one is born with the umbilical cord intact, this one is the one who knows the priestly duties, he who recites this Veda. When one recites this Veda, then they listen to him, saying, "He is reciting." That is how one is born.
1.3.17	The Gāyatrī with fewer syllables at the morning pressing is for the propagation of offspring, for offspring are born as it were from less.
1.3.18	The Gāyatrī verse with fewer syllables at midday pressing is for the prosperity of offspring, for they are born as itwere from less.
1.3.19	At the evening pressing the Gāyatrīverse with fewer syllables is for the prosperity in the world of the sacrificer, for the sacrificer is in the middle of the sacrifice.
1.3.20	The Gāyatrī verse is deficient in syllables, because the Prāṇa and Apāna are deficient in utterance.
1.3.21	The Yajñāyajñīya verse is deficient in the number of syllables, because the Utsṛṣṭi (the release) of the Prāṇas is deficient.
1.3.22	If one were to pour out the full (vessel), if one were to go away, if one were to fall into misfortune, or if one were not to go away, it would leak out.
1.3.23	They say, "These are the Utsṛṣṭis of the Savanas and the Prāṇs."
1.4.1	"O Adhvaryu!" he says. "O Udgātṛ, do not recite the Prātaranuvāka to the Hotṛ without informing me."
1.4.2	The Adhvaryu says:
1.4.3	"He goes when called. He approaches the Havirdhāna (shed) through the eastern door.
1.4.4	Sitting towards the north, facing the northern wheel of the southern Havirdhāna, he sings the Viśvarūpa hymn.
1.4.5	The Stotra is the Kshatra, the Sastra is the Vit. He makes him go to the Kshatra with the Vis, with the power of the Kshatra. And for the beginning of the Stotra and Sastra, for non-falling, for continuity.
1.4.6	Now Glava Maitreyā said, "I will declare the sin of the day at dawn." He sat down in the assembly on the day of fasting and sang the Visvarupa hymn while facing north.
1.4.7	The Adhvaryu may be blamed, saying, "What did the Hotṛ recite in the morning recitation?" He should say, "I did what was my duty. You are asking me about the duty of the Hotṛ." The Hotṛ may be blamed, "What did you recite in the morning?" He should say "I did what I was supposed to do. You are asking about the duty of a Hotṛ." The Udgātṛ may be blamed "What did the Hotr recite in the morning?" He should say, "I did what was mine to do. I sang what was to be sung.
1.4.8	If they say to him, "You have gone to darkness, not to light,"
1.4.9	He should say, "I have gone to the light, not to darkness. You have been enveloped by sin and darkness." He says this because he wants to strike them with sin and darkness.
1.4.10	He says, "I yoke the hundred-footed speech." Speech indeed is hundred-footed. The Rk is hundred-footed, hundred-footed. He makes himself and the sacrificer hundred-footed.
1.4.11	He says, "I sing the thousand-footed." The Sama indeed is thousand-footed. He indeed makes himself and the worshipper thousand-footed.
1.4.12	The Gāyatrī, the Tristubh, and the Jagat are the Gāyatrī metre, the Tristubha metre, and the Jagati metre. The morning pressing is Gāyatrī; the midday pressing is Tristubha; the evening pressing is Jagatī. He thus arranges the pressings in their proper places and in their proper forms.
1.4.13	"All forms are gathered together." Thus he gathers together wealth for himself and for the sacrificer.
1.4.14	"The gods have made the places."
1.4.15	He who knows this, makes the sacrifice his own.
1.4.16	The Kasyapas, it is said, used to chant the Asita-Mriga-sutra. Then the Brahmanas chose the young Kusuru-bindu, the son of Auddalaki, to chant the Udgitha. They said to him, "He is taking away our priestly duties. Let us dissuade him." When they approached him to dissuade him, he said, "Brahmanas, let me have your blessings. I have established the sacrifice in the morning. Just as one would repair what is broken or damaged in a house, so I will repair the sacrifice." They got up, saying, "Who told him this?"
1.5.1	Indra indeed spoke the eulogy to Vishvamitra, and Brahma to Vasishtha. The eulogy is speech, indeed, to Vishvamitra; the mind is Brahma to Vasishta.
1.5.2	This indeed is the Brahma of Vasishtha.
1.5.3	One who knows this should indeed make Vasishtha or Brahma.
1.5.4	Just as one who has a chariot with two yokes can go in whatever direction he wishes, so one who has this sacrifice with two yokes attains whatever desire he may have.
1.5.5	Now the mind is half of the vital airs. When he utters, he establishes it in speech. Just as one cannot go in any direction with a chariot having only one axle, so is this.
1.5.6	As much as they would do with a verse, a mantra, or a Saman, so much the Brahman-priest should restrain speech and desire.
1.5.7	Prajapati created these three Vedas. They, having been created, did not follow him. He pressed them. From them came forth the syllables "bhūr", "bhuvah", "svar". "Bhūr" came forth from the Ṛg verses. This became the world. "Bhuvah" came forth from Yajus. That became the world of the atmosphere. "Svar" came forth from Sāman. That became the heavenly world.
1.5.8	If one were to perform the rite of the Rgveda in a forceful manner, one should offer the oblation with the words "May the earth be svāhā" after approaching the Garhapatya. The Garhapatya indeed is this world, and the Rgveda is this world. Thus one nourishes this world and the Rg Veda with its own essence.
1.5.9	Now if the Yajurveda is to be performed in excess, one should offer the oblation with the formula, "To Bhuvah, svāhā," having gone to the Anvāhāryapacana. The Anvāhāryapacana is the world of the atmosphere, and the Yajurveda belongs to the world of the atmo- sphere. Thus he nourishes the world of the atmos- phere and the Yajur Veda with its own essence.
1.5.10	If the Samaveda is to be performed in excess, one should go to the Ahavaniya fire and offer the oblation with the formula, "Svāhā to the heaven." The Ahavaniya fire indeed is the heavenly world, and the Samaveda is the heavenly world. Thus he prospers the heavenly world and the Samaveda with its own essence.
1.5.11	Therefore, one should offer in all the fires in succession, whichever of them is most intense. Thus his sacrifice becomes un-diminished and accomplished.
1.5.12	Now when the sacrifice has been diminished or broken, it goes forth in three ways: to the gods in heaven, to the men in the third heaven, and to the fathers in the third heaven.
1.5.13	He should touch the gods. The sacrifice went to heaven. From there may it bestow wealth on me. The sacrifice went into the atmosphere. From there may the sacrifice bestow wealth on me, the sacrifice went to the earth. From there may sacrifice bestow wealth on the ancestors. From there may wealth be bestowed on me. Wherever the sacrifice went, from there may wealth be given to me. Thus he bestows wealth on himself and the sacrificer with his own juice.
1.5.14	Varuna indeed offers the sacrifice to Vishnu.
1.5.15	If the sacrifice is performed with excess, one should place it near the water. "The two who have conquered the dusts with their strength, the most heroic, the most powerful, who are the lords of the irresistible forces, Vishnu and Varuna, have gone to the one who was invoked first, svāhā. Thus he nourishes himself and the sacrificer with his own essence."
1.6.1	Those who worship Viraj, they, desiring Viraj, toil in the other world. But those who obtain her here, they, desiring viraj, toil in this world. They toil thus, their good deeds are exhausted, for they cannot in the other world do what they do not do in this world.
1.6.2	This is what Uddālaka Āruṇi said: "How can they worship or perform sacrifices, if they do not rejoice in the prosperity of the sacrifice?"
1.6.3	"I myself should worship at the right time, I myself should perform sacrifices at the right time. I do not rejoice in prosperity of the sacrifice."
1.6.4	Even if one has enjoyed the sacrifice for the sake of pleasure, one will attain greater and greater benefits by performing the sacrifice.
1.6.5	Now, indeed, he who knew this said: "As much as the Hotri does by means of the Rc, so much is the sacrifice in the Hotri; as much as the Adhvaryu does by means of Yajus, so much is it in the Adhvaryus; as much as Udgatr does by means of Saman, so much is in the Udgatrs; as much as Brahman does by means of Brahma, so much is there in the Brahman; where they cease.
1.6.6	Therefore, when that (sun) sets, Brahma should desire to speak.
1.6.7	If he speaks carelessly, he should mentally follow these Vyahrtis: Bhuvar, Bhuvah, Svar.
1.6.8	This is the Vishnu-like radiance that Vishnu has spread.
1.6.9	A monkey, taking the king's silken garments, climbed a tree.
1.6.10	He, Haruni, having raised the oblation, said again: "You will offer them here, but you will offer them to the dead."
1.6.11	He said: "What will you do?"
1.6.12	Expiation."
1.6.13	"What is expiation?"
1.6.14	"All expiation."
1.6.15	"What all expiation?"
1.6.16	The great invocations, O Maghavan.
1.6.17	He said, "O Aruṇa, when you offer a libation, how do you know that the monkey takes the grass?"
1.6.18	He said, "Whatever is known and whatever is unknown, this alone is the atonement for all."
1.6.19	Therefore one should offer this alone.
1.6.20	"If one does not know, one should offer with the verse, "O Agni, do thou arrange (the oblations). Thou knowest how to do it. Svāhā!" Or with the verse, "O Prajapati, these beings are thy offspring. No one else is like thee. Svāhā!" "We offer unto thee for whatever desire we may have. May that be ours. We shall be the lords of wealth. Svāhā." He thus nourishes himself and the sacrificer with his own essence.
1.6.21	Now whatever thing made of clay is broken at a sacrifice, one should touch it and say, "Earth has gone to earth, mother has gone to mother. May we be with sons and cattle. Let him who hates us be broken." Thus he nourishes himself and the sacrificer with his own juice.
1.7.1	When they pour Soma, it is as if they were killing the king Soma. It is as if he were dying. They make this offering to him as a means of protection. Therefore, for a man, a means of protection is made.
1.7.2	The gods, the Sadhyas, were sitting in a sacrifice when the dice were born among them. They approached Indra. "How can the dice be born among them?" "You know them." He gave them this oblation of ghee in the Soma rite. They looked at it and saw. "He who knows this and looks at the Soma oblation becomes one who sees, not blind."
1.7.3	If one is not hungry, but does not eat, he should go to the southern half of the sacrificial place and eat the remaining portion of Soma. If one is not really hungry, but does eat, he steals food from the people. The people eat food through their children. One becomes a giver of food.
2.1.1	Prajapati desired, "May I be many, may I beget offspring." He sang this verse of semen, concealed by the Saman. If he had sung a verse without the Saman, he would have been born without flesh and bones. If he had been born with flesh and bones without the Saman and verse, he would have had flesh and bones without a Saman and verse. He sings the verse concealed by the Samana. Therefore a man is born concealed by flesh, skin, and hair.
2.1.2	He takes it three times.
2.1.3	These are the three worlds; for the securing of these worlds, and from three places semen is emitted.
2.1.4	One should not utter a sound.
2.1.5	The sound 'hiṃ' is a thunderbolt; semen is like strength. If one were to utter a sound, then the semen emitted would be cut off by the thunderbolt-sound.
2.1.6	With the metre of the semen, with the deity Prajapati, meditating on all this, one should sing. For all this is semen.
2.1.7	He sings the second verse.
2.1.8	It has two syllables. He places the last of the middle foot and the first of the last foot in between.
2.1.9	The Prāṇa and Apāna, placed in between, produce offspring.
2.1.10	The Gayatri metre, the Agni deity, and the earth, meditating on these, one should sing.
2.1.11	He sings the third verse.
2.1.12	He sings it as if it were strong, as if it were the chest.
2.1.13	He illuminates two syllables in the last half of it.
2.1.14	He yokes the eye, hence the eye is yoked.
2.1.15	With the Tristubh metre, with Indra as the deity, one should sing, thinking of the atmosphere.
2.1.16	He sings the fourth verse.
2.1.17	He sings it with four verses each, as if playing, up to twelve syllables.
2.1.18	The Jagati has twelve-syllabled feet. Jagati is cattle. He indeed stands firm in cattle.
2.1.19	And it shines with four syllables in its upper half.
2.1.20	It connects the ear, therefore the ear is connected. There are two ears and two echoes. Therefore a person hears in all directions, even if he hears from afar.
2.1.21	One should chant with the Jagati metre and the Sun as the deity, thinking of heaven.
2.1.22	He sings the fifth.
2.1.23	He sings as if roaring.
2.1.24	He eats more food than many men. He becomes the eater of food, he who knows this.
2.1.25	He sings the defined and the undefined.
2.1.26	Those who know the defined enjoy speech; those who know the undefined enjoy it. He who knows this enjoys speech and lives by it.
2.1.27	With the Anushtubh metre, with Prajapati as the deity, one should sing all this, thinking of it as belonging to Prajapati, for everything here belongs to Prajapati.
2.1.28	One sings the sixth verse.
2.1.29	It has two syllables each. One sings the sixth verse, leaving out six syllables.
2.1.30	There are six seasons. One stands firm in the seasons.
2.1.31	The metre is Gāyatrī, the deity is Soma, and one should sing, thinking of this direction.
2.1.32	He who sings the Tristubh at the morning pressing, the Jagatī, the Anushtubh, and the Paṅkti, goes both here and there with his mind.
2.1.33	He sings two Gāyatrī verses.
2.1.34	That indeed is the breath, for the Gayatri is the breath. That indeed is the path, for the Gayatra is the path.
2.1.35	He sings the highest verse of the Rathantara.
2.1.36	This indeed is the Rathantara, he stands firm in this.
2.2.1	Those indeed are yoked for the world of the gods, those which are beyond.
2.2.2	Those which are behind are for the world of men.
2.2.3	This indeed is the one who is born, this is the one who has not lost the placenta, this is the priestly one, for whom the verses are sung. He who, knowing this, sings the verses, makes him who is born fit for food. Both the Udgātṛ and the sacrificer eat food.
2.2.4	One should sing the first one, thinking of it as food.
2.2.5	He gives back the food-grains which have been sprinkled with semen.
2.2.6	One should not utter a sound.
2.2.7	If one were to utter a sound, the semen sprinkled would be cut off by the sound of the thunderbolt.
2.2.8	The metre of semen is joined, the mind is deposited.
2.2.9	The second is the Gayatri. I sing the Gayatri. The two syllables of the Gayatri are placed one above the other, the last of the middle foot and the first of the last foot. The two Prāṇa and Apāna are placed one above another. The Gayatri metre is joined. The Prāṇa and the Apāna are thought of.
2.2.10	The third is the Tristubh. I have come to the Tristubh, singing. She has two syllables in the upper half. He illuminates the eye. He yokes it. Therefore the eye is variegated. One is black, the other is white. The Tristubh metre is yoked. The eyes are seen.
2.2.11	The fourth is the Jagati. I sing that Jagati. It has four syllables in the upper half. It illuminates the ear. It yokes the ear. Therefore the ear is yoked. There are two ears and two echoes. From that also one hears what is beyond. The Jagati metre is yoked to the ear. The ears are understood.
2.2.12	The fifth is the Anushtubh. Having sung it, one should sing it in four ways. The man is divided into four for the sake of valour. For the sake of valour, he sings it in four ways; he should sing it as if high and low, for the speech is high and low; he should sing as if compressed, for the man speaks with compressed speech. The Anushtubh metre is yoked, the speech is arranged.
2.2.13	The one who sings the sixth (verse) goes to the Panka (verse). He sings two syllables of each (verse). He goes to six syllables. There are six seasons. He indeed stands in the seasons. The Panka verse is yoked with the Chanda (verse). The two verses are sung together.
2.2.14	"The first verse ends with the word "sat," because it is from semen that one is born."
2.2.15	The second (verse) is called 'Sam' because it is the source of the second (verse).
2.2.16	The third (verse) is 'Svar' because one knows the heavenly world through it.
2.2.17	The fourth (verse) is said to be 'Ida' because Ida is the cattle, and one stands firm in the cattle.
2.2.18	The fifth (verse) is known as 'Vāg' because all the auspicious words speak in it.
2.2.19	He who knows this.
2.2.20	He should sing the first one as if he were stretching it, for this downward-moving breath is like a stretched bow.
2.2.21	He should sing the second one as if it were a buzzing sound, for this downward breath is like a buzzing sound.
2.2.22	He should chant the third one as if it is being raised, for this upward-moving breath is as if being raised.
2.2.23	The fourth one should be sung as if it were a play, for the Vyana is like a play.
2.2.24	The fifth one should be sung like a well-defined and undefined (verse), for the Sama is like a well- defined and undefined (verse).
2.2.25	The sixth one should be sung facing upwards, for the Udana is like facing upwards, and the Udana is the peak.
2.2.26	One should sing the highest Rāthantara verse. This (verse) is Rāthantara. One stands firm in this (verse).
2.3.1	The gods and the Asuras competed for these worlds. The gods approached Prajapati.
2.3.2	He gave them these vital airs: first the mind, then the breath, then the eye, then the ear, then the speech.
2.3.3	From those five burdens he created the man and the animals.
2.3.4	With that man he drove away the Asuras. In that he drove them away, therefore it is called Dhura (burden). He who knows this drives away evil, his enemy.
2.3.5	He who knows the truth of the burden, becomes superior to his rival. The truth of the burden is that the verses of different powers, different forms, different metres and different deities, come together in the same cry. He who knows this truth of the burden becomes superior to his rivals.
2.3.6	He who knows the great vow of the yoke, all auspicious words speak to him.
2.3.7	The head is Gāyatrī, the chest is Triṣṭup, the middle is Jagatī, the feet are Anuṣṭup. All auspicious words speak to one who knows this.
2.3.8	He who knows the yoke thus and practices its vow, auspicious fame comes to him the day before he arrives.
2.3.9	The fragrance is indeed Surabhi. The vow of the Gāyatrī is to be seen, of the Tristubh to be heard, of the Jagatī to be enjoyed. Whatever good one speaks with the voice, that is of the Anushtubh. That is the vow of all.
2.3.10	They say of him who knows this, "He has spoken to us." One should not heed that.
2.3.11	For him whose burden is sung, the others are sung.
2.3.12	Those whose (hymns) are sung in the Bahispavamāna (Stotra) in the different kingdoms, their hymns are sung.
2.3.13	He who desires, 'May the sacrificer attain fame in one way, and may the subjects be as they are commanded', should sing in the Hotri's clarified butter. The sacrificer attains fame in one way and the subjects become as they are commanded.
2.3.14	If one desires, 'May the offspring be as desired,' one should sing as if it were ghee. The offspring are as desired, and the sacrificer becomes so.
2.3.15	He who thus conquers the Veda, the invincible, for himself and the sacrificer, conquers the world, and carries the sacrificer, the self, beyond death, to the supreme heavenly world.
2.4.1	The Adhvaryu carries Agni towards the east; therefore the Hotṛ recites while sitting towards the east, the sacrificer offers while sitting towards the eastern direction, the Prastotṛ praises while sitting towards the cast.
2.4.2	The sun moves towards the east and towards the west; therefore the Adhvaryu moves towards the east or towards the west.
2.4.3	The moon moves towards the south; therefore they place the Brahman towards the south.
2.4.4	Now, in this northern direction, the rain-god shines forth most. Therefore, the Udgātṛ recites facing that direction.
2.4.5	Now, this space is the middle of all beings. Therefore, they place the Sadasya in the middle.
2.4.6	The waters are high and low, shallow and deep. Therefore, they perform with the Hotr-chant and the Pañca-rc chant, and with the greater (chant).
2.4.7	The rays of the sun follow the path. Therefore, the Camasādhvaryus follow the path of the Adhvaryu.
2.5.1-3	He desires to be invoked at the morning pressing, when the offerings have been brought in. "May Agni, my Hotṛ, invoke me. May the Hotṛ invoke me." "May Āditya, my Adhvaryu, invoke me. May the Adhvaryu invoke me."
2.5.4	The Moon is my Brahman. He should call out, "O Brahman, call me."
2.5.5	Parjanya is my Udgata. He should call, "O Udgata, call me." "
2.5.6	Space is my Sadasy. He should call "O Sadasy, call me."
2.5.7-10	May the waters, the Hotr-invokers, invoke me, the Hotr invokers. Invoke me, the Hotrs. Thus loudly. May the rays, the Camasadhuta-invokers, the Camasadhutas invoke me. Invoke me, Camasadhutas. Thus loudly. Thus loudly. These are the deities who invoke the priests with their own voices. He is invoked and eats.
2.5.11	The sacrificer is the Prāṇa. And where there is the world of these deities, he is invited there.
2.6.1	At the midday pressing, when the Savanmukhiyas have been brought in, he desires to invite.
2.6.2	My speech is the Hotṛ. Let him call me. Let the Hotṛ call me. Let him call, 'O Hotṛ!' My eye is the Adhvaryu. Let him call. Let the Adhvaryū call me. Let them call, 'O Adhvaryu!' My mind is the Brahman. Let him call Let the Brahman call me. Let it call, 'O Brahman!' My ear is the Udgātṛ. Let him call. Let the Udgātā call me. Let he call, 'O Udgātṛ!'
2.6.3	The space within the eye is my Sadasyas. Let them call out, 'The Sadasyas call me.' The waters within the eye are my Hotrāśansins. Let them call, 'The Hotrāśins call me.' The limbs are my Camasādhvaryas. Let them cry out, 'The Camasādhvaras call me.'
2.6.4	Those deities indeed invite the priests with their own voices.
2.6.5	He who is invited eats.
2.6.6	The sacrificer is the Apāna. Then, where there is the world of these deities, he becomes invited.
2.7.1	At the third pressing, when the Savanmukhiyas have been brought, he desires to be invited.
2.7.2	"My Prāṇa is the Hotṛ, he should call me. The Hotṛ should call me loudly. My Apāna is the Adhvaryu, he should call. The Adhvaryu should call me loudly." "My Vyāna is the Brahman, he should call." "The Brahman should call me loudly, My Sāmāna is the Udgātṛ, he should." "The Udgātṛ should call me."
2.7.3	The man within the house, the space, is my member. Let him call out, 'The member calls me.' The waters within the house, they are my Hotr-invokers. Let them call out, 'Hotr-invokers call me.' The hairs on my body are my cup-priests. Let them call, 'Cup-priests call me.'
2.7.4	Those deities indeed invoke the priests with their own voices.
2.7.5	He who is invoked eats.
2.7.6	The sacrificer is the Udanta (the last to eat). And where there is the world of these deities, there he becomes invoked.
2.7.7	The one who utters the Vasat should eat from all the cups.
2.7.8	This is the mouth of the sacrifice of the gods, namely the cup of the Udgātṛ. Therefore no one else should drink from the cup of the Udgatṛ.
2.7.9	Thus, indeed, the sacrifice of one who knows this does not fail. Thus, indeed, for one who knows this, the sacrifice of the sacrificer becomes heavenly, progeny-yielding, cattle-yielding, and desired. Thus, indeed the sacrificer who knows this conquers his hateful enemy. Or, indeed, one should perform the sacrifice with something less than this.
3.1.1	When the Hotṛ abandons speech, he abandons the sacrificer. When he does that, he places his own speech in the sacrificer. He becomes all-pervading in the world beyond.
3.1.2	When the Adhvaryu abandons sight, he abandons (the sacrificer). When he does that he places his own sight in the sacrificer, he becomes all-pervasive in the world beyond.
3.1.3	Whatever the Brahman abandons, that he abandons the sacrificer. Whatever he does, he places his own mind in the sacrificer. He becomes all-pervading with the mind in the world beyond.
3.1.4	Whatever the Udgātṛ abandons, that abandons the sacrificers. Whatever he does he places his own ear in the sacrificer, he becomes all-pervasive with the ear in the world beyond.
3.1.5	Whatever the member abandons, that the Self abandons the sacrificer. Whatever he does, he places his own self in the sacrificer. He is born in the other world with all his Self.
3.1.6	When those who are desirous of the Hotr-ship abandon their limbs, they abandon the sacrificer. Whatever they do, they place their own limbs in the sacrificer. They are born in the other world with their limbs.
3.1.7	And when the Adhvaryus of the cups shave their hair, then they shave the sacrificer's hair. When they do that, they put their own hair on the sacrificer. They are born in the other world with their hair standing on end.
3.1.8	Therefore one who knows this should not perform a sacrifice with a deficiency.
3.1.9	Or else, this is the knowledge of the priests.
3.1.10	The cattle follow the Adhvaryu, fame the Hotri, prosperity and safety the Brahman, the Self and progeny the Udgâtri.
3.2.1	If his cattle should fall sick, he should know that the Adhvaryu has done this. If evil fame should befall him, he should know it is the Hotṛ who has done this. If his prosperity and well-being should be disturbed, he should know the Brahman has done this. And if he or his offspring should fall sick, the Udgātṛ should know it is he who has done this.
3.2.2	Brahma is the deity of the breath, the other priests are the deities of speech. If he thinks, "Brahma did not do this for me," he should bind a piece of green gold to a darbha grass stalk, place it in the ladle, take four spoonfuls of ghee, and offer it with the formula, "Salutations to the breath, to the lord of speech, svāhā." If the others think, "Salutations, to speech, to the wife of the breath, svāhā," if the others think, if the others think. He should offer in succession to all with the formulas, "Salutations...
3.2.3-4	Then he should give that gold to Brahma. Then what is said, "Sacrifice itself is the atonement for sacrifice," means that sacrifice itself is the atonement. But some say that the oblations are the atonement for one who has deviated from the sacrifice.
3.3.1	Those who are the priests, and the sacrificer, the divine ones are the priests, the human ones are the others. Those whom the divine ones consecrate, he attains the world of the gods by them, not the world of men. Those whom the human ones consecrate, they attain the world of men by them, not of the gods. Those whom both consecrate, they obtain both the world of the men and the world of the divine.
3.3.2	He should choose these divine priests: Agni as his Hotṛ, Aditya as his Adhvaryu, Candrama as his Brahman, Parjanya as his Udgātṛ, Ākāśa as his Sadasya, the waters as his Hotrāśansins, the rays as his Camasādhvaryus.
3.3.3	Having chosen these divine priests, he should then choose these human ones who would please him.
3.3.4	If he asks for a kṣatriya who is a worshipper of the gods,
3.3.5	if he gives it to him, he should say, "May you be a worshipper of gods."
3.3.6	If he does not give it to him, then he should say, “I know the worshipper of gods, I will strike you with it.”
3.3.7-8	Agni indeed is the divine sacrifice, the earth indeed is the divine sacrfiice, the waters indeed are the divine sacrifice, faith indeed is the divine sacrifiice. In these divine sacrifices he is indeed included. And he does not go to the distress of a man.
3.3.9	Agni is my Hotṛ. May he give me the divine worship. "O Hotṛ, give me the divine sacrifice." "O Adityas, my Adhvaryus, may they give me the divine offering. O Adhvaryus," "O Chandramas, my Brahman, may he give me the sacrifice. O Brahman, give me the sacrifice." "O Parjanya, my Udgātṛ, may he give the sacrifice. O Udgātṛ," "O Ākāśa, my Sadasya, may he give us the sacrifice. O Sadasya," "O Waters, my Hotrāśansins, may they give us the sacrifice." "The Hotrāśins have given me the sacrifice." "O Rays, my Camasādhvaryus, may you give me the sacrifice." The Camasādhvarus have given me the divine sacrifice.
3.3.10	Those deities, indeed, offer the sacrifice of the gods with the words of the priests. He offers when given.
3.3.11	That which is elevated above the ground, not saline, where there are many plants growing near the sacrificial post, where there may be water, that is the place.
3.3.12	One should not leave the place of the sacrifice in front of it, except as much as the distance of the sacrificial post.
3.3.13	The other men are better than he who thus exceeds.
3.3.14	If one goes to the south, the southern (gifts) are inferior.
3.3.15	If one proceeds to the west, the western (gifts) are superior.
3.3.16	If one moves to the north, the northern (gifts) are better. The northern (gifts) become the northern (gifts). The northern (gifts), the northern (gifts), one's prosperity becomes northern.
3.3.17	In front of whom the three luminaries are seen, Agni, the water, and the sun, that is the divine sacrifice, that is the threefold.
3.3.18	The divine sacrifice is in front of the bright (moon).
3.3.19	The cremation ground is in front of what is bright.
3.3.20	The divine offering is sloping towards the east and north.
3.3.21	The cremation ground slopes towards the west and south.
3.3.22	The divine oblation is like the right hand.
3.3.23	As in the case of the left, so in the case of cremation grounds.
3.3.24	As in the case of creation grounds, so in the rites of the sorcerers.
3.3.25	Some indeed say that one who has faith and performs sacrifices in any country at all prospers.
3.4.1	Whatever is the essence of the sacrifice, by that they proceed towards the east. Then this remnant of the sacrifice remains, which is called "rjiṣa". They should not throw it away for the sake of growth, nor should they offer it into the fire. They sprinkle it with water.
3.4.2	Water is the peace and foundation of everything.
3.4.3	He who sacrifices, destroys sin. This sin is destroyed, do you carry it away."
3.4.4	They go between the sacrificial post and the heap of grass.
3.4.5	This is the path of the gods.
3.4.6	The sage has found this path, who has said here, by which path the gods drink the Soma?
3.4.7-8	This is the sacred place of the gods, for the sacrifice is indeed a sacred place. Therefore, one should proceed with this alone and emerge with this alone.
3.4.9	The gods, having fallen from the sacrifice, and not having attained this place, were attacked by the Rākṣasas. Agni saw this Samaveda as a destroyer of Rākṣasas, and drove them away with it. The gods made them (the Rākṣasas) thus attacked and driven away. Thus one drives away the Rākṣasa.
3.4.10	"He says, 'Let there be no destruction, let there be no destruction.' Thus he repels the Rakshas.
3.4.11	He says, 'Agni burns and consumes.' He consumes the Rakshas indeed.
3.4.12	The Stobha follows each step for the destruction of the Rakshas.
3.4.13	"Burn the world of the Atri-s! Burn the world of the Atiri-s!" The Atri-s are the evil-doers, the evil-doer-s. He thus repels the evil-doings of the Atri.
3.4.14	Its end is thrice mentioned.
3.4.15	This is indeed the way of killing the Suhata. It does not increase again. It is as if one were to kill the Suhata again and again, taking it up. That is how it is.
3.4.16	This is indeed found in the Atichandas.
3.4.17	This is like the way of the Varana. The Atichandas is like the Varana. Varana is like the forest-dwellers. It is as when one crosses one's own forest without fear. That is how this is.
3.4.18	It is performed on seven steps.
3.4.19	There are seven metres, with four extra. Just as one would cross over fear by all the metres, so is this.
3.4.20	It has three recitations and twenty-one steps. It has three Sāmans, making twenty-four.
3.4.21	Twenty-four half-months make a year, and the year is the Sama.
3.4.22	Now, of this year, the Saman, the day and night are the Hinkara, the half-months are the Prastara, the months are the Adi, the seasons are the Udgitha, the full-moon days are the Pratihara, the Aṣṭaka days are the Upadrava, the new-moon day is the Nidhana.
3.4.23	Now, of this year, the spring is the invocation, the summer the invocation-offering, the rainy season the chanting, the autumn the response, and the winter the conclusion.
3.4.24	Therefore, in the winter, the creatures live as if they were in the conclusion. Now, indeed, it is the form of the conclusion.
3.4.25	They say, "In which direction should they go for the final bath?"
3.4.26	The gods went forward. This is the direction of the gods, namely, the east. May the sacrifice be accomplished in that direction of the gods.
3.4.27	The Dakṣiṇās go away. He who sacrifices destroys sin. This sin is destroyed. The Dakṣiņās carry it away. This is the direction of the Pitrs. May the sacrifice be completed in that direction of the Pitṛs.
3.4.28	The men went towards the west. This is the direction of men. The direction of men, may the sacrifice be established in that.
3.4.29	They went towards the north. This is the northern direction of the stars. The direction of the stars, may the sacrifice establish itself in that.
3.4.30	Therefore, whatever water there is, whether flowing or standing, they should approach.
3.4.31	Whatever deed a learned person performs, he becomes the master of it by knowing, "This is from this."
3.4.32	They say, "They should approach the flowing ones and the standing ones."
3.4.33	The rivers flow into the sea. The sacrificer destroys sin. Let these waters carry away this sin that has been destroyed.
3.4.34	The rivers flow into the ocean. The sacrifice should not be disturbed. Let it stand here.
3.4.35	From here, whichever way the waters may flow, they should flow in that direction.
3.4.36	When a learned person performs an action, he does so with the knowledge of what it is for. By doing so, he becomes more powerful.
3.5.1-2	He injures one with the first (verse), three with the middle (verse), five with the last (verse). He injures one, three, five, seven, nine, eleven, thirteen, fifteen, seventeen, nineteen, twenty-one, twenty-three, twenty-five, twenty-seven, twenty-nine, thirty-one, thirty-three, thirty-five, thirty-seven, thirty-nine, forty-one, forty-three, forty-five, forty-seven, forty-nine, fifty-one, fifty-three, fifty-five, fifty-seven, fifty-nine, sixty-one, sixty-three, sixty-five, sixty-seven, sixty-nine, seventy-one, seventy-three, seventy-five, seventy-seven, seventy-nine, eighty-one, eighty-three, eighty-five, eighty-seven, eighty-nine, ninety-one, ninety-three, ninety-five, ninety-seven, ninety-nine, one hundred, one hundred and one, one hundred and three, one hundred and five, one hundred and seven, one hundred and nine, one hundred and eleven, one hundred and thirteen, one hundred and fifteen, one hundred and seventeen, one hundred and nineteen, one hundred and twenty-one, one hundred and twent-three, one hundred and t-wenty-five, one hundred and seventy-seven, one hundred and ninety-nine, two hundred, two hundred and one, two hundred and three, two hundred and five, two hundred and seven, two hundred and nine, two hundred and eleven, two hundred and thirteen, two hundred and fifteen, two hundred and seventeen, two hundred and nineteen, two hundred and twenty- one, two
3.5.3	The arrow is the first line, the bowstring is the second, when he joins the three, he releases with five.
3.5.4	He who praises with this (verse) overcomes his enemies and becomes superior to them.
3.6.1	He injures three (cows) with the three (verses) going away. He injures three with the three going away. He hurts nine with the three, with the three, and with the three.
3.6.2	One should recite (the verses) while practising sorcery.
3.6.3	The Vajra is three-fold, the Vajra is nine-fold. When he makes the fifteen by means of the three-fold and the nine-fold, he thus properly unites the Vajra.
3.6.4	The Vajra is indeed good in this way, that it is smaller when it is raised and larger when it is thrown.
3.6.5	He thus overcomes his evil foe, and becomes superior to him, who worships with this (Vajra).
3.7.1	One should recite this mantra while performing the rite of subjugation.
3.7.2	The three-fold is indeed the thunderbolt, the fifteen-fold is the thunderbolt, the twenty-seven-fold is the vajra. When one arranges the seventeen by means of the three-fold, fifteen-fold, and twenty-seven-folds, one properly arranges the thunderbolt.
3.7.3	Indeed, the thunderbolt is good in this way: it is smaller when it is thrown and larger when it is struck.
3.8.2	The three-fold is the thunderbolt, the nine-fold is the thunder-bolt. When he makes the twenty-one by the three-fold and nine-fold, he thus properly unites the thunderbolt.
3.8.3	The thunderbolt is indeed well-united in this way. When it is smaller in the beginning and larger in the striking, then he overcomes the evil, the enemy, and becomes superior to himself by means of this praise.
3.9.1	He injures nine (enemies) with three (verses), with three, with three. He injures nine with three, with thee, with three. He injures nine with thee, with thee, and with thee. He injures three with thee, with nine, with three. One who is practising sorcery should recite (this hymn).
3.9.2	The Vajra is indeed the Tri-Nav (three nines). He thus directs the Vajra towards the enemy. For praise. By this he overcomes the evil foe. He becomes superior to his foe. He who praises with this (Vajra).
4.1.1	The first Tri-night ends with Svaranta (the Svaras). The Gayatri.
4.1.2	The Gayatri is indeed the breath. Prajapati is Svar. He indeed attains Prajapati.
4.1.3	The second ends with the Nidhana. It is a Tristubh.
4.1.4	The Tristubh is energy. The man is the Tristubh. He attains the man.
4.1.5	The third ends with the Ida. It is a Jagati.
4.1.6	The Ida is cattle. The Jagati is cattle. The cattle are the Jagati. He attains the cattle.
4.1.7	The first Tri-night is of the Prati-sruta metres. By that it is not deficient.
4.1.8	Then they arrange the metres of the northern (verse). The Tristubh verses are the first verses. The Tristubh metres are in the world, the Jagatī metres in the Jagatī verses, and the Gāyatrī metres in the Gāyatrīs. Thus it is not deficient.
4.1.9	Then they arrange the metres in the supreme (verse). The Jagatī verses are the first. The Jagatī metres are in the Jagatīs, the Tristubh metres in the Tristubhs, and the Gâyatrl metres in the Gâyatris. Thus it is indeed not deficient.
4.1.10	Or, they may be for each other. He makes them go to the desired goal. He attains that goal for which this is brought.
4.1.11	Therefore, the two yoked ones do not pull equally. Therefore, the two turned ones become more pulling. Therefore, the milk flows from both sides.
4.1.12-14	In the three-versed (hymn) other Rsis saw Viraj, and Vasishtha in the four-versed. That which is in the three-versed is not the same as that in the four-verse, for there is another Sama in the one-versed. Whatever is in the four is one Sama, that is the four-versed.
4.1.15	This is what Muñja Sāmaśravas said: "We know this nourishment of the Sāman." Therefore, we do not accept it, lest we fall short of the nourishment of a thousand."
4.1.16	Now Vasishtha, the son of Chaikitana, said: "The Samaveda indeed nourishes more than the other Vedas. One who follows the Samaveda nourishes himself. But this is like the birth of a widow, if there is no fourth (verse). Thus they know. Therefore young Brahmanas, before their life is over, become old. Their wives become widows. If there is another Samaveda in the three verses, and another in the one verse, then the Samaveda in the four verses is the same as the one in the four verses."
4.1.17	The animal that is left over should be offered to Indra-Agni.
4.1.18	Indra and Agni are the most powerful among the gods. They are not exhausted. He thus unites them for the attainment of the heavenly world.
4.1.19	One desiring brahminical lustre should offer a horse to Surya.
4.2.3	The hawk is the swiftest of birds; just as a hawk seizes its prey, so does he seize it with this (verse).
4.2.4	The Pavamāna verses are in the Trivrt (Stoma).
4.2.5	The Trivrt is the swiftiest of Stomas. When it is Trivrt, it is for prosperity.
4.2.6	The two Havirdhāna carts are like a chariot; he thus makes it proceed for him like a chariot, for the purpose of covering.
4.2.7	The Vasat-call is the weapon.
4.2.8	This is the most powerful of the weapons, namely the Sama Veda. He who is invoked with many Vasat-calls, to him he hurls the weapon for covering.
4.2.9	The Brihat and the Rathantara are both (used). With both the Brihat and the Rathaantara he hurls the thunderbolt for covering.
4.2.10	Rathantara is used in the reverse order.
4.2.11	He strikes him with the thunderbolt, with the intention of covering him.
4.2.12	His Rathantara is the background, the Brihat is the Brahman-sāman. This is the thunderbolt-sāman; he strikes him with the intention of concealing him.
4.2.13	If one wishes that he may be destroyed, one should make the Brihat the back-portion, and the Rathantara the Brahman-sastra. The Brihat is the Kshatra, the Rathantara the cattle. By the Kshatra he destroys his cattle. He becomes without cattle, and is destroyed.
4.2.14	If one desires that he may go to the farthest limit and not return, one should make the Rathantara in the Pavamana, the Brihat in the Prstha, the Plava in the Brahma-sastra. Having lifted him up from these worlds by means of the Brihat and Rathantara, he makes him cross over by means of the Plava. He goes to the farthest limit, and does not return.
4.2.15	O Vārsahāra, O Pavamāna, O Sahapāga, O Bhava, the fierce Sāmans are collected for covering.
4.2.16	The sacrificial post is made of oil-bearing wood or of wood with sharp edges.
4.2.17	The sacrificial posts are placed in the direction of the wind.
4.2.18	To Agni Rudravata, the red one.
4.2.19	The Upāṃśu and Antaryāma are placed.
4.2.20	The sacrificial grass is made of reeds for protection.
4.2.21	The sacrificial grass is of the Vibhitaka variety for protection.
4.2.22	The priests wear red turbans and red garments and proceed with the offering for covering.
4.2.23	Nineteen gifts are given.
4.2.24	They indeed lead him to the other world.
4.3.1	The Agniṣṭoma sacrifice has three stomas.
4.3.2	Having performed the Viṣṭutisamandhi, one should offer the sacrifice against an enemy.
4.3.3	The arrow-wound kills before the life-span; when he makes the arrow-wound, he cuts him off before the life- span.
4.3.4	The Trivrt stoma is the most distant; when it is Trivrt, it is the most distant.
4.3.5	It ends with the Vasat-call.
4.3.6	It is performed for seven days. The person against whom this is performed becomes helpless from the seventh person.
4.3.7	It is similar to the other one (i.e. the Shyena).
4.4.1	Now this is the Sandamśa.
4.4.2	One should perform the sacrifice against whom one is performing the rite.
4.4.3	Whatever is difficult to obtain, one obtains it with the Sandamśha.
4.4.4	Just as one would take a piece of meat with tongs, so does he take it with this (verse).
4.4.5	The Stoma becomes Trivrt, the metre Brihatī. The Trivrt is indeed the thunderbolt, the Brihatī the cattle. With the thunderbolt he indeed strikes his cattle, he becomes without cattle.
4.4.6	It becomes Vaiyasva (verse), he makes him without horses.
4.4.7	The Pariṣṭutbhedas are the ones that are performed in the end. It is indeed the one that cuts off the enemy.
4.4.8	The Vārṣāhare and Pavamānamukha are the ones that belong to the Vārṣāhara and Pavamāna. The Ananadam is the one that belongs to Kāśī and Taugava. The fierce Sāmans arise for the purpose of praise.
4.4.9	The Nisaptasahas is the one that is fierce.
4.4.10	The other one is the same as the one of the hawk.
4.5.1	Now, this is the thunderbolt that one should offer when performing an attack. One strikes the enemy with the thunderbolt. It is for the purpose of covering.
4.5.2-6	All (the verses) are fifteen in number. The fifteen is indeed the thunderbolt; he hurls the thunderbolt at him for covering. The eulogy is sixteen in number. Cattle are the eulogies, the sixteen is the thunderbolt; with the thunderbolt he hurls the thunder at him for covering.
4.5.7	The Vajra is the Mahanama, the Vajra is the Sodashi, with the Vajra he strikes the Vajra for covering.
4.5.8	The rest is similar to the previous one.
4.6.1	The Atiratra is the twenty-fourth Pravargya day, the Abhijit, three Svarasama days, the Divakirtti day, three Svarasamas, the Vishvajiti, the Mahavrata and the Atiratra.
4.6.2	The All-gods sat together in a sacrifice with Soma, the king, as their householder. They said, "Soma alone should be our king everywhere." Therefore Soma, the king goes to all the constellations, for Soma is the giver of semen.
4.6.3	They take the embryo of the nine-month year.
4.6.4	The nine-month year is indeed the form of the nine-months. They obtain the nine breaths.
4.6.5	Those who perform these rites attain the light of the living beings who have offspring.
5.1.1	Prajapati performed austerities. When he was performing austerities, his mind was born, thinking, "I shall create the gods." Those gods were created by him. He created the gods during the day and the Asuras at night. When he created the gods during daytime, that became the divinity of the gods. When he created them in the absence of the sun, that became the asurity of the Asuras. When he created those who were drunk, that became the paternity of the Pitrs.
5.1.2	The gods, desiring heaven, practised austerities. When they were practising austerities, the essence was born as the earth, the sky and heaven. They practised austerities towards them. When they were practicing austerities, the Rg Veda was born from the earth, the Yajur Veda from the sky, and the Sama Veda from heaven. They practised towards them. When those were practising austerities the essence was born. From the Rg Veda the Garhapatya fire was born, from the Yajur Veda the Dakshina fire, and from the Sama Veda the Ahavaniya fire. They practised towards those. When those were practicing austerities the person was born with a thousand heads, a thousand eyes, and a thousand feet.
5.1.3	Those gods approached Prajapati, saying, "By means of the body of the Veda, this body of immortality is not attained by death." They said, "What is the name?"
5.1.4	He said, "The name is Yajna."
5.1.5	Prajapati approaches the establishment of the sacrifice immediately. The sacrifice indeed approaches the establishment immediately.
5.1.6	The Garhapatya fire which he lights is the Dikshaniya fire. The Dakshina and Ahavaniya fires which he lights are the Prayaniya fires. The kindling of the Samidhs is the Upasads.
5.1.7	If the ghee which has been heated up spills over, it is called a spilled oblation. The sacrificer then becomes short-lived. A boon should be given. That itself is the atonement.
5.1.8	Now if the ghee spills over, that is called the "spilled" oblation. Then the sacrificer's mind becomes confused. A variegated gift should be given. That itself is the atonement.
5.1.9	If one offers into the Garhapatya, that is the morning pressing. If one offers into the Dakshina Agni, that is the midday pressing. If one makes an offering into the Ahavaniya, that is called "the third pressing".
5.1.10	What he sweeps, that is his Avabhṛtha.
5.1.11	What food he gives, that is for the completion of the Udayanīya and Udasanīya.
5.1.12	Now if the fire being churned does not catch, one should bring another and offer it in this place. One should offer it in the hand of a brahmin, or in the ear of a goat, or in a bunch of Kusha grass, or in water.
5.1.13-15	One who offers a hundred oblations to others is better than one who offers a single oblation to his disciple. One who offers a single hundred oblations to his disciples is better than one offering a single oblation for his son. One who offers oblations to his son is better than one making a single oblation. One who offers to himself is better than one giving a single oblation.
5.1.16	He who, knowing this, offers the Agnihotra, has performed all the sacrifices.
5.2.1	Prajapati performed the Sattra for a thousand years. Prajapati performed a thousand years of the Gavam Ayana. The Gavam Ayana is twelve days, the Atiratra is twelve days, and the Atiratra in the Sodashin. The Sodashin is in the Ukthya, the Ukthya is in the Agnishtoma, the Agnishtoma is in the Isti and Pashu Bandha, the Isti and the Pashu Bandha are in the Agnihotra. He who knows this and offers Agnihotra, all his sacrifices are performed.
5.3.1	Prajapati, for the gods, set up the Udumbara post, without a hole, without a knot, with a broad top, with one joint.
5.3.2	The Udumbara post should be of the height of the sacrificer.
5.3.3	Then the hunchbacks, dwarfs, and the sacrificers, of short stature, with arms raised, should cut it.
5.3.4	The number of layers in the Uḍumbara post is nine in the Agnistoma, eleven in the Vaisvadev stoma, seventeen in the Paundarika, twenty-one in the Aśvamedha, thirty-eight in the Purushamedha and unlimited in the Sarvamedha.
5.3.5	He who knows this, and who erects the Uḍumbare post, attains prosperity.
5.3.6	Prajapati desired, "May I obtain the Apaciti." The Udumbara is energy, food is energy, food (is) the Sama. Therefore, one should give Apaciti to those who know the Sama. One who knows this and erects the Udumbara pole obtains Apaciti.
5.4.1	One makes a sacrificial post, thick at the base, tapering towards the top, of uniform thickness.
5.4.2	The sacrificial post is a thunderbolt; he thus strikes his enemy with the thunderbolt.
5.4.3	He makes it eight-cornered.
5.4.4	He encloses the ten directions. He makes two posts on both sides of the sacrificial post.
5.4.5	They are fifteen, seventeen, or twenty-one cubits in length.
5.4.6	Palasa wood for one who desires prosperity, Bael wood for one who wishes for brahmic glory, Udumbara wood for one who seeks food, Khadira wood for one who wants strength, Vibhitaka and Rajavriksha wood for one who has an enemy, Krmu, Ashvattha, and stone for one who desires fame, whatever is suitable for one who desires cattle.
5.4.7	There, the following are to be avoided: a lump, a wound, a split, a stump, a hunchback, a thorn, a burnt, a dried, a hollow, and a worm-eaten one. These are not recommended.
5.4.8	Now, the recommended ones are pure, continuous, and gradual, which are recommended.
5.4.9	The deities of the four directions of the sacrificial post are Agni in the east, Yama in the south, Varuna in the west, Soma in the north, Aditya, Rudra, Maruts, Vasus, the invincible ancestors in the lower direction, and the Sadhyas in the upper direction.
5.4.10	The sacrificial post is dedicated to all the gods. The sacrificial post is of many forms. Having become the thunderbolt, it stands near the gods.
5.4.11	The gods approached Prajapati, saying, "They strike with the sacrificial post, they raise it up, and they fight with it. What is the nature of the sacrificial post?"
5.4.12	He should dig a hole for the root of the sacrificial post, one cubit deep, with the bark still attached.
5.4.13	What is below the navel belongs to the Fathers; what is above it belongs to men; what is below the girdle belongs to plants and trees; what is above the girdle belongs to all the gods.
5.4.14	They sprinkle, adorn, and cover with a new garment.
5.4.15	That belongs to the Gandharvas and Apsarases.
5.4.16	The cup of Indra is to be made one finger above the cup. That is for the Sadhya gods.
5.4.17	Bowing to the east, this is indeed Vishnu's supreme abode.
5.4.18	Its seasons are its body, the head is the year, and the Vedas are its forms. One who knows this indeed stands firm in the year.
5.5.1	The Brahmanas say: Why does the Brahman sit at sunset and worship the twilight? Why does he stand at sunrise? What is twilight? What is the time of twilight? And what is the nature of twilight?
5.5.2	The gods and the Asuras were competing. The Asuras attacked the sun. The sun was afraid. Its heart stood in the form of a tortoise.
5.5.3	He approached Prajapati. Prajapati saw this remedy for him: truth and reality, the Brahman and the Om, and the three-footed Gāyatrī, the face of Brahman.
5.5.4	Therefore, the Brāhmaṇa worships Sandhyā at the conjunction of day and night, seeing the light of the sun. That is the time of Sandhyā, that is the Sandhyā-ness of Sandhyā. When one worships Sandhyă while sitting in the evening, one conquers the heroic place by that. And when one uses water, those drops become like a thunderbolt. Those drops, having become like a thunderbolt, destroy the Asuras. Then the gods become victorious, and the Asuras become defeated. One's own self becomes victorious, and one's enemy becomes defeated, he who knows this. When one worshops Sandhyā in the evening and morning, one conquers by that the heroic place and the continuous place. He who knows this, his place becomes continuous and uninterrupted.
5.6.1	Now there is the waning and waxing of the moon. When the moon wanes and waxes, we shall explain that.
5.6.2	In the former half of the month the gods are initiated, and in the latter half they consume Soma. There, these three vessels are placed: the vessel of earth, the vessel of space, and the vessel of heaven. The gods, with the heavenly vessel, first consume the fifth portion, the fifth part. The Adityas, with the vessel of space consume the second portion, the tenth part. The Vasus, with the vessel on earth, consume the third portion, the fifteenth part. The sixteenth part remains. The moon has sixteen parts. It enters the plants, trees, cattle, animals, the sun, the Brahman, and the Brahmanas. The gods, led by Indra, who drink Soma and do not drink Soma, like a son, grandson, or great-grandson, who approaches death, when old, afflicted by disease, or about to die, spend that night. That is the state of new moon on the new moon day. Therefore, on the new moon, one should not study.
5.6.3	Then the collection. The Brahmanas collect it from the plants, from the trees, from the cows, from the animals, from the sun and from the Brahman. Hence the name of the Saṁnāyya.
5.6.4	The moon is the creator. The full moon before is Anumati, the one after is Raka. The new moon before is Sinivali, the one after, Kuhu. He who sees after does not see another. That becomes his own pair.
5.6.5	Anumati should be known in Pushya, Sinivali in Dvapara, Raka in Kshambha, and Kuhu in the completed Parva.
5.6.6	If the moon is seen in the sky, then it is known that there is a deficiency. If the moon is complete and Kuhu is not seen, then it is said to be the time of the new moon.
5.7.1	Where did Svāhā originate? Whose daughter is she? By whom was she created? What is her family? How many syllables does she have? How many feet? How many measures? How many colors? How many breaths? What is her body? What are her limbs? How many hairs? How many veins? How many eyes? What is her mouth? What is she covered with? What are her arms? What are her feet? Where is she located? What is her foundation? How do you receive Svāhā? Tell me about the form of Svāhā and her deity.
5.7.2	Svāhā, born of truth, the daughter of Brahman, of Brahmanic nature, of the lineage of Lāta, three syllables, one word, three letters of her, white lotus, and gold, these are her four Vedas, the body, the limbs are the six limbs, the herbs and trees are her hair, she has two heads, one head is the new moon, the second is the full moon, the eyes are the sun and moon, the two oblations are the oblations, the oblation is the dakṣiṇā, the covered one, the Bṛhat and Rathantara are her Rg, Yajus, and Sāman, her movement, that is Svāhā, that is Svadhā, that is the Vaṣaṭkāra, she is employed as Vaṣaṭ in the divine sacrifices, as Svadhā in the Pitṛyajña, she moves over the earth with the mouth of a cart, the sky is her heaven, Agni is her deity, the Brāhmaṇa is her form, whatever desires we offer, may that be ours, may we be the lords of wealth. Svāhā!
5.7.3	He is satisfied by the satisfaction of his progeny, cattle, food, radiance, and spiritual splendor.
6.1.1	Now, we shall explain the peace of the rites of the miraculous.
6.1.2	One should offer oblations of Palasha wood eight thousand times.
6.1.3	The eight directions are Indra, Yama, Varuna, Dhana, Agni, Vayu, Soma, and Vishnu.
6.1.4	To Indra, to Indra, to the Maruts, the eagle flying in the sky, the giver of wealth, the divine Savitar, the messenger Agni, we choose, may the wind blow the healing wind, Soma the king, Varuna, this Vishnu has gone forth.
6.1.5	Having recited these eight hundred verses beginning with the Sāman, and having recited the Svāstīvara, one attains welfare.
6.1.6	Svāstīda, Viśaspati, Svāstyayan, Tārkṣya, Ariṣṭanemi, Tyamūṣu, Vājin, Devājūta, Āyur, Viśvāyu, Live for a hundred years, increase in autumn.
6.1.7	Having thus arranged the requisites and having recited the benediction, one attains welfare. One attains welfare.
6.2.1	The gods and the Asuras competed with each other in these worlds. The gods approached Prajapati. He gave them this divine peace.
6.2.2	They then conquered the Asuras by means of the peace-making (rites). Then the gods became victorious, the Asuras were defeated. He who knows this becomes victorious, his foe is defeated.
6.2.3	Then, having offered the morning oblation in the morning, one should bring or have brought Kuśa grass, Śamī leaves, Vīraṇa grass, curd, ghee, mustard seeds, fruit-bearing Apāmārga, Śirīṣa - having bathed, restrained, pure, wearing clean clothes, having smeared and sprinkled a raised platform, having drawn the auspicious marks, having sprinkled with water, having kindled the fire, having performed the rites of the daily routine, having cooked rice, milk-rice, barley, red milk-rice, curd, milk, ghee, and milk-rice with ghee - these are the separate offerings with ghee, or milk-rice for all.
6.3.1	He turns towards the eastern direction.
6.3.2	Now, when there is a breaking of the gem, the gem-pot, the pot, the ladle, or the pestle, or when there is a quarrel with the king's family, or when the chief elephants and horses are killed in the breaking of the chariot, umbrella, bed, seat, house, flag, banner, or house, all these are the wonderful expiations of Indra.
6.3.3	Having offered the oblation of cooked rice to Indra, he offers five oblations of ghee with the mantras: "To Indra, to Indra, to the Maruts." Having offered with the Vyāhṛtis, he should then sing the Sāman.
6.4.1	He turns towards the southern direction.
6.4.2	Now, when in his progeny, in his cattle, in his body, various kinds of diseases, or excessive sleep, or insomnia, or excessive eating, or fasting, or idleness, or wounds, or indigestion, or drowsiness, and so on, occur, all these are the omens of Yama, and require expiation.
6.4.3	Having offered the oblation of Sūpārna in heaven, he offers five oblations of ghee with the mantras: "Svāhā to Yama, to the lord of the departed, to the one with the staff in hand, to the lord, to the one who pacifies all sins." Having offered with the Vyāhṛti mantras, then he should sing the Sāman.
6.5.1	He turns towards the western direction.
6.5.2	Now, when the crops in his fields and houses are afflicted by various kinds of calamities, such as those caused by rats, birds, ants, moths, earthworms, parrots, antelopes, and insects, all these are considered auspicious and require expiatory rites dedicated to the deity Varuna.
6.5.3	Having offered the Ghritavati oblation, he offers five oblations of ghee with the mantras: "To Varuna, svāhā! To the Lord of Waters, svāhā!" "To the one with a noose in hand, svāhā" "To the Lord, svāhā." "To the one who pacifies all sins, svāhā". Having offered with the Vyāhṛti mantras, then he should sing the Sāman.
6.6.1	He turns towards the northern direction.
6.6.2	Now, when there is a separation from his gold, silver, excellent garments, diamonds, lapis lazuli, pearls, and gems, or when undertakings fail, or when other cruel things happen, or when friends become estranged, or when inauspicious things happen, or if anthills grow on the ground, or if mushrooms grow, or if bees settle down, all these are auspicious omens, and the expiations for them are dedicated to the god Vaishravana.
6.6.3	Having offered the oblation of the Sthalipaka oblation with the verse, "We invoke that god," he offers five oblations of ghee with the verses, "To Vaishravana, the lord of Yakshas, to the one with golden hands, to the lord, to the one who pacifies all sins." Having offered with the Vyahrtis, then he should sing the Sama.
6.7.1	He follows the earth.
6.7.2	When the earth shakes, cracks, roars, trembles, burns, weeps, smokes, suddenly emits water, floats without sinking or rising, and produces flowers and fruits out of season, when a mare gives birth to an elephant calf, when it sinks, when a cow climbs onto a house, or a village cow, these are all omens related to the fire deity, and require atonement.
6.7.3	Having offered the oblation of the Sthalipaka, he offers five oblations of clarified butter with the mantras, "To Agni Svāhā, to the lord of oblations Svāhā, To the one with flames in his hands Svāhā,To the lord Svāhā,to the one who pacifies all sins Svāhā." Having offered with the Vyāhṛti mantras, then he should sing the Sāman.
6.8.1	He moves along the atmosphere.
6.8.2	Now, when the winds blow without any clouds, and when the forms of clouds are seen in the sky, and when there fall from above showers of dust, flesh, bones, and blood, having the shapes of crows, goats, donkeys, herons, pigeons, owls, crows, vultures, hawks, bats, and jackals, and when there are seen pairs of crows, and when one sees a gem-bow at night, and when rabbits enter a village, and when trees ooze out blood, and when the royal family resides in the sky, all these are omens of the wind-god, and require expiatory rites.
6.8.3	Having offered the Sthalipaka oblation, he offers five oblations of ghee with the mantras: "May the wind blow the medicine." "To Vayu, svāhā. To the lord of the great beings, svāhā." "To the one with swift hands, svāhā" "To the lord, svāhā". "To the one who pacifies all sins, svāhā"." Having offered with the Vyāhṛti mantras, then he should sing the Sāman.
6.9.1	He attains heaven.
6.9.2	Now, when there are showers of stars, meteors falling, smoke rising, directions burning, comets rising, smoke arises at the tips of cows' horns, blood flows from cows' udders, and snow falls excessively, all these are auspicious omens related to Soma.
6.9.3	Having offered the oblation to Soma, the king, Varuna, he offers five oblations of ghee with the mantras: "To Soma, svāhā! To the lord of the stars, svāhā!" "To the one with cool hands, svāhā" "To the lord, svāhā." "To the one who pacifies all sins, svāhā". Having offered with the Vyāhṛti mantras, then one should sing the Sāman.
6.10.1	He attains the highest heaven.
6.10.2	Now, when these things happen, the temples of the gods shake, the images of the gods laugh, weep, sing, dance, burst, sweat, open their eyes, close their eyes, go back, the rivers become stagnant, the sun is seen in the sky and is surrounded by a halo, banners, flags, umbrellas, thunderbolts, and horns blaze, embers fall on the horses' manes, and the untanned hides crackle. All these are auspicious omens related to Vishnu.
6.10.3	Having offered the oblation of Sthalipaka, he offers five oblations of ghee with the mantras, "This is Vishnu's stride", "To Vishnu, svāhā", "To the lord of all beings, svāhā","To the wielder of the discus, svāhā" ,"To the lord, svāhā" ,"To the one who pacifies all sins, svāhā". Having offered with the Vyāhṛti mantras, then one should sing the Sama Veda.
6.10.4	The earth is purified by four things: digging, burning, touching, and being trodden by cows, and by the fifth, plastering.
6.10.5	Having brought the materials clockwise, one should invoke blessings on the Brahmins.
6.10.6	Whatever is touched by these materials, one should sprinkle it. It becomes pacified.
6.10.7	The food of a brahmin, gold, a cow, a garment, a horse, and land are the dakshina. Thus it is pacified. For the purpose of pacification, for the purpose of pacifying.
6.11.1	He moves towards the southern direction.
6.11.2	Now, when cows, human females, mares, camels, etc. give birth to (hybrid) animals, or when animals are born with deficient or excessive limbs, or with deformed shapes, or when the impossible happens, or the immobile moves, all these are auspicious omens of Rudra, and require expiatory rites.
6.11.3	Having offered the Sthalipaka oblation with the formula, "We invoke thee, O king," he offers five oblations of clarified butter with the formulas, "Svāhā to Rudra, Svāhā to Pasupati, Svāhā, to the one with a spear in hand, Svāhā. To the lord, Svāhā To the one who pacifies all sins." Having offered with the Vyāhṛti formulas, then he should sing the Sāman.
6.12.1	He turns towards all directions.
6.12.2	When the mountains burst, when the sky falls, when the earth shakes, when the great trees are uprooted, when the stones float, when the lakes blaze, when there are four-footed or five-footed animals, all these are portents of the Sun-god, and require expiation.
6.12.3	Having offered the Sthalipaka oblation with the verse, "We invoke the Jātavedas Agni," he offers five oblations of clarified butter.
