1.1.1	When one is about to offer a sacrifice with the New-Moon or Full-Moon oblation,
1.1.2	he prepares a covering for the oblation beforehand.
1.1.3	In one day or two days, according to the season.
1.1.4	Now there is a Vedic text:
1.1.5	"One anoints with curds for Indra's sovereignty, and anoints the Agnihotra leftovers for the continuity of the sacrifice."
1.1.6	If he does not know whether the moon is full or not, he lays down the fires in accordance with the moon.
1.1.7	He lays down three pieces of wood on the Garhapatya, three on the Anvāhāryapacaniya, and three on the Āhavanīya.
1.1.8	They collect the wood.
1.1.9	They perform the rites of the Upavasatha.
1.1.10	Then for him who has undertaken the vow, he cuts off a leaf-branch, facing east or north, or wherever he may know.
1.1.11	He cuts it off saying, "For you who are in the east or north, for you who are in many leaves and many branches, for you who have dry tips."
1.1.12	With that he drives away the calves, saying, "Stand in the wind, stand in the wind."
1.1.13	Then the god Savitr sends forth these mothers. May he direct you to the best deed. Nourish yourselves. O ye goddesses, the share of the gods, ye who are full of strength, full of milk, full of offspring, free from disease, free from sickness, may no thief injure you. May no evil-speaking, the curse of Rudra, encompass you.
1.1.14	"May the cows be firmly settled in this cowherd." Thus he looks at the sacrificer.
1.1.15	Then having taken this branch towards the east of the Ahavaniya fire, having led it through the eastern door, having placed it towards the south of the Garhapatya fire, having covered it in the northern half of the Agni-house, he says, "Protect the sacrificer's cattle." If he places it thus.
1.1.16	If he does not place it, it becomes the step of the sacrificial grass.
1.2.1	Then standing behind the Garhapatya, he takes up the wooden sword or the stone, saying, "For the deity Savitr, for the impulse of Savitr, with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of Pusan, I take thee."
1.2.2	Taking it, he recites, "Thou art the sound of the sacrifice."
1.2.3	He cooks on the Garhapatya, thrice with the formula, "The Rakshas is repelled, the evil spirits are repelled."
1.2.4	Then he goes to the Ahavanīya with the verse, "The mind has gone to the auspicious place, the seat is prepared by Manu, established by Svāhā. The sages carry it forward, the most agreeable to the gods."
1.2.5	He looks towards the altar with the verse, “May the seat be here.”
1.2.6	Then he goes to that direction where he thinks he will find the sacrificial grass.
1.2.7	He takes up a bundle of darbha grass, as much as he thinks is sufficient for the pressing stone, saying, "Thou art the covering of the gods."
1.2.8	Then he sweeps it upwards, saying, "You are the growth of the year."
1.2.9	He puts on the skin of an ass, saying, "May the god-sacrificial grass not injure you, neither sideways nor across. May I obtain your favour."
1.2.10	The cutter cuts off, saying, "May it not injure you."
1.2.11	He touches the cuttings, saying, "The divine grass, a hundred-stalked, may it grow."
1.2.12	"May we grow with a thousand stalks," he says, touching himself.
1.2.13	He pulls out the entire stalk.
1.2.14	Having made the sacrificial grass, he places it, saying, "Protect me from the contact with the earth."
1.2.15	From here onwards he silently releases the knots of the cords.
1.2.16	He releases three, five, seven, nine or eleven knots as much as he thinks proper.
1.2.17	Then having made the gold-piece thrice heated, he encloses it with the left hand, saying, "This is the crest of Aditi."
1.2.18	Having placed it with the tip towards the north,
1.2.19	He places the sacrificial grass on it, with the formula, "I place thee well-placed."
1.2.20	He binds it with the formula, "Indrani's binding."
1.2.21	He makes a knot, with the formula "Pusha may make a knot for thee."
1.2.22	"May it be thy support." He covers it from behind, facing east.
1.2.23	Then he lifts it up with the formula, “I lift thee with Indra's arms.”
1.2.24	He places it on the head with the formula, "I take away with the head of Brhaspati."
1.2.25	"Come, follow the heaven."
1.2.26	Having come, he places it below the Garhapatya towards the north with the formula, "Thou art the path to the gods."
1.2.27	He places it above where he thinks it is safe.
1.2.28	He cuts the paribhojaniya-grains silently.
1.2.29	He cuts once for the Pitrs.
1.2.30	Then having made the sacrificial post of wood in the same way, he piles up the wood of twenty-one pieces, saying, "Having assumed the dark form, you entered the trees. Now I am collecting you in twenty-one ways. Well collected."
1.2.31	He makes the altar with the Vatsa-saman for one desiring cattle, with the Mūtaka-saman for the sake of food, with the Trivṛt-saman for splendour, with the Urdhvāgra-saman for heaven.
1.2.32	He makes the altar from the east to the north, from the enclosing sticks.
1.2.33	Then in the afternoon he performs the Piṇḍapitryajña.
1.3.1	Then he cuts the leaves of this branch and offers them towards the Garhapatya.
1.3.2	Then having covered her from below, he places her on the southern side of the Garhapatya, with the head towards the east, for the purpose of being eaten.
1.3.3	Then having measured a space the size of a palm, he makes a hole with a darbha-blade and makes a three-pronged twig-filter, saying, "The three-pronged Palasha, the darbha, is the size of a span. May it be the best filter at the sacrifice. May it make the oblation of milk."
1.3.4	Then, having offered the Agnihotra in the evening, having spread grass to the north of the Garhapatya, he places four things on them: the milking pot, the strainer, the pot for keeping the Saṁnāyya, and the pot for heating.
1.3.5	Then he sprinkles them with water, saying three times, "Be purified for the divine rite, for the offering to the gods."
1.3.6	Then, having sat down behind the Garhapatya, he puts the embers towards the north with the Upavesha ladle, saying, "Thou art the heat of Matarisvan."
1.3.7	On them he places the Saṁnāyya-tapani, saying, "You are heaven, you are earth, you are the supporter of all, be firm with the highest support, do not be injured."
1.3.8	On it he places the twig of the sacrificial grass with its tip pointing towards the east, with the formulas, "Thou art the purifying twig of the Vasus, having a hundred streams; thou art the purifying twig, having a thousand streams."
1.3.9	Thereafter he remains silent.
1.3.10	Then he waits for the cows to come. They graze here, giving honey, bearing offspring, of various forms, of fame, many, being born, may Indra delight in the cows here. If one is a worshipper of Mahendra, then he says, "Mahendra."
1.3.11	Then he says, "Tell me about the cow that has been let loose."
1.3.12	They say, "The cow that has been released."
1.3.13	While being milked, he recites the verse, "The oblation is offered, the drop is offered."
1.3.14	"To Agni, the great, to the sky, svāhā. To heaven and earth."
1.3.15	Then he asks the one who is bringing it from the front and towards the west, "Which one did you milk?"
1.3.16	The other replies, "That one."
1.3.17	He recites the verse in accordance with that, "She is the life of all."
1.3.18	The second one, as he brings it, is asked, "Which one did you wash?"
1.3.19	The other one replies, "That one."
1.3.20	He recites over it, "She is the universal creator."
1.3.21	The third one, as he is bringing it, is asked "Which one did he wash?"
1.3.22	The others reply, "That one".
1.3.23	He recites, "She is all-creating."
1.3.24	When the three cows have been milked, he releases speech, saying, "May the offering for Indra, the lord of many cows, grow again. May it be for the calves and men to drink again." If he is offering to Mahendra, he says, "For Mahendra."
1.3.25	Having released speech, he milks the remaining cows silently without any interruption.
1.3.26	Having brought the milk to be milked, he brings the washing. Having mixed (the milk and the washing), he says (to the sacrificer), "Do you mix (the milk and washing). The waves are united with truth, the most intoxicated with honey, the slow ones, the enjoyers of wealth."
1.3.27	Having heated it, having taken it out towards the north, having cooled it, having placed it behind the strainer, he anoints it with curds, saying, "I anoint thee with Soma for Indra" or "for Mahendra" if one is sacrificing to Mahendra.
1.3.28	He brings as much as he thinks he will be able to cook.
1.3.29	He puts the remnant of the Agnihotra-offering, saying, "Thou art the continuity of the sacrifice; I follow thee in the continuity of the sacrificel."
1.3.30	Then he places it in a vessel of water or a bronze vessel, with the formula, "Thou art the receptacle; I place thee for Vishnu, for the sacrifice. With the vessel full of water, the purified ones have surrounded (the oblation).
1.3.31	He places it above, where he thinks it is safe, with the formula "O Vishnu, protect the oblation."
1.3.32	At this time, he silently releases the calves for milking in the morning with darbha grass.
1.4.1	After offering the Agnihotra in the morning, he touches his hands, saying, "May I be able to perform the rites for you, O gods."
1.4.2	The fires are spread out at night.
1.4.3	If they are not spread out, he first spreads out the Ahavaniya in front, then on the right, then behind, then on the left.
1.4.4	In the same way he spreads out the Anvähäryapacani.
1.4.5	In the samne way he spreads out Garhapatya.
1.4.6	Then having spread grass in front of the Garhapatya, he places the two-fold sacrificial requisites on them.
1.4.7	The wooden ladle, the skull-cups, the Agnihotra-vessel, the broom, the black antelope skin, the pestle, the mortar, the pestle and the grinding stone, the Juhu, the Upabhu, the Sruva, the Dhruva, the Prashitra-vessel, the Edaka-vessel, the Mekhala, the vessel for keeping the flour, the vessel for holding the Prāṇīta-water, the vessel for the melted butter, the Veda, the wooden vessel, the yoke, the Veda-cover, the Dhṛṣṭi, the scraping of the fire-place, the Anvāhāryā-sthālī, the Madantī, and other vessels, all these are to be placed in pairs.
1.4.8	Having seated Brahma on the right side,
1.4.9	he spreads the grass from the Garhapatya to the Ahavaniya with the verse, "Thou art the continuity of the sacrifice. I spread thee for the continuity of the continuity of the Yajna."
1.4.10	Then he makes the two Barhis-grass-blades, of the size of a span, even, with their tips not cut off, and not cut with nails. "These two, the Prāṇa and Apāna, moving everywhere, nourishing the limbs of the sacrifice, may they move in the purifying filter, purifying the oblation."
1.4.11	Then he anoints them with water, saying, "Ye are purified, ye are belonging to Vishnu, ye are belonging for sacrifice, ye are purified by the wind, ye are purified in the mind of Vishnu, ye are in the purifying of sacrifice."
1.4.12	Then, having sat down to the north of the Garhapatya, he asks for the vessel in which the Soma is to be poured out.
1.4.13	Then, having taken the water beyond the Pavitra, he says, "O Brahman, I shall offer the water. The sacrificer should restrain speech."
1.4.14	Having been born, he is sustained equally with the vital airs, without spilling, having carried it, he places it on the Darbha grass to the north of the Ahavaniya fire, covering it with Darbha grass.
1.4.15	(Having taken the purifying grass) he goes round by the right, and then runs towards the west, and takes the Agnihotra ladle with the right hand and the winnowing basket with the left, with the formula, "For protection thee."
1.4.16	He winnows the grains over the Garhapatya with the formula, “The Rakshas are repelled, the evil spirits are repelled.” thrice.
1.4.17	Then he stands behind the Garhapaty, facing the Anväharya fire.
1.4.18	He touches the northern end of the pole with the formula, "Thou art the pole, the pole, the polist, the pole. He who injures us, may he be pole-ed. Him whom we injure, may he be poled."
1.4.19	He anoints it with the formula, "Thou art the most pressing, the most pressing, most acceptable, most burning, most invoked of the gods, the unerring Havirdhana. Be firm, do not tremble."
1.5.1	Then, having gone around along the right side of the axle-tree, having mounted it, he places the broom in the front.
1.5.2	In the broom, the ladle, in the ladle, the strainer.
1.5.3	Then he looks at the cakes with the verse, "I look at you with the eye of Mitra. Do not be afraid, do not be frightened, do not harm me."
1.5.4	He throws away grass or chaff, saying, "For the wind."
1.5.5	Then having touched water, having explained the ten-hotr, and having addressed the sacrificer, saying, "I shall offer the oblation," he offers with the Agnihotra ladle having a strainer.
1.5.6	If there is a difference, he places the wooden sword behind the Garhapatya, the vessel on the wooden sword, and pours the sacrificial rice on the vessel.
1.5.7	Then he touches the eastern half of the vessel with the formula, "Thou art Dhūr, Dhūr, Dhūrvant, Dhūr, him who Dhūrvates us, Dhūr him whom we Dhūrvate. Thou art the most pressing, the most pressing, most acceptable, most blazing, most invoked of the gods, the undying Havirdhāna. Be firm, do not tremble."
1.5.8	Then he looks at the Purorāśīya (bricks) with the verse, "I look at thee with the eye of Mitra; do not be afraid, do not be frightened, do not injure me."
1.5.9	He throws away grass or a thorn with the words, "For the sake of ample space."
1.5.10	Having touched water, and having announced to the sacrificer, "I shall offer the oblation after explaining the Dashotr (verse), he offers it with the Agnihotra ladle having a strainer.
1.5.11	"Oṃ, the sacrificer offers and permits."
1.5.12	Then he offers:
1.5.13	"In the impulse of the divine Savitr, with the arms of the Ashvins, with the hands of Pūshan, I offer what is pleasing to Agni." He offers three times with this formula.
1.5.14	Once silently.
1.5.15	Having made this the rule, he offers to Agni and Soma at the Full Moon, and to Indra and Vimadrit at the New Moon. He places them together with the words, "To Indra" or "To Mahendra" if he is offering to Mahendra.
1.5.16	Then he touches the offerings thus placed, with the words, “This is of the gods.”
1.5.17	"This is ours, O Agni, to be shared." Those who are left over.
1.5.18	"For Sphyati, for Narati."
1.5.19	Then he looks at the Ahavaniya fire, saying, "Seeking the light of heaven, the all-pervading light."
1.5.20	Then he surveys the houses, saying, "May the paths be firm between heaven and earth."
1.5.21	Then, taking them, he rises up,
1.5.22	Having come, he goes along the sky.
1.5.23	Having come, he places it to the north of the Garhapatya, saying, "I place you on the lap of Aditi."
1.5.24	He recites over the Garhapaty, "O Agni, protect the oblation."
1.6.1	Then, having brought water over the strainer into this very ladle, he strains it three times with the strainer having its tip towards the north, with the formula, "May god Savitr purify you with the stainless strainer, with the rays of the shining Vasu-sun." Towards the back.
1.6.2	Then, while raising them, he rises with the verse, "O divine waters, you are the foremost, you are the leader, lead this sacrifice, place the lord of sacrifice at the forefront. Indra chose you for the battle against Vritra. You chose Indra for the battle against Vrtra."
1.6.3	He sprinkles the waters with water, saying, "You are sprinkled, you are sprinkled" three times.
1.6.4	Then he sprinkles the sacrificial dishes with the formula, "In the impulse of the divine Savitr, with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of Pusan, I sprinkle for you Agni, for Agni-Soma, for so and so and so and So." He sprinkles thrice according to the deity.
1.6.5	Having placed the vessels upside down, he sprinkles them three times, saying, "Purify yourselves for the divine rite, for the offering to the gods."
1.6.6	Having placed the remaining sprinkling water aside,
1.6.7	He shakes the black antelope skin, turning it towards the north with its neck upwards, saying, "The Rakshas are shaken off, the evil ones are shaken off" three times.
1.6.8	Then he strews it with the grass having the point towards the east and the neck towards the west, with the words, "Thou art the skin of Aditi; may the earth hold thee firm."
1.6.9	He places the mortar on it with the words, “Thou art the mortar, belonging to the wood; may the skin of Aditis hold thee firm.
1.6.10	He pours the Purodāśa-portions on it, with the formula, "Thou art the body of Agni, the discharge of speech, for the sake of the divine guest I take thee."
1.6.11	He places the pestle, with the formula "Thou art the mountain, the wooden one. Do thou, O well-pacified one, pacify this oblation for the gods."
1.6.12	Then he calls the Haviskrt (the person who prepares the oblation), with the formula, “O Haviskrt, come, O Haviskrt, thrice.
1.6.13	[and also, 'We shall strike with force'] Then, striking the stones and the pestle with the Vrṣarava (verse), he says, "Strike with force, strike with strength, speak with brilliance, we shall conquer the assembly."
1.6.14	Having carried them away, having made them rise up, he places the winnowing basket on the north, saying, "You are the one who grows with the rain."
1.6.15	In that (basket), he winnows the grains, saying, "May you be recognized as the one who grows in the rain."
1.6.16	Then, turning to the north, he sprinkles (the ground) with the verse, "The Rakshas are purified, the evil ones are purified."
1.6.17	Having thrown the chaff to the left, he dismisses this direction with the words, "You are the share of the Rakshas."
1.6.18	Then, having touched water, he separates (the chaff) with the words, "May Vayu separate you."
1.6.19	In a vessel he scatters the rice, saying, "May Savitr, the god, with golden hands, receive it."
1.6.20	Giving to the Avakshara, he says, "Three times you have to make it into three parts. Tell me when you have made it into three parts."
1.6.21	They say, "We have made it into thrice."
1.6.22-24	The portion of the Rakshas is that which remains when the three portions are taken. Let it flow away from here. He places the rinsing of rice either within the altar or in the direction of the altar. At this time, he milks the cows in the morning with the filter facing north. Here he does not anoint.
1.7.1	Then, having spread the three fruits as mentioned, he spreads the black antelope skin with the neck towards the north and the hair towards the east, saying "The Rakshas are removed, the evil ones are removed" three times.
1.7.2	Then he spreads it in front with the neck towards west and the hair towards north, saying "You are the skin of Aditi, may the earth hold you"
1.7.3	In that (fire-pan) he places the dice with the northern end upwards, with the formula, "Thou art the support of heaven; may the Adityas know thee."
1.7.4	In that (dice) he places the eastern stone, with the formula "Thou art the Dhishana; may the support of heaven know thee."
1.7.5	He places the stone on the dice, with the formula: "Thou art the Parvati; may the Parvati know thee."
1.7.6	At that he pours down the sacrificial portions for the gods. "With the impulse of the divine Savitr, with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of Pusan, I pour down what is dear to Agni, to Agni-Soma, to the gods of such and such a name."
1.7.7	He recites the verse, "Thou art grain; thou dost nourish the gods, thou dost nourish the sacrifice, thou dost nourish Yajapati, thou dost nourish me, the controller of the sacrifice."
1.7.8	He grinds it with the verse, "For thee, O breath, for thee, O out-breath, for thee, the circulating breath."
1.7.9	He looks at his arms with the verse, "For long life, for the long-lasting, for the life-giving."
1.7.10	"May the god Savitar, with golden hands, accept the ground meal which is ground on the black antelope skin."
1.7.11	"When giving the ground meal, he says, 'May the one who is grinding make the ground meal.'
1.7.12	They grind the grains for the sacrificial cakes.
1.7.13	They put the ground meal into the pot."
1.7.14	If he is going to perform the Caturhoma, then before the offering of the Adhi-homa, they should divide the Caturhoma and Purorasa.
1.8.1	Then he places the washed potsherds near the Garhapatya with the rear end facing it.
1.8.2	Eight on the right side and eleven on the left side.
1.8.3	Then sitting near the Garha patya with the rear, he takes up the Dhṛṣṭi ladle, saying, "You are Dhṛṣṭī, protect the Brahman."
1.8.4	He recites over the Garhapatya fire, "O Agni, do thou remove the raw Agni."
1.8.5	He throws out the embers towards the south, saying, "Do thou throw out the one who is not fit to be offered."
1.8.6	Then he turns another one, saying, "Carry the one fit to be offered to the gods."
1.8.7	He places it in the middle of the southern skull-cups with the formula, "Thou art firm, thou protectest the earth, thou protectest life, thou protectest progeny, thou protectest kinsmen. Thou hast surrounded the sacrificer."
1.8.8	He turns the charcoal with the formula, "The Rakshas is burnt, the evil spirits are burnt."
1.8.9	Then he lays down the eastern half-brick, with the formula, "Thou art the supporter, do thou support the atmosphere, do thou support Prāṇa, do thou support Apāna, do thou support kinsmen for this sacrificer."
1.8.10	Then he lays down the western half-brick, "Thou art a firm supporter, do thou suppoit heaven, do thou support sight, do thou support hearing, do thou support kin for this sacrificer.
1.8.11	Then he lays down the southernmost enclosing stick with the formula, "Thou art the law, thou art the direction, thou art the womb, thou art the progeny, thou art the kinsmen. Thou art the enclosing stick. Thou art the guardian of the kinsmen. Do thou protect the kinsmen for this sacrificer."
1.8.12	Then he lays down the easternmost enclosing stick with, "Thou art Cit, thou art progeny, thou art wealth, thou art kinsmen. Thou are the enclosing stick. Do thou protect kinsmen for this worshipper."
1.8.13	Then the westernmost one in the same way.
1.8.14	He places two on the north, touching each other, saying, "May he have offspring, may he have wealth, may he have kinsmen." He says, "May the sacrificer be surrounded by his kinsmen."
1.8.15	Then he covers them with embers, saying, "Be heated by the heat of the Bhrigus and Angiras."
1.8.16	Then he yokes them with the Yoga, as the sages collect the potsherds in the fire. Those of Pūṣan, O Indra-Vāyu, are yoked.
1.8.17	In the same way he places the northern potsherds.
1.8.18	The potsherds are heated.
1.8.19	The rice-pot is heated.
1.8.20	The cooked oblations are heated.
1.8.21	Water for mixing with the flour is heated.
1.9.1	Then, having sat down to the north of the Garhapatya, restraining speech, he pours the flour from the black antelope skin into the vessel, beyond the strainer, with the formula, "In the impulse of the divine Savitr, with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of Pusan, I pour the offering agreeable to Agni, to Agni-Soma, to the deity so and so."
1.9.2	Then he says to the Parigrhnātṛ, "Bring the water."
1.9.3	The Praiṣakāra brings it, having taken it with the ladle from the Prāṇītā vessels, having sprinkled it, having bound it with the Veda, having covered the hand.
1.9.4	In this way to the Madantī vessels.
1.9.5	Having brought both of them, she makes them recite the verse, "The waters have united with the waters, the plants with the juice, the Revatīs with the Jagatīs. May the sweet ones be united with the sweet ones. Let them be released."
1.9.6	Then she sprinkles them with the verse, "Released from the waters, may you be united with the waters."
1.9.7	"I unite you for the sake of begetting."
1.9.8	Having joined and arranged (the bones), he touches them, saying, "To Agni, to Agni-Soma, to the one named so-and-so, to the one called so-and- so." According to the deity.
1.9.9	He makes a lump, saying, "You are the head of the sacrifice."
1.9.10	Having placed the bones in the southern skull, he puts embers on them, saying, "You are the heat, you are the life of the universe."
1.9.11	May the lord of sacrifice spread widely for you.
1.9.12	He makes it in the shape of a tortoise while being stretched.
1.9.13	All the potsherds are spread out. This is the Brahmanical statement.
1.10.1	Then he pours clarified butter into the vessel of clarified butter, which is covered with a cloth, with the verse, "This is the milk of the great ones, the juice of the plants. Of that which is not exhausted, I pour it for the sake of offering to the gods."
1.10.2	Then, having mixed the ashes with the embers, he places them on the north side.
1.10.3	In the same way, he puts the northern cake on the embers.
1.10.4	Then the cooked rice, then the curds.
1.10.5	Then having brought water in a vessel, he makes him take the skin of the southern cake, saying, "Take the skin, take the skin" three times.
1.10.6	Then of the northern one.
1.10.7	Then he performs the paryanji-rite, saying, "The Rakshas are enclosed, the evil spirits are enclosed" three times.
1.10.8	Then he cooks the southern cake, saying, "May the god Savitr cook thee in the highest heaven. May Agni protect thy body."
1.10.9	He recites over the Garhapatya, "O Agni, protect the oblation."
1.10.10	In the same way he cooks the northern cake.
1.10.11	Then, having sprinkled the southern cake with ashes, he sprinkles it with Veda, saying three times, "Be united with Brahma, be united with Brahma."
1.10.12	Then the northern one.
1.10.13	He releases speech, saying, "Do not burn while cooking."
1.10.14	Here he takes the pot and cleans it, heating it with a charcoal from the Garhapatya fire, and then taking it, he places it within the altar, facing west, in three lines, saying, "To the one, svāhā! To the two, svāhā!"
1.10.15	Then he takes the Veda, saying, "This Veda found the earth in its hidden state in the dense and intricate (places). May it find the world for the sacrificer, may it perform the sacrifice without blemish, may it do much work."
1.10.16	With the Veda he thrice rubs the Vedi. With the Veda they found out the earth. It spread out. The earth carries the embryo of the earthly beings within the worlds. From that the sacrifice is born, giving all.
1.11.1	Then, standing with his back towards the Veda, he takes up the wooden sword, saying, "I take thee in the impulse of the divine Savitr, with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of Pusan."
1.11.2	Having taken it, he recites, "Thou art the right arm of Indra, the thousand-armed, the hundred-rayed."
1.11.3	Then he lays down the sacrificial grass on it, with the formula, "Thou art Vayu, of sharp lustre, thou art Satabhrishti, thou art of the forest, thou art the slayer of the enemies."
1.11.4	Then he lays down the grass with its tip towards the north, within the altar, with the formula "Thou art the armour of the earth, thou art the armour for the sacrificer."
1.11.5	On it he strikes with the wooden sword, with the formula. "O Earth, thou art the place of sacrifice, do not injure the roots of the plants."
1.11.6	He takes it with the formula, "The Araru is removed from the earth."
1.11.7	He carries it with the formula "Go to the cattle-pen."
1.11.8	He looks at the altar with the formula, “May the heaven rain for you.”
1.11.9	Having carried it, he scatters it on the mound with the formula, "O god Savitr, bind him whom we hate and who hates us with a hundred nooses in the highest heaven. Let him not escape from here."
1.11.10	The second (stroke) he strikes, saying, 'The sacrifice to the divine Prithivī, the plants, may thy root not be injured!'
1.11.11	He takes it, saying, 'Araru has been removed from Prithivī.'
1.11.12	He carries it away, saying, 'Go to the village, to the cattle-pen.'
1.11.13	He looks towards the altar, saying, 'May the sky rain for thee.'
1.11.14	Having taken it, he throws it on the heap, saying, "O god Savitr, bind him whom we hate and who hates us with a hundred nooses in the highest heaven. Let him not escape from here."
1.11.15	He strikes the third time, saying, "You are the divine altar, O Earth. May I not injure the roots of the plants."
1.11.16	He takes it, saying, "The Araru has been driven away from the Earth, the non-divine altar."
1.11.17	"Go to the cow-pen." He takes it away.
1.11.18	"May the sky rain for you." He looks at the altar.
1.11.19	Having taken it away, he scatters it on the heap. "O god Savitar, bind him with a hundred nooses in the highest heaven, he who hates us and whom we hate. May he not escape from here. May the hawk not seize you from heaven." Here he repeats.
1.11.20	He silently takes the fourth one along with the sacrificial grass.
1.11.21	Then he takes the eastern enclosing stick, saying, "May the Vasus take you with the Gayatri metre." On the right side, "May the Rudras take you with the Trishtup metre." On the back, "May the Adityas take you with the Jagati metre." On the left side.
1.11.22	Then the performers, reciting this verse, make the altar, coming to the altar, rich in wealth, rich in Rudra, rich in Aditya, the expanse of heaven, the navel of the earth, so that this sacrificer may not be harmed.
1.11.23	Then he digs out the altar with the wooden spade towards the east, saying, "Performing the work of the divine Savitar, the wise ones."
1.11.24	Then he tells the Agnidhra, "O Agnidhra, carry it three times from here."
1.11.25	Then the Agnidhra carries (the oblations) three times.
1.11.26	When the Agnidhra has carried (the oblations ) three times, he gives the instruction: "O Brahman, I shall take up the northern enclosing stick."
1.11.27	He takes up the northern enclosing sticks, saying, "Thou art truth," on the right side; "Thou art the abode of truth," on the west; "Thou art truth and glory," on the north.
1.11.28	Then the altar is levelled with the wooden sword towards the west. "The text says, "Thou art the abode of prosperity, thou art the abode of good fortune, thou art the expanse of prosperity and good fortune, thou hast come before the fierce one, the destroyer, the destroyer of the wicked, taking the earth, the giver of long life, whom thou didst create in the moon with the abodes of prosperity." The wise ones worship her, having seen her.
1.11.29	Then having placed the transverse wooden sword within the altar, he gives instructions: "Bring the sprinkling water, arrange the sacrificial grass and wood, cleanse the spoon and ladles, bind the wife, and prepare the clarified butter."
1.11.30	They bring the sprinkling water, filling it up.
1.11.31	The Adhvaryu places the wooden sword on the right side and lays down the path of the wooden sword.
1.11.32	Then he strikes the wooden sword on a heap of earth, saying, "The gods who hate me with their minds, with their speech, with their knowledge, with their deeds, with their hearing, with their hearts, I cut off their heads with Indra's thunderbolt."
1.11.33	Having washed his hands, he washes the wooden sword.
1.11.34	They place the kindling wood and the sacrificial grass, the kindling wood on the right, the sacrificial grass on the left.
1.12.1	Then he takes up these ladles, the ladle on the right, and the Juhu and Upamant on the left, the Dhruva and the Prashitra and the Veda-parivasana.
1.12.2	He burns (the fire) on the Garhapatya with the verse, "The Rakshas is repelled, the evil spirits are repelled. I burn thee with the most brilliant lustre of Agni."
1.12.3	He then cleanses the ladle with the verse, "May I not destroy the cattle-pen. I cleanse thee, O Vājin, the conqueror of foes.
1.12.4	Three times from within, three times from without, thus he wipes the staff with the roots, touches it with water and hands it over to the one who is being heated.
1.12.5	Then he wipes the ladle, saying, "Do not injure speech, the breath, the Vājinī, I wipe you, the conqueror of enemies."
1.12.6	Having wiped it thus, he touches it with water, and hands it over.
1.12.7	Then he cleans the Upabhṛt ladle, saying, "Do not injure my eye and ear. I am cleaning you, the destroyer of enemies."
1.12.8	Having cleaned it in the same way, he touches it with water and hands it over to the Pratiprasthātṛ.
1.12.9	Then he cleans the Dhruva ladle, saying, “Do not injure my progeny and womb. I am cleaning thee, the destroyer of foes.”
1.12.10	Then, having wiped it with water, he hands it over to the one who is going to cook it.
1.12.11	Then he wipes the portion to be eaten, saying, "Do not destroy the form and color for the animals. I am wiping you, the horse, the conqueror of enemies."
1.12.12	Having wiped it with water in the same way, he hands it to the one who will cook it.
1.12.13	Then, having touched the sprinkling-water with these ladles, he strikes it on the Garhapatya with the formula, "The art of heaven has descended, resting on the corners of the earth. With that thousand-streamed, we destroy the enemy. Svāhā!"
1.12.14	Then, having spread grass in front of the heap, and placing the ladles on them,
1.12.15	Then, having led the wife between the two fires, and having seated her facing the south, facing the north, towards the Garhapatya, and having bound her with the yoke, with the desire for happiness, offspring, good fortune, and the body of Agni, she binds herself, saying, "May I be devoted to the well-done."
1.12.16	[Then he makes her recite the verse, "Let the rite be performed in accordance with the wish of the blessing."
1.12.17	Then he makes her sip water behind the strainer, saying, "The plants are rich in milk, the herbs are rich in milk. The milk of the plants is the milk of the water. By that milk, O Indra, may you unite me."
1.12.18	Then he makes her put the kindling-sticks on the Garhapatya fire, saying, "O Agni, lord of vows, I shall observe the vow, may I be able to do it, may it succeed for me, svāhā." "O Vayu, lord of vows... O Aditya, lord of vows ... O lord of vows of vows, I will observe the vow, I will be able to do that, may it succeed."
1.12.19	Then he approaches the Garhapatya from the rear, with the verse, "We approach thee, O Agni, for offspring, for a good wife, for the subduer of foes, for the unassailable, for the invincible. May I be like Indra's wife, like Aditi, with good sons. The Garhapatya has approached thee for offspring. May my sons be for offspring, may my daughter be for offspring. May I be victorious, may my husband's praise be supreme."
1.12.20	[Then he makes her recite: "May the mind be deficient or excessive."
1.12.21	Then he makes her look at the Garhapatya: "O Agni, lord of the house, invite me. O wives of the gods, invite me. Wife, this is your world. May there be reverence to you. Do not harm me."
1.12.22	Then he looks at it with ghee, saying, "This is the milk of the great ones, the sap of the plants, I look at you with the unerring eye for the sake of good offspring."
1.12.23	Then he places it on the Garhapatya, saying, "You are brilliance."
1.12.24	Taking up the kindling wood, he carries it forward, saying, "Go forth following brilliance."
1.12.25	Then he places it on the Āhavanīya with the formula, "May Agni not deprive thee of thy lustre."
1.12.26	Here he places this kindling-wood in the middle of the Āhavanīyī with the formula, svāhā.
1.12.27	Then having taken it around the Prokṣaṇī water and having placed it on the southern half of the Vedi, he makes the sacrificer gaze at the clarified butter with the formula, “Gaze with closed eyes.” So says the Brāhmaṇa.
1.12.28	Then having taken it back as it was taken, and having placed it in the northern half of the altar, the Adhvaryu looks at it with the verse, "O Agni, thou art the tongue, the bright abode of the gods. For each god, for each Yajus, be thou."
1.12.29	Then he pours it back three times through the strainers with their tips pointing towards the north, with the verses, "Thou art bright, thou art light, thou art splendour."
1.12.30	Then he pours out the Prokṣaṇī water, reciting, "May the god Savitr purify you with the stainless purifying (water), with the rays of the shining Vasu."
1.12.31	Having placed the Prokṣaṇī and the Pavitra, he takes up the Sruva in his right hand and the Juhu in his left hand, and having placed it on the Veda, he takes up Sukra with this formula, "I take thee, O Sukra, for the Sukra, for Dhāman, for Dhāma, for the gods, for the Yajus, for the Yajurveda." Having taken four spoonfuls and having touched it, he gives it away.
1.12.32	Then he takes up in the Upabṛt with the formula, "I take thee in the light, in the abode of light, for the gods, for the Yajus, for the Yājus." Having taken up eight times with this formula, he takes up the remaining Grahas, taking less and less clarified butter.
1.12.33	Having touched it thus, he hands it over.
1.12.34	Then he takes up the Dhruva cup with the formula, "To the light, to the light, to Dhāman, to Dhāmaṇ, to the gods, to the Yajus, to the Yājus, I take up." Having taken up four spoonfuls and filled it up, he touches it as before and hands it over.
1.13.1	Then, having placed the ladle with clarified butter on the ground behind the altar, and having sprinkled the Prokṣaṇī water, he rises, reciting, "The divine waters, the leaders, the foremost, lead this sacrifice to the forefront, bestow the lord of sacrifice. Indra chose you in the battle against Vṛtra. You chose Indra in the battle against Vrtra."
1.13.2	He sprinkles the water with water, saying, "Sprinkled, sprinkled." Three times.
1.13.3	Then he spreads the fire-wood and sprinkles it, saying, "Black is the tail of the cow, to Agni thee, svāhā."
1.13.4	He sprinkles the altar, saying, "Thou art the altar, to the sacrificial grass thee, svāha."
1.13.5	He sprinkles (the sacrificial grass), saying, "Thou are the sacrificial grass, to the ladles thee, svāhe."
1.13.6	They bring it between the sacrificial grass and the Havirdhāna cart.
1.13.7	Having placed it in front of the altar with the ends towards the east, he sprinkles it with the formula, "For heaven thee" for the ends, "For the atmosphere thee" for the middle parts, "For the earth thee" for the roots.
1.13.8	Having placed the ladle in front, he throws the knot towards the south. Having taken the Prokṣaṇī water, he pours it on the southern and northern parts of the altar, saying, "May Svāhā be the food for the Fathers. May energy be for those who have energy. May energy go to the earth." Having taken up the Prokṣani water, he spreads the sacrificial grass in front and takes up the Prastara grass, saying, "You are the mound of Viṣṇu."
1.13.9	He places it on the pure (fire) with the formula, "I place the Prāṇa and Apāna in the sacrificer." Or silently.
1.13.10	He gives it to the sacrificer or to the Brahman.
1.13.11	He spreads the grass-binding twigs on the right buttock from the left shoulder.
1.13.12	Then at the end of the southern altar, he spreads the handful of sacrificial grass, saying, "I spread thee, O divine grass, with the wool of the sheep, for the gods, who are in the heaven."
1.13.13	He spreads it in front, towards the west, in three rows, not visible to the eye.
1.13.14	Then the one with the bundle of grass in his hand, having approached from the east, places the enclosing sticks, saying, "You are Gandharva, Visvavasu, the enclosing stick of the sacrificer from all sides. You are the call of the invited. This is the middle one." "You are Indra's right arm, the enclosing stick for the sacrificer. You are the called-for call. This is the right one." "May Mitra-Varuna protect you from the north, with the firm law. You are the enclosing stick for Yajamana. You are the invited call. This is northern one."
1.13.15	Then he places the fire-wood in front of the sun, with the verse, "May the sun protect thee from all curses."
1.13.16	He places the two fire-sticks upright, with the verse "We kindle thee, O Agni, the bright, the wise, the great, the giver of wealth, the knower of all beings." He places the right one silently and the left one with the verse.
1.13.17	The Veda is placed within, with the Udici (verse) in front, and the Tirasi (verse) is placed below. The Visas are placed in the machine.
1.13.18	The two Prishthara verses are placed in the seat of the Vasus, Rudras, and Adityas.
1.13.19	On the Prishthara verse, the Juhu ladle is placed. "The Juhu is called Ghritachi. It is placed in the seat by its dear name."
1.13.20	The Uttarā Upāṃśu is the Upāṃśus. Thou art Ghṛtācī by thy dear name. Sit in the dear place.
1.13.21	The Uttarā Dhruvā is the Dhruvā. Thou art Ghritācī by the dear name. Sit on the dear place.
1.13.22	Then he touches the ladles with the verse, "These have come to the world of good deeds. O Vishnu, protect them. Protect the sacrifice, protect the lord of sacrifice, protect me who am engaged in sacrifice."
1.13.23	Then he recites the verses, "You are the Viṣṇu-ones, you are the Viṣņu-ones, you belong to the Viṣṇus, you belong to Viṣṇu."
1.14.1	Then he takes the vessel of clarified butter with the right hand, and the vessel of the Veda with the left.
1.14.2	Having taken this (water), having turned to the right, having run towards the west, having sat down with his back towards the Garhapatya, he spreads two portions of rice in the vessel, saying, "I make thy abode auspicious, I prepare thy good form with the stream of ghee. Do thou sit down in it. Stand firm. Be thou the oblation of rice, agreeable to my mind."
1.14.3	Then, taking up Dhṛṣṭi, he removes the embers of the southern cake, saying, "This is the face of the army, I am removing it for the sake of consecration."
1.14.4	Then he shows it to him, saying, "The light of the sun shines forth for the sake of the great power."
1.14.5	Having made the Veda free from dust, he pours it down with the verse, "May the Agni, born of ghee, grow, may Agni be pleased with the offerings. May the sky be thy skin, may the sky be thy hide. Thee, the handsome one, the knower of wealth, of the animals, I pour down with the Agni-pleasing lustre."
1.14.6	He pours it down with this verse, whatever deity it may be.
1.14.7	Then he removes it with the verse, "The generated one is heated, the generator of thoughts."
1.14.8	"He anoints with ghee, moist, the first to be born, the protector of the world."
1.14.9	Having anointed from above, he anoints from below, saying, "That Self which has entered into the animals, I anoint."
1.14.10	In the same way, he removes the northern cake.
1.14.11	Then the cooked rice, then the curd.
1.14.12	Then he adorns the Saṁnāyya (vessel) with the verse, "The Self which has entered the animals, which has taken its place among the gods, having become Soma and ghee, may it go to the gods and obtain the good. May it come to me, the sacrificer."
1.14.13	Having seen the potsherds, he places them down with the verse, “May the prosperity of the earth not leak out."
1.14.14	The Brahmanical text says, "He causes the sacrificer to be removed by counting."
1.14.15	Having filled the spoon with clarified butter, he places it in between the two sacrificial dishes.
1.14.16	Having taken them around, he places them within the altar with these Vyāhṛtis: "Bhūr Bhuvah Suvar."
1.14.17	In the middle he places the cakes, on the right side the cooked rice, and on the left side the curds.
1.14.18	Then having moved the ladle forward of the spoon, he places it on the Prastara to the right of the Juhu. "He says, "May it be settled on me, may it be well-settled on the earth. May it spread with progeny and cattle. May it be settled in the heaven, in the earth, in the atmosphere. May I be superior. May my enemies be inferior."
1.14.19	Then he places it on the Dhruva-grass as it was taken, with the formula, "Thou art the bull, the son of Sakvari, the son of Ghritachi, by thy dear name, do thou sit in the dear assembly."
1.15.1	Then taking a twig from the fire, he says, "Do thou recite the formula for Agni being kindled."
1.15.2	Then at the place where the Hotṛ recites, "We know your gifts, O Agni, for the heaven," he places the first one.
1.15.3	He places them at every Praṇava.
1.15.4	Then at the place where he recites, "Agni is kindled, offered," he places the last one.
1.15.5	He arranges the kindling wood around.
1.15.6	Then when the Hotṛ knows that the Adhvaryu is about to offer, he makes the Āhavaniya fire thrice touch the Veda with this Veda.
1.15.7	After the Sāmidhenī verses have been recited, having sprinkled from the Dhruva vessel with the spoon and having touched with the Veda, he offers the oblique libation to Prajāpati with the formula "To Prajāpati svāhā" mentally.
1.15.8	Then he says (to the Agnid) "O Agnid, do thou thrice rub the Agnis."
1.15.9	Then the Agnidhra, having taken the kindling woods and the wooden sword, and having smoothed the enclosing sticks three times towards the middle, three times towards the south, three times towards north, three times towards Ahavaniya, he makes them go away with the verse, "O Agni, the winner of speed, may I win the speed. May I win the speed of the horse, the winner of the speed, the winner of horses, for the winning of horses. I am smoothing Agni, the eater of food, for the eating of food."
1.15.10	Then with the palms of his hands facing east, he makes the offering-spoon and the serving-spoon face east, saying, "You are the world. Spread out. O Agni, the sacrificer, this is your homage."
1.15.11	Then he takes the offering-spoon with his right hand, saying, "Come, O offering-spoon, Agni is calling you for the sacrifice to the gods."
1.15.12	With his left hand he takes the serving-spoon, saying, "O serving-spoon, come, the god Savitr is calling you for sacrifice to the gods.
1.15.13	He recites the verse, "O Agni-Vishnu, I have not transgressed you. May you both be pleased with me. Do not burn me. Make my world and the world of the creator."
1.15.14	He establishes the place, saying, "O Vishnu, you are the place."
1.15.15	When the sacrificer has begun, having touched the straight spoon, he offers the Āghāra offering on the middle enclosing stick, continuously, facing east, without interruption, saying, "Indra performed heroic deeds, beginning from here, the sacrifice reaching the sky, the unerring sacrifice of the lord of sacrifice, Indra and Vānt, svāhā."
1.15.16	He takes up the ladle, saying, "The bright rays."
1.15.17	Then, without touching, he moves forward, reciting, "Protect me, O Agni, from evil conduct. May I be devoted to good conduct."
1.15.18	He anoints the ladle with the Dhruva ladle, saying, "You are the head of the sacrifice. May the light be joined with light." Three times.
1.15.19	Then, having placed the ladles in their respective places, he chooses the Pravaran (ladle).
1.15.20	The Āgnīdhra priest, having taken the kindling woods, the bundles of grass, and the spade, attaches them to the back.
1.15.21	Then he announces, "Let it be heard! Let it be heard! Agni, the divine Hotṛ, is invoking the gods, the wise, the healer, the Manu-like, the Bharata-like, the Amu-like, the Brahman-like, the one who speaks here. The Brahmins are the purifiers of this sacrifice." Thus he takes up the name of the Hotṛ, saying, "This is the human one."
1.15.22	Rising up, the Hotṛ releases.
1.15.23	The Adhvaryu, having released (the Soma), sits down.
1.15.24	He sits down, desiring to produce (the Soma).
1.16.1	When the Hotṛ knows that the Adhvaryu has taken up the ladle full of ghee, he says, "Take it up", and having taken it up in the Juhū and Upabhṛt ladles, he approaches, and having caused to announce, says, "Do ye offer the kindling wood."
1.16.2	At the Vasat-utterance he offers, saying, "Do ye sacrifice, do ye sacrifice."
1.16.3	When performing the fourth (offering), he pours half of the butter from the Upabhṛt into the Juhu.
1.16.4	Having offered five Prayāja offerings, having stepped forward towards the north, he pours the oblations in succession with the Srasrava, first the Dhruva, then the southern cake, then the Dhruva again, then the northern cake, then the cooked rice, then the curds, and finally the Upabhara.
1.16.5	Then, taking four spoonfuls of ghee, he says, "Recite to Agni."
1.16.6	Having stepped across and announced, he says, "Sacrifice to Agni."
1.16.7	Having recited the Vasat call, he offers in the eastern half of the northern half, facing the fire, with outstretched arms.
1.16.8	Then, having stepped across towards the north, taking four spoonfulls of ghee, he recites, "Recite for Soma."
1.16.9	Having stepped over and announced, he recites "Sacrifice to Soma."
1.16.10	When the Vasat-call is made, he offers with the right arm stretched forward towards the eastern half of the southern half.
1.16.11	Having spread (the oblations), he offers from the eastern half of southern half of the cake, saying, "Recite to Agni."
1.16.12	Then he stands near it, saying, "Do not be afraid, do not be frightened, may I not injure you, may your brilliance not depart."
1.16.13	Then he touches it, saying, "I shall lift up the Bharata (spoon), I shall pour down the ladles. I shall pour down for you. Obeisance to you. Do not injure me."
1.16.14	Having taken from the eastern half, he takes from the western half.
1.16.15	He pours over (the ladle) and anoints it, saying, “When I poured down the ladles for you, I did it in the reverse order of the self. I have anointed it with ghee. May that be replenished again.”
1.16.16	Having crossed beyond the Agni, one should offer the Agni.
1.16.17	One offers at the Vasat-utterance.
1.16.18	While taking four spoonfuls of clarified butter, one says "To Prajapati" in a low voice, and "Recite loudly" in a high voice.
1.16.19	Having crossed beyond the Agni and having announced, one says "Prajapati" in low voice, and one says "Offer in a high voice."
1.16.20	One offers at Vasat-utterancel.
1.16.21	Then, having spread out (the cake), he offers from the other half of the northern cake, saying, "To Agni and Soma" at the Full Moon, and "To Indra Vaisvânara" at the New Moon. At the New Moon, he places (the cake) saying, "To Indra"; or he places it saying, "To Mahendra", if he is offering to Mahendra.
1.17.1	The placing is the same.
1.17.2	The touching is the same.
1.17.3	Having taken from the other half, he offers from the former half.
1.17.4	He pours over (the oblation).
1.17.5	The sprinkling is similar.
1.17.6	Having gone beyond (the altar), he calls out, "Do ye offer to Agni-Soma."
1.17.7	He offers at the Vasat-utterance.
1.17.8	Having spread (the oblation), while offering twice from the cake, he says, "Do thou recite the yajus for Indra" or "for Mahendra" if one is offering to Mahendra.
1.17.9	He offers twice from the cooked rice, twice from the boiled rice, and twice from the curds.
1.17.10	He pours over (the oblations).
1.17.11	He anoints (the oblations) with ghee.
1.17.12	Having stepped across, he calls out, "Do you recite the yajya for Indra" or "Do you recite for Mahendra" if one is offering to Mahendra.
1.17.13	He offers at the Vasat-utterance.
1.17.14	Then having spread (the oblations), while offering from the northern half of the Dakṣiṇā cake, he says, "Do you recite (the mantra) to Agni Sviṣṭakṛt."
1.17.15	He offers once from the northern half, once from the Dhruva ghee, once from the northern cake, once from the cooked rice, once from the curd.
1.17.16	He pours twice.
1.17.17	He does not smear (the oblations).
1.17.18	At the Parvan sacrifices he offers with the Svishtakrit ladle, reciting the verses, "We offer to the bull, the steed, the full moon. May it bestow on us abundant prosperity, the nourishment of wealth, a thousandfold. To the life-giving Suradhasa, to the full moon, svāhā!" at the full moon.
1.17.19	"The New Moon is auspicious, well-favoured, like a cow, ever increasing. May she bestow on us abundant strength, prosperity, and a thousandfold wealth, for drinking, for the Suradhasas. To the New Moon, svāhā! At the New Moon.
1.17.20	Having transgressed, he announces, 'One should offer to Agni Sviṣṭakṛt.'
1.17.21	Having transgressed the eastern half of the northern half, he offers the eastern oblations."
1.17.22	Here he strikes the ladle on the Āhavaniya fire.
1.17.23	Then he offers it with the Saṃsrava offering.
1.17.24	Then having stepped over towards the north, having brought the ladle, he pours the rinsing water within the enclosing sticks, with the verse, "I offer this oblation to Vaisvânara, the thousand-fold, hundred-streamed, may he, our father, grandfather, great-grandfather, go to the world of heaven, swelling with nectar, with salutations."
1.17.25	Having cleansed the ladle, having heated it with water, having filled it, having taken it outside the enclosing sticks, having taken it to the ocean with a hundred streams, having taken it from the middle of the world, having taken it out of the milk of Aditi, having taken it away from the people, Agni, do not injure me in the highest heaven.
1.17.26	Here he brings the butter from the Upabhrti vessel entirely into the Juhu vessel.
1.17.27	Then having placed the ladles in their places, he offers the Prasitra from the northern half of the southern cake, a grain-measure, not more than a grain-measure. "May this be done for the sake of the sacrifice. May it be pure. May it be well-offered. May this oblation be pure."
1.17.28	Then having poured it with the ladle-stick, having placed the ladle-sticks in the rear, having touched the ladle-stick with water, he places it.
1.18.1	Then he asks for a pot or a bowl for pouring the ladle-stick.
1.18.2	Having placed it within the altar and having spread it, he puts it down from the southern half of the southern cake with the formula, "Thou art the seen, the one with feet of ghee, impelled by Mitra-Varuna. From the southern half, without breaking, I put down the one-faced one."
1.18.3	He puts down the second cuttings after having broken them.
1.18.4	Then having well satisfied with ghee the eastern half of the southern cake, three or four inches, he places the portion for the sacrificer in front of the Dhruva vessel.
1.18.5	He offers twice from the Dhruva ghee, twice from the northern cake, twice from the cooked rice, twice from the curds.
1.18.6	He pours over (the cake).
1.18.7	Then he anoints the Hotṛ twice.
1.18.8	Having sniffed, he eats.
1.18.9	He offers the four-cornered oblation.
1.18.10	He strews.
1.18.11	He puts in twice.
1.18.12	He pours over.
1.18.13	The Adhvaryu, the sacrificer, the Brahman and the Agnīdhra join together.
1.18.14	Then when the Hotṛ knows that the divine Adhvaryus have been invoked and the human ones have been invoked, then he divides the southern cake into four parts and makes it sit on the sacrificial grass.
1.18.15	Then when the Hotṛ comes to know that the sacrificer has been invoked, then the sacrificer should gaze at the Hotṛ and meditate on Vāyu mentally.
1.18.16	When the Idā has been invoked, the Agnīdhra places (the cake) on six potsherds.
1.18.17	He strews (the cake), places it, pours clarified butter over it, strews (the potsherds), places (the cake), and pours clarified butter over (the potsherd).
1.18.18	They eat.
1.18.19	They cleanse themselves.
1.18.20	Then he says, "Take away the portion for the Brahman."
1.18.21	They take away the portion.
1.18.22	The Veda follows the waters, the Brahman-portion.
1.18.23	Then he asks for the Anvāhārya (rice).
1.18.24	They remove the oblation-remnant.
1.19.1	Then he gives the order: "Brahman, we are about to depart. Having placed the kindling wood, the Agnīdhkar Agni should touch the fires each time."
1.19.2	Having been released, he places this kindling wood in the middle of the Āhavanīya.
1.19.3	Then the Agnidhra, with the kindling woods and the sacrificial grass, cleanses the enclosing sticks, once in the middle, once on the right, once on the left.
1.19.4	He makes the Āhavanīya fire to be brought in once, with the verse, "O Agni, the winner of speed, I win the speed. O Agni, the winner, I win the winner. I win the winner of speed. I win the horse, the winner of the speed, for winning the speed. I cleanse the Agni, the eater of food, for eating food."
1.19.5	Then, having touched the bundles of grass with water, he offers them on the Āhavanīya fire, saying, "May Rudra, the lord of beings, the moving one, the bull, not harm our cattle. May this be offered to you, svāhā."
1.19.6	Then, taking the Juhū and Upamūhvī ladles, he steps forward and announces, "Let us worship the gods."
1.19.7	He offers with "Vasat!" and "Sacrifice! Sacrifice!"
1.19.8	He offers three Anuyajas towards the west.
1.19.9	He mixes them together from the east.
1.19.10	Then, having stepped towards the north, having placed the ladles in their places, he arranges the ladles with the verses, "May I be grasped by the impulse of the horse, by the upward grasping."
1.19.11	He takes up the Juhu towards the south.
1.19.12	Then he takes up the Upamant towards the left, saying, "Indra has made my enemies fall down by means of the Nigraha."
1.19.13	Brahma and the gods have increased both the Udgara and the Nigraha. He takes up the eastern Juhu.
1.19.14	Then he says, "May Indra-Agni separate my enemies who are far away." He places the Upabhṛt ladle towards the west.
1.19.15	He anoints the enclosing sticks towards the east with the formula, "For Vasus thee." The middle one with the formula, “For Rudras thee.” The southern one with the formula “For Adityas thee.” The northern one with the formula,
1.19.16	Then, having touched the ladle with water, he places the ladles in their places. He anoints the sacrificial grass with the ladle.
1.19.17	"The tips of the ladle are anointed with the formula, "Anointed, they flow." The middle parts with the formula, "May we be united." The roots with the formula, "Do not destroy the offspring and the womb."
1.19.18	Then, having cut grass from the bundle, he places it on the ladle.
1.19.19	Then he announces: "Let there be hearing! Let there be hearing! The divine Hotṛs have been sent for the auspicious recitation. The human one has been sent for the recitation of the Sūkta. Recite the Sūkta."
1.19.20	He strikes it as if from above, not too far, not too near, not in front, not behind, not sideways, not obliquely, not downwards, not upwards, not with a downward movement, not with an upward movement, not with a movement to the right, not with a leftward movement, not with the movement of a snake, not with the motion of a bird, not with the shaking of a tree, not with the swaying of a reed, not with the bending of a bow, not with the swinging of a swing, not with the tossing of a ball, not with the throwing of a stone, not with the striking of a man, not with the beating of a woman, not with the hitting of a child, not with the slapping of a slave, not with the stroke of a stick, not with the blow of a fist, not with the strike of a weapon, not with the thrust of a spear, not with the touch of a thorn, not with the bite of a snake, nor with the stroke of an axe.
1.19.21	Then he looks at the Agnidhra (saying), "O Agnidhra!"
1.19.22	The Agnidhra says, "Speak."
1.19.23	The Adhvaryu says, "The Agnidhra has gone."
1.19.24	The Agnidhra says "He has gone."
1.19.25	"Listen," says the Adhvaryu.
1.19.26	"Let it be heard," says the Agnidhra.
1.19.27	"Speak this," says the Advaryu.
1.19.28	The Agnidhrā says, "Strike in unison."
1.19.29	He strikes in unison.
1.19.30	"May there be welfare for the divine Hotṛs, may there be welfare for human beings. Speak well of the good."
1.19.31	Then, having risen, he stands near the Āhavanīya fire, saying, "O Agni, you are the protector of life, protect my life. O Agni, you are protector of sight, protect my sight."
1.19.32	Then he touches this (earth), saying, "You are firm."
1.19.33	He strikes the middle enclosing stick, saying, "The enclosing stick which thou didst take up, O Agni, when thou wast being pressed by the Pāṇis, I now take up in accordance with that. Let not this be contrary to thy will."
1.19.34	Then he puts the other two together, saying, "Come to the path of the sacrifice."
1.19.35	Then he offers them with the Srasrava (oblation).
1.19.36	He pours down the Upāṃśu cup on the Juhu cup. The gods who are the most generous, the most bountiful, the most generous, who are seated on the sacrificial grass, have sung this speech. They should be seated on this sacrificial grass and should rejoice. Svāhā.
1.19.37	Then, having circumambulated clockwise and having run back to the front, he releases the two ladles on the axle, saying, "I place you, O Agni, in your own seat, in the assembly, for good will, for good will. May you be good to me. May you protect me on the axle, O axle-protectors."
1.19.38	If they are different, he releases them on the axle with the wooden sword, with the same formula.
1.20.1	Then, having given the Veda to the Hotṛ, he takes the ladle with clarified butter in his right hand and the Juhu in his left hand.
1.20.2	Having turned to the right, they run towards the east.
1.20.3	The Adhvaryu goes around the Garhapatya on the right, the Hotṛ on the left.
1.20.4	They sit down with their buttocks towards the Garhapatya, facing the east, the Adhvaryu on the right, the Hotṛ on the left.
1.20.5	Then the Adhvaryū, having taken up the Veda and the Upabhṛt, taking four spoonfuls of clarified butter, says (to the Hotṛ), "Do you recite softly, 'To Soma', and loudly, 'Do you recite in praise'."
1.20.6	Having called out, he says (to the Hotr), "Soma", softly, and loudly, "Do you recite in honour of Soma".
1.20.7	He offers at the Vasat-utterance.
1.20.8	When taking four spoonfuls of clarified butter, he says "To Tvashtra" in a low voice and "Recite" loudly.
1.20.9	Having called out, he says "Tvashtra" in low voice and "Sacrifice" loudly.
1.20.10	He offers at the Vasat-call.
1.20.11	When taking four spoonfuls, he says "to the wives of the gods" in a low tone and "Recite loudly".
1.20.12	Having called out, "To the wives of the gods!" he offers silently, and loudly, "To the gods!"
1.20.13	When the Vasat-call has been uttered and the oblation has been sprinkled, he offers to the wives of the Gods.
1.20.14	Then, taking four spoonfuls of clarified butter, he says, "To Agni, the lord of the house!" He should recite silently, and loudly,
1.20.15	Having called out, "O Agni, the householder!" he offers silently, and loudly, "May I offer."
1.20.16	Having omitted the first two offerings in the eastern half of the eastern half, he offers the remaining offerings.
1.20.17	Having gone around in front of the Hotr, he anoints the Hotr twice with the tip of the ladle.
1.20.18	Having eaten the oblation,
1.20.19	he prepares the ladle with four fingers' width of clarified butter.
1.20.20	The Adhvaryu and the wife of the sacrificer begin (the rite).
1.20.21	When the Ida has been invoked, the Agnidhra places the oblation in six portions.
1.20.22	They eat.
1.20.23	They wipe (the vessels).
1.20.24	Then, having taken four spoonfuls in the ladle, and having turned around to the left, he offers the expiation in the Anvāhāryapachana vessel, on the mortar and pestle, on the winnowing basket, on the pestle, on a stone, on the black antelope skin, on the skull, on the potsherd. I join the stains of the Avapruta (vessel) with the stains. May all the Viśve Devas enjoy this oblation. Whatever stains there are in the sacrifice, I offer them all, well-offered, together. Svāhā.
1.20.25	Having taken another four spoonfuls, he puts them on the fire in the Anvāhāryapachana ladle, and having put the Fali-karana ladle, he offers the Fali-karaṇa oblation with the formula, "O Agni, protect us from the unquenchable, from the uncooled, from today, from tomorrow, from the evil, from the evil intention, from the evil conduct. Make our food free from poison, the place of good digestion, svāhā."
1.20.26	Then, having returned by the same way as he went, he makes the sacrificer recite the Veda, saying, "You are the Veda, you are the knowledge." Having given the Veda to the Hotṛ, he says, "I am releasing the noose of Varuna that was tied by Savitar, the well-guiding one, in the womb of the creator, in the world of the well-done. May I be united with my husband."
1.20.27	Then, having placed the yoke-halter on her, he brings the water-vessel. "She goes again with life, with offspring, with Agni's radiance, with her husband. May I go again with my wife. May the self be with my body." Then, having wiped her mouth, "Whatever honey is in the water, O Sarasvati, in the cows, in the horses, thereby, O Sarasvati who bestows strength, anoint my mouth."
1.20.28	He pours out water, saying, "Having made the form of the Avabhṛtha, he rises up." So says the Brāhmaṇa.
1.21.1	Then he makes her drink water, saying, “The plants are rich in milk, the herbs are rich in milk. The milk of the plants is the milk of the water. By that milk, O Indra, do thou unite me."
1.21.2	Then he makes her place the kindling-sticks on the Garhapatya fire, saying, "O Agni, lord of vows, I have observed the vow, I have not been able to do it, may it be accomplished for me, svāhā." "O Vayu, lord of vows... O Aditya, lord of vows ... O lord of vows among vows, I have performed the vow, I was not able to do it. May it be accomplished for Me, svāhā."
1.21.3	Then he makes her go out as she has come in.
1.21.4	Then having gone forward, he makes the Dhruva ladle full of ghee, reciting, "May the Dhruva be filled with ghee. At every sacrifice, for the gods who are present, for Surya, the udder is on Aditi's lap. The earth is a great stream at this sacrifice."
1.21.5	Then he offers the expiations with the ladle from the vessel of ghee, saying, "The invocation, the excessive invocation, the Vasat-utterance, the excessive utterance, and what is excessive in the sacrifice, and what is deficient in the rite, may the sacrifice, repairing the joints, come to be completed. May the oblation offered with Svāhā go to the gods. Svāhā!"
1.21.6	Then he offers the oblations for the prosperity of the sacrifice: "To the desired ones, svāhā! To the undesired ones, svāha! To the remedy for the ill-done, svāhā!" To the atonement, svāhā. To the half-month, svāhā." To the divine bodies, svāhā, to prosperity, svāhā; to abundance, svāhā;" To all prosperity, svāha. "To the earth, svāhā," to the heaven, svāhā: "To the sky, svāhā." This is mine, O Varuna. I go to you. You are Agni. You are Agni, O Agni. You have come. Having come, I am with the mind. Having come, I am offering the oblation. Having come, bestow on us the remedy, svāhā." "You are Agni, the one who is not blamed, and the truth. You have come with the mind. You are holding the oblation. You have come, bestow on me the remedy, svāhā." "Whatever we have done wrong in this rite, whether by speech or action, by that unoffered oblation, I appease it all. May all the gods be satisfied, may they be sprinkled with ghee, svāhā.” Whatever part of this rite we have exceeded or fallen short of, may Agni, the bestower, the knower, make all that well-bestowed and well-offered for me. To Agni, the besTower, the well-offered, the bestower of oblations and desires, svāhā!” “O Prajapati, none other than you has encompassed these worlds. Whatever desires we offer to you, may that be ours. May we be the lords of wealth, svāhā.
1.21.7	Then having mixed the Barhis and the Dhatus, he anoints it on the Dhruva. "He anoints it with the oblation, with ghee, with the Adityas, with the Vasus, with the Maruts, with Indra, with all the gods."
1.21.8	Then he strikes it on the Ahavaniya with the verse, "May it go to the divine sky, svāhā."
1.21.9	Then having risen, having stepped on the altar with the right foot, he offers the Dhruva-oblation with the Samitsya-formula, "The gods knowing the path, having known the path, have gone to the path, O lord of mind, this our sacrifice to the gods, svāhā to speech, svāhā, O wind, svāhā."
1.21.10	He places the ladle.
1.21.11	He takes the Prāṇīta-oblations.
1.21.12	Having risen, the sacrificer steps with the right foot in the steps of Vishnu.
1.21.13	The New-moon or Full-moon sacrifice is concluded.
2.1.1	Now the invocation.
2.1.2	It is known that at the beginning of a sacrifice, one should desire the sacrifice, and at the beginning of the parts of a sacrifice, the parts of a sacrfice.
2.1.3	Having spread out the darbha grass in the east, the sacrificer sits facing east and recites: "Those that flow in front, above, and from all sides, I begin the sacrifice with faith and the purifying rays. The gods who know the path, may they find the path for the sacrifice. May the sacrifice be joined with the wind god, the lord of the mind." "Come, O Faith! I invite you with truth."
2.1.4	He makes the Veda known through inspiration. For inspiration, for desire, for prosperity, I have placed you in front. For immortality, for life.
2.1.5	They yoke the mind of Indra for his inspiration, for his desire, for his prosperity.
2.1.6	He places the goddess Inspiration in front of the mind. May the mother of the sacrifice be well-praising for me. Whatever I desire with my mind, may I know it. May I know that which is fixed in my heart.
2.1.7	He mentally resolves three times and then thrice aloud.
2.1.8	"One who desires all (kinds of) desires, he should resolve, "I shall perform the Agnihotra." In the Agnihotra."
2.1.9	"One who wishes heaven, he should resolve "I shall perform Darsha-Pūrnamāsa" in the Darsha-Pürnamāsa."
2.1.10	"One desiring heaven, he should decide "I shall perform Cāturmāsya" in the Cāturmāsyas."
2.1.11	"One desirous of heaven, he should determine "I shall perform Pasubandha" in the Pasubandha."
2.1.12	One who desires heaven should perform a Soma sacrifice.
2.1.13	One who desires heaven should offer an Agnihotra.
2.1.14	One who performs a sacrifice when the number of days is not lost, as one desires, as one wishes,
2.1.15	"May that be accomplished, may that be prosperous, may that be successful, my desire."
2.1.16	The reply of the priests is, "May it be accomplished for you, may it prosper for you, may your desire be fulfilled."
2.1.17	"Om, so be it" is the reply.
2.2.1	The priests request the sacrifice.
2.2.2	"O Adhvaryu, give me the sacrifice," he says to the Adhvaryu.
2.2.3	"The sun god is the divine Adhvaryu; may he give you the sacrifice."
2.2.4	"Om, this is the reply."
2.2.5	"Brahman, give me the divine sacrifice," to Brahman.
2.2.6	"The moon god, the divine, the Brahman, may he give you the divine sacrifice."
2.2.7	"Om, this is a reply."
2.2.8	"Hotar, give me the sacrifice of the gods," to the Hotar.
2.2.9	"Agni, the god, the divine Hotar, may he give thee the sacrifice of the Gods."
2.2.10	"Om, this is the reply."
2.2.11	"To the Udgātṛ, he says, 'Give me the divine worship.' To the Udgātā."
2.2.12	"Parjanya is the divine Udgātṛ. He will give you the divine worship."
2.2.13	"Om, this is reply."
2.2.14	"He says to the Sadasya, 'Give me divine worship.' To Sadasya."
2.2.15	"Space is the divine Sadasya. He will give divine worship."
2.2.16	"Om, the reply is 'So be it'."
2.2.17	"The Hotrkas (priests) say, 'The divine sacrifice is given to me.' The Hotrkas (say this)."
2.2.18	"The divine goddesses who are the Hotrkas (are said to be) the givers of the divine sacrifice. They give the divine sacrifice to you."
2.2.19	"Om, the reply (is given) 'So be it."
2.2.20	"The Camasadharvas (priests) (say), 'The divine sacrifice (is given) to me.' The Camasadharva (priests) are said (to be)."
2.2.21	The rays, the gods, and the Adhvaryus of the cups, may they give you the divine sacrifice."
2.2.22	"Om, thus it is," is the reply.
2.2.23	Or, if he does not request the divine sacrifice,
2.2.24	Having bathed at the sacred place first, having come up, wearing a new garment,
2.2.25	He is pure, clean, purified, worthy of sacrifice, free from sin, a celibate, dependent on the consent of others, and looking forward to the fourth act, he should perform the Vedic rites.
2.2.26	Facing east, with the sacred thread hanging over the right shoulder, one performs the rites pertaining to the gods, which are directed towards the east or the north.
2.2.27	Facing south, with the sacred-thread hanging over the left shoulder, one performs rites pertaining to the ancestors, which are directed to the west.
2.2.28	Standing, sitting, or bowing, as befits the occasion.
2.2.29	Just as the right hand is for the worship of gods, so is the Chāndogya Brāhmaṇa.
2.2.30	Just as is the left hand, so is the worship of ancestors.
2.2.31	Just as it is for the worship, so is the cremation ground.
2.2.32	Just as for the cremation ground, so is the offering of animals and Soma in the rites of cursing.
2.2.33	The Purodāsa is the first offering to the gods, because they would not find any other offering to the gods before it.
2.2.34	One should offer the Uttaravedi, which is just the size of the Devayajana.
2.3.1	The selection of the priests is described.
2.3.2	It is known that the priests are Brahmanas, who are born in a good family, have good learning and conduct, are not deficient in limbs, and are not eunuchs.
2.3.3	Those who are not excluded, not excluded, not the last born, not the last.
2.3.4	Having excluded the sons of Halaya, Valaya, and their daughters, the sons of others' fields, the sons of Halayā, Valayā, and their daughters.
2.3.5	The Adhvaryu was Angiras, the Brahman was Vasishtha, the Hotri was Vishvamitra, the Udgata was Ayasya, the Sadasya was Kousheetaka.
2.3.6	The remaining ones were the Bhrigus, the Angiras.
2.3.7	Some say that the Veda is the authority when it has been established.
2.3.8	If he were to choose them, he should choose those whose limbs are not defective, the Adhvaryu should have nails, the Brahman should not be lazy, the Hotṛ should be unbroken, the Udgātṛ should not be cruel, the Sadasya should not be cut off.
2.3.9	Then the Pratiprasthātṛ, the Nestr, and the Unnetṛ are the Adhvaryupuruṣas.
2.3.10	The Agnidhra is the Brahmaṇācchaṃsin, the Pot is the Brahman.
2.3.11	The Maitrāvaruṇa is the Acchāvāka, the Grava is the Hotṛ.
2.3.12	The Prastotar, the Pratihartar, the Subrahmaṇya are the Udgātṛ.
2.3.13	The Abhigaro, the Dhruvagopas, the Saṃśrāva are the Sadasyas.
2.3.14	They are the principal ones.
2.3.15	Some say that they are not the principal ones.
2.3.16	The Adhvaryu, the Pratiprasthātṛ, the Brahman, the Hotṛ, the Udgātṛ, the Pratihartṛ, the Nestr, the Subrahmaṇya, the Agnīdhra, the Prati-mādhvaryu, the Sadasya, the Pratiśāstṛ, the Prāṇīdhṛ, the Prāyaṇīdhṛ and the Āgnīdhra are the ten or eleven priests.
2.3.17	It is understood that they are bought with separate Dakṣiṇās.
2.3.18	Therefore, in the Agnihotra sacrifice, there is only one priest.
2.3.19	In the Darsha-Pūrṇamāsa sacrifices, there are four priests: the Adhvaryu priest, the Brahman priest, the Hotṛ priest, and the Agnīdhara priest.
2.3.20	In Cāturmāsya sacrifices, the Pratiprathātṛ priest is the fifth.
2.3.21	The Maitrāvaruṇa is the sixth at the animal sacrifice.
2.3.22	All are Somas at a Soma sacrifice.
2.3.23	He should choose them for each rite.
2.3.24	Having taken each one separately, he should say, "I am going to you for the Adhvaryu rite. May you consecrate me."
2.3.25	As the Brahman, as the Hotṛ, as the Udgātṛ, as the Sadasya.
2.3.26	Some say that there is no member.
2.3.27	With their own respective duties, the Hotrkas.
2.3.28	Some say not the Hotrkas
2.3.29	The Hotrkas and the Camasadhurus are the Tattpurusas.
2.3.30	The Adhvaryu is the first of the priests to be yoked, and the Stoma is to be yoked with him.
2.4.1	The sun is the divine deity, the Adhvaryu is the divine Adhvaryu. He is my Adhvaryu, I choose you as the Adhvaryus.
2.4.2	The sun is the divine divine deity, the divine Adhvaryu. He is your Adhvaryu; with his approval, I shall perform the rites.
2.4.3	"Om, so be it" is the reply.
2.4.4	The Moon is the divine deity, Brahma is the divine deity. He is my Brahma. I choose you as Brahma. Thus to Brahma.
2.4.5	The Moon is the divine divine deity, Brahma. He is your Brahma. With his permission, I shall perform the rite.
2.4.6	"Om, so be it." This is the reply.
2.4.7	Agni is the divine deity; Hotr is the divine deity." He is my Hotr. I choose you, Hotr. Thus to Hotr.
2.4.8	Agni is the divine deity, the Hotṛ. He is your Hotṛ, and he has been approved by you. I shall perform the rite as he has been approved.
2.4.9	"Oṃ, so be it," is the reply.
2.4.10	Parjanya is the divine deity. He is the Udgātṛ. He is my Udgātṛ, and he is your Udgātṛ." The Udgātṛ is the Udgāyin.
2.4.11	Parjanya is the divine Udgata. He is the Udgata. With his approval, I shall perform the rite.
2.4.12	"Om, yes, thus is the reply."
2.4.13	"Space is the divine Sadasy. He is thy Sadasy. I choose thee as Sadasy."
2.4.14	Space is the divine sadasy. He is your Sadasy. With his approval I shall perform the rites.
2.4.15	"Om, the reply is 'So be it'."
2.4.16	"The divine goddesses of water, the ones who are to be praised in the Hotr, may they be the ones to be praised in my Hotr. I choose the Hotr priests for you."
2.4.17	"The divine, heavenly goddesses of water, those who are to be lauded in the Hotr - may they be the approved ones for you. We shall perform the rites with their approval."
2.4.18	"Om, the reply again is 'So be'."
2.4.19	The rays are the gods, the divine Adhvaryus. They are my Adhvaryus, the Adhvaryus of the cups. I choose the Adhvaryu of the cups. The Adhvaryus are the Adhvaryas of the cups.
2.4.20	The rays are the gods and the divine Adhvarus. They are your Adhvaryus and the Adhvaryuses of the cups. With their approval, we shall perform the rites.
2.4.21	"Om, so be it!" is the reply.
2.4.22	"He recites, 'You have praised me, you have praised me. You have praised my fame, you have praised my glory, you have praised the radiance of my glory, you praised my austerity, you praised my praise, you praised my sacrifice, you praised my enjoyment, you praised the universe, you praised everything, you praised all that is good for me. May that protect me, may that enter me, may that enliven me. May I enjoy that. May the god come to the god, may Soma come to Soma.'
2.4.23	"Oṃ, thus it is said."
2.5.1	In the lion, my anger.
2.5.2	In the tiger, my intermediate illness.
2.5.3	In the wolf, my hunger.
2.5.4	In the horse, my thirst.
2.5.5	In the bow, my thirst. 
2.5.6	In Rājagṛha, my eating.
2.5.7	In the stone, my drowsiness.
2.5.8	In the donkey, my hemorrhoids.
2.5.9	In the śalya, my shame.
2.5.10	In the ashvattha, my trembling.
2.5.11-21	In the Kūrma, my disease of the body. In the Vasta, my misfortune. In the Aprasya, my death. In the Bhrātṛvyas, my sin. In the Sapatnas, my misfortune. Translation: In the Kūrman, my disease of body. In Vasta, my calamity. In Aprasya, death. In Bhrātṛvya, sin. In Sapatna, misfortune. In Duskiriti, my misfortune. In Parasva, my misfortune.  In Khadga, my affliction. In Gavaya, my blindness. In Gauri, my deafness. In Rkṣa, my grief.
2.5.22	In the tortoise, my grief.
2.5.23	In the old woman, my frost.
2.5.24	In the black bird, my fear.
2.5.25	In the stick, my bad smell.
2.5.26	In the owl, my dog-like.
2.5.27	In the crow, my envy.
2.5.28	In the monkey, my bad fortune.
2.5.29	In the cuckoo, my desire.
2.5.30	In the hoopoe, my pride.
2.5.31	In the camel, my thirst.
2.5.32	In the bear, my fatigue.
2.5.33	In the Avya, my Avya.
2.5.34	In the womb, I am smell.
2.5.35	In the maiden, I am ornament.
2.5.36	In the pig, I am filth.
2.5.37	In the chaff, I am dream.
2.5.38	In the python, I am bad dream.
2.5.39	In lightning, I am laughter.
2.5.40	In greed, I am moisture.
2.5.41	In the grasshopper, I am sin and misfortune.
2.5.42	In women, I am untruth.
2.5.43	In goats, I am harshness.
2.5.44	In the outcastes, I am going.
2.5.45	Stealing from a Śūdra.
2.5.46	Unjust action against a Vaiśya.
2.5.47	Ignorance of a Rājanya.
2.5.48	Brahmahatyā (killing a Brahmin) against a Niṣāda.
2.5.49	Kṣavathu (a kind of disease) against a Kulīna.
2.5.50	Vīlāsa (a kind of dance) against an Ula.
2.5.51	Vamati (a kind of illness) against an Audri.
2.5.52	Rod (a kind of affliction) against a Kimpuruṣa.
2.5.53	Niṣṭap against a Dvīpin.
2.5.54	Khilāsa (a disease) against a Hastin.
2.5.55	In the Sunis, my Durīpra.
2.5.56	In the Snavanyas, my Mleccha.
2.5.57	In the Videhas, my Śīpatha.
2.5.58	In Mahāvarṣa, my Glau.
2.5.59	In the Mūjavats, my Tapna.
2.5.60	In the Dundubhi, my Kāsika.
2.5.61	In the Ikṣvākus, my Pitta.
2.5.62	In the Kaliṅgas, my Ameḍhya.
2.5.63	In the Aśvatarya, my Aprajatā.
2.5.64	In the Puṃścalya, my Duścarita.
2.5.65	In the crow, my toothache.
2.5.66	In the fly, my itch.
2.5.67	In the parrot, my yellowness.
2.5.68	In the peacock, my stammering.
2.5.69	In the bull, my old age.
2.5.70	In the mynah, my sin.
2.5.71	In the water, my fatigue.
2.5.72	In the Brahmoṣṭha, my sin.
2.5.73	Go away, O sinner! Do not harm us again, O sinner! O sinner, give up the evil in this world. O sinner, give us the one who does not leave us. We destroy you whom we hate.
2.5.74	May the thousand-eyed immortal dwell far from us. May he who hates us perish. May he whom we hate be destroyed.
2.5.75	Then he strikes with the joined palms, saying, "May the friendly waters and plants be."
2.5.76	He sprinkles in that direction where his enemy is, saying, "Let those who are unfriendly to him be."
2.5.77	Then having touched the water, they return as they came.
2.6.1	Now this is the Agnihotra-laying.
2.6.2	Who is the one who begins the rite?
2.6.3	The seasons and the stars have been mentioned, and the self-purification has been mentioned.
2.6.4	How does the sequence proceed here?
2.6.5	Having performed the sprinkling of the water for bathing, the recitation of the sacred formulas, and the recital of the benedictory verses, having invited Sraddha, having taken counsel, having spoken, having approached the priests, having honoured them, having requested the sacrificial fee, having taken the sacrificial fee, taking the wooden sword, going between the Veda and the Utkara, approaching by the prescribed path, standing with his buttocks towards the Garhapatya, he digs out the Garhapaty's place with the wooden sword facing east. The digging out removes the impurity and sin of the sacrificer. May the four directions be auspicious to us. May our mother, the earth, be a protector.
2.6.6	Then he sprinkles it with water, saying, "May the divine waters be auspicious for us, may they flow forth for us to drink."
2.6.7	In the same way he removes the place of the Anvāhāryapacana.
2.6.8	In the same manner he removes the place for the Ahavaniya.
2.6.9	In the case of the other two fires, if one is going to do so.
2.6.10	Then, having gone out towards the north between the sacrificial posts, they proceed towards that direction where the materials are arranged.
2.6.11	Or all the materials are arranged to the north of the hall.
2.6.12	Or within the altar, in the eastern direction, he collects each material with each mantra in order.
2.6.13	The sand is deposited with the verse, "May the form of Visvānara enter the flowing water on the earth."
2.6.14	In the same way, the subsequent heaps are deposited with the subsequent verses.
2.6.15	Usha, Sikata, Akhu-tkar, Valmika-vap, Sud, Varaha-vihata, Pushkara-parna, and Sharkara are the eight kinds of earth.
2.6.16	Then with the northern Yajus, he takes six golden shells.
2.6.17	Then with those pertaining to trees, he takes those pertaining to trees.
2.6.18	He brings the branches, moist, with leaves, with shoots, of the size of a span, with fresh tips.
2.6.19	Or as much as is available.
2.6.20	Leaves with two.
2.6.21	He brings three fire-sticks of the Ficus glomerata, moist, with bark and bark-like covering, of the size of a span, with their ends not dried up, saying, "Brought from the Ficus glomeratas, large, made for the body, three, measured by Prajapati, the mouth of sacrifice, three-fold, in pairs, born of procreation."
2.6.22	Then he brings the Muñja grass, saying, "That thy body, O Agni, which is full of strength and has entered into plants, that I bring here."
2.6.23	Then he brings the two kindling woods, one of ashvattha and one of shámi, or of shámi alone, four fingers in height, twelve fingers in width, sixteen fingers in length, or as big as a span, all equal, four fingers in length.
2.6.24	They make the fire-place for her, sloping downwards, in the direction of the east.
2.6.25	The kindling-stick is of the same size.
2.6.26	Then he brings it, saying, "I bring the body of Agni, born from the ash-vattha tree, the carrier of oblations, the body of Agni for sacrifice, the body of peace, the embryo of the Shami tree, for Agni the begetter."
2.6.27	The one who has ascended the womb of the Ashvattha tree, together with the wind, I bring you with the Brahman and the sacrificial banners.
2.6.28	Then he again collects those well-collected materials: "The one who has collected you, O Jātavedas, as the body is placed in the elements, may you be collected, auspicious for the creatures. May you know our vast world and extend it."
2.7.1	Now, indeed, it is said:
2.7.2	Indra, having killed Vritra and having defeated the Asuras, returned on the new moon day.
2.7.3	The ancestors came on the previous day.
2.7.4	The sacrifice went to the ancestors.
2.7.5	The gods again requested him.
2.7.6	They did not give it to him again. They said, "We shall choose a boon. Then you will give it to us again. Let the rites be performed for us first."
2.7.7	They gave it to them again.
2.7.8	Therefore, the rites are performed for the fathers first.
2.7.9-11	If one does not get a cow, one gets a sheep or a goat. Or, having cooked rice in a gambling match, and having brought plenty of ghee and milk on top of it, one does all this which is to be done with a cow.
2.7.12	And it is known that the semen of a cow is ghee, and the milk of a cow is rice.
2.7.13	It is a cow because of similarity of parts.
2.7.14	They go to Ambarīṣa or Uttāpanīya, covered.
2.7.15	Or they go to Upaśana, covered.
2.7.16	They make half of Upaśana or the whole.
2.7.17	They perform the Brahmauḍanika and the Upavasana rites.
2.7.18	"Here, indeed, the fire is offered."
2.7.19	The rites are similar, because of the sowing of the seeds.
2.7.20	Then the third (rite), having divided the seeds into three parts, in the Sabyas and Avasyas.
2.7.21	The Sabyas and the Avasyas are the places for the Samkalpa.
2.7.22	The rites are the same, because of the addition of the Samit.
2.7.23	He places five kinds of twigs of different trees.
2.7.24	How is the order here?
2.7.25	Here the order is: ashvattha, udumbara, parna, sami, and vikankata.
2.7.26	How is it that the Indra-Agni and Aditya are at the end?
2.7.27	He should offer the oblation to Indra-Agni and Aditya at the end of the day.
2.7.28	Then he should recite another hymn for the sake of the priest who offers oblations to ten deities.
2.7.29	This is appropriate only in the context of the Tantra, not elsewhere, because the Agni mentioned here is a worldly deity.
2.7.30	The Agni to whom oblations have been offered in the Homa rite.
2.7.31	The holding of the Agni is the end of the rite.
2.7.32-36	When the rite is concluded, he becomes a householder. The Tanuhuvi rites are well-known. The Agni-installation rites and the Dakshina are well-known.
2.7.37	One should give a cow as a fee. This is said in the Paiṅgalyāyana Brāhmaṇa.
2.7.38	But one should not be without a fire.
2.7.39	It is known that one who has a fire is one of the gods.
2.7.40	And when he removes his fire, he obtains it as a wish-yielding cow.
2.7.41	Now when he offers the Agnihotra, he says, "May it be a thousand."
2.7.42	This is said to be unlimited.
2.8.1	Then he prepares for the Agni-installation the Upasads, namely, a fat cow, new cloth, four water-pots, three wooden stakes, a wooden ladle, one wooden spoon for pouring the oblation, a wooden spoon without a handle, and all the other requisites for the Pitryajna, such as a broom, unguents, oil, ghee, a handful of grass, a spade, and a thread.
2.8.2	This is the southernmost line.
2.8.3	Having turned towards the east, he shaves the hair at the end of this line, silently.
2.8.4	Having placed three tufts of darbha grass, he shaves, saying, "Shaved, shaved, born by the god Savitr, sharpened by Brahma, may the hairs above me be for my well-being."
2.8.5	Then, having shaved his hair and beard, and having clipped his nails, he sprinkles him with water from a pot, reciting this verse: "May these waters be auspicious for me, may they carry away my evil deeds. May they be pure, may we perform our rites."
2.8.6	Having bathed, he turns towards the east, puts on a new garment, adorns himself, and anoints himself.
2.8.7	Then having purified him silently with twenty-one Darbha grass-broom, divided into three parts, with seven each, taking a water-vessel, having gone to this direction, and having made him look at this very water-vessel on the cross-road, he makes him recite the following verses: "May my anger be like a lion, may my anger be like an antelope."
2.8.8	Having recited this section of the Veda, they go to the water, taking the vessel with them. They return without looking back.
2.8.9	Having washed his hands and feet, he returns by the same way, reciting the section beginning with "Pavamāna" and ending with "Suvarjana". He purifies himself with water, reciting this section.
2.8.10	Having kindled the fire from the embers of the Āmātīya fire, having placed it at the time of the Vāhāryapachana, having purified it, having spread it with grass, having melted the clarified butter, having offered the Upasad offerings, he places these four water-pots, three wooden stakes, a wooden ladle, one ladle for pouring the omentum, a wooden spoon without a handle, and all the materials for the Paitr-yajna, except the Sthālīpāka, on the east side. The eraka, the covering, the unguent, the anointment, the clarified butter, a handful of grass, a wooden spade, and a thread.
2.8.11	He performs the consecration on the right side.
2.8.12	He sows fifty-one seeds.
2.8.13	Then taking up the wooden sword, he strikes once on the right side, saying, "The Asuras, Rakshasas, and Pisacas who destroy the earth have been struck. Let them go elsewhere, where their minds have gone."
2.8.14	Then he sprinkles it with water, reciting, "May the Fathers who are above, below, and in the middle, who have gone to the Soma, who are free from disease, who know the truth, may they help us in our prayers."
2.9.1	Then he takes up the torch, with the verse, "Those who, taking up the new forms of the fathers with their own power, move about, some in front, some behind, and carry them, Agni may they be driven away from this sacrifice."
2.9.2	Then the blazing Agni, the Purifier, making bright days, drives away the Asuras far from the seats of the Fathers, those who, having assumed a form here, desire a share.
2.9.3	Here he makes it end.
2.9.4	In that (fire) he pours down a little ghee from the torch.
2.9.5	He strews the sacrificial grass with its tips towards the south, once cut, soft, and tender, saying, "For the Fathers I am strewing thee; may my Fathers, the Soma-drinkers, the Grandfathers, the Great-grandfathers, with their followers, be seated here."
2.9.6	Then he invokes the Pitrs: "May the Pitrs, the grandfathers and great-grandfathers, the followers, the Asura-slayers, the truth-yoked, the non-slayers, come to us today for our call.
2.9.7	May the Pitrs come here to eat the oblation, having sat down on this sacrificial grass at this sacrifice. May the hero not separate me."
2.9.8	Then he offers them a seat and a bed, saying, "These are the seats and beds of Soma. May they be friendly to us, may they be auspicious and gracious."
2.9.9	Then he brings them drinks, namely, mead, milk, and barley-gruel, or whatever is available.
2.9.10	He gives other things to the Brahmanas.
2.9.11	He places another (vessel) near, saying, "This is the drink of your fathers, grandfathers, and great-grandfathers."
2.9.12	Here he sprinkles with one pitcher of water silently.
2.9.13	Then the four fathers and sons sit around the dice,
2.9.14	the father in front, the eldest on the right, the younger behind, and the youngest on the left.
2.9.15	The father throws twelve dice.
2.9.16-24	That conquers. The eldest of the twelve. That conquers. His younger brother of the twelve. That conquers. If there are any left over, they are united with the youngest. If there are two, the father is twice the height. If there is one, the wife is the third. If there aren't any, both the husband and wife are twice the height.
2.9.25	This is the rule for three.
2.9.26	This is the rule for two.
2.9.27	They go away saying, "Done, undone."
2.9.28	They get up saying, "The cow is in the dice."
2.9.29	Then, having taken the sacrificial grass, he offers the cow, saying, "For the fathers, for the grandfathers, for the great-grandfathers, I offer the cow that is pleasing to you."
2.9.30	Some say silently.
2.9.31	Then he sprinkles her with water, saying, "For the Fathers thee, for the Grandfathers thee, for the Great-Grandfathers thee, I sprinkle thee, the agreeable."
2.9.32	Some say, "Silently."
2.9.33	Here they make her lie down with her head towards the west and her feet towards the south.
2.9.34	When she is made to lie down, he sprinkles her with the water and nourishes her vital airs silently.
2.9.35	Having taken out the omentum silently, he takes out the heart. The known portions of the omentum and the known portions of the fat are placed on these stakes and are roasted in this fire.
2.9.36	When the omentum is roasted, he offers five spoonfuls.
2.10.1	Those who are born in the east and those in the north, with the waters, the sustainers of the entire world, she has placed another within her father. Svāhā!
2.10.2	She has placed another within the mountains, within the great earth, within the day, within the infinite directions, with the blessings. She has placed another within his grandfather. Svāhā!
2.10.3	He has placed within himself all the seasons, days and nights, the half-months and months, and another beyond that, beyond his great-grandfather. Svāhā!
2.10.4	Whatever my mother has desired, acting contrary to me, may my father destroy that semen. May another come to her. Svāhā!
2.10.5	Whatever part of your body the fire-god has burnt, leading you to the worlds, I again restore it to you. Be without injury, all of you, be born again with all your limbs. O Fathers, Svāhā to Svāhā!
2.10.6	Having divided the oblation into three parts, he offers with the Udumbara ladle, saying, "We offer the oblation to Soma, the fatherly, the shining, O Vājin, do thou accept this, O kinsman, the oblation for the gods and the fathers. Svāhā to Svāhā."
2.10.7	For Angiras, for help, we call Yama, the lord of the Fathers. This offering is for Vaivasvata. May our oblation go to the Gods and Fathers. Svāhā!
2.10.8	O Agni, the bearer of oblations, when thou shalt offer to the Fathers, the increasers of truth, may our oblation go unto the Gods and Fathers, Svāhā! Svāhā!
2.10.9	Having placed the ladle silently, he gives the cuttings of the cakes, first the heart, then the left shoulder, then the right shoulder.
2.10.10	This is yours, and those who follow you, and those whom you follow here. This is your share of the food of the earth. As much as the earth is, so much is your measure. I give you this measure of the earth, which is yours. You are measured by the earth. May you be my protector.
2.10.11	This is the second (portion) which your grandfather gives you, and those who follow you, and whom you follow here. This is your grandfather's share of food and earth. As far as the sky extends, so far extends your measure. I give you this measure which belongs to the beings. You are measured by the sky. For the grandfather, do not injure me.
2.10.12	This is the third (portion) which he gives to thee, to thy great-great-grandfather and to those who follow thee and whom thou followest here. This is thy portion of great-great-grandfathers. As far as the sky extends, so far is thy measure. I give thee this measure of the extent of the beings. Thou art measured by day. Thou art the best for the great-great- grandfather.
2.10.13	Here, having said, "The Pitrs take their share as they please," he sprinkles with a single pot of water silently.
2.10.14	Then having approached the cow, he causes the blood to flow. "The Rākṣasas who have a share in blood, and the Fathers who take and wander, may they be satisfied with this blood. Those embryos that have fallen to us, who are satisfied with blood, may they be satiated with their own share of oblations, and may they be pleased. Those who are raw, cooked, or spoiled, and fall to us, may they be pleased with their own share, and may they rejoice. Those boys, women, and those who are unknown, and fall to us, may they be gratified with their own share and may they rejoice."
2.10.15	Having come, he gives the eye-salve.
2.10.16	Then he gives the unguent.
2.10.17	Then he offers the garments.
2.10.18	Then he salutes with six salutations, standing in the opposite direction.
2.10.19	Then he requests the hero.
2.10.20	Then, having raised them and bathed them, he calls the mind with three (verses): "We call the mind, may the mind come to us again and again. Our fathers are the mind."
2.10.21	Here, having given this unsoiled garment to a brahmin who knows this, and having put on another garment, he should go to the right side and cleanse himself with water.
2.11.1	The smells, tastes, colors, and strength that are deposited in them, may those waters be auspicious and carry away my misdeeds.
2.11.2	The waters that are sent by the gods to sprinkle the earth with nourishment, may those waters be auspicious to me, and may they carry away my evil. From which all this world is born, may those waters be auspicious to me, and may they carry away my evil. Those whose three worlds are covered with splendour and glory, may those waters, be auspicious to me, and may they carry away my evil. Those that flow eastward, southward, westward, northward, upward, those that flow with honey, the bright waters, may those waters. be auspicious to. me, and carry away my evil.
2.11.3	Here he puts off the garment which he wore while performing the Asanīya rite and puts on another one. Then he goes out to the Agnihotra-offering with the verse, "O Prajapati, none other than you."
2.11.4	Then he throws the torch with the verse, “Agni became the messenger of the oblation. Having made the fragrant offerings, he gave them to the fathers. They ate them with Svāhā. O Agni, knowing, come back again to the gods."
2.11.5	Here he gives these portions to the Brahmanas. First the heart, then the left shoulder, then the right shoulder, according to his faith.
2.11.6	Having divided this cow into parts, he gives the choice to the Brahmanas:
2.11.7	Those who get any part of its flesh, all of them become sharers of its wealth.
2.11.8	Having offered the oblations to the ministers, he offers the oblations to be offered to the ministers.
2.11.9	This indeed is the Upavasatha (rite).
2.11.10	For the gods dwell in this (rite) and say, "We shall conquer tomorrow, the wealth of the gods."
2.11.11	This indeed is that wealth of the gods, which is the Agniya eight-vessel (oblation).
2.11.12	He indeed goes to the good, to the auspicious, to whom one who knows this offers the cow.
2.11.13	He crosses over all evil.
2.11.14	He crosses the sin of brahminicide.
2.11.15	Prajapati said, "One conquers death again."
2.11.16	These are called Kushamanda, Kajavani, Vamaatyhoma, Atimoksha.
2.11.17	Whatever evil deed he does in this world, he is freed from all that and becomes debt-free. He goes to the heavenly world. Thus did Prajapati say.
2.12.1	When one is about to kindle the fires, he procures eight things from the earth: ashes, sand, clay, earth from an anthill, earth from a cow-pen, earth from a boar-hole, lotus leaves, and sugar.
2.12.2	Then the forest-born ones: the ashvattha, the udumbara, the parna, the sami, the vikankata, the ashani-slain sami, the sami-seed, the arani, the muñja-grass, the variegated ashvattha, three moist, unsplit, unburnt, and un-dried-up sacrificial-sticks, the size of a span, six golden pins, three of gold, three of silver, a horse that has been ridden before, a chariot-wheel, brahmau-danika rice, all herbs, a red hide, a bull, nine new sacrificial vessels.
2.12.3	Then he brings the kindling woods, saying, "The one who has ascended the Asvattha tree with the embryo of the Sami, I bring him to thee with the Brahman and the sacrificial banners."
2.12.4	Now then, the examination of the constellations.
2.12.5	One should kindle the fire in the Krittika constellation.
2.12.6	One should kindling the fire in the Rohini constellation.
2.12.7	One shoud kindle the fire in Punarvasu.
2.12.8	In the two Phalguni constellations.
2.12.9	In the two Phalguni stars.
2.12.10	In the Citra star.
2.12.11	Now, indeed, the examination of the seasons.
2.12.12	A brahmin should kindle the fire in spring.
2.12.13	A kshatriya in summer.
2.12.14	A vaishya in autumn.
2.12.15	A rathakara in the rainy season.
2.12.16	Or, indeed, when he is approached by faith, then he should kindle it.
2.12.17	That itself is his prosperity.
2.12.18	This is for one who is distressed or who has great faith.
2.12.19	Now, there is a Brahmanical saying:
2.12.20	"He who establishes the fire on Rohini attains prosperity and grows all the plants."
2.12.21	"The new moon that comes after the full moon of Vaiśākha coincides with Rohini only once in a year. One should establish it on that day."
2.12.22	Now, before this, he causes to be made a house or a measured (house) in the place of sacrifice which is agreeable to him.
2.12.23	It has two doors, the eastern and the southern.
2.12.24	In the middle they make the place for the Garhapatya.
2.12.25	In front, at twelve paces, the place for the Ahavaniya.
2.12.26	Or else, at the place indicated by the eye.
2.12.27	To the right of the Anvāhāryapacana fire at the time of the equinox.
2.12.28	Or, as two parts would be in front and one part would be at the back.
2.12.29	Having taken three parts of the hair and beard, he shaves.
2.12.30	He cuts the nails.
2.12.31	In the same way, the wife, except for the hair.
2.12.32	Both of them are adorned with human ornaments and wear new clothes.
2.12.33	Then he cooks the food for the vow-breaking rite.
2.12.34	There are two kinds of food, one mixed with ghee and the other mixed with milk.
2.13.1	Then he asks for all herbs, a vessel of ghee, a ladle with a strainer, sacrificial grass, clothes, burning wood, and a potsherd, under the shadow of a tree or in the sun.
2.13.2	Taking this, they proceed, covered, to a place where there is a river or a well.
2.13.3	Having scattered the glowing embers on that (fire), having spread the sacrificial grass, having melted the clarified butter, having poured it into the ladle, having spread it, having poured it, he offers the clarified butter mixed with all herbs, saying, "To Agni, the bestower of all herbs, for prosperity and reproduction, svāhā."
2.13.4	Then having offered the oblations for victory and the oblations for the protection of the kingdom, he offers the oblations for his ministers.
2.13.5	Then, having taken four spoonfuls in the ladle, he offers to Prajapati with the verse, "O Prajapati, none other than you."
2.13.6	Then, having taken another four spoonfuls, he offers to Anukha with the verse, "Anu Agni, the first of the dawns, has proclaimed, Anu the days, the first knower of beings, Anu the rays of the sun in many ways, Anu the heaven and earth has stretched out. Svāhā."
2.13.7	Then the sacrificer takes up these embers in a pot or a pot of reeds, saying, "I take you for life, I take you for brilliance, I take you (for heat), I take you for energy, I take you, for brahmic glory."
2.13.8	Then having taken them, he rises, saying, "May life enter me, may prosperity enter me, may Brahmic glory enter me."
2.13.9	Having handed them over to the Adhvaryu, the sacrificer follows him.
2.13.10	Having returned by the same route by which he went, having entered the house by the northern door, having placed them in the Garhapatya fire-place, he places them near.
2.13.11	They spread (the grass).
2.13.12	Brahma and the sacrificer sit down towards the south.
2.13.13	Then he spreads the red skin of an antelope, with its neck towards the east and its hair towards the north, towards the south of the fire.
2.13.14	At the time of its spreading, he pours four potfuls of rice, saying, "I pour for Brahma what is agreeable," or silently.
2.13.15	Then he touches the grains as described, with the formulas, "For resolve thee, for desire thee, for prosperity thee."
2.13.16	Then having put these grains in a basket, and having sprinkled them with water, he lifts up the skin.
2.13.17	Then having placed the pestle and mortar on that very skin, they pound.
2.13.18	Then with the same vessel he brings four water-pots, if the pot is burnt.
2.13.19	If it is not burnt, then five or more.
2.13.20	It becomes a mixture of water and rice.
2.14.1	One who is skilled in cooking should cook it with ghee, pour over it, and remove it to one side.
2.14.2	Then he tells the officiating priests who are coming up.
2.14.3	The priests approach him.
2.14.4	Having washed the vessel and placed it below, he takes him out of it as if he were not bound.
2.14.5	Having sprinkled clarified butter, and having brought a large quantity of clarified butter,
2.14.6	Then he offers the oblation of the cooked rice and stands up, saying, "Obeisance to the wise, to the poet, to the creator, to the bull, to the strong one, from whom there is fear, may that be free from fear for us. May we worship the gods who are to be worshipped. Svāhā!"
2.14.7	Then having seated these four Ārṣeyas in the north-east direction, having made them perform the Ācamana rite in order, he offers it to them, touching the ground, as if not cutting off.
2.14.8	Having drunk thrice, they praise, "Your Brahmaudana is accomplished."
2.14.9	He gives them a calf that is younger than his own.
2.14.10	Then the Brāhmaṇa, sitting to the north, eats the Kṣāmakaṣa.
2.14.11	He gives him whatever he has to offer.
2.14.12	Then with the remaining ghee he anoints the kindling-sticks and places them. "The kindling-sticks honour the fire, may they be awakened with ghee. May you offer oblations to the guest in this (fire). Svāhā. O Agni, may the offering-bearing, ghee-bearing ones come to you. O tawny one, accept my kindling-sticks. Svāhā. You whom the kindling-sticks honour, we increase you with ghee. O most brilliant one, O most excellent one, Svāhā." With Gāyatrī verses of the Brāhmaṇa.
2.14.13-15	The Triṣṭubh metre is of the king, the Jagatī of the Vaiśya. The king is born with the Triṣṭubha metre, the Vaiśya with the Jagatī. The king is the protector of the people, the Vaiśyas are the protectors of the cattle. The king is Agni, the Vaiśyās are the people. The king is Indra, the Vaiśyā are the Maruts. The king is Brāhmaṇas, the Vaiśāyas are the Kṣatriyas. The king is heaven, the Vaiśyakas are earth. The king is truth, the Vaiśśyas are falsehood. The king is light, the Vaiśys are darkness. The king is day, the Vaiśsyas are night. The king is summer, the Vaiśs are winter. The king is spring, the Vaiśss are autumn. The king is heat, the Vaiśsas are cold. The king is life, the Vaiśyyas are death. The king is wealth, the Vaiśṣyas are poverty. The king is fame, the Vaiśsa are infamy. The king is honour, the Vaiśas are dishonour. The king is happiness, the Vaiśvas are unhappiness. The king is good, the Vaiśa are evil. The king is joy, the Vaiśsis are sorrow. The king is pleasure, the Vaiśis are pain. The king is beauty, the Vaiśias are ugliness. The king is strength, the Vaiśsias are weakness. The king is courage, the Vaiśjas are cowardice. The king is victory, the Vaiśais are
2.15.1	Then, as he is giving him the kindling woods, he says, "You will be silent. Tell me what you have to tell."
2.15.2	He says, "Protect the horses and cattle for the Brahmins. Put together the provisions."
2.15.3	His Agni-installation is prosperous.
2.15.4	The prosperity of one who has installed the Agni.
2.15.5	They say, "One should not perform the Agni-installation with a cow, for it is a terrible form."
2.15.6	He should do it, but he should not do it.
2.15.7	He should do many of them.
2.15.8	And let there be praise for him who does this, says Katyāyana.
2.15.9	Then he gives the kindling woods to him.
2.15.10	They accept it, the earth with her lord, in the abode of truth, the one who is in front, the one who has the cattle, the one who was born, the one who knows, the one who generates the rites, the one who goes before, the one who mounts the ten Shakvari (cows), the one who is immortal, the one who lives, the one who shines, the one who shares, the one who ages, the one who grows, the one who sees, the one who hears, the one who moves, the one who stands, the one who comes, the one who departs, the one who gives, the one who takes, the one who makes, the one who destroys, the one who burns, the one who blazes, the one who cooks, the one who bakes, the one who heats, the one who warms, the one who cleanses, the one who purifies, the one who sanctifies, the one who consecrates, the one who blesses, the one whose blessings are accepted, the one who bestows, the one who grants, the one who protects, the one who saves, the one who guards, the one who preserves, the one who nourishes, the one who sustains, the one who supports, the one who upholds, the one who holds, the one who carries, the one who bears, the one who brings, the one who leads, the one who guides, the one who directs, the one who rules, the one who governs, the one who controls, the one who restrains, the one who punishes, the one whose punishment is accepted, the one whose wrath is accepted, the destroyer of enemies, the one who conquers enemies, the one whose enemies are conquered, the one who defeats enemies
2.15.11	Then he binds them with the formula, "You are the two Agni-s, the two Agni-like ones, you are the two Agni's, the two like Agni. You are the two Agni, the two like the Agni. You are carrying the embryo, you are generating the embryo. I give you that truth, that you are carrying a hero, that you will generate a hero. I shall generate you in the morning. You will generate me when generated. With progeny, with cattle, with Brahmic glory, with heaven."
2.15.12	Then he leads him from untruth to truth, from the human to the divine, saying, "I approach from untruth to Truth, from the human (world) to the divine (world), I restrain the divine speech."
2.15.13	They keep awake the night when the one who restrains speech is asleep.
2.15.14	They kindle the fire with shells during that night. He who kindles the fire with shells, he attains both worlds with their prosperity. I shall cross death after having attained both worlds.
2.15.15	To the north of the Garhapatya's place he ties a black goat, with which he counts the number of the animals to be placed. "O Agni, unite the regions with the animals, and the countries for us, which belong to Savitr's Savitri."
2.16.1	Then the Adhvaryu, having come up in the latter part of the night, kindles the fire-sticks: "O Jātavedas, pour here the seed of the world, which will be born from the heat. From the ashvattha tree, from the womb of the Shami tree, he generates Agni, the carrier of oblations, who is born of Maya."
2.16.2	"This is your natural place, from which you were born and shone forth. Knowing that, O Agni, mount it. May you increase our wealth."
2.16.3	Then having placed this Agni in the Sata, they sit down to the right side and kindle it.
2.16.4	Then he smears the places of Agni with a lump of dung.
2.16.5	Then he lays down the third (kindling) wood in the Garhapatya fire-place, with the verse, "Whatever nectar was produced from the earth, that Agni gave to Agni; may this be deposited in it."
2.16.6	When he comes to the place where the fire is kept, he mutters the verse, "What is dark in the moon, that is here also.
2.16.7	Then he places them, saying, "With the strength of heaven, with the greatness of earth, with the nourishment of the atmosphere, I place all the animals."
2.16.8	Then he unites them, saying, “I unite your hearts. Let your minds be united. Let your breath be united.
2.16.9	May your dear bodies be united, may your dear hearts be united, may the Self of you all be united. May your bodies be united, and may my bodies be united.
2.16.10	Then he arranges them: May heaven and earth be arranged, may the waters and plants be arranged, may Agni be arranged separately for my supremacy, with the same vows.
2.16.11	The fires which are in the midst of the heaven and earth, the two seasons of spring, being conceived, may they enter Indra as the gods did.
2.16.12	Then, having taken half of the remaining materials, he takes them out through the southern door with Dakṣiṇā, and pours them into the place of Anvāhāryapacana, saying, "Whatever nectar was in the atmosphere, that Vāyu gave to Agni. Let it be deposited here."
2.16.13	When he comes to the place where he is to spend the night, he recites: "Whatever is dark on the moon, that is here."
2.16.14	He places it thus.
2.16.15	He prepares it thus.
2.16.16	It is thus imagined.
2.16.17	Then, having returned by the same route by which he went, and having taken the remaining materials, and having removed the door-posts, he pours them into the place of the Āhavanīya with the verse, "Whatever nectar has been produced from heaven, that Aditi gave to Agni. Let this be deposited in it."
2.16.18	When he comes to the place where he is to spend the night, he recites, "Whatever is dark in the moon, that is here."
2.16.19	He places it thus.
2.16.20	He prepares it thus.
2.16.21	It is thus imagined.
2.16.22	Then he instructs the guardian.
2.16.23	He says, "The fires have been enjoyed. Let no one wander between them."
2.16.24	Then the Adhvaryu, having turned by the right, having hastened towards the west, places the Muñja-grass-bunch on the Garhapatya-fire-place on the piled-up fuel.
2.16.25	Having placed the kindling-stick with the generative end towards the west, he places the kindling-wood with ten Hotr-verses above it.
2.16.26	He says, "Do thou churn."
2.16.27	The sacrificer first churns.
2.16.28	The sacrificer last churns.
2.16.29	He generates.
2.16.30	When he is born, he utters the words, "I give a boon."
2.16.31	Then he approaches him, saying, "The immortal ones have generated the one who is immortal, the one who is to be worshipped, the one who has a sharp tongue, the ten sisters, the foremost, the ones who are in harmony, they have approached the man who is born."
2.16.32	Then he breathes over it, "I breathe thee with the breath of Prajapati, with the nourishment of Pusan for my long life, for a hundred autumns, for a hundred years, for life, for radiance, for living, for the auspicious.
2.16.33	I place thee in the breath, the immortal, the eater of food, the protector, for protection."
2.16.34-37	Then he says to the Udgātṛ, "Recite the Rathantara." Then he places it. "Bhūr Bhuvaḥ Gharmā Śiras, this Agni is dear to the cattle, may he be in the womb, for the offspring, for the son." "I place you in the vow of the Bhṛgus and Angiras, the lords of vows," one should place it in the vow of Bhṛgus and Angiras.
2.16.38	"I place thee in the vow of the Adityas, the gods, the lords of vows, by the vow." So of the other Brāhmanas. "I place thee by the vow of Varuna, the king, the lord of vows, by his vow." So of a king.
2.16.39	"I place thee by Indra's vow, the lord of strength, by his vow," so of a Kshatriya.
2.16.40	"I set thee in the vow, the lord, of the mind, by his vow" so of a Vaishya.
2.16.41	"I place thee in the vow of the Rishis, in the vow of thee, the lord of vows, of the gods." (The sacrificer) gives the chariot-maker's fee.
2.16.42	According to the Rishi and the family.
2.16.43	"With the metre of the Gayatri."
2.16.44	Having placed the golden plate on the north, he says, "May I be united with my own body."
2.16.45	Then he gives this silver plate to a poor man or to a stranger.
2.16.46	He gives away affliction." So says the Brahmana.
2.16.47	Then he approaches him with the verse, "I am yours, you are mine; this is mine, you are the womb of mine. I am the womb of yours. Being mine, do thou carry the oblations, O Agni, the son, the creator of worlds, the all-knowing.
2.16.48	"Agni, burning the evil spirits, bestowing the most excellent dawns, driving away the enemies, bestowing prosperity, food and energy, may he bestow it upon us."
2.17.1	Then they take up this Agni, who is lying down in the fire-chamber.
2.17.2	Having taken it out through the southern door, he places it in the Anvāhāryapacana. "Bhuvar, Vāta, Prāṇa, this Agni is indeed dear to the cattle. May it be cooked for the offspring and the sons to eat.
2.17.3	I place you in the vow of these gods, O lord of vows."
2.17.4	According to the sage and the family.
2.17.5	With the Gayatri metre.
2.17.6	Having placed the golden plate to the north, he recites, "May I be born with my own body."
2.17.7	Then he gives this silver plate to a low-caste person or to an unknown person.
2.17.8	He gives away suffering, says the Brahmana.
2.17.9	Or one can establish the Anvähäryapacana fire from the Garhapatya.
2.17.10	Prajapati created Agni. He was afraid, "He will burn me." He divided his greatness into three parts for peace and non-burning. From this Brahmanical text.
2.17.11	Then he stood near him, "May these (cows) stand near me for wealth. May I dwell here with these creatures. May Ida stand here in the middle of Vasu, shining in various forms, O Jātavedas."
2.17.12	Then, having returned in the same way, he places the kindling wood and the sacrificial grass.
2.17.13	He places it in such a way that he thinks, "The Āhavanīya fire being laid down when the sun has risen half, will be successful."
2.17.14	It becomes successful for him in that way.
2.17.15	They prepare the Upopayamanī fires.
2.17.16	A horse is tied up in front of the eastern gate, having been smeared with butter.
2.17.17	Then he says to the Udgātṛ, "Recite the Vāmadevya."
2.17.18	Then he says to him, "Rise for strength, for power, for virility, for life, for radiance, for overcoming enemies, for overcoming Vṛtra.
2.17.19	The glory that is yours among the gods, the heaven, the self that has entered into the cattle, the prosperity that is yours among humans, with that, O Agni, come to us, accepting."
2.17.20-24	From heaven, from earth, from the atmosphere, from the wind, from the animals, from the plants, wherever thou, O Jātavedas, hast been born, from there, O Agni, come hither, accepting our offerings. He takes it from here first. Then he takes it from there. Then he again takes it from there.
2.17.25	He should give them only after having taken them. This is another (view).
2.17.26	They lead the horse first.
2.17.27	He addresses him with the verse, "Go along the eastern direction, O wise one, be in front of Agni, O Agni, may you be in front of all directions, shining, illuminating, do thou bestow upon us food for the bipeds and the quadrupeds."
2.17.28	At the equinoxes they cease, thou art the great one, thou art the conqueror. Thou art the knower among men, thou art the watcher in the three worlds.
2.17.29	Then they say, "Agni has known the foremost of the dawns, the first-born, the knower of the days, the rays of the sun in many places, and the heaven and earth that are spread out."
2.17.30	Then he places the horse on the side towards the east and north, so that the embers of the fire as placed may fall on it.
2.17.31	Then having turned it round to the right, he sprinkles it with water and releases it facing upwards.
2.17.32	It becomes the Adhvaryu's.
2.17.33	He gives another to the Brahman.
2.17.34	Then, having circumambulated clockwise, he establishes the kindling wood: "Whatever is above the heaven and below the earth, the two who are united in agreement, they have come together. On their back may the all-knowing one, the auspicious one, sit down for the welfare of creatures."
2.17.35	"I establish you as the life-force, the eater of food, for the eater of food. The protector for protection."
2.17.36	Then he says to the Udgātṛ, "Sing the Bṛhat, the Vāravantin, the Śyait."
2.17.37	He instructs all (the priests).
2.17.38	The Brhat-sāman being chanted, he lays down the Āhavanīya fire. "The earth, the midregion, the heaven, the sun, the eye, that is the sun, that is this Agni, agreeable to cattle. The bright, the bright light, the bright body, the bright, constant light, by that do thou shine for me. By that do I lay thee down with Agni, with Brahman, with Agni. Thee, O lord of vows, I lay down in the vow of these gods."
2.17.39	As the sage, as the family.
2.17.40	With the Gayatri metre.
2.17.41	He places the golden plate to the north, saying, 'May I be born with my own body.'
2.17.42	Then he gives this silver plate to a low-caste or unknown person, saying,
2.17.43	'He gives away affliction.' So says the Brahmana.
2.17.44	Then he stands over it, saying, 'You have eaten, I have eaten, all life has eaten.'
2.17.45	Here he lays down two fires, the Sāṃbhara and the Avāsathya.
2.17.46	He makes the chariot wheel revolve continuously from the Gārhapatya to the Āhavanīya.
2.18.1	Having pacified the fires with all the herbs and the Vyāhṛtis, he offers five kinds of twigs of different trees, reciting the five verses beginning with "Agni, shining forth, the first, the law..." and ending with "O Agni, accepting the oblation, may you be the giver of life."
2.18.2	Then, having turned around to the right, having run towards the west, standing behind the Garhapatya, he stands with his bodies: "Those of thine, O Agni, are the two auspicious bodies, the Viraj and the Svaraj, may they enter me, may they enliven me. Those of thine, O Agn, are the two auspicous bodies, the Samraj and the Abhibhu, may they enter, may they enliven. Those of thine are the two auspicious bodie, the Vibhu and the Paribhu, may they eneter, may they enliven, Those of thine are two auspicious bodies, Prabhu and Prabhutis, may they enter thee, may they enliven thee. Those of thine auspicious bodies, O Agni, may they be placed upon thee."
2.18.3	All (the verses) to the Garhapatya.
2.18.4	All (the verses) for the Anvāhāryapacaniya.
2.18.5	All (verses) for the Āhavanīya.
2.18.6	Then he recites the terrible verses, "O Agni, with those terrible forms of yours, go to him."
2.18.7	Here the sacrificer mentally thinks of the one whom he hates.
2.18.8	Then having touched water, he stands up with the steps of Viraj.
2.18.9	"Protect my progeny, O Agni, for immortality, for life, for the one born and the one to be born, established in immortality and truth." This is the Garhapatya.
2.18.10	"O Atharvan, protect my father, the juice, the food, for life here, for the uninjured, for the one without heat, make our father free from poison." This is the Anvähäryapacani.
2.18.11	"Protect my cattle, O Agni, the two-footed and the four-footed, those with eight hoofs and those with one hoof, those who move swiftly. Thus he says to the Ahavaniya."
2.18.12	"Protect my assembly hall, O Agni, those who are in the assembly, those who sit in the assembly. Make them strong. May all live to the end of their lives." Thus he says to Sabhya.
2.18.13	"Protect the mantra of the Veda, which the sages who know the three Vedas know, the verses, the Sāmans, and the Yajuses. That indeed is the immortal glory of the good." This is the Avasathiya (mantra).
2.18.14	Then having melted the clarified butter in the Garhapatya fire, having purified it, having taken four spoonfuls in the ladle, he offers a full oblation in the Āhavanīya fire with the verse, "O Agni, thy seven kindling woods, thy seven tongues."
2.18.15	At the full oblation, he gives a boon.
2.18.16	Then he places the Agnihotra-vessels, which have been washed, to the north of the Garhapatya, either on a cushion or in a pit, namely, the pot with the ladle, the spoon, the fire-kindling wood, and the kindling-wood.
2.18.17	Then having placed the Agnihotra-cow to the south facing the north, the Brahman milks.
2.18.18	One should milk first.
2.18.19	He should milk the other two.
2.18.20	He should not touch them.
2.18.21	One should milk two (cows) for one who desires cattle.
2.18.22	Having placed it on the fire, he brings it forward.
2.18.23	Having brought this Agnihotra forward in front of the Ahavaniya, having placed it in the eastern door, having placed it behind the Garhapatya, having performed the Agnihotra rite in it, having put the kindling wood, he carries it forward.
2.18.24	He places the fire-wood on the ground in front of the Ahavaniya fire.
2.18.25	He silently puts this kindling-wood in the middle of the Ahavani ya fire.
2.18.26	When it is burning, he offers twice facing it, and sprinkles it above and below. The Brahmanical text says, "One obtains both."
2.18.27	Having sipped twice with the tip of the forefinger, turning to the north, he eats with the ladle turned towards the east.
2.18.28	Having cleansed the ladle, having heated it, having filled it with water, he directs it towards the north.
2.18.29	It is indeed said, "He pleases the seven sages." This is the Brahmana.
2.18.30	Having offered, he kindles the fire for the sake of kindling the Brahmic lustre.
2.18.31	He pours out water. He makes the form of Avabhrtha. Thus says the Brāhmaṇa.
2.19.1	Then he sends the Parakarmīṇ to bring the sacrificial grass and wood.
2.19.2	He brings it with the Yajus.
2.19.3	Having strewn the Prsthyā grass and having poured out water, one who is going to offer the Agniya eight-vessel oblation should announce the Dashahotar.
2.19.4	One who is going to recite the Samidheni verses should announce the Dashohtar.
2.19.5	Having melted it, he takes it.
2.19.6	It has fifteen Sāmidhenī verses, five Prayāja offerings, and two Ajyabhāga offerings in the Vārtraghna (oblations).
2.19.7	Then the oblations, Agni is the head of the universe.
2.19.8	The Anuvāka verses are in Triṣṭubh metre.
2.19.9	Having placed the Anvāhārya portion, he gives the Dakṣiṇā for the Agnihotra.
2.19.10	He gives it for twelve years.
2.19.11	He gives more than is desired.
2.19.12	This Iṣṭi is concluded with the full vessel and Viṣṇukramani.
2.19.13	He releases the vow.
2.19.14	Then at that time itself, having strewn the Prṣṭhyas and having taken water, he offers the Indra-Agni on eleven potsherds and the Āditya oblation.
2.19.15	This oblation is made of ghee.
2.19.16	When the ghee is heated, he brings it.
2.19.17	Having cooked, he takes it.
2.19.18	It has fifteen Sāmidhenī verses, five Prayāja offerings, and two Ajyabhāga offerings in the Vārtraghna (oblations).
2.19.19	"Then of the two oblations, "Indra and Agni have loosened Vritra from the bright sky," is of Indra and Agni.
2.19.20	"May Aditi protect the great mother," is of Aditi.
2.19.21	The two Samyājyā verses are in Triṣṭubh metre.
2.19.22	Having taken the Anvāhārya portion, having taken out this cake, four Ārsheya (students) eat.
2.19.23	"One offers to the directions in the light." So says the Brahmana.
2.19.24	This Iṣṭi comes to an end with the full vessel and the Viṣṇukrama.
2.19.25	He releases the vow.
2.20.1	Here he observes the vow for twelve days.
2.20.2	This is his vow:
2.20.3	He does not speak untruth.
2.20.4	He does not eat meat.
2.20.5	He does not approach a woman.
2.20.6	His clothes are not washed with soap.
2.20.7	He drinks from a vessel made of clay, not from one that has been used by a Śūdra.
2.20.8	He washes his feet himself.
2.20.9	He does no eat salt.
2.20.10	He does eat grain other than sesame.
2.20.11	He defecates in the morning, himself brings the kindling wood, and sleeps at the end of the fires.
2.20.12	These twelve Agni-offerings are performed by him without interruption.
2.20.13	No Brāhmaṇa who is not a horse-sacrificer dwells in his house.
2.20.14	The sacrificer observes the vow of Agnihotra-remnant.
2.20.15	His wife brings food.
2.20.16	Then, when the sun has risen twelve times, having strewn the Prastara grass and having carried forth the water, he offers cooked rice to Pavamāna Agni on eight potsherds.
2.20.17	Having melted it, he takes it.
2.20.18	It has fifteen Sāmidhenī verses, five Prayāja offerings, and two Ajyabhāga offerings in the Vārtraghna (oblations).
2.20.19	Then (the Adhvaryu) says, "O Agni, do thou purify the life-breaths; O Agni, do thou be purified."
2.20.20	The Anuvākyā and the Prāṣaṇṇī are in Tristubh metre.
2.20.21	Having placed the Anvāhārya cooked rice (within the altar), he gives thirty Māṇas of gold.
2.20.22	This Iṣṭi is concluded with the full vessel and Viṣṇukramani.
2.20.23	He releases the vow.
2.20.24	Then, having spread out the Pṛṣṭhyas and having taken water, he offers a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Pavaka and a cake to Agni Śuci.
2.20.25	Having roasted, he places (the oblations).
2.20.26	Its fifteen Sāmidhenī verses, five Prayāja offerings, and two Ajyabhāga offerings in the Vārtraghna (Sāmans).
2.20.27	Then (the Adhvaryu) says, "O Agni, the purifier, may that purifying Agni, the most pure of vows, O Agni, the pure ones are yours."
2.20.28	The Anuvāka consists of Tristubh verses.
2.20.29	Having placed the Anvāhārya rice, he gives gold weighing thirty or forty mānas.
2.20.30	This Iṣṭi is concluded with the full vessel and Viṣṇukramam.
2.20.31	He releases the vow.
2.21.1	Now, the deliberation on the Anvarambha (New Moon) rite.
2.21.2	One performs the Anvarambham (New Moon) with the same Upasads as the Full Moon.
2.21.3	Then, having offered the Agnihotra in the morning before the offering of water, having melted the ghee in the Garhapatya fire, having taken four spoonfuls in the ladle, having followed the four Hotr priests mentally, he offers in the Ahavaniya fire while the sacrificer has joined him, with "Svāhā."
2.21.4	Having taken another four spoonfuls, he offers the two Homa offerings to Sarasvatī.
2.21.5	Having recited the verse "Pūrṇā paścāt" (RV 1.154.1) without reciting the Anuvāka, he offers to Agni and Soma.
2.21.6	Taking another four spoonfuls, having recited the verse "Nivāsanī saṅgamani" (RV 9.1.1), he offers with the verse "What the gods have assigned to you as your share"
2.21.7	Then having spread out the Prsthya grass and having offered water, he offers cooked rice to Agni-Vishnu in eleven potsherds, cooked rice to Sarasvati and cooked rice to Sarasvata in twelve potsherds.
2.21.8	Having roasted, he places (the oblations).
2.21.9	It has fifteen kindling verses, five Prayājas, two Ajyabhaga oblations to Varuna-ghna.
2.21.10	Then, with oblations, to Agni-Vishnu, Agni-Vishnu. O divine Sarasvati, do thou grant us the flowing stream of milk. Those are thy waves, O Sarasvati.
2.21.11	The two Samyajya verses are in Tristubh metre.
2.21.12	Having placed the Anvahaarya vessel, he gives a pair of cows.
2.21.13	This Iṣṭi comes to an end with the full vessel and the Vishnu-step.
2.21.14	He releases the vow.
2.21.15	Then he performs the Full-moon and New-moon sacrifices.
2.21.16	The Agnihotra rite is concluded; the Agnihotra rite is completed.
3.1.1	One who is about to re-establish the fires.
3.1.2	They say, "One should perform the rite after the mantras have been recited and the materials have been collected, but not after the materials have been gathered and the mantras have not been recited."
3.1.3	Then indeed the materials for the re-establishment of the fire are to be prepared. The rite of the re-establishment is to be performed with the same materials as in the original establishment.
3.1.4	He prepares a new chariot, new garments, a new bull, a bundle of darbha grass, and three darbha-grass-made vessels.
3.1.5	The materials for the reestablishment of the fire have been prescribed.
3.1.6	If the full moon of Āṣāḍha is followed by a new moon, then it coincides with Punarvasu only once in a year. One should perform the rite on that day.
3.1.7	On the day before that, having placed the fires on the kindling woods, having gone to sleep and having churned out the fires, having performed the Vihrī rite, one should offer an oblation of eight potfuls to Agni, and twelve potfuls to Vaiśvānara Agni, when one is about to consign the fires.
3.1.8	The well-known Iṣṭi comes to an end.
3.1.9	Then, having sprinkled the fires with water at that very time, having cooked the Brahmaudana, he observes fast.
3.1.10	Then in the morning, he performs the rite of Agni-installation.
3.1.11	This much is different.
3.1.12	What was the Muñja-bunch there, that is the Darbha-bunch here.
3.1.13-16	The kindling wood that is to be used there is here the darbha grass. He lays down the Garhapatya with darbha grass, the Anvähäryapacani with darbha grass and the Ahavaniya with darbha. He lays the Garhapaty with darbha grass. At the laying down he recites the verses of the Serpent Queen.
3.2.1-4	Earth with its own (substance), Heaven with its own (subtance), and the four (elements) with their own (substances) are offered in the Garhapatya fire, and the three (elements) with theirs in the Ahavaniya fire. The rite is the same as that of the chariot-wheel. This much is the difference. What is done silently in the other world, that is done here with the offering of the Saptasami-oblation. "Seven are thy kindling-sticks, O Agni, seven thy tongues."
3.2.5	The Agniyeṣṭi which is performed with eight potfuls of cooked rice in the other world, is performed here with five potfuls of cooked
3.2.6	At his Prayāja offerings he places four portions: "O Agni, come for the sacrifice; O Agni, let the kindling woods offer the ghee; O Agni, we choose thee as our messenger; O Agni, Tanunapata, let the ghee be offered; Agni is kindled by Agni; O Agni, the kindling woods are offering the ghee; Agni has destroyed the foes; O Agni, may the ghee be offered."
3.2.7	The Prajāh is excellent in itself.
3.2.8	Now, the discussion of the two Ajyabhaga offerings.
3.2.9	Some say that the two Ajyabhagas should be offered to Varuna and Agni.
3.2.10	Some say they should be offered to Vritra and Agni.
3.2.11	Others say that the two should be offered to Agni and Soma.
3.2.12	"One should say: 'O Agni, do thou purify the life-forces; O Agni, do thou be purified.' Some say that these two should be said."
3.2.13	What is Pavamāna, that is the form of Soma.
3.2.14	"The Agni who is the ladle, that is the Agni who is the oblation. Today, O Agni, do you accept it, for you are Agni."
3.2.15	Then he offers oblations on both sides of the cake with the verse, "Together with energy and wealth."
3.2.16	Having offered the Svishtakrit oblation to Agni, he says, "For you, for us, with these rays." Having offered the Samyājyā oblation,
3.2.17	he approaches the Anvāhārya rice.
3.3.1	He gives as Dakṣiṇā a fresh sacrificial post, a fresh sacrificial grass, a fresh sacrificial thread, a fresh sacrificial animal, a fresh sacrificial ladle, a fresh sacrificial spoon, a fresh sacrificial cup, a fresh sacrificial vessel, a fresh sacrificial pot, a fresh sacrificial jar, a fresh sacrificial bowl, a fresh sacrificial pan, a fresh sacrificial basket, a fresh sacrificial cloth, a fresh sacrificial garment, a fresh sacrificial robe, a fresh sacrificial turban, a fresh sacrificial head-dress, a fresh sacrificial staff, a fresh sacrificial seat, a fresh sacrificial bed, a fresh sacrificial couch, a fresh sacrificial pillow, a fresh sacrificial mat, a fresh sacrificial rug, a fresh sacrificial cover, a fresh sacrificial umbrella, a fresh sacrificial chariot, a fresh sacrificial horse, a fresh sacrificial cow, a fresh sacrificial goat, a fresh sacrificial sheep, a fresh sacrificial bird, a fresh sacrificial fish, a fresh sacrificial elephant, a fresh sacrificial deer, a fresh sacrificial tortoise, a fresh sacrificial snake, a fresh sacrificial tree, a fresh sacrificial fruit, a fresh sacrificial flower, a fresh sacrificial leaf, a fresh sacrificial root, a fresh sacrificial tuber, a fresh sacrificial bulb,
3.3.2	At the Anuyājas he offers the Vibaktis. "O Agni, the mortal who has obeyed your mind with his thoughts, who has come to you with his gifts, may he be the first to obtain the good, the god who is the sacrificial grass in the house of wealth, may he be worthy of the offering of wealth. We have sung Agni's praise, the one who touches the sky, for the sake of the wealth of the god. The god Narāśamsa, may he be in the house of riches, may he be deserving of the offering of riches."
3.3.3	The Anuyaja is the best, self-accomplished.
3.3.4	This Iṣṭi comes to an end with the full vessel and the Viṣṇukrama.
3.3.5	He releases the vow.
3.3.6	Then at that very time, having spread out the Pṛṣṭhyas and having taken water, he offers the Agni-Varuṇa oblation on eleven potsherds.
3.3.7	Having roasted, he places (the oblations).
3.3.8	Its fifteen Sāmidhenī verses, five Prayāja offerings, and two Ajyabhāga offerings in the Vārtraghna rite.
3.3.9	"Then (the Adhvaryu) says, "O Agni, you are the oblation." "O Agni you are the oblations."
3.3.10	The Anuvāka verses are in Triṣṭubh metre.
3.3.11	Having placed the Anvāhārya rice, he gives away a bullock.
3.3.12	This Iṣṭi comes to an end with the full vessel and Viṣṇukrama.
3.3.13	He releases the vow.
3.3.14	The Puna-radheya is concluded.
3.3.15	The Punaradheya for prosperity.
3.3.16	Now, indeed, it is said:
3.3.17	"One who lays the fire after the Punaradheva should offer these oblations."
3.3.18	He offers the three oblations of clarified butter before the five-piled Agni-offering and the Svishtakrit, with the formulas, "Lekas, Salakas, Sulakas, may the Adityas, enjoying clarified butter, come. Svāhā. Ketas, Saketas, Sukekas, may the Aditvas, enjoying clarified butter. Svāhā, Vivasvan, Aditi, Devjuti, may the Adtvas, enjoying clarified butte, come. Svāhà."
3.3.19	The third kindling is concluded.
3.3.20	Now, for one whose fire has been stolen or lost, one should proceed with the Brahmoḍana.
3.3.21	The kindling of the fire is accomplished.
3.4.1	Before sunset, having kindled the Garhapatya, having brought the Anvāhāryapacani, and having taken up the blazing Āhavanīya, one offers in the evening.
3.4.2	Having placed the Garhapatya fire before sunrise, having brought the Anvähäryapacani fire, he takes up the blazing Ahavaniya fire for the morning oblation.
3.4.3	With speech I draw thee up with the Hotṛ, with breath with the Udgātṛ, with sight with the Adhvaryu, with mind with the Brahman, with hearing with the Agnidh, with these five divine priests I draw thee up. "O thou that art drawn up, draw me up from sin, whatever sin I have done knowingly or unknowingly, whatever sin I may have committed by day, whatever sin I committed by night, whatever sin I did in ignorance, whatever sin I knowingly committed, whatever sin I am guilty of, whatever sin I commit, whatever sin I shall commit, whatever sin is mine, whatever sin is yours, whatever sin is ours, whatever sin is of all beings, whatever sin is committed by all beings, whatever sins there are, whatever sins there will be, whatever sins there now are, whatever sins are in the world, whatever sins there may be, whatever sins are not in the world, all those sins I confess."
3.4.4	Whatever sin has been committed during the night, may I be freed from all of it. May I be released from it.
3.4.5	He places the fire, saying, "I offer the immortal oblation in the immortal (fire). I offer the fire on the earth for the conquest of immortality. By that we may conquer the endless desire here. Prajapati, who first conquered him, offered the fire in the fire, Agni Vaisvānara, saying, 'Svāhā!' in the evening.
3.4.6	He offers the sun in Agni Vaisvânara, saying, "Svâhâ!" in the morning.
3.4.7	The wife attends to it in the evening and morning.
3.4.8	Some say: in the evening and evening.
3.4.9	Then he places the Agnihotra vessels, which have been washed, to the north of the Garhapatya, on a cushion or in a pit, namely the pot with the ladle, the spoon, the kindling wood, and the kindling wood.
3.4.10	Then having placed the Agnihotra-vessel on the right side, facing the north, the Brāhmaṇa should milk.
3.4.11	One should milk from the two front teats for the eldest son, or for the son of the eldest son, if he has lost his wealth.
3.4.12	One should then milk from the two hind teats for the youngest son, or for a son of the youngest son, if he is aspiring.
3.4.13	One should not rub (the udder).
3.4.14	One should milk (from both) for one who desires cattle.
3.4.15	Having placed it on the fire, he brings it back.
3.4.16	Then having taken this Agnihotra around the Ahavaniya from the front, having brought it in through the eastern door, having placed it near the Garhapatya from the rear, then he sprinkles it.
3.5.1	In the evening he sprinkles it with the formula, "I sprinkle thee with truth and righteousness."
3.5.2	In the morning he sprinkles it with, "I sprinkle you with truth and righteousness".
3.5.3	Having offered thus, he sprinkles.
3.5.4	Then, having circumambulated clockwise, having hastened back, having sat down behind the Garhapatya, having placed the coals facing north, having made them hot, having placed them on that, he illuminates them with the light, saying, "May Agni not cover your brilliance."
3.5.5	With the ladle, he brings back the water, saying, "You are immortal."
3.5.6	Again he illuminates it and thrice performs the Parigni rite, saying, "The Rakshas is concealed, the evil spirits are concealed."
3.5.7	Taking the kindling-wood and the spoon with his right hand, and the Agnihotra-vessel with his left, he takes up the embers, having moved them upwards and to the north, with the formula, "I take thee with the impulse of Savitr, with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of Pusan."
3.5.8	He heats it on the Garhapatya three times with the formula, "The Rakshas is repelled, the evil spirits are repelled."
3.5.9	Then, having placed the ladle in the basket, he addresses the sacrificer, saying, "I shall offer."
3.5.10	The sacrificer responds, "Offer."
3.5.11	Then he offers four ladles, either full or half-full, saying, "Bhuri Ida, Bhuvah Ida, Suvar Ida, Bhuvah Suvar Ida."
3.5.12	Having placed the ladle in the vessel, he touches it with the formula, "May the gods, the evening-goers, the evening-farers, the gods, may they lead me safely with cattle." In the evening.
3.5.13	"May the gods, morning-goers, morning-farers, the morning-farers, may the gods lead me safely with the cattle." In the morning.
3.5.14	Here, having taken up this kindling wood with the ladle and the handle, he places it near the Garhapatya with the verse, "O Kūrca, salutations to the Lord of beings. May my progeny and cattle prosper. May I, the sacrificer, not be afflicted."
3.5.15	Dashashtra, having run forward, carries (the Soma). "Bhuvah, Suvah, Urva, Antariksha, this path is spread out, the path of the gods, by which the sages desiring heaven went, by that I go to the supreme heaven, so that I may not fall away from the presence of the good."
3.5.16	He places the fire-wood on the ground in front of the Ahavaniya with the verse, "Obeisance to the lord of creatures, may my progeny increase. May I, the sacrificer, not be injured."
3.5.17	Here he places the fire-stick in the middle of the Ahavaniyas.
3.6.1	He places the brick of Night, made of silver, pertaining to Agni and Jyotiṣa, pertaining to Vāyu, pertaining to heaven, for the heavenly world, not on the ground, saying, "I place immortality in the breath. May Prajapati settle you."
3.6.2	He makes it the deity. He says, "May it be firm like the Angiras with that deity."
3.6.3	Then he performs the Sudadohasam. The Sudadohasam presses Soma for him. The Prisni-cows, the birth of the gods, in the three luminous regions of heaven, in the evening.
3.6.4	Then in the morning he lays down the brick of the day, the deer, the light of the sun, the wind-possessed, the heavenly, for the heavenly world, the imperishable, saying, "I place immortality in the out-breath. May Prajapati settle thee."
3.6.5	Having made it the deity, he performs the Sudadoha rite.
3.6.6	When it is burning, he offers towards the face with the formula, "Agni is light, light is Surya, svāhā." In the evening.
3.6.7	"Surya is light, light Agni, svāhā," in the morning.
3.6.8	Thus it is mixed.
3.6.9	Now it is unmixed: "Agni is the light, light is Agni, svāha," in the evening.
3.6.10	"The Sun is light, light is the Sun, svāhā, in the morning."
3.6.11	Then, having placed the ladle on the couch once, turning to the right, he waits for the Gārhapatya, saying, "May you who have come together unite. May you not transgress the share of the participants. Where is the world of the seven sages who do good deeds, there may it place this sacrifice and the sacrificer."
3.6.12	Having excluded the previous oblation, he offers again, with the verse, "May Prajapati be pleased with this oblation."
3.6.13	Then, having thrice rubbed the ladle on the grass, he places it in the ladle, cleans it downwards, and smears the grass with the palms of his hands, saying, "May I win the herbs for the herbs."
3.6.14	In the same way, having wiped the second time, he smears it on the plants, facing south, facing east, saying, "For the Fathers thee, do thou delight the Fathers." In the evening.
3.6.15	Then in the morning, having wiped upwards, he smears the paste on the plants with the right hand stretched out, saying, "To the plants thee, do thou delignt the plants."
3.6.16	In the same way, having wiped the second time, he smears it on the herbs, facing south, with his back towards the east, saying, "For the Fathers thee, do thou delight the Fathers."
3.6.17	Having touched water, he eats twice with his fingers, saying, "Progeny, light."
3.6.18	Then, having turned towards the north, he eats with the ladle, with its handle towards the east.
3.7.1	May this oblation be for me the begetter of offspring, tenfold, with all its clans, for welfare. For the self, for offspring, for cattle, for safety, for the world, for rain, for the world.
3.7.2	May Agni make my offspring abundant, may he bestow food, milk, and seed upon us, may he bestow prosperity, wealth, and strength upon us. Svāhā in the evening.
3.7.3	"May the Sun make my progeny abundant."
3.7.4	Having wiped the ladle, having heated it, having filled it with water, he directs it towards the north, saying, "Satisfy the seven sages, delight the seven sages, svāhā to the seven sages."
3.7.5	It is indeed said, "He satisfies the seven sages."
3.7.6	Then he pours water towards the Garhapatya with the formula, "This I offer to Agni Vaisvânara, the immortal, svâhâ."
3.7.7	He pours it within the altar with the formula, “I offer an inexhaustible oblation to the inexhaustible, svâhâ.”
3.7.8	Having offered, he kindles it for the sake of kindling the Brahmic glory.
3.7.9	He pours water with the formula, "This is the form of Avabhrtha."
3.8.1	Then, having offered the Agnihotra in the evening, having sipped water with the sacrificial thread on, standing in the place of the sacrificer, he approaches the Āhavanīya fire with the six verses in anuṣṭubh metre: "Approaching the sacrifice, we approach the sacrifice, approaching the sacrifice, we have approached the sacrifice. Approaching the sacrifice, may we approach the sacrifice. Approached by the sacrifice, may the sacrifice approach us. Approached by all sacrifices, may we approach all sacrifices. Approached by everything, may everything approach us. Approaching the truth, may we approach truth. Approached by truth, may truth approach us."
3.8.2	With the six subsequent Agni-Pāvamānī verses, he approaches the Āhavanīya fire. "Agni, do thou purify our lives. O Agni, do thou purify. O Agni, O Purifier, do thou purify us. That Agni, the most pure of pure vows, O Agni, thy purities are shining."
3.8.3	Then he approaches the Ahavaniya (fire) with the verse, "O Agni, thou art the giver of life, give me life; thou art the giver or lustre, give me lustre; thou art the protector of the body, protect my body; whatever is deficient in my body, do thou fill it up."
3.8.4	Then he approaches the night with the verse, “O Citravasa, may I attain thy auspicious end.
3.8.5	Then he puts the kindling-wood on the Ahavaniya (fire) with the formula, "We kindle thee with a hundred bright fires, with the life-giving, with the life, with the life of the cattle, with the life giving, with the life. We kindle thee with the life-bestowing, with the life bestower, with the life bestowing, with the bestower of life. We kindle the life-bestower, the bestower of the life, the life-bestow-er, the bestower, the life-giver, the bestower. We kindle thee, O Agni, the life-giving and life-besto-wing, the life- bestower, the bestowing, the life giver, the bestower."
3.8.6	Then he approaches the Ahavaniya fire, saying, "Do thou, O Agni, approach with the lustre of the sun, with the praise of the sages, with thy own dear abode.
3.8.7	Thou art Agni, O Agni, with the lustre of Surya. Do thou unite me with life, lustre, and progeny."
3.8.8	Now indeed it is said,
3.8.9	Just as a man, a horse, a cow grows old, so the fire set up grows old. One should worship the Gārhapatya with the Agni Pavamāna hymns after a year.
3.8.10	He worships the Gārhapt ya with the Agni Pavāmaņa hymns after a year
3.8.11	He makes it new and ageless again. So says the Brahmana.
3.8.12	Then he stands by the houses and cattle, reciting: "May I see the progeny, the progeny of Ida, the progeny of Manu. May all be in our house.
3.8.13	May the waters be yours to eat. May the mountains be yours to eat, May the great ones be yours to eat; may the great ones be ours to eat. May those who are united be yours to eat: may those who are united (be ours to eat). May the strength be yours to eat ; may the strength be ours to eat; may energy be yours to eat : may energy be ours to eat ; may prosperity be yours to eat (and) may prosperity be ours to eat . May the Revatī (stars) rejoice in this world, in this homestead, in this pasture, in this womb. Do not go away from here. May there be many of you.
3.8.14	Then he touches the calf with the Agnihotra-rite, saying, "Thou art the union, of all forms, thou art the union of all forms. Thou art the union of the classes, thou art the unity of the classes. Thou art the unity of all classes. Thou art of all classes. May I enjoy the prosperity of a thousand, may my wealth be prosperous. May my wealth be prosperous."
3.8.15	Then he worships the Garhapatya with the verses beginning with "two" and ending with "three," saying, "O Agni, we come to thee every day with our homage, with our homage, to thee who art the bestower of wealth.
3.8.16	The king of sacrifices, the guardian, the shining one of truth, growing in his own abode.
3.8.17	Like a father to his son, O Agni, be a good protector to us. Be with us for our welfare.
3.8.18	O Agni, you are our protector and saviour. Be auspicious and helpful.
3.8.19	We now invoke you, O Agni, the most radiant, for our pleasure and for our friends.
3.8.20	Vasu Agni, Vasu-shravas, the best of lights, gives wealth.
3.8.21	Then he approaches the houses and cattle.
3.9.1	I see you with energy, may you see me with energy. I see you with the prosperity of wealth, may you see with the prosperity of my wealth. You are the honey-makers, the pleasant ones. May you enter me. May your intoxication be for a thousandfold prosperity. May your wealth be established in me.
3.9.2	Then he worships the Ahavaniya fire with the verse, "We meditate on the excellent light of Savitar, the god, whose inspiration may prompt our thoughts."
3.9.3	He worships the Ahavanīya fire with the following verse, "O Brahmanaspati, make Soma the son of Kakshivat and Ushas."
3.9.4	Then he worships the night: "Thou art never old, O Indra, thou never growest old for the giver. Thou comest near, O bountiful one, to give more. Thy gift is sought by the god."
3.9.5	Then he worships the Garhapatya: "We have surrounded thee, O Agni, the wise, the brilliant, the breaker, the breaker of the hard, the breaker of hard things."
3.9.6	Then he approaches the Garhapatya (fire) with the formula, "O Agni, the lord of the house, may I be the good lord of the house through you, the lord of house. May you be the good lord through me, the lord ofhouse. I seek that blessing of a hundred winters for myself, for him. I seek that luminous blessing for him, for him."
3.9.7	As many sons as he has, they are the threads.
3.9.8	Now it is said:
3.9.9	"He who stands facing the fire, he approaches him. He who stands facing away, he goes away. He who stands obliquely, he goes away."
3.9.10	He stands obliquely, neither facing nor away.
3.10.1	When he is going to perform the Piṇḍapitṛyajña, he prepares the following things: a single unbroken darbha-grass, darbha-grass for spreading, grains, a winnowing basket, a pestle and mortar that have been washed, a pot, a ladle, a strainer, a ladle with a long handle, a ladle with an eye, a ladle with two eyes, a ladle with three eyes, a ladle for offering, a ladle for pouring, a ladle for sprinkling, a ladle for dipping, a ladle for taking, a ladle for holding, a ladle for pressing, a ladle for scraping, a ladle for wiping, a ladle for cleaning, a ladle for removing, a ladle for filling, a ladle for emptying, a ladle for covering, a ladle for uncovering, a ladle for spreading, a ladle for scattering, a ladle for sweeping, a ladle for washing, a ladle for rinsing, a ladle for rubbing, a ladle for anointing, a ladle for applying, a ladle for smearing, a ladle for cleansing, a ladle for purifying, a ladle for making pure, a ladle for preparing, a ladle for arranging, a ladle for setting, a ladle for placing, a ladle for putting, a ladle for inserting, a ladle for introducing, a ladle for bringing, a ladle for carrying, a ladle for conducting, a ladle for leading, a ladle for guiding, a ladle for directing, a ladle for controlling, a ladle for restraining, a ladle for stopping, a ladle for preventing, a ladle for obstructing, a ladle for closing, a ladle for opening, a ladle for separating, a ladle for uniting, a ladle for joining,
3.10.2	Then he spreads the Anvāhāryapacana (fire).
3.10.3	He places it to the north of each one, with the sprinkling of grass, with the application of oil, with the application, with the ten-fold, with the wooden sword, with the water-pot, with the sacrificial implements.
3.10.4	Then having put on the sacred thread, and having sat down with his back towards the Anvāhāryapacana, he pours the rice into the vessel with the Pavitra-thread, saying, "I pour out what is agreeable to your Fathers," or silently.
3.10.5	Having made half of the vessel above, and having placed the pestle and mortar on that skin, he grinds it once only, facing the south.
3.10.6-10	Then he offers them without distinguishing them. Then having brought water over the strainer into the same vessel, and having placed it over the strainer, he pours the rice over the strainer. Then he pours the clarified butter. Then he places the clarified butter. Having encircled both with fire, he cleans the ladle and the spoon.
3.10.11	Having cooked this rice-pap and having poured clarified butter over it, he places it in the Uḍuḍaṇḍa vessel.
3.10.12	Then having put on the sacrificial thread and having placed the Anvāhāryapachana (vessel) near, having struck with the spoon, he offers three oblations with the formula, "To Soma, drunk by the Pitrs, Svāhā, salutations to Svāhā. To Yama, son of Angiras, fatherly, Svāhā salutations to Svāhà. To Agni, the carrier of Kavya, the bestower of what is desired, Svāhā salutaions to Svāhā." In the southeastern quarter.
3.10.13	Having placed the wooden sword silently, having put on the sacred thread, having taken up the wooden sword from the Anvāhāryapacana with the right hand, having sprinkled it, having spread the sacrificial grass with the tip towards the south, he sprinkles himself with water, saying, "May the Pitrs sprinkle, may the grandfathers sprinkle, may the great-grandfathers sprinkle."
3.10.14	Then with the ladle he offers three balls of rice, which have been sprinkled and smeared, saying, "This is for thee, O Tatasau, and those who follow thee. This is for thy father, O Pitasau, and those that follow thee. This for thy grandfather, O Prapitasau, and for those who follow thee."
3.10.15	Here, having said, "O fathers, partake according to your share," and having turned towards the north, he attends to the heat, having turned away.
3.10.16	They say, "Having turned away from the heat."
3.10.17	Then, having turned around, he smells this cooked rice.
3.11.1	Those fathers who are equal, of equal minds, in Yama's kingdom, their world, svadha, may the sacrifice be established among the gods.
3.11.2-4	May the prosperity of those who are born together, of the same mind, of the same life, of the same self, of the same soul, of the same body, of the same lineage, of the same clan, of the same family, of the same name, of the same caste, of the same learning, of the same knowledge, of the same understanding, of the same faith, of the same devotion, of the same conduct, of the same good conduct, of the mine, of the same destiny, of the same goal, of the same heaven, of the same hell, of the same birth, of the same death, of the same happiness, of the same sorrow, of the same joy, of the same grief, of the same hope, of the same fear, of the same desire, of the same anger, of the same love, of the same hatred, of the same affection, of the same enmity, of the same friendship, of the same rivalry, of the same wealth, of the same poverty, of the same success, of the same failure, of the same fame, of the same infamy, of the same praise, of the same blame, of the same honour, of the same dishonour, of the same pleasure, of the same pain, of the same gain, of the same loss, of the same victory, of the same defeat, of the same glory, of the same shame, of the same merit, of the same demerit, of the same virtue, of the same vice, of the same truth, of the same falsehood, of the same goodness, of the same evil, of the same right, of the same wrong, of the same duty, of the same non-duty, of the same dharma, of the same adharma, of the same righteousness, of the same unrighteousness,
3.11.5	Then he gives the unguent, saying, "The Fathers, the Grandfathers, the Great-Grandfathers, the Unguents."
3.11.6	Then he gives the garments, saying, "These are your garments, O Fathers, these are your garments, your Grandfathers, these are your great-grandfathers' garments."
3.11.7	"Cut off the hair for a long life," says the Brāhmaṇa.
3.11.8	Then with six salutations he stands in the opposite direction: "Salutations to you, O Fathers, for the life-giving, salutations to you, Fathers, for the heat, salutations to the Fathers for the living, salutations to thee, Fathers, for your own, salutations to your Fathers for the wrathful, salutations to those Fathers who are in this world, those who are in this are with you, those who are here are with me. You be the most venerable of those who are in that world, I be the most venerable among those who are here."
3.11.9	Then he asks for the hero: "O Fathers, give me a hero. O Grandfathers, give me a heroic grandson. O Great-grandfathers, give me heroic great-grandsons. May I be like a father to you all. May you all be like sons to me."
3.11.10	Then he makes them rise, saying, 'Rise up, O fathers, ye dead heroes, ye have followed the path of Yama. Let him who is the ancient one bestow on us wealth and whatever is good. Do ye proclaim to us the shares of the deities.'
3.11.11	Then he makes them reach (the world of the Fathers) with the verse, "May the Fathers go to their world, by mind, by speed, by the deep paths of the Fathers, by the ancient paths. Then the Fathers who have drunk Soma, who are enjoying the same feast as Yama, come to us."
3.11.12	Then with three verses he calls the mind, "We call the mind, may it come to us again and again. The Fathers are the mind."
3.11.13	Here he offers these oblations along with the sacrificial grass in the fire.
3.11.14	Then they take out two of each of these weapons.
3.11.15	Then having tied the sacrificial thread, he worships the Garhapatya with the Prajapati verse, "O Prajapati, none other than you."
3.11.16	Here he recites this second verse, "Whatever is in the sky, on the earth, and in heaven."
3.11.17	The Pindapitryajna is concluded.
3.12.1	When one is going to perform the Agrayan sacrifice with Shyamaka grains during the rainy season,
3.12.2	he has a known Upavasatha rite.
3.12.3	Then in the morning, having offered the Agnihotra, having strewn the Prastara grass and having carried the water, he offers a cake on eight potsherds to Agni, a cake on eleven potsherds to Indra, and a Shyamaka cooked rice to Soma.
3.12.4	Having released speech, having melted the clarified butter over the Garhapatya fire, having purified it, having taken four spoonfuls in the ladle, he offers clarified butter on the Ahavaniya fire with the verse, "To the one having a hundred weapons, to the one having a strength of a hundred." Five times.
3.12.5	Having cooked, he places it.
3.12.6	It has fifteen kindling verses, five fore-offerings, two portions of clarified butter for the Agnihotra oblations.
3.12.7	Then (the Adhvaryu) says, "Do thou swell with the oblation; do thou be united with it."
3.12.8	The two Samyājas are in Tristubh metre.
3.12.9	Having placed the Anvāhārya portion, he gives away a garment.
3.12.10	Then he eats the share of the sacrificer, saying, "May Agni, the first, eat; for he knows how to make the oblation auspicious for us, the plants for all the people."
3.12.11	This Iṣṭi comes to an end with the full vessel and the Viṣṇukrama steps.
3.12.12	He releases the vow.
3.12.13	Now, when one is going to perform the Āgrayaṇa rite with rice in autumn,
3.12.14	he has a known Upavasatha day.
3.12.15	Then, having offered the Agnihotra in the morning, having strewn the Prṣṭhyā grass and having carried the water, he offers the Indra-Agni oblation on twelve potsherds, the Vaiśvadeva oblation on rice, and the Dyāvāpṛthivi oblation on one potsherd.
3.12.16	Having released speech, having melted the clarified butter over the Garhapatya fire, having purified it, having taken four spoonfuls in the ladle, he offers clarified butter on the Ahavaniya fire with the verse, "To the one having a hundred weapons, to the one having a strength of a hundred." Five times.
3.12.17	Having cooked, he places it.
3.12.18	It has fifteen kindling verses, five fore-offerings, two portions of clarified butter for the Agnihotra oblations.
3.12.19	Then, with the oblations, Indra and Agni loosened Vritra from the shining heaven. This is for Indra-Agni.
3.12.20	"All the gods, all the gods." This is for the Visve Devas.
3.12.21	"Heaven and earth, to our ancestors in the past." This is for Dyava-Pritvi.
3.12.22	The two verses are in the Tristubh metre.
3.12.23	Having placed the Anvähärya vessel, he gives the first-born calf.
3.12.24	Then he eats the portion for the sacrificer, saying, "May the gods have chosen for us what is good and auspicious. We have obtained you through your power. Be our friend, O father, come to us. For the offspring and the body, be auspicious."
3.12.25	This Iṣṭi comes to an end with the full vessel and the Viṣṇukrama steps.
3.12.26	He releases the vow.
3.12.27	Then in spring, one who is going to perform the Āgrayaṇa of barley becomes.
3.12.28	His Upavasatha is known.
3.12.29	The rite is similar to that of Vrihyagrayana.
3.12.30	The only difference is this.
3.12.31	Then he eats the portion for the sacrificer, reciting the verse, "They, Sarasvati and Manu, have mixed this barley with honey. Indra was the lord of the plough, the hundred-armed one. The Maruts were the ploughmen, the givers of good gifts."
3.12.32	This Iṣṭi is concluded with the full vessel and Viṣṇukramapādas.
3.12.33	He releases the vow.
3.13.1	When about to proceed to the fire, having sipped water with the sacred thread passing over the right shoulder, and having gone round in front of the Āhavanīya fire, standing in the place of the sacrificer, he approaches the Āhavanīy a fire, saying, "My name first, O Jātavedas, my father and mother gave me when I was born. That you have borne again. I have borne your name, O Agni."
3.13.2	Then he proceeds silently.
3.13.3	He releases speech in the presence of the fires.
3.13.4	He goes away with his wife, having put her to sleep below, without meat, and without means of livelihood.
3.13.5	He does not go away for more than twelve days.
3.13.6	He does no fasting.
3.13.7	Coming, he makes the kindling woods on the path.
3.13.8	Having gone beyond the fires, he restrains speech.
3.13.9	He approaches the Ahavaniya (fire) with the verse, "O Jātavedas, may thy name and mine be as two garments worn by us. We who are moving, for thy life and for our life, may we again and again exchange them as we please."
3.13.10	Then he attends upon the Garhapatya (fire) with the formula, "Salutations to Agni, the unpierced; salutations to the unassailable; salutations to Samrajas. Agni is the best, the great, the all-conquering, the most excellent Gandharva."
3.14.2	If they tell him that there was a break in the sacrifice, he should say, "It did not happen." Having melted the clarified butter over the Garhapatya fire, having purified it, having taken four spoonfuls in the ladle, he offers it continuously on the Ahavaniya fire with the verse, "May the mind and light enjoy the clarified butter. May they join this broken sacrifice. Those auspicious dawns and the shining ones, I join them with oblation and ghee. Svāhā."
3.14.3	Then he offers a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Tantumata.
3.14.4	He gives a horn as Dakṣiṇā.
3.14.5	The Iṣṭi comes to an end in the prescribed manner.
3.14.6	Then he offers the Ati-prastha offerings.
3.14.7	It is indeed by this that the ancient learned ones, desiring brilliance, desiring fame, desiring Brahmic glory, used to worship.
3.14.8	This is the only one that has been lost, because of the importance of the vow.
3.14.9	Now, then, the Upaṣṭhāna (worship) of Vaiśvānara (Fire).
3.14.10	"O Nari (female), protect my progeny!"
3.14.11	"O Atharva (male), protect my father!"
3.14.12	"O Śaṃsa (female), protect the cattle!"
3.14.13	"O Sapratha (male), protect the assembly!"
3.14.14	"Protect my Budhniya mantra!" This is the Avasathiya.
3.14.15	He departs for an unlimited time.
3.14.16	Returning, he makes the kindling woods on the path.
3.14.17	He stops speaking after announcing the fires.
3.14.18	Having returned, he worships with this alone.
3.14.19	The atonement is the same.
3.15.1	Then on the Upavasatha day, having put on the sacrificial thread and sipped water, having gone around in front of the Āhavanīya fire, having sat down in the place of the sacrificer, having sipped water with the Pavitra (a strainer) in front, he says: "May the plants be rich in milk, may the herbs be rich in milk. May the milk of the waters be rich in milk; with that milk, O Indra, do thou unite me."
3.15.2	Then he puts the kindling woods on the Ahavaniya fire, saying, "O Agni, lord of vows, I shall observe the vow, may I be able to do it, may it succeed for me, svāhā." "O Vayu, lord of vows... O Aditya, lord of vows ... O lord of vows among vows, I shall perform the vow, may be able to do so, may it succeed."
3.15.3	Then, on the next day, when the oblation is being offered, he recites: "I invoke Agni, the Hotar, here, and the gods worthy of sacrifice, whom we invoke here. May the gods come, with good intentions, may the gods partake of my oblation."
3.15.4	Having recited this, he restrains speech until the oblation is offered.
3.15.5	Having released speech, the one who offers oblations yokes the sacrifice through yoga. "Who yokes you? May he yoke you."
3.15.6	At the right time, the skulls are yoked. The skulls that the wise ones collect in the summer, those of Pūṣan, are yoked by Indra and Vayu.
3.15.7	When the Yajus-reciters split up, he puts aside the Utkaras. The Gharma is not split up. It goes back to the place from where it was brought.
3.15.8	Then having melted the clarified butter in the Garhapatya fire, having purified it, having taken four spoonfuls in the ladle, he offers a continuous oblation in the Ahavaniya fire with the verse, "The fire-wood, the altar and the enclosing sticks, all of them follow the life of the sacrifice. The thirty-three threads that were spread out, those who give this sacrifice with their own wealth, to them I offer this severed (oblation) with Svāhā."
3.15.9	Then he offers another oblation with the verse, "O Agni, do thou lead the gods."
3.15.10	Now indeed it is said:
3.15.11	"If the Aśvina sacrifice is lost, one should offer a cake on two potshards to the Aśvins and a cake on one potshard to Dyāvāpṛthivi."
3.15.12	The well-known Iṣṭi comes to an end.
3.15.13	Then, having melted the clarified butter over the Garhapatya fire, having purified it, having taken four spoonfuls in the ladle, he offers a continuous oblation on the Ahavaniya fire, saying, "The wood, the altar, and the enclosing sticks, all of them follow the life of the sacrifice. The thirty-three threads that were spread out, those who give this sacrifice with their own nature, to them I offer this severed (oblation), svāhā."
3.15.14	Then he creates another (fire) with the verse, "May the heat lead the gods."
3.15.15	If the ghee or the Saṁnāyya falls down anywhere other than the Barhiṣa and the Purouttama Prayāja, then he collects the Svadhā.
3.16.1	"I sprinkle you with the Yajus. May the offspring, life, and wealth be generated by Brihaspati. May the sacrificer not be harmed here."
3.16.2	He consecrates the spilled (water) with the formulas, "To the lord of the earth svāhā, to the lord of the world svāhā, and to the lord of beings svāhā."
3.16.3	Then when he proceeds with what remains, then he makes the sacrificer gaze at the clarified butter. "Thou art clarified butter, thou art truth, thou art the overlord of truth, thou art oblation, thou art Vaiśvānara, Vaiśvadeva, of purified splendour, of true energy, thou art strength, thou art the bearer of strength, thou art victorious over the enemies of strength, thou are victorious over those who are hostile to strength, thou art victor over the armies, thou art victor of those who are hostile towards armies, thou art of a thousand energies, thou art victorious for me. Thou art the clarified butter of clarified butter, thou are the truth of truth, thou are the true life, thou art the true splendour, I sprinkle thee with truth. Thou art worthy of being eaten of that."
3.16.4	Now, the taking of the oblations of clarified butter.
3.16.5	He takes up the ladle with the formula, "I take thee for the control and support of the five winds; I take thee for the support and control of the five seasons; I take thee as the support and control for the five directions; I take thee, as the support and the control for the five peoples." With four formulas he takes up the ladle.
3.16.6	I take thee for the Brahman's lustre, for the Brahman' s lustre I take thee; I take thee for strength of the Kshatra, for strength of the Kshâtra I take thee; for the people I take thee, for the people Itake thee; for good heroes I take thee;for good offspring I take thee;I take thee for the increase of wealth; I take thee, O Brahman, for the Brahman-splendour; I take thee.
3.16.7	With four (verses) he takes up the Dhruva vessel, "May the gods accept our oblation, may the gods accept the blessings of the sacrificer." "I take thee, O god, for the gods."
3.16.8	He recites the verse, "I take thee for desire."
3.16.9	He recites the formulas to the stakes being driven in: "Thou art firm, I am firm; may I be firm among my kinsmen, the firm, the wise, the possessor of wealth." This is the middle one.
3.16.10	"Thou art fierce, I am fierce; may I be fierce among my kinsmen; the fierce, the wise, possessor of wealth." The southern one.
3.16.11	May I be the overlord among my equals. The overlord of wealth. The overlord. The one who knows wealth.
3.16.12	Then he yokes Agni with yoga. I yoke you with divine Brahman for the carrying of oblations to the one who knows.
3.16.13	When the two Samidhás are being placed, he recites the verse, "May we live long, O Agni, the giver of good offspring and good heroes, we who have offered oblations."
3.16.14	Then he recites over the oblations placed near the fire, "O Agni, if anything of this sacrifice of mine is lost, or if the ghee is spilt, or if it is lost, I strike down the enemy with that, the one who has ill-will. I place him in the presence of Nirriti."
3.17.1	Then one should offer the Agnihotra with these Vyahrtis: "Bhuvah, Bhuvah, Suvah."
3.17.2	The Agnihotra is the mouth of sacrifice, and these are the Brahmanic utterances.
3.17.3	He makes the Brahmanic utterances in the mouth of sacrifice itself.
3.17.4	When the year is over, he should offer them.
3.17.5	He thus encloses the year on both sides with Brahman. So says the Brahmaṇa.
3.17.6	Now, indeed, it is said:
3.17.7	One who is performing the Darsa-Purnamāsa sacrifices should offer the oblations with these Vyāhṛtis.
3.17.8	The Darsa-Purnamasa sacrifices are the mouth of the sacrifice, and these Vyāhṛti are Brahman.
3.17.9	One makes the sacrifice the mouth of Brahman.
3.17.10	When the year is completed, one should offer with these (Vyāhṛtis).
3.17.11	One encloses the year on both sides with Brahman. This is the Brāhmaṇa.
3.17.12	Now, indeed, it is said:
3.17.13	One who is performing the Cāturmāsya sacrifices should offer the oblations with these Vyāhṛtis.
3.17.14	The Cāturmāsyas are the beginning of the sacrifice, and these Vyāhṛti are Brahman.
3.17.15	He makes Brahman the beginning of the rite.
3.17.16	When the year is completed, he should offer with these alone.
3.17.17	The Brahman himself takes the year on both sides. Thus says the Brāhmaṇa.
3.17.18	Now indeed it is said:
3.17.19	Whatever is done with the Yajus of the sacrifice, the blessing of the sacrifice goes to the kingdom, and whatever is done with the Rk, the blessing of sacrifice goes to the clan.
3.17.20	Then the Brahman performs a sacrifice without blessing.
3.17.21	One who is about to recite the Sāmidhenī verses should place these Vyāhṛtis before them.
3.17.22	One makes Brahma the first step.
3.17.23	Thus a Brahman performs a sacrifice with blessings. This is the Brahmanical text.
3.17.24	Now indeed it is said:
3.17.25	If one desires that the sacrificer's enemy may go away from the blessings of his sacrifice, one should place these Vyāhrtis before the Puronuvākyā for him.
3.17.26	The Puronuvākyā is addressed to the deity of the enemy.
3.17.27	The enemy alone goes to the blessing of the sacrifice. So says the Brāhmaṇa.
3.17.28	Now indeed it is said:
3.17.29	If one desires that the sacrificers may go to the blessing of a sacrifice, then he should place one of these Vyāhṛtis in the middle of the Puronuvāka, one before the Yājyā, and one before the middle of the Yājyās.
3.17.30	Thus they go together to the blessing of the sacrifice. Thus says the Brāhmaṇa.
3.17.31	Now indeed it is said:
3.17.32	Just as Parjanya showers well, so the sacrifice showers on the sacrificer.
3.17.33	They take up water from the pits.
3.17.34	The sacrificer takes up the sacrifice with a blessing. Thus says the Brahmana.
3.17.35	The Brahman is initiated with the Vyahrtis, the Rajanya with the Hinkara, and the Vaishya with the Rca. One should perform all these three. This is another view.
3.17.36	One recites this verse when the wood is being piled up:
3.18.1	"O Agni, may the heat not burn the sacrificer. May the heat not burn. O Agni, kindled by the gods, kindled by Manu, with a gentle tongue."
3.18.2	When the Pravargya is being offered, he recites the verse, "O Hotṛ, I have placed on your head the immortal, for the sake of prosperity, for good progeny, for good strength."
3.18.3	When the oblation is being poured with the spoon, he recites, "You are the mind, belonging to Prajāpati. May I enter with the mind."
3.18.4	When the offering is being poured into the ladle, he recites the verse, "May his speech be Indra's, the destroyer of enemies. May he enter me with Indra's speech."
3.18.5	He recites the praise of the Prayājas, "I gratify the spring among the seasons, may it, being gratified, gratify me. I gratify the summer among the seasons, it, being gratified may gratify me. I am gratified the rainy season among the seasons, they, being gratified, may gratify me. I gratify the autumn among the seasons, she, being gratified, should gratify me. Iam gratified the winter and the cold among the seasons, those, being gratified,should gratify me."
3.18.6	He recites the two portions of clarified butter with the formula, "By offering to Agni and Soma, may I become one with sight."
3.18.7	He recites the formula for the offered Agni, "By offering Agni, may I become a nourisher."
3.18.8	He recites the Upāṃśuyāja formula, "May I be free from injury, may I injure him."
3.18.9	Here he mentally thinks of the person whom the sacrificer hates.
3.18.10	Then having touched water,
3.18.11	he recites the formula for Agni-Soma, "May I become the slayer of Vrtra through the worship of Agni-Soma."
3.18.12	"O Indra and Agni, I pray to you. By the worship of Indra and Agni, may I be the one who has power and food."
3.18.13	"O Indra, I pray to thee. By the worship to Indra, may I be one who has power."
3.18.14	"O Mahendra, I pray to Thee. By the worship unto Mahendra, may I attain the greatness of the one who has conquered."
3.18.15	He recites the Svishtakrit formula over the oblation offered to Agni Svishtakrit, "By the sacrifice to the gods, may I attain the long life and the firm position of Agni Svishtakrita."
3.18.16	When the food is being distributed, he recites, "May Agni protect me from evil deeds, and Savitr from sin."
3.18.17	At the share of the sacrificer, he recites (the formula), "He who is far away from me, the enemy, I conquer him with this."
3.18.18	When the Idā is being brought, he makes her recite the formula, "Come, O beautiful one, having the colour of rain." Having reached, she says, "O Maghavan, I have come."
3.18.19	When the Idā is consumed in the middle, he makes her say the formula, "Thou art agreeable. Be agreeable to us. Thou art agreeable to us. May I attain thy agreement."
3.18.20	Then he cleanses himself with water within the Veda, saying, "May the mind enjoy the light, may the gods enjoy the light. May Brihaspati join this interrupted sacrifice. May the All-gods rejoice here."
3.18.21	He recites over the sacrificial cake placed on the grass, "O Brahman, swell, let not my giving be exhausted, let not my doing be exhausted."
3.18.22	Then he asks for the Anvāhārya.
3.18.23	He recites over it, which is near the altar, the formula, "This is the share of Prajapati, full of energy and milk," from the end of the Anuvaka.
3.19.1	He recites the Anuyājas in this way: "By the sacrifice to Barhiṣa, may I be endowed with offspring. By the sacrifice to Narāśaṃsa, may I be possessed of cattle. By the sacrifice of Agni Sviṣṭakṛt, may I be long-lived and attain stability through the sacrifice."
3.19.2	Then when the Hotṛ knows that the Agni has consumed the oblation, he makes the sacrificer recite the Ujjiti-verse, "I follow the Ujjiti of Agni." As one pleases.
3.19.3	The arrangement of the Vājavatī verses has been explained.
3.19.4	Then when the Hotṛ knows that the sacrificer is present, he makes the sacrificer recite the Yajña-dohāna (the Yajña-milk) thus: "These have come, the blessings, desiring to be milked, we have invoked Indra. We shall milk the progeny and food."
3.19.5	When the fire-wood is being carried, he recites (the following verses): "May Agni, with his reddish colour, lead thee to the deity; may Indra, with his tawny horses, lead thee to deity; may Surya, with his rays, lead thee to thee deity."
3.19.6	When the boundaries are being released, he recites (the formula), "I release your ropes, your rays, your yokes, and your coverings. Let him give us wealth and whatever is good. Do you announce to us the shares in the deities."
3.19.7	When the Shamyuvaaka is recited, he recites, "By the sacrifice of Vishnu, I may attain stability through the sacrifice."
3.20.2	Then he makes peace with the other two. The wife of the gods, Agni the householder, the union of the sacrifice, by the sacrifice to these two may I be united with the union.
3.20.3	He makes the sacrificer recite the Veda. The Veda is yours, the Veda is yours, you are the Veda, you are the knower of the Veda. From the end of the chapter.
3.20.4	While the Dhruva is being filled up, he recites the verse, "May the Dhruva be filled up with ghee, for each sacrifice, for the gods who are worthy of sacrifice, for Surya, for the udder of Aditi, for the earth which is the seat, for the extensive stream, in this sacrifice."
3.20.5	Then he eats the portion for the sacrificer, saying, "In the world called Vibhan of Prajapati, I place you together with the sacrificer." Or, "May the sacrificer be blessed."
3.20.6	Here he asks for the full vessel.
3.20.7	Having placed him within the altar, he makes the sacrificer recite (the formula), "Thou art existence, may I be existence; thou art all, may I be all; thou art full, may I be full; thou art inexhaustible, may not I be exhausted."
3.20.8	Then he directs the quarters: "The gods, the priests, may they cleanse in the eastern direction; the months, the fathers, may they cleanse (the offerings) in the southern direction; the houses, the cattle, may they cleanse them in the western direction; the waters, the plants, the trees, may they cleanse the offerings in the northern direction; the sacrifice, the year, the lord of sacrifice, may they cleanse it in the upward direction."
3.20.9	Then he leads them to the sea, saying, "I send you to the boundless ocean, your own birthplace. May I be without a gap in progeny. May my cattle not be lost."
3.20.10	Then, having risen, he steps with the right foot in the steps of Vishnu.
3.21.1	The sequence of Vishnu, the conqueror of foes, is spread over the earth in the Gāyatrī metre. He who hates us is excluded. Four verses are recited in succession.
3.21.2	In the third verse, the fourth is repeated.
3.21.3	One does not proceed to the fourth.
3.21.4	One does no approach the Havirdhāna fire.
3.21.5	Then, standing here only, he attends upon the Ahavanīya fire, saying, "We have gone to the light, we have gone to the sight. Do not cut me off. That heat of yours, for that I pray to you."
3.21.6	Then he attends upon the sun, saying, "You are the best, the most brilliant of rays. You are the bestower of life, bestow life on me. You are the giver of radiance, bestow radiance on me."
3.21.7	Then he divides his enemies from these worlds: "This is my enemy. I divide him from these directions, from this heaven, from this atmosphere, from this earth, from this food. I divide him. He whom I hate is divided."
3.21.8	Then having touched water,
3.21.9	"He touches himself with the verse, "I have come to the light, to the world of the gods."
3.21.10	Then he turns to the right shoulder with the verse, "I follow the Indra-like covering."
3.21.11	Then he turns towards the north with the verse, "May I be united with offspring, may offspring be united with me; may I be united with prosperity, may prosperity be united with me."
3.21.12	Then he puts the kindling-wood on the Ahavaniya with the formula, "May Agni, being kindled, shine for me; may I shine being kindled by thee, O Agni. Svāhā."
3.21.13	Then he worships the Ahavaniya (fire) with the formula, "May the sacrifice be endowed with wealth; may I be more wealthy."
3.21.14	Then he prays to the Garhapatya with the Agni-Pavamānī verses, "O Agni, thou shinest for long life; O Agni, do thou shine."
3.21.15	Then he approaches the Garhapatya (fire) with the formula, "O Agni, the lord of the house, may I be the good lord of the house through you, the lord of house. May you be the good lord through me, the lord ofhouse. I seek that blessing of a hundred winters for myself, for him. I seek that luminous blessing for him, for him."
3.21.16	As many sons as he has, they are the threads.
3.22.1	And indeed it is said:
3.22.2	"He who, having yoked the sacrifice, does not release it, becomes one without a foundation."
3.22.3	"Who yokes you, may he release you."
3.22.4	At the proper time, he releases the skulls that the gods collect in the summer. O Indra and Vayu, release those skulls of Pūṣan, which are his vow.
3.22.5	Then, having returned by the same route by which he had gone, and having sat down in the place of the sacrificer, he sips water as before, with the verse, "The plants are rich in milk, the herbs are rich in milk; the milk of the waters, the milk of the milk, with that milk, O Indra, do thou unite me."
3.22.6	Then he puts the kindling woods on the Ahavaniya fire, saying, "O Agni, lord of vows, I have observed the vow; may it be accomplished. Svāhā!" "O Vayu, lord of vows... O Aditya, lord of vows ... O lord of vows among vows, I have performed the vow; may that be accomplished. Svāhākiti."
3.22.7	Then, rising up, he recites the re-invocation of the sacrifice: "The sacrifice became, it shone forth, it prospered, it grew, it became the lord of the gods. May it make us lords. May we be the lords of wealth."
3.22.8	Then having stepped forward, he mutters: "O Agni, the lord of cattle, the lord of horses, the sacrifice, the friend of men, always unassailable, the lord of Ida, this Asura, the long-lasting, the vast-bottomed, the naturally-existing wealth."
3.22.9	Then having made the Brahmanas satisfied, he instructs: "Let it be done."
3.23.1	Desiring to become the Brahman, having sipped water with the sacrificial thread, having gone around in front of the sacrificial fire, standing facing the north, he approaches the Brahman's seat, saying, "Salutations to Brahman, salutations to the Brahman's abode."
3.23.2	Then he removes a blade of grass from his seat, saying, “O Dhaiṣaṇya, standing here, may he who is more worthy than us sit in your abode."
3.23.3	He sits down, saying, "May I be in the sky and on the earth."
3.23.4	Then he looks at them, saying, "Let not the sky and earth fall today."
3.23.5	Having sat down, he mutters: "Bhuḥ, Bhuvaḥ, Suvaḥ, Who will be the Brahman? He will be the Brahman. The life-force is united with Prajapati. I am united with the Brahman. Like a horse, like a strong fire, like a bull, united, I shall offer oblations to the deities. I resort to Bhuḥ, I resort to Bhuvaḥ, I resort Suvaḥ, I take refuge in Bhuḥ, Bhuva, Suvaḥ. I take refuge in Vayu, I take refuge Brahma, I take refuge the Kshatra, I take refuge Anarta, the deity, and speech. Om, I take refuge."
3.23.6	The sacrificer chooses the Brahman-priest, saying, "O Lord of the Earth, Lord of the World, Lord of the Great Being, we choose you as the Brahman-priest. We choose you as the chief priest, O Vītahavya, by whom the gods, the Angiras, have gone to the highest heaven."
3.23.7	The Brahman is surrounded. I am the king. I am the lord of the world. I am the ruler of the great being. I shall perform the priestly duties with the god Savitar. Do not obstruct Brahman, O Vītahavya, who has gone to the supreme heaven. The gods, the Angiras, have gone to heaven. O god Savitar, they choose you as the divine Brahman. That I tell you for the mind. Mind to the Gayatri. Gayatri to the Tristubh. Tristubh to the Jagati. Jagati to the Anushtubh. Anushtubh to the Pankti. Pankti to Prajapati. Prajapati to the All-Gods. All-Gods to Brihaspati. Brihaspati to Brahman. Brahman to the earth, the atmosphere, and the heaven. Brihaspati is the Brahman of the gods. I am the Brahman of men. O Brihaspati, protect the sacrifice.
3.23.8	When he says, "Brahman, I am about to offer water. The sacrificer should restrain speech," then the Brahman priest releases it.
3.24.1	"O divine Savitar, lead the sacrifice, may the deities increase. May the sacrificer be in the world of heaven, on the back of the sky, where is the world of the seven sages and the well-done deeds. Lead him to that sacrifice and the sacrificer. Om, lead!"
3.24.2	He is silent when the cows are being led to the milking place, when they are being milked, and when the milk is being offered.
3.24.3	When the milk is being milked for the Saṁnāyya, he says, "Milk much for Indra and the gods," or "For Mahendra," if he is sacrificing to Mahendra.
3.24.4	He is silent at the Adhivapana rite, until the skull is placed on the fire.
3.24.5	He is also silent at the Samvapana rite, till the pouring of the Soma.
3.24.6	The Sṭambayajus is recited while the Prokṣaṇī water is being taken up.
3.24.7	When the Brahman says, "O Brahman, I am about to take up the northern enclosing stick," the Brahman recites, "O Brihaspati, take up the altar. Take up the sacrifice with Brahman. Place this sacrifice and the sacrificer in the world of the seven sages where there is good conduct." He says, "Take up."
3.24.8	When the clarified butter is being taken up, he restrains speech till the taking up of the Dhruva vessel.
3.24.9	When the Sāmidhenī verses are being recited, he restrains his speech till the recitation of the Pravara verse and the Puronuvākyā verse.
3.24.10	When the Prasitra is being offered, he restrains himself till the offering.
3.24.11	They remove the Prasitra towards the east of the Ahavaniya.
3.24.12	He sees it being brought.
3.25.1	"He says, "I see you with the eye of the sun."
3.25.2	Then he receives it with both hands, saying, "I receive you in the impulse of the divine Savitr, with the arms of the Ashvins, with the hands of Pusan."
3.25.3	Then he places it, saying, "I place you in the navel of the earth."
3.25.4	Then he looks at it with the words, "I look at thee with the eye of Suparna Garutmat."
3.25.5	Then he takes it with the thumb and the great name, and having passed it over, he puts it on the tip of the tongue before the teeth, with the words, “I eat with the mouth of Agni.”
3.25.6	Having eaten and sipped water, he swallows it with water, with the words "With the belly of the Brahman, with the Brahman of Brihaspati."
3.25.7-8	Then having sprinkled with water, he touches the vital airs: "Speech was in my mouth, breath in my nose, sight in my eyes, hearing in my ears, strength in my arms, energy in my thighs, all the limbs are faultless, the body is in the body. May there be peace to you. Do not harm me." Or, "The vital airs are in me, the vital airs are in me."
3.25.9	Having taken the portion of Brahman, he places it in the taking of the Prasitra.
3.25.10	Then he asks for the Anvähärya.
3.25.11	He recites this mantra over the Anväharya near the altar:
3.26.1	"Brahman, you are Brahman. Salutations to you, Brahman. Protect me, Brahman. May everything be offered to me that has not been offered."
3.26.2	Then, having taken as much as is required, he puts it in the place for the taking of the Prasitra, saying, "May this be yours. Come to me. May I be the eater of food, the giver of food."
3.26.3	Then, as it is being carried towards the east, he recites, "May the sacrifice ascend heaven, may the sacrifice go to heaven, by that path which is divine, may the sacrifice reach the gods."
3.26.4	When he says, "Brahman, we are about to depart. Having placed the kindling wood, the Agnid may touch the fires one by one." Then the Brahman releases it. "O god Savitar, this is told to you. May it be well-sung and well-offered. Brihaspati is the Brahman. Protect the sacrifice, protect the lord of sacrifice, protect me. Om, to the established."
3.26.5	"May it proceed" at the Pravargya.
3.26.6	He remains here itself till the Homa of the Samitsya-yajus. Having risen from the Samitsya yajus, he approaches the Ahavanīya with the verse, "O Jātavedas, the knower of all, the unerring one, the first, having sat down at the end, may we be united with the united one. Release us from the bondage. Bestow wealth on us, O Jātavedā. Whatever is auspicious..."
3.26.7	He becomes Brahma himself by this very (rite) at the Darsha-Paurnamasa sacrifices, the seasonal sacrifices, the animal sacrifice and the Sautrāmaṇī.
3.27.1	Having placed the oblations, he invites the Hotr.
3.27.2	Having put on the sacrificial thread, having sipped water, he touches his hands, saying, "May I be able to perform the rite for you, O gods, for your power and for your good deeds."
3.27.3	Then with two (verses) he takes Agni in himself, with the words, 'I take Agni first in myself; Agni who is ours'
3.27.4	Then he approaches the two ends of the Veda-wood, saying, "I approach truth, I approach reality, I approach immortality, I approach the beloved body of Prajapati, free from distress. With this fifteen-fold thunderbolt, I advance against the enemy who hates us and whom we hate. Earth, sky, heaven, I stand in Vishnu's place."
3.27.5	Having stepped with the right foot beyond the end of the Veda, he stands.
3.27.6	When he knows that (the Adhvaryu) says, "Recite to Agni being kindled", then he mutters this Hotr-prayer: "Whom do I resort to? Whom do I resort to ? Whatever is your refuge, O Prajapati, that is the metre, I resort to that. Whatever you know, O Vishnu, that I shall do. I shall perform the priestly duties with the sanction of the god Savitr. Obeisance to Agni, the observer. Obeisance to Vayu, the listener. Obeisance to Aditya, the announcer. Today I have uttered the speech agreeable to the gods, agreeable to the human beings, agreeable to the Pitrs, agreeable to the entire world. May there be prosperity, may there be prosperity, and may there be prosperity. May the lord of creatures, Prajapati, be resorted to by me. May there be safety for me. I shall recite the Prajapati-hymn. I resort to speech. Speech will perform the priestly duties. For fame, for splendour, for strength, for prosperity, I resort to you. May the sacrifice and the sacrifice grant great protection."
3.27.7	Here, having recited the Abhihinṅkāra three times, he recites the Rk in the Abhihinṅkārā.
3.27.8	"He recites the first three times, "May your praises come forth to the sky."
3.27.9	Three times the last.
3.27.10	All the half-verses are recited.
3.27.11	Having invoked the deities in the Sāman-verses not yet recited, he sits down on the ground after having made a space for himself, saying, "With the Gayatra metre, with the Trivṛt Stoma, with the Rathantara Sāman, with the Vasat-utterance, with the thunderbolt, I strike down the hateful enemy. The enemy is struck down."
3.27.12	He sits down looking at the Āhavanīya fire, between the two fires, the Prāṇīta and the Prāṇītā.
3.27.13	He looks at it, saying, "No!" or "Yes!"
3.27.14	He is not yet fully grown.
3.27.15	When he knows that Agni is the deity, he recites this: "O god Savitar, they choose you as Agni for the office of Hotri, together with your father Vaishvanara."
3.27.16	Then, having risen, he touches the Adhvaryu on his right shoulder with his right hand, and the Agnidhra on his left shoulder with his left hand.
3.27.17	If he himself were to call out, he should begin with the right side of the fire, saying, "We begin with Agni, the Hotri, the priest, by whom the gods, the Angiras, have gone to the highest heaven."
3.27.18	"The gods among the gods, the first among the second, the second among the third, the third among the eleventh, they all begin together."
3.27.19	Then he recites the name of the Adhvaryu.
3.27.20	Then he turns to the right shoulder, reciting, "The Indra-like covering is turned around."
3.27.21	Approaching the Hotṛ's seat, he murmurs:
3.28.1	"May the six cows protect me from harm - heaven and earth, day and night, water and plants. May they protect me, may they guard me. Obeisance to them."
3.28.2	Then he removes the grass from the seat, either dry or with the tip cut off, towards the south and west, saying, "Parāvasu has been removed."
3.28.3	Then having touched water, spread it out, and sat down, saying, "I am seated in the abode of Arvāvasu," facing south and north.
3.28.4	Then he approaches the Garhapatya, turning to the right, with the verse, "Thou art the creator of the body, do thou protect my body."
3.28.5	Both of them look at the Ahavaniya and say, "O Agni-Vishnu, may I not transgress you. Do you both give up the strength that has been left. Do not burn me. Do you both make the world for me, the maker of the world."
3.28.6	"This is your world." Thus he moves towards the north as if in his mind.
3.28.7	Then he recites three verses: "May the All-gods instruct me, as the Hotṛ is chosen here, sitting down, they should tell me my share, by which path I may bring your oblation.
3.28.8	That is the first speech of today, by which the gods approached the Asuras, the five classes of people who are worthy of sacrifice, may they accept my Hotṛ-ship."
3.28.9	Obeisance to the great ones, obeisance to the young ones, obeisance, to the youthful ones, obeisance. to the old ones. If we are able to worship the gods, do not let us be deprived of the praise of the superior gods.
3.28.10	Then having heated the ladles with the ladle, he offers the oblations to the respective deities.
3.28.11	Then the invocation of the Vasat-calls: "May the Vasat-call not fail me. I invoke you with the great mind, with the life-giving wind. Do not take away my speech. I am carrying the oblation to the gods. Strength, might, strength, might, speech."
3.28.12	If the Vasat-utterances are to be uttered later, then he should recite the Anumantrana-formula only this much: "Ojas, Sah, Ojas, Speech."
3.28.13	Then he anoints the Hotri twice with the two fingers.
3.28.14	What is anointed first, that he puts on the upper lip, saying, "I eat what is offered to you, O lord of speech, for the breath."
3.28.15	I offer thee to the lord of the true and the false, to the lord of strength and drink. He removes the water from the lower lip.
3.28.16	Then having touched water, he makes the person drink water from a vessel with four corners, with his hand not flowing, with all (the fingers).
3.28.17	He calls out the Idā, which is equal to the mouth.
3.29.1	May the Rathantara be invoked with the earth, with Agni, with food, with speech. May the Rathantara, invoked with the earth...
3.29.2	May the Vamadevya be invoked along with the atmosphere, along with the wind, along with the breath, along with the animals. May the Vamadevas invoke me along with the atmosphere...
3.29.3	May the Brihat be invoked along with day, along with the sun, along with the eye. May the Brihats invoke me along with day...
3.29.4	May the world of the standing ones, when invited, stand near me. May the world of those who call out, when invited, call out near me.
3.29.5	May the world of the moving ones, when invited stand near me.
3.29.6	The seven Hotras, when invited, may they invite me.
3.29.7	The cows with the same heads, when invited, come near me.
3.29.8	The cow with the bull has been invoked. May the cow with the bull come to me.
3.29.9	The rain has been invoked. Let the rain come to me. The rain has been invoked,
3.29.10	The food has been invoked. The friend has been invoked.
3.29.11	The cow has been invoked. Homage to the cow.
3.29.12	"Having called out, 'O Hotr, do thou call out', having uttered the Upamsu verse, he calls out loudly the verse recited in the normal manner.
3.29.13	If he is going to consume all (the Soma), having taken them in the hand, he should consume from the goblet.
3.29.14	If he desires to give or to receive, he should eat after cutting off a piece of the cake, saying, "Thou art the seat, thou art the soft, thou art the maker of the soft, thou bestowest on us prosperity, good offspring, and good fortune. I eat thee for the sake of the brilliance of the mouth, for the sake of fragrance, for the sake that it may be pleasant."
3.29.15	Having sipped water and rinsed, he makes the water flow towards the east or the west, silently. This is indeed the utterance for ghee.
3.29.16	Then he also recites this prayer: "May the mind and light enjoy the ghee. May Brihaspati join this interrupted sacrifice. May all the gods be pleased here."
3.29.17	Having offered the Anuyājas, having recited the Śamyuvāka, having made the Barhiṣya Anjali, he pronounces (the following): "O sacrifice, may I be united with you. O Prajapati, whatever is deficient in your sacrifice, whatever is excessive, that belongs to Prajapati."
3.29.18	Then, having placed the Veda on the southern half of the altar, he makes the sacrificer recite.
3.30.1	By that, O god, you became the Veda for the gods. By that, may you bestow the Veda on us. You are the Veda, you are the prosperity, you are the one to be known. May I have offspring, cattle, heaven, the world. You are the deed, you are the compassion, you are the action. May I have meritorious deeds. You are the agreement, you are the agreement-maker, you are the agreeable. May the Veda bestow the horse-sacrificer, the one with ghee, the one with a family, the one with prosperity, the one with thousands. It is said.
3.30.2	Having offered the Patnîsaṃyâgas, and having offered the Homa in the Phalîkaraṇa, he makes the Veda recite the Patnî, saying, "Thou art the Veda; thou art the Veda; I am to be known. Thou art the act; thou art the act; I am to do. Thou art the union; thou art the union; I am to unite. Thou art the butter; thou art the nest; thou art the prosperity of wealth; thou art the thousand; may the Veda give the horse."
3.30.3	Having spread out the Veda in half, he gives it to his wife.
3.30.4	She places them in her inner thighs, and holds them with her right thigh.
3.30.5	Then he goes forward, spreading the other (blades of grass), stretching the thread, following the light of the rays, guarding the path of the luminous one, made by the wise. May you be strong, not weak, for the yoke. Be a Manu, beget the divine race.
3.30.6	Then he places those which are left over on the sacrificial grass, with the formula, "Thou art a bestower, thou art a bestower. Bestow on me offspring and cattle."
3.30.7	Then, having gone out as he has approached, having gone around in front of the Āhavanīya, standing facing north to the right of the Āhavaneya, he attends upon the Āhavanīy a with the verse, "O Jātavedas, the inviter, the unassailable, the first, sitting here, the one who unites, may he unite us with good release. Bestow wealth upon us, O Jātavedā, and whatever is good."
3.30.8	With this Brahman, O Agni, do thou grow. If we have done anything wrong or right, do thou, O Agni, be gracious to us. Do thou unite us with thy good will and with thy strength.
3.30.9	Those hundred of thine, O Varuna, those thousand, the great, the fit for sacrifice, the bonds that are stretched out, may Agni, Indra, Brihaspati, the All-gods, the Maruts, release us from them.
3.30.10	These are the mantras to be recited at the Darsa-Pūrṇamāsa sacrifices, the seasonal sacrifices, the animal sacrifice and the Sautrāmaṇī.
3.31.1	Then the animals are placed.
3.31.2	When he knows that the fire is being churned, he recites these two verses: "If we have transgressed the vows,
3.31.3	The Hotr, knowing the sacrifice, knows that which the mortal men do not know with their minds, that which is to be done. The Agni knows that which is to come. The Hotr, the knower of the sacrifice, knows it. The most sacrificable one sacrifices to the gods in due order.
3.31.4	The Adhvaryu makes the sacrificer recite the formula on the Maitrāvaruṇa staff, "The cows have chosen thee for kingship; the Maruts of heaven invoke thee. Thou art shining in the eastern direction of the firmament of the kingdom, then the fierce one distributes the wealth."
3.31.5	Having taken it first, he gives it to the Maitrāvaruņa, "I am giving thee in accordance with the instruction of Mitra-Varuna, the rulers."
3.31.6	He receives it from the right hand, saying, "I receive thee in the rule of Mitra-Varuna."
3.31.7	Then he smears it upwards, saying, "May I be straight and unbent."
3.31.8	Taking it, he instructs, saying, "The Hotri should invoke Agni with kindling-sticks, well-kindled, well-kindling."
4.1.1	When one is about to perform a sacrifice with animals.
4.1.2	He prepares the Pautrī-cups, the enclosing sticks, Guggula, fragrant incense, a white woolen thread, two horns, two ropes, one double and the other triple, two ladles for pouring the oblations, Viśākhā and Aviśākhā, the heart-stick, enclosing sticks of Karṣmāra wood, the Maitrāvaruṇa staff of Udumbara wood, the length of one's own height, the sacrificial grass and kindling wood, the kindling wood to be placed, the Ficus glomerata branch, the Idasūnas, barley, parched barley from barley-bearing plants, parched barley for the oblation, clarified butter, curd, gold.
4.1.3	Then having offered the oblation of the New-moon sacrifice or having offered it in the asterism, having melted clarified butter over the Garhapatya fire, having taken four spoonfuls in the ladle, having mentally recited the six Hotr verses, he offers on the Ahavaniya fire when the sacrificer has begun, with "Svāhā."
4.1.4	Taking another fourfold portion, he offers the Yūpa-oblation with the verse, "O Vishnu, do thou extend thyself, do thou extend for our prosperity. Drink the ghee, O ghee-born one, do thou go to the lord of sacrifice. Svāhā."
4.1.5	Taking another fourfold portion he then asks for the vessel of ghee with the ladle, the sacrificial grass, gold, and a vessel of water.
4.1.6	They call the carpenter with his axe.
4.1.7	"Come, O sacrificer!" Having gone out by the eastern door, they go to that direction where the sacrificial post is visible, or where he thinks it will be.
4.1.8	He stands by that tree which has grown on the even ground, which is sweet, which has many leaves, many branches, and whose tips are not dry, which is inclined towards the west, and says, "I have come to thee, not to others. I have not come to others. I know thee as lower than the higher, higher than the lower. I enjoy thee, the Vaisnava, for the sake of divine worship."
4.1.9	Then he anoints it with ghee, saying, "May the god Savitr anoint thee with honey."
4.1.10	He lays down the grass with its tip pointing upwards, saying, "O plant, protect him."
4.1.11	He strikes it with a wooden mallet, saying, "Do not injure him, O wooden mallet."
4.1.12	The first chip that falls down he puts in a known place.
4.1.13	He cuts it without breaking it, without touching the stars.
4.1.14	He recites the formula to one going east or north: "May you not be scratched by the sky, may you not be hurt by the atmosphere, may you be united with the earth."
4.1.15	Then, having placed gold in the un-cut (part) and having spread it around, he offers with the formula: "O tree, grow with a hundred shoots, svāhā."
4.1.16-19	"We have grown with a thousand branches." He touches himself. "He spreads the branches one by one, saying, 'This is the one whom this Svadhita (ritual) has led to great good fortune.' "He should give him a staff of five cubits." This is the minimum for Brahmins.
4.1.20	He places it in the cup, which is the supreme embrace, and which is of the size of a span, at the time of the cup, saying, "The uninterrupted wealth of the good hero."
4.1.21	He cuts off four fingers from the top.
4.1.22	Having made it square or octagonal, he pours it or causes it to be poured.
4.1.23	It is poured and stands.
4.1.24	He makes the molten metal of the cutting tools.
4.1.25	Now on the previous day, the altar for the animal sacrifice is measured out for him.
4.1.26	It is ten-footed in length, twelve-footed in width, and eight-footed in front.
4.1.27	Having spread it, he carries the Stambayajus.
4.2.1	This is well known as the Purodashika.
4.2.2	Three times with the Yajus, silently the fourth.
4.2.3	First he takes up the enclosing sticks.
4.2.4	He recites the formula while taking them up.
4.2.5	He throws them down.
4.2.6	The Agnidhra takes them up three times.
4.2.7	When the Agnidhra takes up three times, then he asks for the wooden sword, water-pot, sacrificial grass and the wooden chips.
4.2.8	Taking these, he goes saying, "Come, O sacrificer!"
4.2.9	Having drawn the line towards the north of the altar, either in two or three steps, he measures the Cātvāla with the wooden sword and the Samīya twig.
4.2.10	"He draws the line towards the east with the wooden sword, between the two eastern pots, with the formula, "Thou art the one who gives wealth to me."
4.2.11	"He draws another line towards the south with the wooden sword between the two southern pots, with the verse, "Thou art bitter to me."
4.2.12	"He draws (the line) from the southern corner towards the northern corner with the formula, "May it protect me from distress."
4.2.13	He draws (the lines) from the northern corner towards the eastern corner with the formula "May it protect from affliction."
4.2.14	Having placed the sacrificial grass in the Catvāla, he strikes with the wooden sword with the formula, "Agni is the wood, the sky is the name, Agni is Angiras, who art in this earth."
4.2.15	He takes it with the name of the life-force.
4.2.16	Having taken it, he places it on the northern altar, saying, "With your unassailable name that is fit for sacrifice, I place you."
4.2.17	He strikes the second time, saying, "Agni, the sky, the name Angiras, you who are on the second earth."
4.2.18	He takes it with the named of the life-breath.
4.2.19	Having taken it, he puts it on the northern altar, saying, "With that name of yours which is not violated, which is fit for sacrifice, I have placed you."
4.2.20	He strikes the third time, saying, "Agni, the sky, the name of Agni, the Angiras, who art in the third part of the earth."
4.2.21	He takes it, saying, "I take it with life, with the name."
4.2.22	Having taken it to the northern altar, he places it with the formula, "Whatever thy name is, not to be violated, fit for sacrifice, by that I place thee."
4.2.23	Silently he takes the fourth one along with the sacrificial grass. Then the Adhvaryu, with the wooden sword, takes up the soil from the Catvāla.
4.2.24	Then he says to the Agnidhra, "O Agnidhra, take it thrice from here."
4.2.25	Then the Agnidhra takes it thrice.
4.2.26	The Agnidhra takes it three times, then the Adhvaryu pours the clay from the northern end of the altar, saying, "Thou art a lioness, thou art a she-buffalo."
4.2.27	"Thou spreadest, spread widely. May thy lord of sacrifice spread widely."
4.2.28	He strikes it with the wooden sword, saying, "Be firm."
4.2.29	Then he sprinkles it with water,
4.2.30	"Purify for the gods!" "Purify for gods!" He scatters sand.
4.2.31	Having made it the size of a span and square, he measures it with a twig.
4.2.32	Having levelled the northern navel,
4.2.33	Then, having covered it, he takes up the shovel, saying, "For the god Savitar's impulse, with the arms of the Ashvins, with the hands of Pusan, I take up."
4.2.34	Taking it, he recites: "You are the ladle, you are the woman."
4.2.35	With that (water) he draws a line around the sacrificial post-pit, so that half of it is within the altar and half outside. "The Rakshas are drawn around, the evil spirits are drawn around. 'I cut off the neck of the Rakshas, he who hates us and whom we hate, I cut off his neck.'
4.2.36	Then he says to the Agnidhra, "O Agnidhra, come, dig out this pit for the sacrificial post, four inches deep, and dig it out so that it is even with the top of the post."
4.2.37	He digs it out or causes it to be dug out.
4.2.38	As long as the Adhvaryu is engaged here, the Pratiprasthātṛ puts in the kindling wood to be carried forward.
4.2.39	They prepare the Upopyamani-waters from the Catvala-waters.
4.2.40	The Adhvaryu takes up the Prokṣaṇi-waters with the sound of the self and Indra.
4.2.41	He gives the Parikarmin the five-fold quantity of clarified butter.
4.2.42	The materials are kept ready for Brahma.
4.2.43	Then he gives the order, "O Agni, being led forward, do thou proclaim; O Agnid, do thou follow with the single-spoon."
4.2.44	They undertake when it is uttered thrice.
4.2.45	They go under the control of the Hotṛ.
4.2.46	They proceed towards the north of the altar.
4.2.47	They carry this Agni.
4.2.48	Then the Adhvaryu sprinkles the northern altar with sprinkling water accompanied by the sound of Indra.
4.3.1	"He sprinkles in front with the formula, "May Indraghosha protect thee in front with the Vasus."
4.3.2	"May the wind, with the Fathers, protect thee from the south." From the south.
4.3.3	"May Prachetas, with the Rudras, protect thee from behind." From behind.
4.3.4	"May Visvakarman, with the Adityas, protect thee from north." From the north.
4.3.5	And what remains of the sprinkling water, he carries to the north of the southern altar.
4.3.6	Whatever is cruel there, he appeases with that. Thus it is a Brāhmaṇa.
4.3.7	Then, having concealed her with gold, he sprinkles her with the five-fold ladle, saying:
4.3.8	"You are a lioness, conquering enemies, svāhā," on the right shoulder.
4.3.9	"You are the lioness, the bestower of good offspring, svāhā" on the left hip.
4.3.10	"Thou art the abode of wealth and prosperity, O lioness! Svāhā!" on the right hip.
4.3.11	"Thou art the abode (of the sun), O lioness! Svaha!" on the left shoulder.
4.3.12	"O lioness, bring the gods to the sacrificer who worships! Svāhā!” in the middle.
4.3.13	Then he takes up the ladle, saying, "For the beings!"
4.3.14	Then he places the enclosing sticks of Pāṭhīna wood.
4.3.15	You are the world-protector. Hold the earth. (Thus) the middle one.
4.3.16	You are the firm-seated. Hold the atmosphere. (Thus) to the right.
4.3.17	You are not to be shaken. Hold the heaven. (Thus) on the left.
4.3.18	Then he scatters the remaining materials: Guggula, fragrant incense, a white woolen cover, ashes of fire, and the excreta of fire.
4.3.19	Then he sprinkles them with the Saṃsrava (oblation).
4.3.20	Then, having turned around by the right, he places the kindling woods, saying, "May the sacrifice be established in the good counsel, in the good service. May the good services approach you. May the Vasus enter you in many ways. Making a long life for the sacrificer, then with immortality, the singer."
4.3.21	Then having made him a sacrifice of the Visrs, he offers him with the oblations of the sacrifice.
4.3.22	May Agni, knowing, lead the sacrifice. May the destroyer of sacrifices not know him. May the gods announce him. May the sacrifice go forth to the lord of sacrifice. Svāhā.
4.3.23	May Vayu, the knower, lead the sacrifice. May he not be known by the destroyer of sacrifices. Let him be told to the gods. Let the sacrifice go forth to the lord of sacrifice. Svāhā.
4.3.24	May Surya, the knower lead the sacrifice. Let him not be known by him who destroys sacrifices. Let him tell it to the gods. May the sacrifice go forth for the lord of sacrifice.
4.3.25	May the sacrifice lead the sacrifice, knowing it. May the destroyer of sacrifice not know it. Let the gods proclaim the sacrifice. Let the sacrifice go to the lord of sacrifice. Svāhā.
4.3.26	Then the sacrificer himself offers these oblations: "Agni, the nourisher, the lord of food, may he give me food. Svāhā. Vāyu, the giver of life, the lord of life, may he give life to me. Svāhā." "Āditya, the giver of abundance, the lord of many animals, may he give many animals to me. Svāhākṛti."
4.3.27	Having taken up the northern enclosing stick with the formula, "Thou art Agni," having gone around, having placed the transverse piece of wood, he gives out the call, "Do thou place the Prokṣaṇī water; do thou place the sacrificial grass and the sacrificial post; do thou cleanse the spoon, the wooden sword, and the ladles; do thou silently take up the Pṛṣadājya; do thou bind the wife; do thou bring clarified butter and curds."
4.3.28	Having taken up the Prokṣaṇī water, having cleansed the wooden sword, having placed the sacrificial grass and the sacrificial grass-holder, having turned around towards the right, having hastened towards the west, he cleanses the spoon, the wooden sword and the ladles silently, taking up the clarified butter for the Pṛṣadājya offering.
4.3.29	Having sprinkled the wife with ghee and curds, having purified the ghee and the sprinkling water, having taken the well-known portions of ghee, he spreads it in the vessel for the first portion of ghee, saying, "You are the milk of the earth."
4.3.30	The second one, saying, "The body of all the gods."
4.3.31	Having covered the two sacrificial grass-blades, he brings the curds, saying, "May I prosper today the cup of the tawny ones. Thou art the cup of the tawny ones."
4.3.32	Having taken out the two sacrificial grass blades, he then pours over them, saying, "Thou art the heart of Visnu."
4.3.33	The second one, saying, "Visnu has followed thee with one wish."
4.4.1	Then he rises with the sprinkling water and sprinkles the fire-wood,
4.4.2	He sprinkles the altar and the sacrificial grass.
4.4.3	Having sprinkled the sacrificial grass near the altar, he takes up the Prastara grass and places it in front.
4.4.4	Having spread the sacrificial grass in five layers, taking the Prastara in his hand, he approaches the east and places the enclosing sticks made of Khadira wood.
4.4.5	He places the two upright kindling woods.
4.4.6	He places them in a slanting position with the support.
4.4.7	Having held the Prastara of the Vidhṛtis.
4.4.8	The Juhu on the Prastara.
4.4.9	The Barhis is superior.
4.4.10	Having touched them with the formula, "They have sat down," having turned around to the right, having hastened towards the west, he asks for the Prokṣaṇī water mixed with barley, the Barhis, the ladle, the vessel of clarified butter with a spoon, the Svaru, the staff of Maitrāvaruṇa, the piece of wood of the sacrificial post, gold, and the water-pot.
4.4.11	Having placed this (wood) near the sacrificial post, he cleanses it with the formula, "Whatever the carpenter has cut off from the top of thee, may the waters of the trough cleanse that, O tree, and make them pure."
4.4.12	This sacrificial post is cleansed, brought down, and placed in front of the trough.
4.4.13	Standing to the north of the Ahavaniya fire, he sprinkles the oblation facing towards the west, saying, "For earth thee, for atmosphere thee, for heaven thee."
4.4.14	He pours water into the pit, saying, "May the world be purified, the abode of the Fathers."
4.4.15	He scatters barley, saying, "Thou art barley. May our enemies be barleyed, may our adversaries be barleyed."
4.4.16-18	Having placed the Barhi grass across the hands, he spreads it with the formula, "Thou art the seat of the Pitrs." Having placed the gold within it, he offers it with the formula "Svāhā to the Pitrs." Having placed the piece of wood of the sacrificial post, he says, "Thou art Svāvaśa, the leader of the Pitrs, the tree-god will stand upon thee. Thou art its protector."
4.4.19	Then he takes the ladle with clarified butter, the spoon, the Maitrāvaruṇa staff, and the water vessel.
4.4.20	Taking these, he goes forth, saying, "O sacrificer, come!"
4.4.21	The sacrificer follows him, the wife behind him. Having gone around in front of the sacrificial post, they stand facing south, the Adhvaryu in front, the sacrificer behind him, and the wife behind him.
4.4.22	Then, having taken up the cup, he anoints the top of the sacrificial post, saying, "May Savitr, the god, anoint thee with honey," both inside and outside.
4.4.23	Having anointed the cup, he releases it, saying, "From the well-sprouting plants."
4.4.24	Then, pouring clarified butter over the Agniṣṭha ladle, he says, "Recite the Anuvāka for the sacrificial post being anointed."
4.4.25	He anoints the inside, he anoints the sacrificer with inside (heat).
4.4.26	He does not anoint the outside.
4.4.27	The wife anoints the outside.
4.4.28	He touches all around, he places heat in him without leaving anything out. So says the Brahmaṇa.
4.4.29	"He says, 'O Hotr, recite for the one who is being raised up.'
4.4.30	He raises it up, saying, "Thou art raised up to heaven, thou fillest the atmosphere, thou spreadest over the earth."
4.4.31	Then he fashions it with two Vedic verses addressed to Vishnu, saying, "Behold the forms of Vishnu, his works."
4.4.32	When he places the Agniṣṭhāna brick on the Āhavaniya fire, he looks at the Dhruva cup. Then he recites the verse, "The sages always see the supreme abode of Vishnu, as if the eye is stretched out in the sky."
4.4.33	Then he encloses it with dung, reciting, "I enclose thee for the sake of Brahman, for the sake of the Kshatra, for the sake progeny, for the sake prosperity."
4.4.34	With the staff of Mitra-Varuna he presses it down, reciting, "Press down Brahman, press down Kshatra, press down progeny, press down prosperity."
4.4.35	Having placed the pot of water in a place that is neither too low nor too high, and having brought it near,
4.4.36	Then, having thrice divided the three-fold girdle, he puts it on the navel, saying, "Do thou recite the Anuvākya while the girdle is being put on."
4.4.37	He puts it on thrice, turning to the right, saying, "Thou art the girdle; may the divine classes put thee on; may the human classes put on this prosperity of wealth for the sacrificer."
4.4.38	He puts the girdle on at the end.
4.4.39	He puts it in the middle.
4.4.40	The Agniṣṭha is the smallest, the Uttaravedi the largest, and the Madhyama the middle one.
4.4.41	Then he places the Svara in the middle line of the Uttaravedi, saying, "I place thee in the protection of the atmosphere."
4.4.42	He releases the stake with the Svāhā-utterance.
4.5.1	Then he puts the animal, which has been sprinkled, between the sacrificial ground and the heap of grass, and places it in front of the stake, facing east.
4.5.2	Having taken up the two sacrificial grass-blades with the formula, "To thee, O Agni, I offer," he offers them with the formula, "Upasya, upasya, up to the gods, the divine hosts, the bright, the wise, O Brihaspati, do thou hold the treasures. May thy offerings be gratified. O Tvashtri, O god, may thy gifts be agreeable. May the auspicious ones rejoice. Ye are born of Prajapati. This animal is thine. Today I offer thee agreeable to Indra and Agni."
4.5.3	Whatever deity it is to be.
4.5.4	Having placed the two sacrificial grass-blades in a known place, he places the wooden sword, saying, "Thou art the womb of Agni."
4.5.5	"The two testicles are in front, the two testicles are firm."
4.5.6	Then he takes up the ladle, saying, "O Urvaśi, thou art the life, Purūravas."
4.5.7	Then he anoints the two testicles in the ladle of clarified butter, saying, "Anoint with clarified butter, and place the testicles."
4.5.8	Then he recites the Prajātī verses: "May the Gāyatrī metre be born after me, may the Tristubh metre be born after, may the Jagatī metre be born after."
4.5.9	Then he says, "Recite to Agni being churned."
4.5.10	One who is born says, "Recites to one who is born."
4.5.11	One who strikes says, "Reciting to one who is being struck."
4.5.12	"May the two of you strike for us."
4.5.13	Having struck, he offers with the formula, "Agni moves in Agni, having entered."
4.5.14	Then he takes up the rope with the formula, "I take you in the impulse of the divine Savitr, with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of Pusan."
4.5.15	With that (verse) he binds the animal, with its head towards the south, at a distance of half a head. "He says, "With the noose of the divine oblation I bind thee, the truth."
4.5.16	He joins the ends of the two-fold and three-fold (noose) with the verse, "The human beings are impetuous."
4.5.17	He fastens it.
4.5.18	Then he sprinkles it with water with the verse, "I sprinkle thee with water, with plants, for Indra and Agni, for what is agreeable.
4.5.19	Whatever deity it is for.
4.5.20	He offers water with the verse, "Thou art the water-sprinkler."
4.5.21	"The gods have given thee the oblation; may the divine waters delight in it." Having sprinkled from above, he sprinkles from below.
4.5.22	He makes it pure on all sides. So says the Brahmana.
4.5.23	Having taken up the Prokṣaṇī vessel,
4.6.1	Then, taking the kindling-wood from the fire, he says, "Do you recite the Anuvākya for Agni being kindled."
4.6.2	He places the kindling- wood.
4.6.3	He arranges the kindling-woods.
4.6.4	He sprinkles with the Veda.
4.6.5	He offers the libation with the spoon when the Sāmidhenī verses are recited.
4.6.6	When the spoons are sprinkled, the northern one is sprinkled.
4.6.7	Then, without touching, he steps forward with the ladle towards the north and anoints the animal with the ladle.
4.6.8	"He says, "May your breath go with the wind." on the forehead.
4.6.9	" "May your limbs go with the sacrificial rites." on the neck.
4.6.10	" " "May the lord of sacrifice go with the blessings." on the right hip.
4.6.11	Then, having placed the ladles in their respective places, he chooses the Pravaran.
4.6.12	He chooses the well-known Hotr.
4.6.13	Then he announces: "Let the Hotr announce! May the Hotr announce!" The Hotr announces: "May the Mitra-Varuna, the rulers, rule!" The human one (i.e., the Hotr) announces: "This is the name of the Maitra-Varuna."
4.6.14	Then he announces:
4.6.15	If he does not call out here, let him call out. The Agni is the leader of the divine clans, this sacrificer is the leader of human clans. They have a common Gārhapatya, shining brightly. There are a hundred winters, two summers. They are united, not united, their bodies.
4.6.16	The Hotṛ sits down.
4.6.17	He desires the birth.
4.6.18	Having taken up the oblations in the two ladles, having gone around along the front of the Āhavaniya, having caused to announce, he says, "Do thou invoke the kindling woods."
4.6.19	At the Vasat-utterance he offers, saying, "Do thou invite, do thou invite."
4.6.20	At the fourth and eighth (offerings) he makes the offerings simultaneously; at the eighth he makes all offerings simultaneously.
4.6.21	Having poured down the remnants into the oblations which have been sanctified by the Svastika-utterance, he pours down the remnants.
4.6.22	Having offered ten Prayāja-offerings, having gone around towards the north, he asks for the Svara and the Sasa.
4.6.23	Having anointed the two ladles, he anoints the animal with them, saying, "Anoint the animal with ghee."
4.6.24	He gives the ladle.
4.6.25	He covers the sound.
4.6.26	Then having placed the ladles in their respective places, he says, "Recite the Anuvakya for the Agni being carried around."
4.6.27	Then the Agnidhra, taking a torch from the Ahavaniya, goes around three times to the right, between the Cātvāla and the Utkara, to the north of the Shamitra place, in front of the animal, behind the ladle. Thus he goes around three times.
4.6.28	Then he offers the Apāyas (oblations) in succession. The recipients know (the oblations) and receive them. Those whose lord is Pasupati, the lord of animals, who are bound when the animal is bound, who are wild animals of various forms, being released, are the seed of the universe.
4.6.29	Having placed the torch in the Agni-dhrā (fire-bearer), he returns three times in the same way.
4.6.30	Then they proceed with the first Uddhṛti.
4.6.31	The animal is offered to the Anvākāra.
4.6.32	The Adhvaryu offers the animal with the Vapa and the Shrāmaṇī.
4.6.33	The Vapa and the Sramani are offered by the sacrificer.
4.6.34	Having called out, he instructs (the Hotṛ) to recite (the Mantra) saying, "O Hotṛ, do offer the oblations to the gods."
4.6.35	Then when the animal is being led towards the north between the Catvāla and the mound, he recites the formula, "The animal of the sacrificer has a different breath. It enters the lord of sacrifice through the Revatī verses."
4.6.36	When the Agnidhra puts down the torch there, he places the sacrificial grass near the animal being killed, either in front or to the north, saying, "Protect me from the contact with the earth."
4.6.37	Then they kill the animal with its head towards the west and its feet towards the east, saying, "Thou art the one who is not born, thou art the one who makes known." Having said this, they return by the same route and sit down at the place of the clarified butter. "May all the forms of creatures delight in this sacrifice, the knowers of all, the Ghrtachi (goddesses), approaching Agni, the family-lord, may they protect us with milk and ghee."
4.6.38	The Sāmhitā text is said to be the one that is sanctioned.
4.6.39	The animal is said to be offering a sanctioned oblation when it says, "I have done the oblation."
4.6.40	Then the Sāmitāras come near, saying, "We have come."
4.6.41	Releasing the animal from the noose, he recites, "Aditi has released the noose from this one."
4.6.42	He directs the two Avasathya priests to ward off the southern direction, saying, "I am directing the one who is hostile towards us to the lower direction."
4.6.43	Then the Pratiprasthātṛ priest leads the wife to the water pot and raises it.
4.6.44	Then he makes her gaze at the sun, saying, "Salutations to the sun."
4.6.45	Then, having gone out between the Catvāla and the mound, he makes her go towards the east. He makes her recite the verse, "Go straight on, following the stream of ghee, along with offspring, along with prosperity."
4.6.46	The Adhvaryu recites over the water that has come (to the sacrificial place) the verse, "The divine waters are pure and youthful; you are pure. You have brought the gods. We have been purified. May we be your protectors."
4.6.47	He successively nourishes the vital breaths of the animal.
4.6.48	"May your speech be nourished." He says this for speech.
4.6.49	"May the breath be nourished." He nourishes the breath.
4.6.50	May your eyes be nourished. Thus, the eyes.
4.6.51	May your ears be nourished. Thus the ears.
4.6.52	He again touches them: "Whatever heat has gone to your breath, whatever to your eyes, whatever to your ears, whatever is cruel of yours, whatever is settled, may that be nourished, may that be purified by this."
4.6.53	May your navel be nourished. Thus your navel.
4.6.54	The anus is the source of nourishment. May the anus be nourished.
4.6.55	Having grasped the foot, he washes it, saying, "May the conduct be pure. May there be peace from the waters, peace from the plants, peace from the earth."
4.6.56	"May there be peace from day and night," he says, placing the remaining part to the right side, not touching the back.
4.6.57	They lead the wife.
4.6.58	They cover the animal with its belly up.
4.6.59	He places the sacrificial grass on the right side, with its tips pointing towards the east, saying, "O plant, protect him."
4.6.60	He places the wooden sword horizontally, saying, "May the wooden sword not injure him."
4.6.61	He cuts the sacrificial grass.
4.6.62	He makes the skin (of the animal) firm.
4.6.63	Then it becomes attached to that very sacrificial grass.
4.6.64	Having smeared both sides with red (powder), he turns away this direction, saying, "This is the share of the Rakshas. I lead this lowest darkness to the Rakshas who hates us and whom we hate. I lead this to the lowest darkness."
4.6.65	Then having touched water, he takes out the Vapa, saying, "You are the shade of the Varis."
4.6.66	With that (spoon) he pours down the Vapa-sravanī, saying, "Thou pourest down the sky and earth with ghee."
4.6.67	He places it below the two Avisa-srotamsi, saying, "The unbroken wealth, the good heroes."
4.6.68	Then, having turned it round to the right, he sprinkles it with water and bakes it on the embers.
4.6.69	Then they proceed with the torches in front.
4.7.1	The Adhvaryu follows with the omentum.
4.7.2	Here the sacrificer again takes up the omentum-holding spoon.
4.7.3	(He says) "Having come, do thou follow the sky."
4.7.4	Having come, he places the tip of the sacrificial grass on the embers near the Ahavaniya fire, while the omentum is being heated, saying, "O Vayu, do thou blow the omentum."
4.7.5	Then, having taken it between the sacrificial post and the Āhavanīya fire, the Pratiprasthātṛ cooks it facing south, looking towards the north.
4.7.6	Then he offers it with a spoonful of clarified butter, saying, "You have been appointed as the carrier of oblations."
4.7.7	Then he says, "Recite the Stoka mantras."
4.7.8	When the stokiyas have been removed, having taken up the ladle and the spoon from the cooked Vapa, having gone around and having caused to announce, he says (to the Hotṛ), "Do thou recite (the Mantra) with Svāhā-utterance for the offerings."
4.7.9	He offers at the Vasat-utterance.
4.7.10	Then having gone around along the north, having poured clarified butter over the Prasṛd-clarified butter, he pours clarified butter over the Vapa.
4.7.11	Then having spread (the oblations) and having sprinkled the Vapa with the spoon twice, he says (to the Hotṛ), "Do you recite (the Mantra) in accordance with the offering of the fat of the goat to Indra-Agni."
4.7.12	He sprinkles twice.
4.7.13	Having gone beyond (the Hotṛ), having called (the Hotr), he says (to him), "Do you send forth the fat of the Vapa of the goat to Indrāgni."
4.7.14	Then he offers the oblation of the ladle in the form of Svāhā in front, saying, "Svāhā to the gods."
4.7.15	At the Vaṣaṭ-call, he offers the oblations, saying, "Jātavedas, go to the gods with the oblation. You became the first Hotṛ. With ghee, you nourish the bodies. Svāhā. May the gods eat the oblation offered with Svāhā."
4.7.16	Then he offers the oblation of the ladle-form upwards with the formula, "To the gods svāhā."
4.7.17	Here he offers the Vapa-srāmaṇī with the formula, “To the eastern Viśākhā, to the western Aviśākhā svāhā, to the upward sky, to the Maruts going."
4.7.18	Then he offers it with the Saṃsrava.
4.7.19	Then having gone beyond to the north, having placed the two ladles in their places, and having come up, they sprinkle themselves in the Catvāla.
4.7.20	They call the wife, they call the Hotar, they call the Brahman, they call the Pratiprasthâtar, they call the Prashâstar, they call the Agnidh, they call the Adhvaryu, they call the Udgâtar, they say, "Come, O sacrificer!" "Carry away this water, the sin and the impurity, whatever sin and impurity I have committed, whatever wrong I have done, whatever I have done in anger, whatever I have said in anger, whatever wrong I did in ignorance, whatever wrong I knowingly did, whatever wrong I am doing, whatever wrong I shall do, whatever wrong I do now, whatever wrong I may do, whatever wrong is being done, whatever wrong is to be done, whatever wrong I will do, whatever wrong has been done, whatever wrong will be done, whatever sin I have committed, whether by day or by night, whatever sin I may commit, whether by day, or by night, may I be free from all that. May I be free from the curse, from Varuna, from Yama's noose, from all the sin of the gods, and also from the sin of men."
4.7.21	Then he strikes with the joined palms, saying, "May the friendly waters and plants be."
4.7.22	He turns towards the direction in which his enemy is, saying, "Let there be unfriendly waters and plants to him."
4.7.23	Then having touched the water, they sit down in their respective places.
4.8.1	Then he says (to the Agnidh) "Do thou offer the Pasupurodāsa; do thou, O Pratiprasthātṛ, prepare the animal."
4.8.2	The Agnidh offers the Indra-Agni oblation on eleven potsherds.
4.8.3	Then the Pratiprasthātṛ divides the animal. "He says, "The heart, the tongue, the breast, these he should make into one. The fat, the marrow, these he should join together. The left arm, the right arm, these he should unite. He should separate the two sides. He should make the right hip, the right thigh, the left hip, the anus, these he should form into three parts. He should separate (the parts) called the tail and the buttocks. He should make it very long. He should throw the animal three times. He should make three times the heart of the animal that has been thrown, the best."
4.8.4	When the animal has been roasted, he asks for the Pasupurodāsa.
4.8.5	Having spread and sprinkled it, he takes it to the inner altar.
4.8.6	While the Juhu and Upamushas are being spread, he says, "Recite the Anuvāka for the Indra-Agni Purorasa being cut."
4.8.7	Having cut from the front half, he cuts from the rear half.
4.8.8	He sprinkles.
4.8.9	He anoints.
4.8.10	Then at the Upāṃśu-offering, he offers once from the right half of the cake.
4.8.11	He pours clarified butter over it twice.
4.8.12	He does not besprinkle it.
4.8.13	Having gone beyond, he makes the call and says, "Do thou offer the cake to Indra-Agni."
4.8.14	He makes the offering at the Vasat-utterance.
4.8.15	Then at the Samāvapaṇa-offering, he says, "Do you recite the yajus to Agni."
4.8.16	Having made the call, he says, “Do thou offer to Agni.”
4.8.17	Having recited the Vasat call, having skipped the first half of the eastern half, he offers the eastern oblations.
4.8.18	Then having stepped towards the north, having placed the ladles in their places, having taken up the portion for eating, he pours clarified butter on it.
4.8.19	When the Ida has been invoked, the Agnidhra puts in six spoonfuls.
4.8.20	They eat.
4.8.21	They cleanse themselves.
4.8.22	Then he says (to the Agnidhra), "O Agnidhra, place the northern end of the sacrificial grass; O Pratiprasthātṛ, exchange the animal with the one belonging to the sacrificer."
4.8.23	Then this Agnidhra places the Idasūna on the branch of the fig tree.
4.8.24	It becomes the northern end of sacrificial grass.
4.8.25	Then the Pratiprasthātṛ, having cut off the Pṛṣadājya, and having brought it to the Juhu, and having gone out towards the north between the Cātvāla and the Utkara, asks (the Adhvaryu), "Are the oblations cooked, O Śamita?"
4.8.26	The Śamita stands holding the heart-spike towards the north.
4.8.27	He replies, "They are cooked."
4.8.28	He asks him the same way a second time, having gone out.
4.8.29	The other replies the same way.
4.8.30	Having thus gone out for the third time, he asks him.
4.8.31	The other one replies in the same way. Having taken the heart of the enemy, he burns it with the heart and gives it to the enemy. Having sprinkled the heart with clarified butter, he offers it with the formula, "May your mind be united with my mind, may your breath be united with my breath. The offering is agreeable to the gods, with ghee, svāhā."
4.8.32	Having made the Viyu offering, having said, "Take it away," having returned by the same route, he spreads four (blades of) grass on the Juhu and Upasthala, on the Idadhana and on the Vasahomya which he is going to take.
4.8.33	They bring that animal between the Cātvāla and the Utkara, between the sacrificial post and the Havirni, and having brought it near, they place it to the south of the five Hotr-priests.
4.8.34	By this very (rite) they bring the Yūpa.
4.8.35	By this very (rite), the Iḍasūna.
4.8.36	Then, having placed the heart on a fig-tree branch, and having offered it in front of it with the Svadhā-formula, he says:
4.9.1	"Recite after the oblation of Manotā is being offered."
4.9.2	He offers twice in front of the heart.
4.9.3	Then of the tongue, then of the chest, then of the lower part, then of the two cheeks, then of the left thigh, then of the right side, then of the (left) hip, then of the upper part of the right hip.
4.9.4	Having divided the anus into three parts, he places the smallest part in the Sviṣṭakṛt, the largest in the Upayas, and having divided the middle into two parts, he places it in the Juhu.
4.9.5	Then having prepared the broth of the flesh of a jackal, he pours it over the ladle.
4.9.6	He pours it over the heated (ladle).
4.9.7	He pours clarified butter over it.
4.9.8	Then in the Upabhrt for Sviṣṭakṛt, he cuts off a portion of each of the three parts of all (the oblations).
4.9.9	Having cut off the flesh of the right thigh, he puts it down. Having cut off the fat of the left buttock, he puts it in the same way. Having put down the fat of the anus, he pours the broth over it and pours the broth over the Upasrita.
4.9.10	He pours the broth over.
4.9.11	He pours twice.
4.9.12	Then having placed the heart, tongue, breast, fat, and the tail in a vessel, he pours hot (clarified butter) over it.
4.9.13	He pours clarified butter over it.
4.9.14	Then he takes up the Vasahom in a pot or a goblet.
4.9.15	He pours hot (clarifed butter) over it
4.9.16	He pours clarified butte over it.
4.9.17	Then he touches the animal's limbs with the Avadana formulas: "Indra, the vital breath, is deposited in each limb. Indra, the out-breath, is spread out in each limb. O divine Tvashtar, may your abundance come forth in many forms. May you be endowed with good fortune, going to the gods. May your friends follow you. May your mother and father rejoice."
4.9.18	Then he offers the Vasahomas with the right side, from the pot. "May prosperity be his. May Agni prosper thee. The waters have united thee. For the running of Vayu thee. For the speed of Pusan thee. For the growth of the waters and plants thee."
4.9.19	They take the hind-quarters of the animal which has been rubbed.
4.9.20	They take the animal around.
4.9.21	Then, taking up the Juhu and Upamant, he says, "Do you recite the yajus for the offering of the goat to Indra-Agni."
4.9.22	Having stepped across, he announces, "The offering of the goat for Indra-Agni is being sent forth. Do you send it."
4.9.23	The Pratiprasthātṛ stands to the north, holding the Vasahomas.
4.9.24	He offers the Vasahomas for the half-verses and the Yajyas with ghee, saying, "O you who drink ghee, drink the fat; O you who drink fat, drink the fat. This is the oblation of the atmosphere. Svāhā to you, Svāhā to the atmosphere."
4.9.25	At the Vasat-utterance, he offers the oblation.
4.9.26	The Pratiprasthātṛ offers the Homa of this (Agni) in the manner of the Vasat-homa, offering to the directions, the sub-directions, the intermediate directions, the upper directions, the quarters, the quarters, and the quarters. "Oṃ, salutations to the directions, Oṃ svāhā."
4.9.27	Then, having circumambulated clockwise, striking with the spoon from the clarified butter, he says, "Recite for Vanaspati."
4.9.28	Having announced, he says, "Send forth for Vanaspati."
4.9.29	Having recited the Vasat call, he offers the preceding oblations, leaving aside the latter half of the eastern half.
4.9.30	Then, while pouring down (the oblations), he says, "Do you recite the yajus to Agni Sviṣṭakṛt."
4.9.31	Having caused to announce, he says, "To Agni Sviṣțakṛt, do you send forth."
4.9.32	Having recited the Vasat-call, he offers the oblations, leaving out the latter half of eastern half.
4.9.33	Then, having stepped across towards the north, having placed the ladles in their places, the Hotr takes up the Idā for the Medas.
4.9.34	When the Idā has been invoked, the Agnīdhra places the six-cornered and half-cornered (bricks) and then the half-cornered and fatty (bricks).
4.9.35	They eat.
4.9.36	They cleanse themselves.
4.9.37	Then he says, "Take the breast for the Brahman."
4.9.38	Then the Brahman accepts it.
4.10.1	"We, O Soma, having your mind in our bodies, may we be endowed with offspring."
4.10.2	Then he gives the instructions: "Agni, bring the sacrificial wood-charcoals. O Upasthātṛ, sit down. O Brahman, we are about to depart. Having placed the kindling wood, O Agni, touch the fires each time."
4.10.3	They bring these embers from the Sāman-cup.
4.10.4	He places them in front of the Hotr.
4.10.5	The Upayasṭr approaches and offers with the third part of the anus.
4.10.6	Then the Adhvaryu, having cut off the clarified butter, having brought it to the Juhu, having approached, having called out, says, "Do thou announce to the gods."
4.10.7	At the Vasat-utterance he offers, saying, "Do thou send, do thou send."
4.10.8	In the same way, he offers with the formula, "Do thou go to the cutting of the anus, to the ocean, svāhā." With these eleven formulas.
4.10.9	He strikes all at the end with the formula, “Do thou go to Agni Vaisvānara, svāhā.”
4.10.10	Then he smears his hands on the sacrificial grass with the formula, "Do thou be pleased with me, O mind, from the waters and plants.
4.10.11	Then he looks at its smoke, saying, "I seek your body, skin, son and grandson."
4.10.12	Having offered eleven Anuyājas, having stepped forward towards the north, having placed the Svāru in the Juhu, standing towards the east, he offers, saying, "May your smoke go to heaven, your flame to the atmosphere, and may you fill the earth with ashes. Svāhā!"
4.10.13	Then, having placed the ladles in their respective places, he arranges the ladles with the Vājavatī verses.
4.10.14	Having strewn the Prāstara and Pariṣṭara with the Śamyu verse, having sprinkled, having released the ladles, they offer to the wife with the Jaghana ladle.
4.10.15	He offers Soma and Tvashtri with ghee.
4.10.16	To the wife of the gods, with the Jaghana turned upside down.
4.10.17	To the lower Agni, the householder.
4.10.18	To the lower buttocks, the Hotr offers the Iḍa.
4.10.19	To the higher Agni, the Adhvaryu offers the six Avatsas.
4.10.20	They eat.
4.10.21	They wipe.
4.10.22	Then, having taken four spoonfuls in the ladle, and turning around to the left, he offers the expiation in the Anvāhāryapacana. Then, without performing the offering of the fruits, he proceeds.
4.10.23	Then having gone forward and having filled the Dhruva vessel, he offers three Samitsya-offerings with the formulas, "Go to the sacrifice, go to the lord of sacrifice, go to your own place, svāhā."
4.10.24	With the ladle itself, he offers the second offering with the formula, "This is your sacrifice, O lord of sacrifice, accompanied by the recitation of the Sūkta, with good heroes, svāhā.
4.10.25	The gods, knowing the path, have gone the third time with the ladle. Knowing the path, they have gone the path. O divine one, this our sacrifice among the gods, svāhā! In speech, svāhā. In the wind, svāhā."
4.10.26	He places the ladle.
4.10.27	Then he asks for the wooden sword, a pot of water, and the heart-shaped ladle.
4.10.28	Taking this, he says, "Come, O sacrificer."
4.10.29	The sacrificer follows (the Adhvaryu) with his wife, going out between the Cātvāla and the mound, towards the north, and having gone out in front of the sacrificial post, having dug with the wooden sword, he places the heart-spike at the junction of the dry and the wet (wood).
4.11.1	"You are a thorn, you prick him who hates us and whom we hate."
4.11.2	Then they sprinkle themselves with water, saying, "O king Varuna, from this sin do thou release us. We have sinned against the waters, against Varuna. From that sin, O Varuna, do thou release us."
4.11.3	Then they go without waiting, for the disappearance of Varuna.
4.11.4	They place the kindling-sticks on the path, saying, "May we be kindled by his kindling."
4.11.5	Having come, he places it in the Āhavanīya with the formula, "Thou art the kindling wood, thou art brilliance, do thou bestow brilliance on me."
4.11.6	Then they attend upon the Āhavanīyīya with the verse, "I have followed the waters, I have united with the juice, I have come to the Agni possessing milk, do thou unite me with brilliance."
4.11.7	Then he offers the oblation of barley-meal on the Upavasatha fire, saying, "Whatever debt I have incurred, by which I am bound to Yama, may I here pay it off. This is it. O Agni, I am free from debt."
4.11.8	Then he offers the oblations of barley-meal spread in a vessel and sprinkled with ghee on the Pradava fire, saying, “I offer to the All-devouring, the All-devourer, Svāhā!”
4.11.9	One (is destroyed) by the fire, one by the wind, one by the mind. May they make us healthy. The assembly, the strength, the most excellent.
4.11.10	He offers the second oblation: "Those waters which are unknown, those which are not seen, I am following the strong oblation of Yama. May they come here and return to that. We have come to life, we have brought this life from the living. Svāhā!"
4.11.11	One (is destroyed) by the fire, one by the wind, one by the mind. May they make us a remedy, the assembly, the strength, the desirable.
4.11.12	He offers the third oblation, saying, "May we be free from debt in this world, free from debt in the next world, free from debts in the third world, free from all debts of the path leading to the gods and the path leading to ancestors. May we be free from all debts. Svāhā."
4.11.13	One (is destroyed) by the fire, one by the wind, one by the mind. May they make us a remedy, the assembly, the strength, the desirable.
4.11.14	Then he attends on the deities:
4.11.15	"This is our city in the sky." Agni. "You are our lord of the sky." Vayu.
4.11.16	"O god, in the battle." Aditya.
4.11.17	Then he stands by the sacrificial post, aspiring for good cattle, prosperity, and good fortune, saying, "May I stand for the sacrificer, made by Brihaspati, by the sacrifice."
4.11.18	Then he places the two halves of the fire in the east, saying, "This is your natural place."
4.11.19	He puts it on the middle fire, saying, "O Agni, you who are invoked, be awake" with two verses.
4.11.20	Then having kindled the middle fire, he offers the full oblation in the middle fire, with the verse, "O Agni, thy seven kindling woods, thy seven tongues."
4.11.21	At the full oblation, he gives a boon.
4.11.22	Baudhayana says that one should give a cow or a goat as a boon.
4.11.23	The animal sacrifice is concluded. The animal sacrifice is concluded.
5.1.1	He who is going to perform the Vaiśvadeva sacrifice, should do so on the full-moon day of Phālguna or Caitra.
5.1.2	Some say that it should be done on an auspicious day of the ascending lunar mansion.
5.1.3	It should be done on the auspicious day of the increasing lunar mansion during the northern solstice.
5.1.4	He prepares three bundles of grass, a razor of red iron, four potsherds for the cakes, four bowls for the gruels, as many spoons, two vessels of milk, one for the Pṛṣadājya and the other for the curd, the oblation for the sprinkling, the sacrificial grass is arranged in three parts and then again in one part, the Prastara is of Kusha grass.
5.1.5	Then on the Upavasatha day he offers the two-oblation Ārambhaṇīya Isti, the Vaiśvānara oblation on twelve potsherds and the Pārvana oblation.
5.1.6	This is the well-known Isti. It is concluded.
5.1.7	On this day the calves are driven away for the Visve Devas.
5.1.8	Having milked the milk for the Visvadev offering, he observes fast. He is silent when the Saṁnāyya (milk) is covered.
5.1.9	Then in the morning, after the Agnihotra has been offered, before the water is taken, having melted the clarified butter over the Garhapatya fire, having purified it, having taken four spoonfuls in the ladle, having mentally followed the five Hotṛ priests, he offers on the Āhavanīya fire, while the sacrificer has begun, with the formula, "Svāhā."
5.1.10	Then having spread out the Prsthya grass and having offered water, he offers the Agniya cake on eight potsherds, the Soma rice, the Savitra cake on twelve potsherds, Sarasvata rice, the Pusya rice, the Maruta cake on seven potsherds, Vaisvadevya milk-rice, the Dyavaprithivyam cake on one potsherd.
5.1.11	Having made the oblations, he releases speech.
5.1.12	The procedure is common upto the offering of oblations.
5.1.13	Having poured (water) on the southern half of the Garhapatya, he places eight potsherds.
5.1.14	Then, having brought water from the north, beyond the filter, he places it on the Soma-vessel.
5.1.15	Then, on the northern side, he places twelve potsherds for Savitr.
5.1.16	Then, from the north, having brought water beyond the filter, (he places it) on the vessels of Sarasvati and Pusan.
5.1.17	Then on the north he places seven potsherds for Maruts.
5.1.18	Then having brought the clarified butter from the north, he places it on the cooked rice.
5.1.19	Then on the north he puts the potsherd for Dyāvāpṛthivi.
5.1.20	The potsherds are filled.
5.1.21	The rice-bowls are filled.
5.1.22	Having prepared and pounded them, he then pours out the oblations for Agni on eight potsherds.
5.1.23	He pours out the oblatory portions for Soma and Savitr on twelve potsherds. He pours out the oblation for Savitr on twelve potsheds.
5.1.24	He pours the oblatory portion for Soma and Savitri on twelve potsherads. He pours out oblations for Soma and Savitrs on twelve potsherbs.
5.1.25	He pours oblations for Soma, Savitr, Sarasvati and Pusan on twelve potsherls. He pours out offerings for Soma, Savitri, Sarasvati and Pusans on twelve potsheris.
5.1.26	He then pours out the offering for Maruts on seven potsherds.
5.1.27	He pours the curds into the heated milk, having passed through the strainer.
5.1.28	It becomes a cooked dish.
5.1.29	One who is skilled in it, having cooked it with ghee, and having made it free from fat, puts it in a hot place.
5.1.30	Then he offers the oblation to Dyāvāpṛthivi on one potsherd.
5.1.31	Having taken the skin of the cakes, having roasted them, having sprinkled them, having gone forward, having offered them, he carries the Stambayajus.
5.2.1	This is well known as the cake-offering.
5.2.2	Three times with the Yajus, silently the fourth.
5.2.3	He takes up the Parigraha first.
5.2.4	He mutters the Karana.
5.2.5	He lifts it up.
5.2.6	From the lifted up (cake) the Agnidhra carries it three times.
5.2.7	When the Agnidhra takes up the oblations three times, and having taken up the northern enclosing stick, and having placed the wooden sword horizontally, he gives the instruction: "Bring the sprinkling water, place the sacrificial grass and wood, cleanse the spoon and ladles, silently bring the ladle for the clarified butter, and bring the wife with curds and clarified butter."
5.2.8	Having taken the sprinkling-water, having cleansed the wooden sword, having placed the sacrificial grass and the sacrificial grass-holder, having turned around towards the right, having hastened towards the west, he cleanses the spoon and the ladles silently, the ladle for taking the clarified butter.
5.2.9	Having bound the wife with ghee and curds, having purified the ghee and the sprinkling water, having taken the clarified butter and the sprinkling water which are full of clarified butter, he rises with the sprinkling water.
5.2.10	He sprinkles the wood.
5.2.11	He sprinkles on the altar.
5.2.12	He sprinkles upon the sacrificial grass.
5.2.13	Having sprinkled the grass near the fire, having placed it, he takes up the grass-bunch with the Prasumaya (grass) in front.
5.2.14	Having spread the grass in three layers, taking the grass-bunch in hand, having approached towards the east, he places the enclosing sticks made of Khadira wood.
5.2.15	He places the two upright kindling woods.
5.2.16	He places them in a slanting position.
5.2.17	The Prasumaya grass-bunch on the enclosing sticks.
5.2.18	On the stone, the Juhu.
5.2.19	The Barhis is superior.
5.2.20	Having touched them with the formula, "They have sat down," having turned by the right, having run towards the west, he places the oblations in order, having sprinkled the cakes which have been spread and poured over, and the Carus.
5.2.21	Upto the Marutvat.
5.2.22	Then, having taken out the oblation from the pot or vessel, and having brought the horse, he pours it down.
5.2.23	Then, having taken out one potful, and having brought much, he makes the Viṣṭṛti.
5.2.24	Then, taking these (pots) around, he places them within the altar with these Vyāhṛtis: "Bhūr Bhuvah Suvar."
5.2.25	On a mound or in a village, the horse.
5.2.26	Then the Nirmanthya (kindling wood) moves about without being covered, with the Nirmanthyd.
5.2.27	With the Prahrita and Abhihuti.
5.3.1	Then when taking the Samidha from the Dhma, he says, "Recite to Agni who is kindling."
5.3.2	He puts down the Dhma.
5.3.3	He arranges the Samidha.
5.3.4	He makes it move with the Veda.
5.3.5	When the Samidhenis are recited, he offers the libation with the spoon.
5.3.6	The two ladles are wiped together.
5.3.7	Then, without touching the ladles, he steps forward towards the north, joins the Juhu to the Dhruva, and places them. He then chooses the Pravargya.
5.3.8	He chooses the well-known Hotr.
5.3.9	The Hotr sits down.
5.3.10	He desires the Prasuti.
5.3.11	Having taken the ladles after being Prasuta, he steps forward and announces, "Do you offer the Samidhs."
5.3.12	He offers with "Vasat" at the fourth and eighth offerings, bringing them together.
5.3.13	At the eighth offering, he brings all together.
5.3.14	Having offered nine Prayāja offerings, he steps forward towards the north and pours the oblations in succession with the Srasrava.
5.3.15	Then he performs the Ajyabhāga offerings with "To Agni and Soma".
5.3.16	Then he performs in succession the oblations.
5.3.17	It is well known up to Maruts.
5.3.18	"Recite for the Viśve Devas, recite for the Viśvedevas." He offers with cooked rice and with a single pot. He offers to the heaven and earth.
5.3.19	Then he offers with the Svishtakrit.
5.3.20	Here he places the ladles in the Āhavanīya.
5.3.21	Then he offers them with the Srasrava.
5.3.22	Then, having stepped towards the north, having placed the ladles in their places, having taken up the Prasitra, he offers the Idâ.
5.4.1	When the Idâ has been invoked, the Agnidh puts in six Avattas.
5.4.2	They eat.
5.4.3	They cleanse themselves.
5.4.4	Then he says, "Bring the Prasitra to the Brahman."
5.4.5	They bring the Prasitra.
5.4.6	The Veda follows the waters, the share of Brahman.
5.4.7	Then he asks for the Anvāhārya (rice).
5.4.8	He gives the first-born calf, and they remove the oblation, which is left over.
5.4.9	They prepare the horse.
5.4.10	Then he says (to the Brahman), "O Brahman, we are about to depart; having placed the kindling wood, the Agnidh may touch the fires one by one."
5.4.11	Then the Adhvaryu, having cut the clarified butter, having brought it to the Juhu, having stepped across, having announced, says, "Let us offer to the gods."
5.4.12-14	Having offered the Anuyājas, having gone northwards, having placed the ladles in their places, having arranged the ladles with the Vāja-verses, having strewn the Prastara and the Pari-dhis with the Samyu-verse, having sprinkled water, having released the ladles, he then asks for a pot or a bowl smeared with clarified butter.
5.4.15	Having placed it within the altar, and having sprinkled it on the sacrificial grass, he brings the horse and says, "Recite the Yajus for the horses."
5.4.16	Having crossed over and announced, he says, "Sacrifice to the horses."
5.4.17	At the Vasat-utterance, he offers with, "To the horses, svāhā."
5.4.18	Having offered at the Anuvṣat-utterance and having taken the portion, he says,
5.4.19	He makes the sacrificer himself eat the oblation after having offered it to the priests. "He says, "May I be blessed with that which is my semen, that which nourishes me, that which grows me, that which stands firm for me. May I be blessed with the semen, may I be blessed with semen, may I enter the auspicious (state). Of that which is drunk by the Vājin, drunk by the Vājins, of the Madhumat, invited, I eat the invited oblation."
5.4.20	Then the Adhvaryu, having turned by the right, having hastened towards the west, having offered the Patnīsaṁyājya offerings, having approached towards the east, having swollen the Dhruva vessel, offers three Samitsya offerings pertaining to the animal-sacrifice, with the formulas, "O sacrifice, go to the sacrifice. This is thy sacrifice. O lord of sacrifice, the gods know the path."
5.4.21	Then having performed the rites with the full vessel and the Viṣṇukramā steps, he releases the vow.
5.4.22	Then, having performed the Full-moon and New-moon sacrifices, having sat down in the place of the sacrificer, he shaves his head with a razor of red iron and a three-year-old horse-hair brush. He shaves around and also shaves off. Indeed, the supreme Brahman is truth, one does not transgress truth in any way. Truth is deposited in the ocean, truth is resorted to in this earth. Agni with his sharp radiance has seized the head. The head is deposited in the heat of the fire of Vaisvânara. With truth I turn him back, with truth I turn him around. With heat I follow him, with peace I approach him. With power I advance him, with the head.
5.4.23	"That is true, that is real, that is the vow, that I am able to do, by that may I be able to do, may I prosper." First in front, then on the right, then behind, then on the left, then above.
5.4.24	The offerings to the All-gods are completed.
5.4.25	He prays for the welfare of those who are one year old.
5.5.1	Now, then, one who is going to offer the Varuna-prastha oblations in the four months.
5.5.2	He prepares three wooden sticks, a razor of red iron, four potsherds for the cakes, five bowls for the gruel, as many strainers, two vessels of milk, one for the Pṛṣadājya and the other for the Dadhi-Havirasthāna, Śamī-leaves, barley-flour, and chaff, a basket of reed, and for each person a vessel of the paste of barley-grains which have been slightly heated and ground with water.
5.5.3	There are one more.
5.5.4	They make the sheep and the ram.
5.5.5	The ram has horns, the ewe does not.
5.5.6	They are covered with white wool.
5.5.7	There are two Adhvaryus.
5.5.8	There are pairs of sacrificial vessels.
5.5.9	There are the two kinds of kindling wood and sacrificial grass.
5.5.10	There are (two) altars.
5.5.11	The Dakṣiṇā are the two animals bound together, and the two animals bound separately.
5.5.12	They are later equal and earlier unequal, the altar being of the same size as the Vedi, and not separated from it.
5.5.13	On this day, two calves are driven away for him, for the Maruts and Varuna.
5.5.14	Having milked two cows, he observes fast, either with the Saṁnāyya or silently.
5.5.15	Then, having offered the Agnihotra in the morning, having spread out the sacrificial grass, having carried the water, he offers the oblations: the Agniya with eight potsherds, the Vaisvaviya with ten potsherds, and the Savaniya with eleven potsherds.
5.5.16	He releases speech after the oblations have been prepared.
5.5.17	The rite is the same up to the placing of the fire.
5.5.18	Here they place the pot of gruel, the sheep and the goat, the leaves of the Sami tree, the flour of barley, the grass of the Iṣīka plant, and the broom.
5.5.19	Having taken the skin of the cakes, having cooked them, having sprinkled them, having come forward, having offered them to the fire, they take them with the Stambayajus verses.
5.5.20	The Adhvaryu carries (the cake) on the northern altar, the Pratiprasthātṛ on the southern altar.
5.5.21	Of these two carrying, the Adhvaryu goes first, the Prati-prasthātṛ goes first, returning.
5.5.22	This is the well-known Pūroḍāśa.
5.5.23	Three times with the Yajus, the fourth silently.
5.5.24	The two enclosing sticks are taken up first.
5.5.25	The Adhvaryu alone mutters the formula.
5.5.26	Uddhata.
5.5.27	The Agnidhra carries three times with the Uddhatas.
5.5.28	When the Agnidhra carries thrice, the Adhvaryu and the Cātvāla-carriers encircle the Cātvālam.
5.5.29	Having encircled the northern altar, he pours down the northern altar.
5.5.30	Having levelled the northern altar, having encircled the fire, they carry two fires.
5.5.31	The Adhvaryu, having placed the fire on the northern altar, offers oblations to the gods.
5.5.32	The Pratiprasthātṛ, having placed the fires on the southern altar, offers silently.
5.5.33	Having taken up the two enclosing sticks with Agni on them, having placed them, having placed the two transverse wooden swords, the Adhvaryu alone gives the instructions: "Do you place the sprinkling water, do you place the kindling wood and the sacrificial grass, do you place two ladles and the spoons, do you cleanse the silent vessel for the clarified butter, do you bind the wife, do you bring the honey and curds."
5.5.34-35	Having taken up the Prokṣaṇī water, having cleansed the wooden sword and the wooden ladle, having placed the kindling woods and the sacrificial grass, having turned around towards the right, having approached the Sruva and the Sruva ladle, having cleansed the clarified butter for the Pṛṣadājya offering silently, having tied the wife, having offered the Ajya and Dadhi offerings, they stand.
5.5.36	The Adhvaryu takes up the clarified butter and the Prokṣaṇī water in the northern part of the altar.
5.5.37	The Pratiprasthātṛ takes up the Dārśapūrṇamāsika oblations in the southern part of the altar,
5.6.1	Then they rise with the Prokṣani water.
5.6.2	They sprinkle the two bundles of sacrificial grass.
5.6.3	They sprinkle on the altar.
5.6.4	They sprinkle over the two bundles of grass.
5.6.5	The two sacrificial grass-blades are to be placed near the Barhis and sprinkled. The two sacrificial grass blades are to be taken up in front.
5.6.6	The Adhvaryu strews the sacrificial grass on the northern altar in five rows.
5.6.7	The Pratiprasthātṛ strews it on the southern altar in three rows.
5.6.8	Then the two holding the sacrificial grass move forward and place the enclosing sticks made of Carṣmarya wood.
5.6.9	They place the upright kindling woods.
5.6.10	Placing the Vadhriti-sticks in a slanting position.
5.6.11	Placing the Prāstara-sticks on the Vadhriti sticks.
5.6.12	Placing two Juhu-sticks on the Prāstāra sticks.
5.6.13	The other ones on the Barhi-sticks.
5.6.14	Having touched them with the formula, "They have sat down," they move around along the right and run towards the west. The Adhvaryu moves along the south and the Pratiprasthātṛ along the north.
5.6.15	They place the oblations in order.
5.6.16	The Adhvaryu pours out the oblations beginning with those to Agni, as is well known, except that to Indra-Agni.
5.6.17	The Pratiprasthātṛ, having taken out the flesh from the pot or the goblet, puts it into the sheep.
5.6.18	He then pours over it the chaff of Śamī-leaves mixed with barley-grains, saying, "O oblation of milk."
5.6.19	Having brought the Vājinī, he then pours clarified butter over it.
5.6.20	The Adhvaryu, having taken out the meat from the pot or the goblet, puts it on the sheep.
5.6.21	Then he pours the meat-juice along with the chaff of the Śamī-leaves.
5.6.22	Having brought the Vājinī, he pours it over.
5.6.23	Having taken out the single-pot, he brings much and performs the Aviṣṭa-Prstha.
5.6.24	Then having taken these (cups) and having gone to the interior of the altar,
5.6.25	the Adhvaryu places the cups beginning with the Agniya on the northern altar, as prescribed, except the Indra-Agni.
5.6.26	The Pratiprasthātṛ places the Marutī on the southern altar.
5.6.27	The Adhvaryu puts the Vāruṇī on the northern altar and the single-vessel for the body.
5.6.28	Similarly in the Utkara or in the Vāja area.
5.6.29	The Adhvaryu himself, having taken the Nirmanthya, performs with the Nirmanthyal.
5.6.30	Having struck, he offers.
5.7.1	Then, taking the Samit from the fire, he says, "Do you recite the Anubrūhi to Agni who is being kindled."
5.7.2	He places the two fires.
5.7.3	He arranges the Samits.
5.7.4	They are released with the Vedas.
5.7.5	When the Sāmidhenī verses have been recited, they offer two Āghāra libations with two ladles.
5.7.6	The Adhvaryu alone gives the instruction: "O Agnidh, do you thrice rub the fires."
5.7.7	The northern fire is rubbed thrice, the southern one not at all.
5.7.8	Then the Pratiprasthātṛ asks the wife: "O wife, who is your husband?"
5.7.9	He is the one.
5.7.10	He points out, saying, "May Varuna seize him."
5.7.11	If he does not say that he is a paramour, he would obstruct a dear relative. He should point him out, saying, "This is my paramour."
5.7.12	Having pointed him out, he should have him seized with Varuna's noose." This is the Brahmanical text.
5.7.13	Here he gives to his wife the vessels of curds, having been heated over the fire and having been wrapped in a basket and a winnowing basket.
5.7.14	The wife places them on her head.
5.7.15	Then having taken her out by the southern door, having gone around by the southern side of the Anvāhāryapacan and the southern side of both the altars, and having brought her to the eastern side, he makes her recite the verse, "We invoke the Maruts, the carriers of sacrifice, with the Karambha, in unison."
5.7.16	Then, standing facing the southern fire, with their faces towards the east, the Adhvaryu stands towards the north, the sacrificer towards the south, and the wife towards the south.
5.7.17	Here the wife gives the Karambha vessels to the sacrificer.
5.7.18	The sacrificer places them on his head.
5.7.19	Then he recites the Puronuvākyā.
5.8.1	O Indra, among the gods, we are thy friends, O thou of mighty power. The great ones of the bountiful one, the Maruts, who are to be praised, are the givers of gifts.
5.8.2	"Both the sacrificer and his wife, whatever sin we have committed in the village, in the forest, in the assembly, among the Shudras, among the Aryas, whatever sin we committed against one who is righteous, that is your release. Svāhā."
5.8.3	Here he strikes the chaff of grain into the fire.
5.8.4	They eat after sprinkling with water.
5.8.5	The Adhvaryu, having performed the rite, says (to the sacrificer), "Do thou go to the world of heaven." The Adhvaryus, having performed the rites, say (to the sacrificers), "Do ye go to the world where there is no sorrow." The Adhvaryu, having performed the act, says (to his sacrificer), "The act has been performed by us, by the gods, by the speech, by the Yamas, having performed the deed, do thou go to the place of the well-giving ones."
5.8.6	Then the Pratiprasthātṛ cleanses the southern fire.
5.8.7	Both of them offer two Āghāra libations with the two ladles.
5.8.8	The Adhvaryu alone chooses the Pravara.
5.8.9	He chooses the Hotṛ who is well-known.
5.8.10	The Hotṛ priest is seated.
5.8.11	When he desires to give birth.
5.8.12	Having taken the ladles after the birth, having approached, having called out, he says, "Do you offer the kindling wood."
5.8.13	At the Vasat-call, they offer, saying, "Do you sacrifice, do you sacrifice," at the fourth and eighth (offerings), bringing them together.
5.8.14	At the eighth, the Adhvaryu brings everything together.
5.8.15	The Pratiprasthātṛ priest pours the remnants for the Anuyāja offerings.
5.8.16	Having offered the nine Prayāja offerings, having stepped up towards the north, the Adhvaryu and the Pratiprasthātā pour the oblations in succession, beginning with the Samāvartana offerings.
5.8.17	The Adhvaryu pours the oblations beginning with the Agniya, the Pratiprasthatā pours the oblations starting from the Indra-Agni.
5.8.18	The Pratiprasthātr pours the oblations of Maruts.
5.8.19	The Adhvayu pours the oblations for Varuna and the single-pot oblation for the Kaṃsa.
5.8.20	Then, having performed the offerings to Agni and Soma, he proceeds with the offerings to the Maruts.
5.8.21	Then the Pratiprasthātṛ goes beyond.
5.8.22	Then the Adhvaryu proceeds with the offerings in order, ending with the offering to Indra and Agni.
5.8.23	Then the Ādhvaryu goes beyond.
5.8.24	The Pratiprasthātr, having offered the oblation to the Maruts, says, "Recite the yajya to the Maruts."
5.8.25	In the first offering, he offers the rice-gruel of Shami leaves and barley with the milk.
5.8.26	In the second offering, he offers Shami leaves, rice-gruel, barley and the milk of a female sheep.
5.8.27	He pours clarified butter over it.
5.8.28	He anoints it.
5.8.29	Having stepped across, he calls out, "Do you recite the yajya for the Maruts."
5.8.30	He offers at the Vaishnavite Vaishnavite offering.
5.8.31	Then the Pratiprasthātṛ goes beyond.
5.8.32	Then the Adhvaryu, offering with the Varuna formula, says (to the Hotṛ), "Do thou recite (the yajus) in honour of Varuna."
5.8.33	With the first offering he offers the fried grains of Shami-leaves and Kīra, along with the milk-rice.
5.8.34	With the second offering he offers the Shami-leaves, fried grains of Kīra, and the milk-rice along with the sheep.
5.8.35	He pours clarified butter over it.
5.8.36	He anoints it.
5.8.37	Having gone beyond (the altar), having called (the Hotṛ), he says (to him), "Do thou offer to Varuna."
5.8.38	He offers when the Vasat-call is uttered.
5.8.39	He performs with one potsherd, turning towards the north, saying, "Do you recite the Kâyânuvâka; do you recite the Kâmânuvâkâ."
5.8.40	When the Svishtakrit is performed.
5.8.41	The Adhvaryu pours out the oblations of the Agniya and others, except the Indra-Agni.
5.8.42	The Pratiprasthâtar pours out the oblation of the Marutvatîya.
5.8.43	The Adhvarya pours out the obla- tion of the Vâruṇî from the one potsherd.
5.8.44	He pours twice.
5.8.45	There is no Pratiprasthâtâ.
5.8.46	Having skipped the Agni-Svishtakrit, one should offer.
5.8.47	Having skipped the Vasat-utterance and the eastern half of the southern half, one offers the eastern oblations.
5.8.48	Here one offers the ladle-fuls on the Anvähäryä fire.
5.8.49	Then one offers them with the Srasravä oblations.
5.8.50	Then having stepped up and having placed the ladles in their places, having put down the Prasitra, the Adhvaryu pours down the Iḍa.
5.8.51	The Adhvaryu offers the oblations beginning with that to Agni, as is well known, except that to Indra-Agni.
5.8.52	The Pratiprasthātṛ offers to Marut.
5.8.53	The Adhvayu offers to Varuna from the one-pot of the Ashā.
5.8.54	He pours down the oblation.
5.8.55	Then the Pratiprasthātṛ approaches the northern altar.
5.9.1	When the Ida is invoked, the Agnīdhra places the six Avatsas.
5.9.2	They eat.
5.9.3	They cleanse themselves.
5.9.4	Then he says, "Take the Prasitra for the Brahman."
5.9.5	They take the Prasitra.
5.9.6	With water and Veda, the Brahman's share.
5.9.7	Then he asks for the Anvāhārya.
5.9.8	He gives it according to his faith.
5.9.9	They remove the oblation, which is left over.
5.9.10	They bring the horse.
5.9.11	The Adhvaryu alone gives the announcement: "O Brahman, we are about to depart. Having placed the kindling wood, O Agnid, do you touch the fires one by one."
5.9.12	Then the Adhvaryu, having cut off the portion of the cake, having brought it to the Juhu, having stepped across, having called out, says, "Do you invoke the gods."
5.9.13	At the Vasat-utterance, he makes the offering. Having offered the nine Anuyajas, having stepped across towards the north, having placed the ladles in their places, he arranges the ladles with the Vaja verses.
5.9.14	Having spread the Prāstara and Pariṣṭara, having poured out the Sruva, having released the Sruva.
5.9.15	Similarly, having besmeared the two bowls or two cups with clarified butter, one should request.
5.9.16	The conduct of the horses is the same.
5.9.17	The Adhvaryu, having turned by the right, having hastened towards the west, having offered the Samyājas to the wives, having approached towards the east, having swollen the Dhruva, offers three Samīṣṭyajūṣas pertaining to the animal-sacrifice.
5.9.18	The Pratiprasthātṛ offers one pertaining to the Darsa-Pūrṇamāsa on the right.
5.9.19	Having performed the rites with the full vessel and the Viṣṇukramam, he does not release the vow.
5.9.20	Then he asks for the vessel of clarified butter with the ladle, the spoon, the sacrificial grass, the garments for the guest-reception, the strainer for the Varuna-rite, and the husks.
5.9.21	Having taken these, he says, "Come, O sacrificer!"
5.9.22	The sacrificer follows him, the wife behind him, between the Cātvāla and the mound, going northward, they go to the place where there is water.
5.9.23	Avabhrtha is well-known.
5.9.24	"And the Sama and the Goddesses, and the waters, this is your embryo."
5.9.25	Then they go without waiting for the disappearance of Varuna.
5.9.26	"They make the kindling woods on the path, saying, "May we be kindled by his kindling."
5.9.27	"Having come, he places it on the Ahavaniya, saying, "You are the kindling wood, you are the brilliance, bestow brilliance on me."
5.9.28	Then they attend upon the Ahavaniya fire, reciting, "I have followed the waters, I have united with the sap, I have come to the Agni who is full of milk, may he unite me with radiance."
5.9.29	Here he releases the vow.
5.9.30	Then, having performed the Full-Moon and New-Moon sacrifices, having sat down in the sacrificial hall, he shaves the head with a razor of red iron, moving around and shaving in a circle. Whatever Agni has moved around, the ends of the earth and heaven, Agni is the lord of power, Varuna with his thoughts, Indra with his friends, the Maruts, Agni with his sharp radiance, the head is enveloped in heat, it is placed in the heat of the all-consuming fire. With truth I turn him back, with truth I turn him around, with heat I follow him, with peace I approach him, with strength I advance him, with the head.
5.9.31	"That is true, that is real, that is the vow, that I am able to do, by that may I be able to do, may I be successful." First in front, then on the right, then behind, then on the left, then above.
5.9.32	The Varuna-grahas are concluded.
5.9.33	"He prays, 'May there be welfare for the calves.' He prays thus.
5.10.1	Now, when one is about to perform the Sākamedha sacrifices in the four months,
5.10.2	he prepares three bundles of grass, a razor of red iron, four potsherds for the cakes, four bowls for the gruel, as many strainers, curds for the Pṛṣadājya.
5.10.3	Then on the new-moon day, he offers a cake on eight potsherds to Agni, the leader, at sunrise.
5.10.4	This is the well-known Iști. It is concluded.
5.10.5	Then at midday, he offers cooked rice to the Maruts, the tormentors.
5.10.6	This is a well-known Iṣṭi. It is concluded.
5.10.7	Now on this day the calves of the cows are driven away for the Maruts, the householders.
5.10.8	Now in the evening, after the Agnihotra has been offered, having milked from all (cows), having cooked the oblation for the householders on the Garhapatya, having poured clarified butter over it, he places it on the fire, facing east.
5.10.9	Then having cleansed this vessel and spread it, he takes out the oblation from it, as if it were not well-bound.
5.10.10	Having sprinkled clarified butter, having brought in plenty of clarified butter, he places it within the altar.
5.10.11	Then he offers the two portions of clarified butter with the formulas, "To Agni Soma."
5.10.12	Having spread (the oblations), while cutting from the eastern half of the oblation, he says, "Recite for the Maruts, the householders."
5.10.13	Having cut from the eastern half, he cuts from the western half.
5.10.14	He pours clarified butter over it.
5.10.15	He sprinkles.
5.10.16	Having gone beyond, he announces, "The householders are to be worshipped by the Maruts."
5.10.17	He offers at the Vasat call.
5.10.18	Then he performs the Svishtakrit offering.
5.10.19	The Grihamedhiya sacrifice comes to an end with the Idamantra.
5.10.20	He cleans the pot with the Darvi for the full pot.
5.10.21	They cook for the women and young boys in the neighborhood.
5.10.22	They become hungry.
5.10.23	They anoint.
5.10.24	They massage.
5.10.25	They make the calves graze after them.
5.10.26	They tie the calf to the cow on this very night.
5.10.27	Then the Adhvaryu, having hastened at the end of the night, offers the Agnihotra with the milk of the cow that has a calf.
5.10.28	Then having cleaned this ladle and spread it, he puts this entire mixture of curds and ghee in it.
5.10.29	He pours over it twice.
5.10.30	Then he recites the Puronuvākyā: "O full ladle, fall down! Fall down again, full. Like a merchant, we sell the food and energy to you, O hundred-sacrificer."
5.10.31	He offers with the verse: "Give to me, I give to you. Give to me, I have given to you. Give me, I give you. Give me what I have given to me. Svāhā."
5.10.32	One should offer the Rṣabha (bull) at the Rṣabhagraha (rite).
5.10.33	This is another name for Brahma.
5.10.34	He offers on the Garhapatya fire, when the sacrificer has begun, with "Svāhā."
5.10.35	Having spread out the Prsthya (bricks) and having offered water, he offers a cake on seven potsherds to the Maruts, the playful ones, at sunrise.
5.10.36	This is the well-known Iṣṭi.
5.10.37	Then at that very time, having spread out the Prsthya grass and having taken the water, he offers the oblations, namely, the Agniya oblation on eight potsherds, the Indra-Agni oblation on eleven potsherds, and the Indra oblation on one potsherd, and the Visvakarman oblation on one
5.10.38	Having taken the skin of the oblations, having cooked it and having sprinkled it, having come forward, having taken the water from them, he offers the Stambayajus.
5.10.39	This is the well-known Pāuroḍāśika.
5.10.40	Three times with the Yajus, silently the fourth.
5.10.41	He takes up the enclosing sticks first.
5.10.42	He murmurs the Karana.
5.10.43	He throws up.
5.10.44	The Agnidhra throws up three times from the thrown up (sticks).
5.10.45	When the Agnidhra has thrown up three times, he draws the line around the Catvāla from the Catvāla which is covered.
5.10.46	He pours down the Uttaravedi (the northern altar) within the Uttaravedi.
5.10.47	Having levelled the northern navel, he carries the Agni within the Agni.
5.10.48	Having taken up the northern enclosing stick with the formula, "Thou art Agni," having gone around, having placed the transverse piece of wood, he gives out the call, "Do thou place the Prokṣaṇī water; do thou place the sacrificial grass and the sacrificial post; do thou cleanse the spoon and the ladles; do thou silently take up the vessel for the Pṛṣadājya; do thou prepare the wife; do thou bring clarified butter and curds."
5.10.49	Having taken up the Prokṣaṇī-water, having cleansed the wooden sword, having placed the sacrificial grass and the sacrificial post, having turned around towards the right, having hastened towards the west, he cleanses the spoon and the ladles silently, the ladle for taking up the clarified butter.
5.10.50	Having tied the wife with clarified butter and curds, having melted the clarified butter and the Prokṣani-water,
5.10.51	As is well known, the Vaisvadev oblations are concluded in this way, except for the horse sacrifice.
5.10.52	Then, having performed the full-vessel and Vishnu-step rituals, one does not release the vow.
5.11.1	When one is going to perform the great Paitr yajna, he procures rice and barley, six potsherds, milk for the oblation, half a vessel, two new vessels, a sugarcane stalk, three leaves of the Palasa tree with roots, grass, a bundle of grass, a bundle for the fire, a bundle for covering the fire, a broom, a bundle of Kusha grass, a bundle, a bundle of Darbha grass, a bundle with roots, a bundle of Palasa leaves, a bundle of leaves, a bundle for sprinkling, a bundle for spreading, a bundle for sweeping, a bundle for rubbing, a bundle for anointing, a bundle for applying, a bundle for smearing, a bundle for wiping, a bundle for cleaning, a bundle for washing, a bundle for rinsing, a bundle for cleansing, a bundle for purifying, a bundle for removing, a bundle for taking away, a bundle for carrying, a bundle for bringing, a bundle for holding, a bundle for supporting, a bundle for lifting, a bundle for raising, a bundle for moving, a bundle for shifting, a bundle for transferring, a bundle for transporting, a bundle for conveying, a bundle for guiding, a bundle for leading, a bundle for directing, a bundle for controlling, a bundle for restraining, a bundle for stopping, a bundle for preventing, a bundle for obstructing, a bundle for closing, a bundle for opening, a bundle for separating, a bundle for dividing, a bundle for cutting, a bundle for chopping, a bundle for splitting, a bundle for breaking, a bundle for crushing, a bundle for grinding, a bundle for pounding, a bundle for pulverizing, a bundle for sifting, a bundle for filtering, a bundle for straining, a bundle for clearing, a bundle for clarifying, a bundle for settling, a bundle for distilling, a bundle for refining, a bundle for blending, a bundle for mixing, a bundle for combining, a bundle for uniting, a bundle for joining, a
5.11.2	Then he spreads out the Garhapatya.
5.11.3	He places each one to the north of the other. The skin of a black antelope, the ointment, the unguent, the ten-fold wooden sword, the water-pot, the sacrificial implements.
5.11.4	Then having put on the sacrificial thread, and having sat down to the north of Garhapatya, he offers with the Agnihotra ladle having the Pavitra-thread.
5.11.5	"With the impulse of the divine Savitr, with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of Pusan, I pour out the offering agreeable to Soma, the fatherly, with four handfuls of rice."
5.11.6	Having made this the first step, he pours out four handfuls of barley, saying, "I pour out the offering acceptable to the fathers who sit on the sacrificial grass."
5.11.7	Having made this the rule, he offers the oblation to the Pitrs, the Agniṣvāttas, saying, "I offer the oblation to be acceptable to the Pitrs." There are four barley grains.
5.11.8	He puts the barley grains into the oblation.
5.11.9	They take up the barley grains.
5.11.10	The oblation is released with the words.
5.11.11	The rite is the same up to the sowing.
5.11.12	Having poured (the Soma), he places six potsherds on the southern half of the Garhapatya.
5.11.13	Having ground those barley grains in a mortar, they roast them on the Garhapaty fire after placing one potsherd.
5.11.14	Having made many kinds of barley grains, half of them become barley grains.
5.11.15	Then they make the rest into roasted barley grains.
5.11.16	Having prepared and pounded the flour, he mixes it with water and bakes the cake on six potsherds.
5.11.17	Then, having placed a new vessel on the embers mixed with ashes to the north, and having brought the clarified butter and the cooked grains across the strainer, he pours the cooked grains across.
5.11.18	Then he asks for half a vessel of milk for the Abhivanīya rite.
5.11.19	Having placed the strainer on that, he grinds the parched grains with a stalk of sugarcane.
5.11.20	He grinds them from the right.
5.11.21	He grishes them without beginning. This is the Brahmanical text.
5.11.22	Then having placed the ashes-mixed embers to the north, he places them on that.
5.11.23	Having taken the skin of the cake, he offers it here and then takes it away.
5.11.24	Here on the southern side a mound is made.
5.11.25	He draws a square altar without digging.
5.11.26	Having placed the Anvāhāryapacana pot in the middle of it, he takes the Stambayajus.
5.12.1	This is well-known as the cake-offering.
5.12.2	Three times with the Yajus, and once silently.
5.12.3	He takes up the enclosing sticks first.
5.12.4	He mutters the Karana formula.
5.12.5	He throws it up.
5.12.6	The Agnidhra throws it up three times from the thrown up (sticks).
5.12.7	The Agnidhra takes up the fire three times, then taking up the northern enclosing stick, having made the Yojupit, having placed the Sphy horizontally, he gives the instruction: "Bring the Prokṣaṇī water, place the kindling wood and the sacrificial grass, cleanse the spoon and the ladles, and bring the clarified butter."
5.12.8	Having taken up the Prokṣaṇī water, having cleansed the wooden sword, having placed the sacrificial grass and the sacrificial grass-holder, having turned around towards the right, having hastened towards the west, he cleanses the spoon and the ladles.
5.12.9	Having taken up the clarified butter, the Prokṣaṇī water, and having purified them, having taken up the clarified-butter-offerings either five or six times, he rises up with the Prokṣani water.
5.12.10	He sprinkles the wood.
5.12.11	He sprinkles on the altar.
5.12.12	He sprinkles upon the sacrificial grass.
5.12.13	Having placed the sacrificial grass near, having sprinkled it, having brought it forward, he silently takes up the sacrificial grass with its roots in front.
5.12.14	Then having tied the sacred thread over the left shoulder, he goes around thrice, scattering (the grass) towards the left.
5.12.15	First the Santara (grass),
5.12.16	Then the Vitara (grass), and
5.12.17	Then the Vitata (grass).
5.12.18	Then having tied up the sacred thread over his right shoulder, he goes back thrice in the same way.
5.12.19	Then with the Prāstara in his hand, he places two enclosing sticks, the middle one and the right one.
5.12.20	He places the two kindling woods above.
5.12.21	He places them with the root downwards.
5.12.22	He places silently the Prāstāra with the root on the two kindling sticks.
5.12.23	On the Prāstārā he places the Juhu.
5.12.24	On the Barhiṣītara.
5.12.25	Having touched them with the formula, "These have been placed," having turned around towards the right, having run towards the west, he places the oblations in order. Having sprinkled the cake which has been spread and sprinkled, he sprinkles the cooked grains, the gruel.
5.12.26	They recite the formulas for each of them in a low voice.
5.12.27	He places the cake on the south.
5.12.28	The cooked grains on the north.
5.12.29	On the north side the pot of water.
5.12.30	On the south side he places the pot of water, the pot of water for sprinkling, the pot of oil, the pot of ghee, the pot of clarified butter, the pot of ashes, the pot of earth, the pot of wood, the pot of grass, the pot of chaff, the pot of sand, the pot of salt, the pot of cowdung, the pot of Kusha grass, the pot for the sacrificial grass, the pot with the sacrificial grass, and the pot for the Darbha grass.
5.12.31	On the north side two pots of water.
5.12.32	The Brahman and the sacrificer sit on the south side, the Adhvaryu and the Agnidhra on the north side.
5.13.1	Then, taking the kindling-wood from the fire, he says, "Do you recite the Anuvāka to Agni, to the gods, to the ancestors, to the kindling."
5.13.2	He places the kindling- wood once or three times.
5.13.3	He arranges the kindling-woods.
5.13.4	He sweeps with a Veda.
5.13.5	He offers the libation with the ladle when the Sāmidhenī verses are recited.
5.13.6	When the ladles are wiped, the northern one is wiped.
5.13.7	Then, without touching, he steps forward with the ladle towards the north, joins the Dhruva with the Juhu, settles it, and offers the Pravaran-oblation with the ladles.
5.13.8	Then he announces: "Let it be heard! Let it be heard! Agni, the deity, the Hotṛ, may he invoke the gods and the Pitṛs. Let him be seated." This is the extent of the Pravaran.
5.13.9	The Hotṛ sits down.
5.13.10	He desires the Prasu (oblation).
5.13.11	Having taken up the oblations in the two ladles, having gone around along the front of the Āhavaniya, having announced (the offerings), he offers with "Do thou offer to the kindling woods."
5.13.12	He offers at the Vasat-utterance.
5.13.13	Having offered four Prayāja-offerings on the bare ground, having gone around towards the north, he pours the oblations in succession with the Anupūrva-graha.
5.13.14	Then he proceeds with the Ajyabhāga-offerings with "To Agni and Soma."
5.13.15	Then having gone beyond to the north, having placed the ladles in their places, they put on the upper garments.
5.13.16	The priests move around.
5.13.17	They remove the oblations.
5.13.18	He places the cake to the north.
5.13.19	The gruel to the south.
5.13.20	The cooked barley-grains are kept in the same place.
5.13.21	The Brahman and the Sacrificer sit down to the north, the Adhvaryu and the Agnidhra to the south.
5.13.22	Then they sprinkle it.
5.13.23	They make the northern door.
5.13.24	He says to the stronger one, "Sprinkle it three times with a continuous stream from this water-pot, moving counter-clockwise."
5.13.25	He does so.
5.13.26	Having placed the pot as before, he again goes around three times.
5.13.27	Then having spread (the pot), while offering the cake from the eastern half, he says:
5.14.1	"To Soma, the father, with Svāhā."
5.14.2	He offers from the eastern half of the cake.
5.14.3	From the eastern half of cooked grains.
5.14.4	From the east half of the gruel.
5.14.5	He pours clarified butter over it.
5.14.6	He anoints it.
5.14.7	Having taken it to the right, he crosses to the north.
5.14.8	Having called out "O Svāhā!"
5.14.9	He responds, "Let it be Svāhā!" "
5.14.10	"May the Soma be for the Fathers, may it be Svādhā."
5.14.11	"Those who have Svādhā, those who have Svādha."
5.14.12	He offers with "Svādhā, salutations!"
5.14.13	He offers when "Svāhā!" has been uttered.
5.14.14	Then having spread (the oblations) in the middle of the oblations, he says, "To the Fathers who are seated on the sacrificial grass, Svāhā!"
5.14.15	He offers from the middle of the offerings.
5.14.16	From the middle of the curds.
5.14.17	From the centre of the cake.
5.14.18	He pours clarified butter over it.
5.14.19	He anoints it.
5.14.20	Having offered to the right, he goes around along the north.
5.14.21	He calls out, "Svāhā!"
5.14.22	"Let it be so, svadhā." He responds thus.
5.14.23	"May the Pitrs who are seated on the sacrificial grass perform svadhā."
5.14.24	"Those who have come to svadhā, those who have come to our svadhā." Or "Those who have come for svadhā, for our svadhā".
5.14.25	He makes the offering with "Svāhā, namaḥ."
5.14.26	He makes the oblation when the Vasat-call is uttered.
5.14.27	Having approached and having taken up the Avadana from the other half of the Karambha, he says, "For the Pitrs, for the Agniṣvāttas, svadhā".
5.14.28-36	He offers the remnant of the oblation of cooked rice. He offers the remnant of cooked rice. He offers the remnant of cooked rice. (The Adhvaryu) pours clarified butter over it. He anoints it. Having offered the remnant towards the south, he goes around along the north. He invites (the Pitrs) with "O svadhā." He responds with "May there be svadhā." He says, "May the Pitrs, the Agniṣvāttas, perform svadhā."
5.14.37	Those who have called out "Svādhā" or "Svādhām aha" (at the offering of the oblations).
5.14.38	He offers with "Svādhānāmaḥ" and "Vasat".
5.14.39	He offers when "Vasat" has been uttered.
5.14.40	Having spread (the oblations), while offering from the right half of the cake, he says, "To Agni Kavyanāyana Svishtakṛt Svādhā".
5.14.41	He offers from the right half (of the cake).
5.14.42	From the right half of cooked grains.
5.14.43-50	from the southern half of the Karambha. He pours twice. He does not smear (the Karambha). Having taken it to the south, he goes around along the north. He invites (the Hotr) with "O Svāhā!" He responds with "May there be Svāhā!" saying, "Svāhā to Agni, the carrier of oblations, the well-offered one." Those who have Svāhā, those who have Svādhā.
5.14.51	"Svadha! Namah!" he offers with the Vasat-call.
5.14.52	After the Vasat-offering, having skipped the southern half and the eastern half, he offers the eastern oblations.
5.14.53	Here he strikes the ladle on the fire, saying, "This is the ladle."
5.14.54	Then he offers it with the dripping (ghee).
5.14.55	Then, having gone beyond to the south, they place the ladles in their respective places and put on the sacrificial thread.
5.14.56	The priests move around.
5.14.57	They remove the oblations.
5.14.58	He places the cake on the south side.
5.14.59	The gruel on the north side.
5.14.60	The cooked barley grains are kept in the same place.
5.14.61	The Brahman and the sacrificer sit to the right, the Adhvaryu and the Agnidhra to the left.
5.14.62	Having placed the Prastara, he offers the Idā.
5.15.1	When the Idā has been invoked, the Agnidhra places it in the fire six times.
5.15.2	Having eaten with the Nigha, they place it on the sacrificial grass.
5.15.3	Then having put on the upper garment, he pours the cake, cooked rice, and gruel into a vessel.
5.15.4	He gives three balls of dough on three leaves in three places.
5.15.5	"This is for your grandfather, and those who follow you." On the right hip.
5.15.6	"This for your great-grandfather, and those who..." On the right shoulder.
5.15.7	This is for your great-great-grandfathers and those who follow you.
5.15.8	On the northern hip, he smears the paste, saying, "This is yours, this is ours. May we live, living, moving along with it."
5.15.9	Here, having said, "O Pitrs, do according to your share," they come out, put on the sacrificial thread, and stand by the Ahavaniya fire, saying, "We have seen you well, O Maghavan, we have praised you. Now, O Indra, you go to the abode of the full-yoke, as you are praised. We will follow you."
5.15.10	They stand by the Ahavana fire.
5.15.11	Then they attend on the Garhapatya with the verse, "They have eaten, they have enjoyed, they have sung, the sages, the knowers of truth, with their latest thought. O Indra, I seek thy favour."
5.15.12	They attend on him with the verse,
5.15.13	Then having put on the upper garment, they approach the Anvāhāryapacana (vessel) with the formulas, "The Fathers have drunk, the Fathers have been satisfied, the Fathers have anointed, the Fathers have departed, the Fathers are Soma-worthy."
5.15.14	They stand near it with the formulas,
5.15.15	He says to the stronger one, "Sprinkle him with this water-pot with a continuous stream of water three times in the opposite direction, saying 'Parīhi'."
5.15.16	He does so.
5.15.17	Placing the pot as it was, he again goes around three times in the same direction.
5.15.18	He gives the broom and the ointment for the eyes and the body out of affection for the one who is taking it.
5.15.19	Then he gives clothes.
5.15.20	Then he worships with six salutations, and stands in the opposite direction.
5.15.21	Then he requests the hero.
5.15.22	Then having raised them and sprinkled them, he calls the mind with three (verses): "We call the mind, may it come to us again and again. Our fathers are the mind."
5.15.23	Here he offers these balls together with the leaves on the fire.
5.15.24	They cut off the fringe.
5.15.25	Then they make the sacrificial cords.
5.15.26	Then he gives the order: "O Brahman, we are about to depart. Having placed the kindling wood, the Agnid may touch the fires one by one."
5.15.27	Then, having taken the Juhu and Upamant, and having approached, having announced, he says: "O gods, may you be worshipped."
5.15.28	At the Vaṣaṭ-utterance, he offers.
5.15.29	Having offered the two Anūyājā offerings with the formula, "Do thou offer, do thou offer," and having stepped towards the north, having placed the ladles in their places, he arranges the ladles with the Vājavatī verses.
5.15.30	Having strewn the Prastara and the Paridhi with the formula, “May I be auspicious,” having poured down the melted butter, having released the ladles, he offers the Samīṣṭayajus here only.
5.15.31	Then they recite two verses each for these weapons.
5.15.32	Then having tied the sacrificial thread, they stand by the Garhapatya fire reciting the Prajapati verse, "O Prajapati, none other than you."
5.15.33	Here he recites this second verse, "Whatever is in the sky, on the earth, and in heaven."
5.15.34	The great ancestral offering comes to an end.
5.16.1	The Pratiprasthātṛ, having cooked on the Garhapatya fire, the Triyambaka oblations in three potsherds, one more than the number of men, without pouring clarified butter over them, and having placed them in a place where there is grass or in a place where the grass is old, attends to them.
5.16.2	Then he asks for the last leaf of the blue and red thread, the last of the house, a torch, and a water-pot.
5.16.3	Taking this, they approach the Garhapatya fire, saying, "I have done what I had to do for all the householders. Be the protector of the cattle, be the protector of the sacrificer, protect me."
5.16.4	Then, having gone out, they go in the direction where the four-way intersection is always well-prepared and clear.
5.16.5	If it is not there, they go by foot or by chariot.
5.16.6	Having placed this single torch, having spread it out, having collected all the Triyambaka-offerings in one place, he offers them together. "One alone is Rudra, not a second. The rat is thy animal, O Rudra, do thou accept it. This is thy share, O Rudra. Do thou accept it with thy sister Ambika. The remedy for the cow, the horse, and the man. And for us the remedy, the good remedy. As there is good health, so may there be good health for the ram and the ewe. We have approached the god, the three-eyed Rudra, that he may do what is good for us, that he may bestow prosperity on us, that he do what is good, that he may give us cattle, Svāhā."
5.16.7	Here he places the last leaf, saying, "May it go to him whom I hate." He places it among the animals.
5.16.8	If he does not hate anyone, he places it in a hole for a dog.
5.16.9	Then he gives each of these Triyambaka animals to the sacrificer, giving two.
5.16.10	Then they circumambulate the fire three times, touching their right thighs, reciting: "We worship Tryambaka, the fragrant one, the enhancer of prosperity, like the bondage of the Urvara plant. May I be released from death, from immortality."
5.16.11	Having circumambulated once, they stand facing north.
5.16.12	They dig out.
5.16.13	They desire, saying, "For Bhaga you."
5.16.14	In the same way, she goes around the second time.
5.16.15	In the same way, the third time.
5.16.16	Then she goes around three times counterclockwise, touching her left thigh, reciting: "We worship Tryambaka, the fragrant one, the knower of the husband, like a cucumber from its bondage, may I be released from this. Do not let me fall from my husband."
5.16.17	Having gone around once, she stands across.
5.16.18	She steps up.
5.16.19	"To Bhaga you belong."
5.16.20	In the same way he goes around the second time.
5.16.21	In the same manner the third time.
5.16.22	Then he pours the water into the hands of the sacrificer.
5.17.1	"I unite you with offspring, like Sura with the month of spring."
5.17.2	The sacrificer pours the water into his wife's hands. "I unite you with progeny and cattle, like Sura with spring."
5.17.3	His wife says, "I unite you with Bhaga, the god of love, with Bhaga, with the month, as with Sura."
5.17.4	Then having bound them with blue and red threads, he ties them to a dry tree or a branch. "This is your share, O Rudra, do you accept it. With this boon, do you go beyond the one who has the power of the bow, the one with the Pināka in his hand, the one wearing the hide of an antelope."
5.17.5	They stand near him.
5.17.6	Then having sprinkled water, they go back without looking at the vessel.
5.17.7	Having washed the hands and feet, they return by the same way and offer the cooked rice to Aditya.
5.17.8	This is Aditi, she stands in this (earth). So says the Brahmana.
5.17.9	The Isti comes to an end.
5.17.10	Here the vow is given up.
5.17.11	Then, having performed the Full-moon and New-moon sacrifices, having sat down in the sacrificial hall, he shaves his head with a razor of red iron and a three-year-old horse-hair brush. He shaves around and shaves off the hair. He who turned this earth by seasons, he who turns the skin of this earth, the plants, Agni is the lord of power, Varuna with his thoughts, Indra with his friendly Maruts, Agni with his sharp radiance, the head is enveloped in heat, the head is placed in heat, by the brilliance of the all-pervading Agni, I turn away from him by truth, I turn around by truth, I follow him by truth, by truth I turn towards him, by truth I approach him, by truth he turns towards me, by truth he approaches me, by truth I am turned towards him, by the truth he is turned towards me, by the truth I am approached by him, by the head.
5.17.12	"That is true, that is real, that is the vow, that I am able to do, by that I am able, by that may I succeed." Having thus gone forward, he goes to the right, then to the rear, then to the left, then above.
5.17.13	The oblations of the Soma-sacrifices are concluded.
5.17.14	He prays for the welfare of the present year.
5.18.1-3	Now, he who is going to offer the oblations to Sunaśirī in the four months, prepares three bundles of grass, a razor of red iron, five potsherds for the cakes, five vessels for the gruel, as many ladles, and curds for the Pṛṣadājya. Now, on this night, the calves are removed for Vayu.
5.18.4	The next morning he milks the cow for Vayu. He does it silently, for the Saṁnāyya is silent.
5.18.5	Then, having offered the Agnihotra in the morning, having spread out the sacrificial grass, having carried the water, he offers the oblations: the Agniya eight-spoon oblation, the Indra-Agni twelve-spoon oblation in the form of cooked rice, the Visvedeva cooked rice, the Indra-Suna-sira oblation in the shape of twelve-spoon cake, the Vayu oblation in the nature of milk, and the Surya oblation in the one-spoon form.
5.18.6	Having taken the skin of the cakes, having roasted them, having sprinkled them, having gone forward, having offered them, he carries the Stambayajus.
5.18.7	This is well known as the cake-offering.
5.18.8	Three times with the Yajus, silently the fourth.
5.18.9	He takes up the Parigraha first.
5.18.10	He mutters the Karana.
5.18.11	He lifts it up.
5.18.12	From the lifted up (cake) the Agnidhra carries it three times.
5.18.13	If he makes the northern altar, then he concludes as in the case of the principal oblations.
5.18.14	If he does not make the northern altar, he concludes as in case of the oblations to Visvedevas, except in the case of Vaji.
5.18.15	Having performed the rites with the full vessel and the steps of Visnu, he releases the vow.
5.18.16	Then, having performed the Full Moon and New Moon sacrifices, having sat down in the sacrificial hall, he shaves the head with a razor of red iron and a three-year-old horsehair brush. He shaves around and cuts off. One month was released by Prajapati for the sake of creatures. By that he brought immortality to mortals. You are born after creatures. That is your mortal and immortal (nature). By which months, half-months, seasons, and years, they turned back the sacrifice of you, O Prajapati, by that I turn you back with this Brahman for life. Agni with his sharp radiance has enveloped the head. The head is enveloped by the heat of Vaishvanara's brilliance. By his truth I turn him back. By his truth, I turn him around. By his austerity, I follow him. By his auspiciousness, I approach him. By his strength, I advance him. By his head.
5.18.17	"That is true, that is real, that is the vow, that I am able to do, by that I am able, by that may I succeed." First in front, then on the right, then behind, then on the left, then above.
5.18.18	The offerings of Shunashīriyah are concluded.
5.18.19	He prays for the welfare of the calves, saying, "May they be well."
6.1.1	He who is going to perform the Agniṣṭoma sacrifice.
6.1.2	He prepares a black antelope skin, a black horn, a garment, a girdle, this earth is to be made into a braid, three-fold, with one noose, twenty-two darbha grass bundles, ghee, collyrium, cotton, a reed, an udumbara staff, a pot, a gift of vows, a pot with a lid, and a mirror.
6.1.3	These thirteen belong to the sacrificer.
6.1.4	So many belong to the wife, namely, a pot, a bundle of Kuśa grass, a garment, a yoke, an unlimited number of bundles of Darbha grass, fresh butter, collyrium, a cotton-wool, a reed-stalk, a vessel made of clay, a peg, a pot with a lid, and a mirror.
6.1.5	A house is built for the sacrifice in a place frequented by gods.
6.1.6	The Puronuhis and the Devayajana are to be offered in the east. This is the order of the offerings.
6.1.7	The eastern direction is the oldest, the southern is the most brilliant, and the western is the youngest.
6.1.8	It has four gates: east, south, west, and north.
6.1.9	To the south they build the house for the Vrata-fire, and to the west the house for the wife.
6.1.10	If the sacred place is far off, then they make two enclosures around the hall, one for the sacrificer and the other for his wife, to the north.
6.1.11	They make the doors towards the east.
6.1.12	He places two water-pots there.
6.1.13	Then having performed the offering of the New-Moon sacrifice or having ascended the fires at the time of the asterism, he approaches the hall.
6.1.14	Having gone round the shed on the north and having entered it by the eastern door, having churned out the fires in the place of the Garhapatya, having moved them, they attach the king (Soma) to the middle post.
6.1.15	They spread (the grass).
6.1.16	Brahman and the sacrificer sit down towards the south.
6.1.17	Then having melted the clarified butter in the Garhapatya fire, having purified it, having taken four spoonfuls in the ladle, having mentally followed the seven Hotṛ priests, he offers in the Āhavanīya fire, when the sacrificer has begun, with "Svāhā."
6.1.18	Having taken another four spoonfuls, he offers the Yūpāhuti, if he offers here.
6.1.19	In the morning itself they tie the calves of the two cows giving the vow-milk.
6.1.20	Then he cooks the vow-milk for them.
6.1.21	They eat it mixed with ghee and milk.
6.1.22	Then the Adhvaryu asks for the materials for the Tīrtha.
6.1.23	Then he says, "Come, O sacrificer."
6.1.24	Having gone out through the eastern door, they go to the place where there is water.
6.1.25	Then he pours water on the right side of the animal facing east.
6.2.1	"The waters flow for life, for long life, for prosperity."
6.2.2	He places the grass with its tip upwards, saying, "O plant, protect him."
6.2.3	He places a wooden post horizontally, saying, "May the wooden post not harm him."
6.2.4	He sows, saying, "The divine hearer sows these."
6.2.5	"May there be welfare for the northern direction." He touches the head with the hair.
6.2.6	He offers the cow-gift with this (verse) only, sprinkling with water, or silently.
6.2.7	Giving the razor to the barber, he says, "O barber, shave my hair and beard, cut my nails."
6.2.8	He says to him thus.
6.2.9	Then he sprinkles him with water, saying, "May the waters, our mothers, cleanse us; may the givers of ghee purify us with ghee."
6.2.10	Having run together, he sprinkles the dust, saying, "Let all the streams carry us away."
6.2.11	"Rising up, I am pure and cleansed."
6.2.12	Having covered himself with the end of the garment, he sips water.
6.2.13	The Brāhmaṇa says, "He eats water."
6.2.14	Then he puts on a new garment, turning to the right, saying, "You are the body of Soma, protect my body."
6.2.15	Then he lies down with his new garment spread out on the two-handled pot.
6.2.16	His face becomes soft with his hands, and he first anoints his face, saying, "Thou art the milk of the great ones, thou art the bestower of radiance, bestow radiance upon me."
6.2.17	He anoints in the order of the feet.
6.2.18	Another anoints his back.
6.2.19	Then this ointment of his is ground and kept on a stone, together with cotton and a reed.
6.2.20	Sitting facing east, he anoints the right eye of him facing west, with the left hand, saying, "Thou art the pupil of Vritra, thou art the eye-protector. Protect my eye." He anoints three times.
6.2.21	Twice more.
6.2.22	"The Brāhmaṇa says, "Even if one applies five times."
6.2.23	Five times to the right, five times to the left.
6.2.24	Then he purifies him with twenty-one darbha-grass-broom-sticks: "May the lord of speech purify you, may the lord of speech, may the god Savitr purify you with the stainless purifier, with the rays of the shining Vasu Surya."
6.2.25	He makes the sacrificer recite: "O lord of purification, with which purifier may I purify whom? That I am able to do."
6.2.26	Then having placed him in the left hand, he brings him to the hall, saying, "We desire you, O gods, of true rites, at the sacrifice, whatever you, O gods. We invoke you, O you worthy of sacrifice."
6.2.27	He enters the hall by the eastern door, saying, "Indra-Agni, heaven-earth, water, plants."
6.2.28	Then having led him around in front of the Ahavaniya fire, having made him sit facing the south and looking towards the Ahavaniya, he says, "You are the lord of the consecrations."
6.2.29	"Protect me here while I am alive," he says about himself.
6.3.1	As long as the Adhvaryu is active here, the Pratiprasthātṛ silently anoints the right shoulder of the wife with water.
6.3.2	He places the grass with its tips pointing upwards, silently.
6.3.3	He places the sacrificial grass, silently.
6.3.4	Silently he sows the seeds.
6.3.5	Silently, he touches the sown seeds.
6.3.6	Silenty, he sprinkles the upper part of the wing with water, enclosing it with the same (grass).
6.3.7	When giving a razor to the barber, he says, "The barber has cut my nails and beard."
6.3.8	He says this to her.
6.3.9	Then he sprinkles her with water silently.
6.3.10	Having run silently, he sprinkles the dust silently.
6.3.11	He rises with water silently.
6.3.12	Having covered himself with the garment, he sips water.
6.3.13	Silently, he puts on the garment, turning to the right.
6.3.14	Silently he anoints himself.
6.3.15	Silently anointed,
6.3.16	Then he purifies her with an unlimited number of darbha grass and puñjīla grass, silently, silently alone.
6.3.17	Then having brought her in by the other door, and having led her into the hall, he makes her recite (the verse) "May the wife of Brahman go forth, may she be seated on the altar with her colour. Now I, the obedient one, am in my own world, in the assembly."
6.3.18	Then she sits down behind the Garhapatya with the verse, "We, O Agni, the well-born ones, the well-married ones, sit down to you, the destroyer of enemies, the unassailable, the invincible."
6.3.19	Then having spread out the Prsthya grass and having offered water, he offers the cake on eleven potsherds to Agni-Visnu in the Diksaniya Isti.
6.3.20	The sacrificer does not approach the vow, does not bind the wife, does not make the sacrificer's share, does not make Brahma's share, nor does he make the cake for the Barhisad deity, does not request the Anvähäryahom, does not perform the Phalikäraṇahoma, does not offer the Samishtayajus, does not recite the sacrificer in the full vessel, does not walk in the Vishnu steps.
6.3.21	Then the Adhvaryu, having turned by the right, having hastened towards the west, having offered the Patnīsaṃyājya offerings, having approached towards the east, having filled the Dhruva vessel, having taken up the melted butter from the vessel of melted butter, offers the Dīkṣāhutis with the spoon of the vessel of melted
6.4.1	To Akriti, to Pratiti, to Agni, Svāhā! To Medha, to Manas, to Agni, svāhā! To Dikṣā, to Tapas, to Agni, svihā! To Sarasvatī, to Pūṣan, to Agni, svaha!
6.4.2	Then, having taken four spoonfuls in the ladle, he offers the fifth oblation with the ladle, reciting: "The goddesses, the great, the all-pervading, the heaven and earth, the firmament, and Brihaspati may be nourished by our oblation. Svāhā!"
6.4.3	Taking another four spoonfuls, he offers the full ladle of clarified butter to the Udgātṛ, with the verse, "May the mortal choose friendship with the universal lord of gods; may all the gods be pleased with him. May he choose the splendour of all the rays; may he prosper with Svāhā."
6.4.4	Here he places the full vessel within the altar.
6.4.5	Then, having moved forward from the Ahavaniya fire, he gives to the sacrificer the black antelope skin, the black-horned cow, the garment, the girdle, the Udumbara staff as the fifth, and the turban as the sixth.
6.4.6	Then the Pratiprasthātṛ gives to the wife the pot, the Kuśa grass, the garment, yoke, and the peg.
6.5.1	Then on the place for the sacrificer he spreads a black antelope skin with its neck towards the east and with the hairy side upwards.
6.5.2	On it he touches the white and black (parts) with the thumb on the white and the fingers on the black, saying, "You are in the art of the Ṛg and Sāman verses. I begin with you. Protect me. May I attain the goal of this sacrifice."
6.5.3	Then, having bent the right knee, he approaches, reciting this verse: "O god, O Daksha, O Varuna, I am learning the wisdom of the sacrifice. With that wisdom, may we cross all difficulties. We ascend the boat of the good protector."
6.5.4	Then, having placed the knee on the ground, he ties the girdle clockwise, reciting: "The Angiras have strength, the Urnas have strength. May they give me strength."
6.5.5	"Protect me, do not injure me." He ties the knot of the Nistarka.
6.5.6	At this time, the Pratiprasthātṛ ties the wife with the yoke, hoping for good fortune, saying, "I bind you with two."
6.5.7	Then he covers the sacrificer with a garment, saying, "You are the protection of Vishnu, protect the sacrificer, protect me."
6.5.8	He recites over the garment, "Protect me from the stars, from the sky."
6.5.9	He wraps the head with the garment, turning to the right, with the turban, "I wrap your head with prosperity, for prosperity, for fame, for radiance."
6.5.10	At this time, the Pratiprasthātṛ silently recites over the pot and the bundle of grass for the wife.
6.5.11	Then this three- or five-fold rope of black grass, fastened with a string, is wound around it like a circular fence.
6.5.12	He gives it to the sacrificer, saying, "You are the womb of Indra."
6.5.13	The sacrificer receives it, saying, "Do not harm me."
6.5.14	Having bound the rope to the end of the garment, he throws a clod of earth within the altar with the formula, "For thy prosperity, for thy good harvest."
6.5.15	He scratches the right side of the cow with the formula, “For the good herbs, for the good grasses."
6.5.16	At this time the Pratiprasthātṛ ties a peg for his wife with the formula, "Scratch yourself with this.
6.5.17	Then he gives him the Udumbara staff with the tip pointing upwards, measuring it with his mouth, saying, "The divine tree is well-established."
6.5.18	The sacrificer receives it, saying, "Protect me from above, from below."
6.5.19	Then he makes him recite the beginning of the sacrifice: "Svāhā to the sacrifice with the mind, svāhā to heaven and earth, svāhā from the sky, svāhā I begin the sacrifice from the wind."
6.5.20	Here he makes a fist and restrains speech.
6.5.21	Then he says, "This Brahman was initiated, he of such a family, son of so-and-so, grandson of so-andso, great-grandson of so-and so. We shall tell him to Indra, Indra-Agni, Vasus, Rudras, Adityas, All-Gods, and Brahmins who drink Soma."
6.5.22	He says this three times in a low voice.
6.5.23	He announces him to the gods alone.
6.5.24	Having gone out three times loudly,
6.5.25	he announces him to both the gods and men. This is the Brahmanical text.
6.5.26	Then he instructs him:
6.6.1	You have been initiated. Speak the words of initiation. Speak the truth. Do not be silent. Do not scratch. Do not turn away. If you do scratch, scratch with the black-horned one. If you do speak, speak the Vedic verse dedicated to Vishnu. May the sun not rise on you except at the time of initiation. May it not set. Tell me the names of the deities as they are known. Then tell me the names of those that are not deities as they are also known. Place the discerning one above. Speak the words that are discerning and black-horned. Do not separate yourself from the staff.
6.6.2	He does all this in the same way.
6.6.3	At the time of the final kindling, standing to the north of the Āhavanīya fire, he gives the instruction: "Make the fires with light, O initiated one, restrain speech, O wife, restrain speech."
6.6.4	Having given the instruction, the one who restrains speech and the one who is being milked for the vow.
6.6.5	Then the Adhvaryu, having gone out by the eastern door, having milked, and having returned by the same way, having performed the Agnihotra rite in the Garhapatya fire, having heated it, having taken it up, having cooled it, having put it in a vessel with or without a lid, places it in the northern part of the shed.
6.6.6	Then the Pratiprasthātṛ, having gone out by the southern door, having milked, and having returned by the same route, having heated (the milk) in the Vrata-oblation, having taken it out towards the north, having cooled it, having taken it away from the skin or without the skin, places it in the southern part of the shed.
6.6.7	Then, when the stars have risen, the sacrificer, having put on a black antelope skin, having gone out through the eastern door, standing in front of the hall, says three times, "Let us perform the vow, let us perform the vow."
6.6.8	Then he approaches the guests.
6.6.9	He speaks words that are pleasing and beneficial.
6.6.10	If he happens to come across something unclean, he recites: "The mind is untied, the eye is poor, the sun is the best of lights. May I not be deprived of initiation."
6.6.11	If it rains on him, he recites thus: "You give strength, you give energy, you give strength. May my initiation and austerity not be destroyed."
6.6.12	These two verses are recited by him in the course of the Paraplava rite.
6.6.13	Then at the time of his lying down, he spreads for the sacrificer a black antelope skin with its neck towards the east and with the hairy side upwards.
6.6.14	If it is spread out in excess, he lies down on it without being covered by the black antelope skin.
6.6.15	Then he recites the verse for lying down.
6.7.1	O Agni, do thou be watchful; we shall be watchful. Protect us for welfare. Give us back when we are awakened.
6.7.2	He sleeps facing the south. This is the place of the sacrificer. He sleeps in his own place. He sleeps facing Agni. He sleeps facing the deity and the sacrifice. So says the Brahmana.
6.7.3	Then the wife silently sits down with her back to the Garhapatya.
6.7.4	Then the Adhvaryu, having hastened at midnight, makes the Prabuddha-yajus recited: "You, O Agni, are the guardian of vows, a god among mortals. You are to be invoked in sacrifices."
6.7.5	Then he sips water with the verse, "We have conceived the divine mind, the gentle one, for our own sake. The one who carries the sacrifice, the one who bestows radiance, may it be well for us."
6.7.6	Then, having poured it into a pot or a bowl, he gives the vow.
6.7.7	Having placed it to the south, he consecrates with the verse, "Those gods who are born of mind, who are united with mind, who are well-skilled, who are the fathers of skill, may they protect us, may they favour us. Obeisance to them, svāhā."
6.7.8	Having consecrated as much as is prescribed in the Yajus, he consecrates further silently.
6.7.9	At this time the Adhvaryu, having poured the oblation into the wife's vessel, gives her the vow.
6.7.10	She, having covered it, gives the vow silently.
6.7.11	Having sprinkled the vessel, he gives it.
6.7.12	Then, in the same way, before the disappearance of the stars, having ordered the vow-observing couple to be silent, he milks them.
6.7.13	Then, when the sun has risen, the sacrificer, having put on the black antelope skin, having gone out through the eastern door, standing in front of the hall, utters the words "Bhūr Bhuvah Suvar, let us perform the vow, let us perform" three times.
6.7.14	The utterance of speech is the same, the invocation at the time of entering is the same, and the invocation at the moment of awakening is the same. The sipping of water is the same, as is the vow.
6.7.15	Then he sends forth the one with frost.
6.7.16	He sends forth first the one whom he thinks will not reject him, saying, "All the gods have turned towards me, Pusan with his gifts, Soma with his gifts, the god Savitar with his gifts."
6.7.17	Seeing him bringing (the Soma), he recites, "O Soma, bring again, give as much as is brought. Do not be deficient in fullness. For my life."
6.7.18	He accepts it in the form of the deity.
6.8.1	"You are the moon," for gold.
6.8.2	"You art cloth," for cloth.
6.8.3	"You arc a cow," for a cow.
6.8.4	"You ar a horse," for a horse.
6.8.5	"You ara a goat," for a goat.
6.8.6	"Thou art a ram." Thus he takes the ram.
6.8.7	Whatever is not given by the Brahman, he takes it saying, "Thou art Prajapati, for my enjoyment."
6.8.8	They protect them collectively.
6.8.9	If one of them perishes or dies, he dedicates it to Vayu saying, "To thee."
6.8.10	If it is in water or in a noose, he dedicates to Varuna saying, "To Thee."
6.8.11	If it is torn or falls into a hole, then it belongs to Nirriti.
6.8.12	If it is killed by a snake or a tiger, then it belongs (to Rudra).
6.8.13	Of these, three are excluded.
6.8.14	If they find the one that is lost, what should be done?
6.8.15	It should be given to the one who is instructed. This is the only one.
6.8.16	Who would be a better recipient of this?
6.8.17	One should give her along with the Dakshina. This is one view.
6.8.18	One should worship her with the Vayu-offering. This is another view.
6.9.1	Now, the discussion on the departure.
6.9.2	One who is initiated for a sacrifice or for the sake of prosperity, or for some other purpose, is initiated by the gods. They are united in the vow.
6.9.3	The calves of the two cows are tied together.
6.9.4	When they place the fires, they place the Garhapatya in the nest and the Ahavaniya in the Prāg.
6.9.5	Having ascended the fires at the Vāraṇas, he proceeds with the verse addressed to Brhaspati: "Go from the good to the better, may Brhaspati be your leader."
6.9.6	Now if he should reach the place of the vow while going, having placed the kindling wood to the north and having surrounded it to the south, he kindles the fire.
6.9.7	He waits silently for grass and water.
6.9.8	If he does not reach the bank, he should recite this: "The divine waters, the waters, the waters' foot, the wave that is Indra-like, the most powerful, the most intoxicating, may I not transgress it. I follow the unbroken thread of the earth."
6.9.9	One may cross by swimming or by floating.
6.9.10	Having made a bridge, one crosses. This is the Brahmanical text.
6.9.11	Then when he is going to stay, he recites this (verse): "Then I shall stay, having come to the earth."
6.9.12	Then when the sun rises, he recites: "Make all enemies powerless, O most heroic one."
6.9.13	Then when he is going for a sacrifice, he recites (this verse): "We have come to the place of sacrifice on earth."
6.10.1	Now, then, the Upavasatha of the purchase itself is completed.
6.10.2	He procures the Soma-purchasing cow, a red and yellow one-year-old heifer, two horses for carrying the Soma, a cart for carrying the Soma with its axle removed, a red hide, two skins of black antelope, kindling wood and sacrificial grass, enclosing sticks of Karṣmarya wood, a wooden sword, a wooden ladle, a wooden vessel, a wooden pestle, a wooden sieve, gold, a wooden stool, a wooden couch, the feet of which are of the same height as the navel, the heads of which are of a cubit's length, and which are covered with skin.
6.10.3	It is spread out with ropes of muñja grass, with single strands.
6.10.4	If the Soma is to be pressed for the king, it is like a royal couch, with the best part facing downwards.
6.10.5	Then the Adhvaryu, having hastened at the end of the night, instructs (the Soma-presser), "Press the Soma for the three-teat vow."
6.10.6	When the sun has risen in the morning and the speech has been released, standing in front of the house, he contemplates the divine sacrifice. If it is not contemplated before,
6.10.7	then he says, "O Yajamana, come!"
6.10.8	Having entered the house through the eastern door, having spread the sacrificial grass, having offered water, he performs the Prāyaniya Iṣṭi with the rice-gruel offering to the Sun.
6.10.9	Having released speech, having melted the clarified butter over the Garhapatya fire, having heated it over the Ahavaniya fire, he offers a spoonful oblation with the formula, "The wise one spreads the path of the sacrifice, on the back of the sky, in the shining heaven, by which you carry the oblation, you come as a messenger from here, the intelligent one from there, the desirable one. Svāhā."
6.10.10	Then, having gone out, he says to the one who is going to sell Soma, "O Soma-seller, purify the Soma. At the time of the evening twilight, the Brahman should sit facing south on the red hide of a cow at the edge of the water. Those cows should not go far away, where the cow for buying Soma and the two Soma-carrying cows are. The Soma-carrying cow is being washed. The vessel is being taken out."
6.10.11	They perform as they have been instructed.
6.10.12	Then, having returned by the same route by which they went,
6.10.13	having cooked this rice-gruel, having poured clarified butter over it, having taken it up with the ladle, having placed it on the fire, he prepares the Prāyaniya oblation with six Hotr-priests.
6.10.14	The rite is similar to that of the Prayāja offerings.
6.10.15	Having offered the five Prayāja offerings, having stepped forward towards the north, having poured the Dhruva vessel five times with the Srasrava (mixture), having poured the rice-gruel, he pours the Upāṃśu.
6.10.16	Then, while taking four spoonfuls of clarified butter, he says:
6.11.1	"Recite the Yajus softly, 'For the Pathya and for prosperity,' and loudly, 'Recite the Yajurveda."
6.11.2	Having crossed over, he says (to the Hotṛ) "Recite the Svasti-sutra" in a low voice, and "Recite loudly" in a high voice.
6.11.3	He offers at the Vasat-utterance in the eastern half.
6.11.4	Then, taking four spoonfuls of clarified butter, he says "To Agni" in a low tone, and "Recount" in a high tone.
6.11.5	Having crossed over, he announces "To Agni" softly, and "Recites" loudly.
6.11.6	At the Vasat-call, he offers in the southern half.
6.11.7	Then, taking four spoonfuls of clarified butter, he says "To Soma" softly and "Recite" loudly.
6.11.8	Having stepped across and having been invoked, he says "Soma" softly and "Sacrifice" loudly.
6.11.9	At the Vasat- call, he offers in northern half.
6.11.10	Then, when taking the four spoonfuls of clarified butter, he says "to Savitr" in a low voice, and "recite" in a loud voice.
6.11.11	Having stepped across, and having been announced, he says "Savitr" in a loud and low voice, and says "offer" in a loud.
6.11.12	He offers in the eastern half, after the Vasat-utterance.
6.11.13	Having spread (the oblations), and offering from the eastern half of the pan, he says "Adityas" in a low and loud voice, and says "
6.11.14	Having taken from the eastern half, he takes from the western half and pours over (the oblation). He anoints (the oblation) with the formula, "Thou art the oblation."
6.11.15	Having stepped across, he calls out, "Aditi!" and offers with the formula, “Obeisance to Aditi!" softly, and loudly, "Obeisance to Maruts!"
6.11.16	At the Vaṣaṭ-call, he offers in the middle.
6.11.17	Now indeed it is said:
6.11.18	"Having offered to Aditi, one should recite the Marutī verse:
6.11.19	"O Maruts, whatever you have done in heaven..."
6.11.20	Then having spread (the cake) on the northern half of the pan, and having cut it, he says, "Do you recite the yajus to Agni Sviṣṭakṛt."
6.11.21	Now indeed it is said:
6.11.22	"The Sviṣṭa-kriti has eight portions, the Ida has twelve portions."
6.11.23	He pours twice, does not wipe off.
6.11.24-26	Then, while handing over the ladle to the Agnidhra, he says, "Do not let it be too much." Having stepped across and having been addressed, he says, “One should offer to Agni Sviṣṭakṛt.” Having stepped across, having been addressed, and having said, "One should offer to Agnisvita," he offers the oblations in the northern half of the southern half of the fire. Having stepped across again and having been addressed,
6.11.27	Here, having sprinkled the ladle with water from the Ahavaniya fire, he places it to the north. Having stepped over towards the north, having placed the ladles in their places, having taken up the portion for eating, he offers the Iḍa oblation.
6.11.28	When the Iḍa has been invoked, the Agnidh (priest) places the oblation in the fire, six times.
6.11.29	They eat.
6.11.30	They cleanse themselves.
6.12.1-3	Then the performers of the rite, having taken out the rice-gruel, eat it without leaving any residue. Then they place the rice-grual vessel with its contents, the ladle, the Veda, and the four-fold sacrificial grass for the Udayaniya sacrifice.
6.12.4	Then having filled the Dhruva vessel with ghee, having taken four spoonfuls in the ladle, having bound a golden thread with a darbha-grass thread, having placed it in the ladle, he places it in the ladle with the verse, "This is thy bright body, this is thy lustre. By this mayst thou be born and go to the shining."
6.12.5	Here, having taken up the Darbha-blade-tube along with the ladle-stick, he offers on the Ahavaniya fire when the sacrificer has begun, with the formula, "Thou art the ladle, held by the mind, agreeable to Vishnu. May I obtain the instrument of speech at thy true impulse. Svāhā."
6.12.6	Having taken up another four-fold portion, he then asks for the wooden sword, water-pot, sacrificial grass and gold.
6.12.7	Having taken this, he goes forward, saying, "O sacrificer!"
6.12.8	The sacrificer and his wife, having taken the pot and the ladle, go out through the eastern door, and standing in front of the hall, the sacrificer looks at the ghee, saying, "This is bright, this is nectar, this is the offering for all gods."
6.12.9	Then, having concealed him with gold, he makes him gaze at the sun, saying, "Thou hast ascended the eye of the sun, the pupil of the eye of Agni, when thou art led by the shining ones, the wise."
6.12.10	Then they lead the Soma-purchasing cow beyond the hall towards the north.
6.12.11	He instructs her with the verse, "Thou art the mind, the true mind."
6.12.12	Then he says, "You should place the seventh step of the southern direction."
6.12.13	It moves out six steps from that.
6.13.1	"You are Vivasvat, you are Rudra, you are Aditi, you are Aditya, you are Shukra, you are Chandra."
6.13.2	He takes the seventh step, saying, "May Brihaspati bless you with good fortune, may Rudra with the Vasus proclaim you."
6.13.3	Then having placed gold in this place and having strewn it all around, he offers with the verse, "I have raised thee to the head of the earth, at the place of Ida, the divine sacrifice, O ghee-possessor, svāhā."
6.13.4	Having taken out the gold, he draws a line with the wooden sword or with the black horn, saying, "The Rakshas is drawn; the evil ones are drawn. I draw the neck of the Rakshas who hates us and whom we hate. I draw his neck."
6.13.5	Then with the wooden sword he makes it reach up to the water. He pours it into the trough three times with the formula, "For us be the wealth, for us be the wealth."
6.13.6	He gives it to the sacrificer with the formula, “For you be the wealth.”
6.13.7	The sacrificer gives it to his wife with the formula,
6.13.8	"For us be the prosperity." Then he makes the sacrificer's wife look at the Soma-purchasing cow with the formula, "O divine one, look at the divine cow."
6.13.9	Then the wife looks at the sacrificer, saying, "May I be blessed with Tvashtri, bearing the seed of the gods, may I know your heroic son."
6.13.10	Then the sacrificer looks at the Soma-purchasing cow, saying, "Do not be separated from me in prosperity."
6.13.11	Then he washes the gold with water and ties it to the middle finger.
6.13.12	Then he sprinkles him with water, lying down on the ground.
6.13.13	They let loose the Soma-purchasing cow.
6.13.14	They lead the wife (to the house).
6.13.15	They place the foot.
6.14.1	Then standing here only, he asks for the moon, the ladle, the black antelope skin, the woolen blanket, the turban, two garments, two black antelope skins, and the Soma-purchaser.
6.14.2	Then he asks the Soma-seller, "Are your Somas pure?"
6.14.3	The other replies, "They are pure."
6.14.4	The king, well-versed in the Vedas, stands before him with the verses beginning with "This is thy Gayatri portion." "Tell Soma this." "This is thy Tristubh portion." "Tell this to Soma." "This is Thy Jagati portion." "Tell me this to Soma." "May I attain the sovereignty of the Chandomas." "Tell me to Soma."
6.14.5	Then he spreads the red hide of an antelope with the hair turned upwards.
6.14.6	Then he spreads the garment, doubled, on the northern half of the skin, with the ends towards the east.
6.14.7	Then with a golden-handled hand he touches the king, saying, "May your hair be touched by the hair, may your skin be touched by the skin, may your fragrance be touched by fragrance, may your juice be touched by juice for intoxication, you are an unchanging minister, your grasp is bright."
6.14.8	Then he measures him with the Atichhandas verse.
6.14.9	He measures it with one and one.
6.14.10	He measures it with the unmeasured and the measured.
6.14.11	In all (the fingers) he holds the thumb. I worship that God Savitar, the impeller, the wise, of true gifts, the giver of treasures, the one who has the pleasant mind, whose mind shines upwards, in the light, in the assembly. The one with golden hands, of good counsel, has measured out the good.
6.14.12	Five times with the Yajus, five times silently.
6.14.13	Mimans (the king) ten times, the half-time of the king.
6.14.14	Then he puts the remaining king to rest for the subjects.
6.14.15	Having collected, he puts on the ends of the garment clockwise with the Uṣṇīsa, saying, "For Prāṇa."
6.14.16	He puts on the Anushrntha, saying, "for Vyāna."
6.14.17	Then, having made a space above with the finger, he looks at the sacrificer, saying, "May your progeny follow you; may your progeny follow you."
6.14.18	Then he places him on the skin.
6.14.19	Then Kauṣṭa takes it.
6.14.20	Having sprinkled it with water, he lifts up the skin.
6.14.21	Having risen, he asks, "O Soma-seller, is your Soma bought?"
6.14.22	The other replies, "It is for sale."
6.14.23	The other replies, "For the cow."
6.14.24	The other says, "For the one with the cow."
6.14.25	He says, "I buy it for a cow."
6.14.26	The seller of Soma says, "Soma is bought." "Tell me about the cattle."
6.14.27	"This is your Soma-purchasing cow. The moon is yours. The wool is yours. The cloth is yours."
6.14.28	Then he offers it for sale with gold.
6.15.1	Having said, "I buy Soma from you, full of strength, full of milk, full of vigour, full of power, bright, I buy you with brightness, the moon with the moon, the nectar with the nectar," having said, "You are bound by the cow," he gives the Chandrani to the sacrificer.
6.15.2	Then he offers it to him with the neck turned towards the west, saying, "Thou art the body of Tapas, the colour of Prajapati. I buy thee with the last animal for the prosperity of a thousandfold prosperity of her who is prospering."
6.15.3	He looks at the sacrificer, saying, "Thy friend is with us."
6.15.4	"May thy wealth be established in me," he says, looking at himself.
6.15.5	Then, having circumambulated her clockwise, sprinkling her with water, he releases her towards the north.
6.15.6	This is for Kautsa.
6.15.7	Then he takes the king from Kautsa, saying, "O Mitra, come, for the sake of good friendship."
6.15.8	He places him on the right thigh of the sacrificer, saying, "Enter Indra's right thigh, O shining one, the shining one, the auspicious one, the auspicious."
6.15.9	Then the sacrificer puts it on him.
6.15.10	Having sprinkled with water, he gives the turban to the attendant or to Kautsat.
6.15.11	Then he ties the sacrificer with a white woolen thread, saying, "May there be light for us."
6.15.12	Then he ties this black one, saying, "I am tying the neck of all serpents and venomous snakes."
6.15.13	He strikes the Soma-seller with the formula, "O Tamas, thou art the Soma-seller."
6.15.14	Then he points out the Soma-buyers to the guardians of the quarters, "These are your Soma-buyers, viz. Suhasta, Krsana, Hasta, Suhasta, Bambhara, Bhrājāṅghāra. Protect them, do not let them be harmed."
6.15.15	Then, having taken it, he rises, saying, "With life, with my life, with the juice of plants, with the strength of rain, I rise to the immortal."
6.15.16	To the south of this, the Soma-bearing chariot, yoked with horses facing east, is placed, ready for use.
6.15.17	Having approached it, he says, "Go over the sky."
6.15.18	He spreads a black antelope skin on his nest, saying, "Thou art the seat of Aditi."
6.15.19	"Thou art the seat for Aditi," he says, placing the king on the black antelope skin.
6.15.20	Then he stands by him, saying, "The bull supported the sky, measured the atmosphere, and settled the extent of the earth. He is the overlord of all worlds, all those are the vows of Varuna."
6.15.21	Then he covers him with a cloth, reciting, "In the forests he stretched out the sky, the strength in the horses, the milk in the cows, the heart in the men, Varuna the sacrifice in all directions, Agni in heaven, the sun, he poured down Soma."
6.15.22	Then with the verse addressed to Surya, "I praise that Jātavedas," he ties the black antelope skin in front.
6.15.23	Then he addresses the two Soma-bearing horses being led in, saying, "These two are the horses of Soma, the destroyers of foes, the non-weeping, the non-killing, the instigators of Brahman."
6.15.24	He yokes the right one first, saying, "Thou art the prop of Varuna."
6.15.25	He puts the yoke-halter, saying, "thou art the releasing of Varuna's prop."
6.15.26	The yoke-halter, "Varuna's noose is turned back."
6.15.27	With this very (verse) he yokes the bullock with the yoke turned back.
6.15.28	Then, beginning with the southern yoke, he gives the order:
6.16.1	"Recite for Soma, bought and being offered. O Subrahmanya, invite Subrahmanya. Do not invite yourself. The sacrificer will invite."
6.16.2	When the sacrificer thrice calls out in a low voice, then this Subrahmanya, standing between the two, holding a Palasha branch, calls out to the Subrahmanya, saying "Subrahmanya, Subrahmanya" thrice.
6.16.3	When it is uttered thrice, they throw it away. "O lord of the earth, may you be thrown away. May all the worlds not know you. May those who oppose you not know you. The wolves with evil intentions, may they not know you. Let the Gandharva Visvavasu not know you. Having become a hawk, may you fall away. In the house of the sacrificer, may you be purified by the gods."
6.16.4	They carry the king around clockwise.
6.16.5	Then the Adhvaryu and the sacrificer approach the Anjasas. The sacrificer's path is for welfare. We have gone along it. We have gone by the path of welfare, free from distress, by which one overcomes all enemies and obtains prosperity.
6.16.6	Then, standing in front of the hall, he addresses the king being led forward, "Salutations to Mitra and Varuna, to the great god, to the one who sees, to the one to be worshipped with truth. To the distant-seeing, to the banner of the divine race, to the son of heaven, to Surya, I praise."
6.16.7	Then they place the Soma-bearing Anus in front of the shed, facing upwards.
6.16.8	He places it with the formula, "Thou art the prop of Varuna."
6.16.9	He places the wooden mallet with the formula, “Thou art the releasing of Varuna's prop."
6.16.10	He releases the yoke with the formula, "The noose of Varuna is released."
6.16.11	Now indeed it is said,
6.16.12	One is released, another becomes a bull, another accepts hospitality. For the continuity of the sacrifice, the wife takes part. This is the Brahmanical text.
6.16.13	Then he says, "O sacrificer, come!"
6.16.14	Having entered the house through the eastern door, having spread the sacrificial grass, having offered water, he offers hospitality when the wife has taken part.
6.17.4	Having made this the first step, he says, "For Agni, for thee, for the bestower of wealth and prosperity, I pour out what is agreeable to Vishnu."
6.17.5	Having made this the first, he says, "For the hawk, for thee, the bearer of Soma, I pour out that which is agreeable to Vishnu."
6.17.6	Five times with the Yajus.
6.17.7	Having released speech with the Havishkrit formula, he releases the bull with the same formula.
6.17.8	Then these four Brahmanas take up the seat.
6.17.9	Then the sacrificer takes up the king from the nest, saying, "Those who worship thee with oblations, may they all be thy protectors at the sacrifice."
6.17.10	They approach the seat from the east.
6.17.11	The sacrificer follows the king, the Sudra follows with the water-pot.
6.17.12	He makes the hall enter through the eastern door with the verse, "The shelterer, the protector, the very heroic, the slayer of foes, the protector, O Soma, do thou protect us from the evil ways."
6.17.13	Then having brought forward this stool towards the Ahavaniya fire, they place it on the right (south) side.
6.17.14	On it he spreads the black antelope skin with the verse, “Thou art the seat of Aditi.”
6.17.15	He sits on the black antelope skin on the seat of Aditis with the verse,
6.17.16	Then he addresses him, "You are Varuna, the one who holds the vow. You are Varuna."
6.17.17	Having tied the ends of the black antelope skin with a string, he ties it to the bamboo, saying, "For the friendship of the gods."
6.17.18	Then the Brāhmaṇa sprinkles him between the two seats, the Śūdra washes him, saying, "May I not cut off the share of the gods."
6.17.19	Then he attends to him with the Varuna verse, saying, "I approach you with the Brahman, bowing down."
6.17.20	Then he instructs him, "No one should pass between the king and the Havirdhāna cart. No one should approach him with a weapon, with a stick, with an umbrella, with a turban, with shoes."
6.17.21	Then they offer him a Madhuparka and a cow.
6.17.22	The Adhvaryu instructs her.
6.18.1	They cook this guest-offering to Vishnu on nine potsherds.
6.18.2	With that he places the Madantīs.
6.18.3	This is the procedure for the Iḍā-oblations.
6.18.4	With the Kārṣmarya-wood, with the Aśvālā-wood, with a stone, with the two Ekṣavī-wood, with that procedure.
6.18.5	Having taken the skin of the cake, having cooked it, having sprinkled it, having gone forward, having offered it to them, he takes the Stambayajus.
6.18.6	This is the well-known Pāuroḍāśika.
6.18.7	Three times with the Yajus, silently the fourth.
6.18.8	He takes up the first portion.
6.18.9	He recites the Karana.
6.18.10	He lifts it up.
6.18.11	The Agnidhra takes it up three times from the lifted up (portion).
6.18.12	When the Agnidhra takes up the spoon three times, then having taken up the enclosing sticks, having placed the wooden sword horizontally, he gives the instructions: "Bring the Prokṣaṇī water, place the sacrificial grass and the sacrificial grass-blades, cleanse the spoon and the ladles, and bring clarified butter."
6.18.13	Having taken up the sprinkling water, having cleansed the wooden sword, having placed the sacrificial grass and the sacrificial grass-holder, having turned around towards the right, having hastened towards the west, having cleansed the spoon and the ladles, having come up with clarified butter, having melted the clarified butter and the sprinkling water, taking four or five spoonfuls of clarified butter, he stands up with the sprinkling water.
6.18.14-19	He sprinkles the sacrificial grass. He sprinkles the altar. He sprinkles (the grass) on the sacrificial grass. Having sprinkled the grass near the sacrificial grass, he takes up the wooden sword in front (of the altar). Having spread the sacrificial grass in five layers, and having approached towards the east with the wooden sword in his hand, he places the enclosing sticks made of Carissa spinosa. He places the two upright kindling woods.
6.18.20	The Aikhshani (spoon) is the support, the Tarshani (spoon) the support, the Sadani (spoon) supports.
6.18.21	The Asvalayana (spoon) is a support, the Prishthara (spoon) is support.
6.18.22	The Juhu (spoon) is on the Prishtharas.
6.18.23	The Barhisheetare (spoon) is in the Barhisheetares.
6.18.24	Having touched them together with the formula, "They have sat down," having turned around to the right, having run towards the west, having placed the Puronuvakya-s, having placed the Purodasha which has been spread and sprinkled, having placed the Atithya-s in the four Hotr-s.
6.18.25	Here he explains the collection of materials.
6.18.26	Then, the one who is to be churned moves without being covered by the one who is churning.
6.18.27	Having struck with the oblation, then taking the kindling wood from the fire, he says, "Recite for Agni who is kindling."
6.18.28	He places the kindling wood.
6.18.29	He does not destroy the kindling wood completely.
6.18.30	He removes it with a Veda.
6.18.31-36	Having placed the oblations on the fire, he offers them with the verse, "O Agni, do thou offer the oblations, do thou offer them well, do thou offer all the oblations." Having offered the oblations, he offers the Anubandhya oblation with the verse, “O Agni, do not burn us, do not burn our offspring. Having offered the Anubandhyā oblation, he offers the Samidhenī oblations with the verse, "O Agni, do you offer the oblations." Having offered the Samidhenīs, he offers the Ājyabhāgas with the verse, "O Agni, do offer the oblations. Having offered Ājyabhāga, he offers the Sviṣṭakṛt oblation with the formula, "O Agni, do burn the oblations." Translation: Having placed the oblatory substances on the fire, one offers them with the formula, “O Agni! Do thou offer the oblatory materials, do thou offer well, do thou make all the oblations.” Having offered the materials, one offers the Anubandha oblation with the mantra, “O Agni ! Do not burn us, nor our offspring.  Having offered the Anubandha, one offers the Samidhaṇī oblations with this verse, “O Agnis ! Do offer the oblations.” Having offered the Samidhānī oblations, one offers the Ājyabhagas with the verse “O Agnis! Do offer the oblatioṇs.” Having offered Ājya-bhagas, one offers the Sviştakṛt oblation by means of the formula, “Do thou burn the oblations, O Agni.”
6.18.37	Having taken it up in the two ladles, having gone around, having announced (the offering), he says, "Do you offer the kindling wood."
6.18.38	At the Vasat-utterance he offers, saying, "Do you sacrifice, do you sacrifice."
6.18.39	When he is about to offer the fourth (oblation), he pours this butter from the Upabṛt into the Juhu entirely.
6.18.40	Having offered the five Prāyājas, having stepped forward towards the north, having poured the Dhruva with the Srasrava, he pours over the Purorasa, not over the Upāṁśu.
6.18.41	Then he performs with the Ajyabhāga offerings to Agni and Soma.
6.18.42	He performs with the Havis silently, saying, "Recite for Vishnu, offer to Vishnu."
6.18.43	Then he performs the Svishtakrit offering.
6.18.44	The Iḍānta Ātithyas are concluded.
6.18.45	Here he places the full vessel inside the altar.
6.18.46	Here he pours the Dhruva-vessel with ghee and asks for a pot or a bowl.
6.18.47	Having placed it inside the altar, he pours the Tānūnaptrā into it.
6.19.1	I take thee for the falling down, I take thee for Tapanta, I take thee to Tanunaptra, I take thee unto Shakra, I take thee, O Shakra, to the most powerful one.
6.19.2	The priests, as many as there are, examine him. He is not to be assailed, he is not to be attacked, he is the strength of the gods, he is the protector from censure, he is not censurable.
6.19.3	The sacrificer recites the following verse: "May the lord of initiation approve of my initiation, may the lord of austerity approve of my austerity. I have approached truth by the right path. May you grant me good fortune."
6.19.4	Having offered libations to all the priests, the sacrificer himself thrice inhales, saying, "I offer thee in Prajapati, in the mind."
6.19.5	Having sprinkled it with water, he sprinkles it towards the north.
6.19.6	Then he says, "The waters are singing."
6.19.7	"The goddesses are singing, immortal, increasing with truth."
6.19.8	"They are singing."
6.19.9	Then having touched the Madanti waters, having risen, having loosened, having placed the gold, they make the king grow. "The verse is: "May the rays of the god Soma grow for you, O Indra, who knows the one wealth. May Indra grow for you. May you grow for Indra."
6.19.10	The sacrificer recites the verse, "May the Soma, the god, be pleased with us, may he be pleased with us. May he be pleased with our oblations."
6.19.11	Having touched water, they sit down in their respective places.
6.19.12	Then the Adhvaryu arranges the two ladles with the verses addressed to Vayu.
6.19.13	Having taken up the Prastara with the two verses addressed to Vidhṛti, he anoints it thrice without listening to the response.
6.19.14	He does not call out to the Prastara.
6.19.15	He does not throw the sacrificial grass.
6.19.16	Having placed it on the southern half of the sacrificial place, they sprinkle it from south to north, saying, "O Asti, O Rati, O Bhaga, O Artam, O Ritavadin, salutations to heaven, salutations to earth."
6.19.17	He collects the chips on the enclosing sticks.
6.19.18	On the stone slab, having spread the sacrificial grass to the extent of the body, having bound it with a string, having sprinkled it with water from the Ahavaniya fire, he places it towards the north.
6.19.19	Then he leads the sacrificer to the intermediate consecration, with the verse, "O Agni, lord of vows, thou art the lord of vows. This body of mine is in thee, and thy body is in me. Together with thee, O lord of vows, are the vows of us who are vow-holders."
6.19.20	Then he instructs him: "Tie the girdle, make the fists, be on a hot vow, cleanse yourself with the Madanti-verses, release the vow first, protect us with that Rudra form of yours, Svāhā to that. From now on, let me be on a vow."
6.19.21	He does all this in the same way.
6.20.1	Then, having performed the Pravargya rite, he performs the Avrita rite.
6.20.2	Taking up the wooden sword, he says, "Place the Madantī (bricks) and the oblation. Come and sit down."
6.20.3	He brings more water into the Madantī bricks.
6.20.4	He places clarified butter.
6.20.5	That is the oblation.
6.20.6	Then, having spread the sacrificial grass on the same spot,
6.20.7	The Stambayajus is taken away.
6.20.8	This is well-known as the Purodasa.
6.20.9	Three times with the Yajus, and the fourth silently.
6.20.10	He takes up the first portion.
6.20.11	He murmurs the Karana.
6.20.12	He lifts it up.
6.20.13	The Agnidhra takes it away three times from the lifted up (portion).
6.20.14	The Agnidhra takes up the fire three times, then taking up the northern enclosing stick, having placed it, having placed the transverse wooden sword, he gives the instruction: "Bring the Madantī (kindling wood), place the sacrificial grass and the sacrificial grass, smear the spoon and the ladles, bring the oblations."
6.20.15	When the Madantīs have been brought, having cleansed the Sphy, having placed the sacrificial grass and the sacrificial grass-holder, having turned around to the right, having run towards the west, he cleanses the spoon and the two ladles.
6.20.16	He goes to the oblation.
6.20.17	Having heated the oblation and the Madantīs, he takes eight portions in the Juhu.
6.20.18	Four in the Upabṛt.
6.20.19	Having placed the third ladle in the vessel of clarified butter, she rises with the Madantīs.
6.20.20	He sprinkles the wood.
6.20.21	He sprinkles (the altar) of the Vedi.
6.20.22	He sprinkles grass.
6.20.23	Having sprinkled the grass near the altar and having brought it near, he takes up the Aśvavalya sacrificial grass in front.
6.20.24	Having spread the sacrificial grass in one direction, taking the Prastara in hand, he moves forward and places the enclosing sticks made of Caruksha wood.
6.20.25	He places the two upright kindling woods.
6.20.26	He places them with the tip towards the north.
6.20.27	The Prastara is made of Aśvalā wood.
6.20.28	On the Prastara, the Juhu ladle.
6.20.29	On the Barhiṣīta, the Upabhṛt ladle.
6.20.30	Having touched them with the formula, "May these be auspicious," having turned around to the right, having run towards the west, having sat down with the back towards the Garhapatya, he recites the Devapatnī verses.
6.20.31	Then having come back by the same route, taking a fire-stick from the embers, he says, "Do you recite the Yajus for Agni being kindled."
6.20.32	He puts the embers once or thrice.
6.20.33	He does not put the fire-stick.
6.20.34-40	He makes the offering with the Veda. When the Sāmidhenī verses are not recited, he offers the Āghāra libation with the spoon. When the spoon is wiped, he offers the Uttaravedi libation with the spoons. Then he chooses the Pravara. Then he announces, "Let it be heard, let it be heard, O Hotr, sit down." This much is the Pravara. The Hotr sits down. He desires the Prasu.
6.20.41	Having been born, he says while taking up the spoon.
6.21.1	"One should recite softly, "To the fires." One should recite loudly, "Do you recite."
6.21.2	Having stepped over, having announced, he says, "To Agni." One should recite softly, "Do you recite to Yaj." One should recite loudly."
6.21.3	At the Vasat-utterance, one offers at half the time in the eastern half.
6.21.4	Then standing here itself, he says, "To Soma." One should recite soflty, "Do you recites." One recites loudly.
6.21.5	Having called out, he says, "To Soma" softly, and "To be worshipped" loudly.
6.21.6	At the Vasat-call, he offers in the middle.
6.21.7	Then, while leading the animal, he says, "To Vishnu" softly, and "Recite after me" loudly.
6.21.8	Having called out, he recites, "To Vishnu," softly, and says, "To be worshipped" loudly.
6.21.9	At Vasat-call he offers everything at the rear.
6.21.10	Then, having stepped over towards the north, and having placed the ladles in their places, he says, "The fires are drinking the Soma."
6.21.11	"The goddesses are drinking, the immortal ones, growing with truth."
6.21.12	"They are drinking."
6.21.13	Then having touched the Madanti waters, having risen, having loosened, having placed the gold, they make the king grow with the verse, "O Soma, may you grow with rays, O Indra, the knower of one wealth. May Indra grow for you. May you grow for Indra."
6.21.14	The sacrificer recites the verse, "May the Soma, the god, be pleased with us, may he be pleased with us. May he be pleased with our oblations."
6.21.15	Having touched water, they sit down in their respective places.
6.21.16	Then the Adhvaryu arranges the two ladles with the verses addressed to Vayu.
6.21.17	Having taken up the Prastara with the two verses addressed to Vidhṛti, he anoints it thrice without listening to the response.
6.21.18	He does not call out to the Prastara.
6.21.19	He does not throw the sacrificial grass.
6.21.20	Having placed it on the southern half of the sacrificial place, they sprinkle it from south to north, saying, "O Indra, O Agni, O Soma, O Varuna, O Yama, O Aryaman, O Mitra, O Vivasvat, O Savitar, O Pusan, O Sarasvati, O Dhātar, O Nasatyas, O Bhaga, salutations to the speakers of truth, salutations to heaven, salutations to earth."
6.21.21	Having covered the wooden sword in his left hand, he offers the first Upasad oblation with the ladle of the vessel of clarified butter, reciting, "O Agni, the form of thine that is most excellent, that is most hidden, I have removed the harsh speech. I have removed the speech that is not thine. Svāhā."
6.21.22	He places the chips on the boundary lines, spreads the sacrificial grass on the Prastara, and having tied it with a string, sprinkles it with water from the Havaniya vessel, and places it towards the north.
6.21.23	Then, having gone out, he gives the instruction: "O Subrahmaṇya, invite the Subrahmaṇyā, and give the three-breasted vow."
6.21.24	Subrahmanya calls out to Subrahmanya.
6.21.25	He gives the three-breasted vow.
6.21.26	Then in the afternoon, he performs the evening Pravargya and Upasads.
6.21.27	Their rites are the same, except for this difference.
6.21.28	They shave on the left and right sides.
6.21.29	Then having gone out, he says to the Subrahmaṇya, "O Subrahmaṇyā, call the Subrahmaṇa to milk the cow with three udders."
6.21.30	The Subrahmaṇy calls the Subrahmaņa to milk the cow.
6.21.31	He gives it at midnight.
6.22.1	Then the Adhvaryu, having come up in the latter part of the night, instructs (the sacrificer), "Do thou milk the cow twice for the Tanu-rite."
6.22.2	When the sun has risen in the morning and the speech has been released, he proceeds with the Pravargya and Upasad rites by means of the middle ones.
6.22.3	Here he offers to Rājasuya.
6.22.4	Then having gone out, he says to the Subrahmaṇya (priest) the words of invitation: "Invite the Subrahmaṇaṇyā, give the two-breasted vow."
6.22.5	The Subrahmaṇyā is invited.
6.22.6	The two-breasted vow is given.
6.22.7	He first lays down six steps towards the east from the Āhavanīya fire.
6.22.8	He strikes the peg there.
6.22.9	That is the stake of the Śālamukha.
6.22.10	From the stake of the Salamukha, he moves forward thirty-six steps towards the east.
6.22.11	He strikes that stake.
6.22.12	That is the stake of Yūpāvatī.
6.22.13	From the Salamukha stake, he moves forward fifteen steps towards the south and fifteen steps towards the north.
6.22.14	He strikes those stakes.
6.22.15	Those are the hips.
6.22.16	From the post-hole, he measures twelve paces towards the east and twelve towards the north.
6.22.17	He strikes the post there.
6.22.18	Those are the shoulders.
6.22.19	Then, having measured it with a span, he encloses it all around with a rope.
6.22.20	He spreads it on the back.
6.22.21	From the Yūpāvatīya peg, he lays down twelve small steps towards the east, from the Anuspandya peg.
6.22.22	The peg in the middle of the northern side is the middle one.
6.22.23	From the peg in the middle on the northern side, he lays down five small steps towards the south and five towards the north.
6.22.24	He strikes the peg.
6.22.25	These are the hips.
6.22.26	From the Yūpāvatīya and the Śaṅku, four Dakṣiṇā (are given). He places four small steps towards the east.
6.22.27	The Śaṅku strikes them.
6.22.28	Those are the shoulders.
6.22.29	Then he measures it with a span and a half and cuts it around with a swinging (line).
6.22.30	He spreads it on the back.
6.22.31	From the middle of the northern altar, he measures six steps towards the west, and seven towards the south, from the point where the line of the southern altar meets the line of the northern altar.
6.22.32	He places the wooden sword there.
6.22.33	This is the time for the Uparava offerings.
6.22.34	From the northern corner of the great altar, he measures twelve steps towards the west along the edge of the altar, and thirteen steps towards the east.
6.22.35	The Agnidhra approaches (the Hotr).
6.22.36	This is the time for the Utkara.
6.22.37	Then from the time of the Uparava-offerings, he takes the Stambayajus.
6.23.1	This is the well-known Purodasa.
6.23.2	Three times with the Yajus, and the fourth silently.
6.23.3	He takes up the Parigraha first.
6.23.4	The men who recite this hymn, having come to the altar, make it rich in wealth, rich in Rudra, rich in Aditya, rich in all the gods, as wide as the sky and the earth, so that this sacrificer may not be harmed.
6.23.5	He lifts it up.
6.23.6	The Agnidhra carries it three times from the lifted up (place).
6.23.7	The Agnidhra thrice takes it up, and then standing in front of the hall, he gives the directions: "The makers of the altar make the altar, break the high places, fill up the low places, remove the gravels, and stand in the east, west, and north."
6.23.8	They do as directed.
6.23.9	Then from the northern end of the Mahāvedi, he measures three steps towards the west, along the edge of the Vedi, and one step towards the north.
6.23.10	He then encloses the Cātvāla with the Vedi.
6.23.11	He lays down the northern altar-platform, enclosing the northern altar-stone.
6.23.12	Having levelled the northern altar-mound, he covers it and performs the evening Pravargya and Upasads.
6.23.13	Then having gone out, he says to the Subrahmaṇya, "O Subrahmaṇyā, call the Subrahmaṇa to milk the two-uddered cow."
6.23.14	The Subrahmaṇy calls the Subrahmaņa.
6.23.15	He milks the two-udder cow.
6.23.16	He gives it at midnight.
6.24.1	Then the Adhvaryu, having come in the latter part of the night, instructs (the sacrificer) thus: "One who is observing the Ekastana-vow should milk."
6.24.2	When the sun has risen in the morning and the speech has been released, he proceeds with the Upasads of the Pravargya.
6.24.3	Here he offers to Haraśaya.
6.24.4	Then having gone out, he says to the Subrahmaṇya, "Invite the Subrahmaṇaṇyā and give her the half-breast vow."
6.24.5	The Subrahmaṇyā is invited by the Subrahmaṃya.
6.24.6	She is given the half-breast-vow.
6.24.7	Then at that very time, having performed the evening Pravargya and Upasad rites, having gone out, he gives the instruction: "O Subrahmanya, invite the Subrahmanya priest. O Pratiprasthātṛ, bring the Pravargya vessel for the Pravargya rite to be placed in the fire."
6.24.8	They make this place three-fold.
6.24.9	They place the third at the Garhapatya, the third in the Upayamaniya ladles, and the third in the fire.
6.24.10	Then, having covered the Pravargya, he places it down.
6.24.11	Having covered Agni, he carries Agni.
6.24.12	Having taken up the northern enclosing stick with Agni, having placed it down, having made the wooden sword lie down, he gives the instruction: "Collect the sprinkling water, place the kindling wood and sacrificial grass." This is the extent of the instruction.
6.24.13	Here only he spreads the sacrificial grass, once only.
6.24.14	Here only he spreads the grass and the sacrificial grass for the animal to be sacrificed to Agni-Soma, says one.
6.24.15	Then these two, having washed and put on the garments, stand near the house.
6.24.16	Of these two, the right one is the younger and the left one is the smaller.
6.24.17	The southern one is with fruits plucked, the northern one without fruits plucked.
6.24.18	Of these two, the one on which the dice are tied, that one wins.
6.24.19	Then they turn back within the altar.
6.24.20	Then having placed a stick at a distance of a span in front of the hall, he sprinkles it, saying, "Obeisance to Viṣṇu, may you be purified."
6.24.21	Then he says, "Come, O sacrificer."
6.24.22	Having entered the hall by the eastern door, having melted clarified butter over the Garhapatya fire, having purified it, having taken four spoonfuls in the ladle, he offers to Savitr at the mouth of the hall, when the sacrificer has begun, with the verse, "They yoke the mind and they yoke the thoughts, the seers, the wise ones, of the great sage. He has placed himself in the office of Hotr, knowing the union. He is the one who knows the great praise of the god Savitr. Svāhā!"
6.24.23	Having taken up another four spoonfuls, he asks for the vessel of clarified butter with the ladle, the wooden sword, the water-pot, the sacrificial grass and gold.
6.24.24	Having taken this, he says, "Come, O sacrificer!"
6.24.25	The sacrificer and his wife, having taken the third step, go out by the eastern door, approach the southern axle of the southern Havirdhāna, throw the grass with the wooden sword on the southern axle, place the gold, spread it around, and offer with the formula, "This Viṣṇu strode thrice, he placed his foot in three places. His foot is spread over the dust. Svāhā."
6.24.26	Then he pours the half of these grains of barley into the water for the wives.
6.24.27	Then he pours them with the dripping (water).
6.24.28	She touches the right axle-pin with her hand stretched out towards the east, saying, "May a hero be born to us, the most capable, whom all of us may follow, who shall be the lord of many."
6.24.29	Taking another four spoonfuls, he moves towards the northern Havirdhāna, and having placed the gold on the northern axle, having sprinkled it with the wooden sword, having spread it around, he offers with the verse, "May the cow, the giver of food, the giver of wealth, the giver of fame, the giver of good fortune, the giver of progeny, the giver of heaven, the giver of all, the giver of everything, the giver of the world, the giver of life, the giver of strength, the giver of beauty, the giver of happiness, the giver of peace, the giver of prosperity, the giver of abundance, the giver of milk, the giver of butter, the giver of honey, the giver of grain, the giver of water, the giver of earth, the giver of fire, the giver of wind, the giver of space, the giver of light, the giver of darkness, the giver of time, the giver of truth, the giver of falsehood, the giver of knowledge, the giver of ignorance, the giver of virtue, the giver of vice, the giver of pleasure, the giver of pain, the giver of joy, the giver of sorrow, the giver of love, the giver of hatred, the giver of friendship, the giver of enmity, the giver of affection, the giver of anger, the giver of fear, the giver of courage, the giver of hope, the giver of despair, the giver of faith, the giver of doubt, the giver of devotion, the giver of non-devotion, the giver of worship, the giver of disrespect, the giver of praise, the giver of blame, the giver of success, the giver of failure, the giver of victory, the giver of defeat, the giver of birth, the giver of death, the giver of existence, the giver of absence, the giver of creation, the giver of destruction, the giver of union, the giver of
6.24.30	Here he pours down the ashes of these (sacrificial) substances in the water of the wife.
6.24.31	Then he pours them down with the Saṃsrava (oblation).
6.24.32	She puts the axle of the wheel on the right side with the right hand stretched out.
6.24.33	The anointing is common.
6.24.34	Then the Pratiprasthātṛ hands over these implements.
6.24.35	They lead the wife, call the Hotr.
6.24.36	Then, having taken hold of it, he says to the Praiṣa-reciter:
6.25.1	"Recite while the Havirdhāna carts are being turned around."
6.25.2	When it is recited three times, they turn around, saying, "Turning towards the east, we establish the sacrifice. Lead the sacrifice upwards, do not be sluggish."
6.25.3	If the dice are cast, he mutters, "O god, the dice have spoken well."
6.25.4	Then the Adhvaryu and the Pratiprasthātṛ approach the two Anjasas.
6.25.5	Having gone around along the north of the Havirdhāna, having gone beyond the eastern ones, having gone beyond from the middle of the northern altar, having moved towards the east, they take three steps towards the west.
6.25.6	May you delight in the delight of these two, who are in the sky, and are sporting on the neck. O Varṣman, may you delight in the earth.
6.25.7	Then the Adhvaryu strikes the southern door-post of the Havirdhāna with the verse beginning with "O Vishnu, whether in heaven or on earth" (Taitt. Sam. 1. 1.1).
6.25.8	Then he binds it with the Spandyā, well-fastened, reciting the verse, "Which of the powers of Vishnu shall I praise?"
6.25.9	In the same way, the Pratiprasthātṛ binds the Methi on the northern side of the northern Havirdhāna cart.
6.25.10	Then he binds it with Spandyā, also well-fastened. With the same verse.
6.25.11	Then the Adhvaryu, having measured a span towards the east from the corner of the southern Havirdhāna, places it on the ground and digs a pit.
6.25.12	Then, having measured a hand towards the east from near the southern yoke, places it on ground and digs a hole.
6.25.13	Both of them dig another hole towards the north.
6.25.14	In the same way, the Adhvaryu digs three pits towards the north.
6.25.15	In the same way, towards the south.
6.25.16	In them are erected the posts with their ears towards the east.
6.25.17	On them are fixed two bamboos.
6.25.18	He places the Rarați in front, saying, "Thou art the Rarați of Visnu."
6.25.19	He places the middle covering-board, saying, "This is the back of Visnu."
6.25.20	"O Vishnu, you are the protector." Those who are on both sides.
6.25.21	They spread on the right and left sides.
6.25.22	They make the eastern and western doors.
6.25.23	Then, holding a handful of Kusha grass at the right door frame, he recites, "O Vishnu, your needle is here."
6.25.24	"He makes the knot, saying, 'Thou art firm for Vishnu.'
6.25.25	Immediately after that he loosens it, saying, 'Those who make knots without skill, they stand still.'
6.25.26	In the same way the other door-posts.
6.25.27	In the same manner the other door-frames stand still.
6.25.28	Then he touches it, saying, ‘Thou art for Vishnu, for Vishnu thee.’
6.25.29	Then the Adhvaryu, having turned by the right, having hastened towards the west, having touched the tip of the sacrificial grass at the door of the hall, and having taken six steps towards the east, he takes seven steps towards the south.
6.25.30	He places the wooden sword there.
6.25.31	This is the time for the Udumbara (wood).
6.25.32	From the time of the Udumbara, he takes the wooden sword.
6.26.1	"I take thee in the impulse of the divine Savitr, with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of Pusan."
6.26.2	Having taken it, he recites: "Thou art a ladle, thou art a woman."
6.26.3	He draws a line around the pit with the Udumbara twig, saying, "The Rakshas is encircled, the evil spirits are encircled. I cut off the neck of the Rakshas who hates us and whom we hate."
6.26.4	Then he says to the Udgātṛ, "Come, O Udgātṛ! Dig this pit for the Udumbara post, and remove the dung."
6.26.5	He digs it himself or makes someone else dig it.
6.26.6	He measures the Sadas (the hall) from that (pit).
6.26.7	The front side is three times the height of a man.
6.26.8	The side towards the east is three times the width of a man.
6.26.9	Or else, as in the case of two parts to the north of the line and one to the south.
6.26.10	He digs out the pits for the three rows.
6.26.11	Having run towards the east, he measures the distance of the eastern axle of the southern Havirdhāna cart from the eastern axle of its northern counterpart, and makes the holes for the axles, with their mouths towards the east and their bottoms towards the west, of the size of a span.
6.26.12	Then he says to the Unnetr, "Come, dig these pits, of the size of a span, with the mouth towards the east, with the feet inside the span, of the size upto the elbow, not breaking the ground above and below, and filled with grass."
6.26.13	He digs them or causes them to be dug.
6.26.14	Then he scatters the soil of these pits in front of the southern Havirdhāna pillar.
6.26.15	He makes it square.
6.26.16	Then he makes it into a receptacle for water with sand.
6.26.17	Then he takes the upper part of the mortar from the time of the Kalā. "He takes it with the formula, "I take thee in the impulse of god Savitr, with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of Pūshan."
6.26.18	Taking it, he recites over it, "Thou art the mortar, thou art the woman.
6.26.19	With that he draws the line around the sacrificial post, so that half of it is within the altar and half outside. "The Rakshas are drawn around, the evil ones are drawn around. I cut off the neck of the Rakshas, he who hates us and whom we hate. I cut off his neck."
6.26.20	Then he says to the Agnidhra, "Come, O Agnidhra, dig this pit for the sacrificial post, four fingers above the ground, and dig it so that the soil may be thrown out towards the east."
6.26.21	He digs it himself or makes someone else dig it.
6.26.22	The Adhvaryu performs the rite as long as he does. The Pratiprasthātṛ makes the Udumbara post touch the sacrificer with the formula, "The uninterrupted wealth is well-guarded."
6.26.23	Then the Adhvaryu, having turned by the right, having hastened towards the west, asks for the barley-sprout-sprinkled water, the sacrificial grass, the ladle, the vessel of clarified butter with the spoon, the staff of Maitrāvaruṇa, gold, and the water-pot.
6.26.24	Having taken these, he says, "Come, O sacrificer."
6.26.25	The Udumbara post, having been washed and brought, lies down towards the east, near the hole.
6.26.26	He sprinkles it beyond and towards the east.
6.27.1	"For heaven thee, for atmosphere thee, for earth thee."
6.27.2	He pours water into the pit with the verse, "May the world be purified, the abode of the Pitrs."
6.27.3	He scatters barley with the verse, “Thou art barley; may barley remove our enemies, may barley remove our adversaries.”
6.27.4	Having placed the grass across the hand, he spreads it with the verse, "Thou art the abode of the Fathers.
6.27.5	Then, having concealed the gold, he offers it with a ladleful, saying, "Svāhā to the Fathers."
6.27.6	Then he raises it, saying, "Stand up to heaven, fill the atmosphere, and hold the earth."
6.27.7	Then he lays it down with the ears towards the east, saying, "May the Maruts, the sky-goers, lay thee down on the firm law of Mitra-Varuna.
6.27.8	Then he encloses it with dung, reciting, "I enclose thee for the sake of Brahman, for the sake of Ksatra, for the sake progeny, for the sake prosperity."
6.27.9	With the Maitrāvaruṇa staff he strikes, reciting, "Firm up Brahman, firm up Ksatra, firm up progeny, firm up prosperity."
6.27.10	Having placed the pot of water in a place that is neither too low nor too high, and having brought it near,
6.27.11	Then, having placed gold in it, he offers with the ladle, reciting, "O heaven and earth, fill yourselves with ghee. Svāhā!"
6.27.12	He pours it down to the bottom.
6.27.13	He anoints the sacrificer with the bottom itself. So says the Brāhmaṇa.
6.27.14	Then he announces it to the Udgātṛs.
6.27.15	They perform on it what they know.
6.27.16	The poles are erected with the top towards the east.
6.27.17	They put in the bamboos towards the south.
6.27.18	They cover the middle roof, saying, "Thou art the hall of Indra."
6.27.19	The two on either side are called the shade of the people.
6.27.20	One who desires brilliance should cover with nine roofs.
6.27.21	All have three each.
6.27.22	He makes the southern ones the northern ones.
6.27.23	He makes the southern ones southern ones and the northern ones northern ones.
6.27.24	They are made to be inside by turning away.
6.27.25	He places the grass-blades at the joints.
6.27.26	They are inside.
6.27.27	Then they spread it around, with the verse, "May these songs of the giver be around thee; may the praises be around thee, the old, may the loved ones be around thee, those that are loved."
6.27.28	They spread it around on the right and left sides.
6.27.29	They make the eastern and western doors.
6.27.30	Then, holding the grass in his right hand, he makes the grass-cutter cut. "He says, "You are the thread of Indra."
6.27.31	He makes the knot, saying, "You are Indra's firm one."
6.27.32	Then, immediately after loosening it, he says, "Those who make knots without skill, let them stand!"
6.27.33	In the same way, the left door-post."
6.27.34	Thus the other two door-posts are placed.
6.27.35	Then he touches it with the formula, "Thou art Indra, for Indra thee."
6.27.36	Then from the northern end of the altar, he measures eighteen steps towards the west, at the end of the altar.
6.27.37	He measures out the shed of the Agnidhra in such a way that half of it would be within the altar and half outside.
6.27.38	Then having collected it, they pile it up.
6.27.39	They make the southern door of it.
6.27.40	The side of the Āgnīdhra house is five cubits.
6.27.41	This explains the Mārgālīya.
6.27.42	They make its northern door.
6.28.1	Now, standing here, he asks for the wooden sword, the barley grains, the sprinkling water, the sacrificial grass, the ladle, the vessel of clarified butter with the strainer, the strainer, the skin, the strainer-board, the six potsherds, the stone for pressing, the gold, the water-pot.
6.28.2	Taking all this, he goes (to the sacrificial place) saying, "O sacrificer, come!"
6.28.3	Having taken the oblation-holder through the eastern door, he spreads the skin on the seat of the southern oblation-holder.
6.28.4	The other (oblation-holders) are placed in front of it.
6.28.5	Then at the time of the upper-most (oblation-holder), he takes the wooden sword with the formula, "I take thee in the impulse of god Savitr, with the arms of Asvins, with the hands of Pusan."
6.28.6	Taking them, he recites: "You are the ladle, you are the woman."
6.28.7	He draws a line above them, first drawing the southern one. "Rakshas is drawn, the enemies are drawn. I cut off the neck of the Rakshas who hates us and whom we hate. I cut off his neck." He cuts off all of them in order.
6.28.8	He digs (the pit) with the formula, "I dig out the Rakshas, the Valaghanas, the Vaishvanaras." He digs them all in due order.
6.28.9	Then he removes the earth from them with the formula, “I remove this Vala which is common to us and which is not common. I make it lower down. It is the one which is common to and which is not-common to us and which causes harm. With the Gayatri metre."
6.28.10	He scatters the dust from the feet of the sacrificer towards the south of the eastern ones with the formula, "O Vala, thou art removed."
6.28.11	From the southern ones of the western ones with the formula "For the Tristubh metre."
6.28.12	From the northern ones of the western with the formula, “For the Jagati metre.”
6.28.13	From the northern of the eastern ones, with the formula, "For the Anushtubh metre."
6.28.14	Here he scatters the dust of the feet in the non-moving direction.
6.28.15	Here, the sacrificer mentally thinks of the one whom he hates.
6.28.16	Then having touched water, the Adhvaryu and the sacrificer rub them. The Adhvaryu rubs the southern one and the sacrificer the northern one.
6.28.17	Then the sacrificer asks, "O Adhvaryu, what is here?"
6.28.18	"Good."
6.28.19	"That is ours together."
6.28.20	Then the Adhvaryu asks the sacrificer, "What is here?"
6.28.21	"Good," he says.
6.28.22	"That we together."
6.28.23	The Adhvaryu abandons the one whom the sacrificer has abandoned.
6.28.24	The Adhvaryu abandons the one on the right side, the sacrificer the one on the left side.
6.28.25	The Adhvaryu asks here.
6.28.26	Then the sacrificer.
6.28.27	The Adhvaryu recites the formula over the two northern ones, the sacrificer over the two southern ones.
6.28.28	The sacrificer asks here.
6.28.29	Then the Adhvaryu.
6.28.30	The Adhvaryu first recites the formula on the two northern ones and the sacrificer on the two southern ones,
6.28.31	The Adhvaryu asks here.
6.28.32	The sacrificers asks.
6.28.33	The sacrificier first asks and the sacrificer last.
6.28.34	Then he touches them with the formula, "Thou art Viraj, the slayer of foes; thou art Samraj, the slayer of enemies; thou art Svaraj, the slayer of adversaries; thou art Visvaraj, the slayer, of all the demons." Thus successively all.
6.28.35	Then he sprinkles them with water with the formula, “I sprinkle the Vaisnavas, the destroyers of Rakshas and Valagas.” Thus successively all.
6.28.36	Then he pours water on them with the formula, "I pour down the waters, destroying the Rakshas, destroying the Vala. They are of Visnu." On all of them in due order.
6.28.37	Then he scatters barley on them with the verse, "Thou art barley. Thou hast made our enemies and foes to be barley." On all ofthem in due order.
6.28.38	Then he strews them on the sacrificial grass, saying, "I strew the Rakṣas-destroying, the Vala-destroying, for Vishnu." All in due order.
6.28.39	Then, having placed gold among them, he offers them with a spoon-offering, saying, "For Vishnu I offer the Rakṣas destroying, the Vala destroying, Svāhā." All in due sequence.
6.28.40	Then these two are placed on the long Soma-tray, which is not yet placed (on the altar), and which is for one day.
6.28.41	He places them touching each other, with the formulas, "I place the Rakṣa-destroying, the Vala-destroying, belonging to Visnu."
6.28.42	Then he encloses them with two stakes in front, two behind, and two on either side, to prevent their moving.
6.28.43	Then he covers them with dung, reciting, "I cover the two (stones) that destroy the Rakshas and the Valgas, the two that belong to Vishnu."
6.28.44	Then he strews them with grass, reciting, "The two that destroy the Raksha and the Valgas I strew, the two that are Vishnu's."
6.28.45	Then he touches them, reciting, "Those that destroy the Rakasha and the Valgas are Vishnu's.
6.28.46	Then he spreads the skin with the neck towards the east and the hairy side upwards, saying, "May the sacrifice be established," or silently.
6.28.47	He cleanses the stones on the skin.
6.29.1	"Thou art great, the great stone; speak the great speech to Indra."
6.29.2	He spreads the skin on the nest.
6.29.3	He puts the stone in the stones.
6.29.4	Then he places a bundle of sacrificial grass in front of the southern Havirdhāna cart with the verse, "For the Stotras."
6.29.5	Then he asks for a wooden sword, a pot of water, sand from the Ātvala, and gravel.
6.29.6	Taking these, he says, "Come, O sacrificer!"
6.29.7	Having run to the Āgnīdhra (shed), having taken out the soil with the wooden sword, and having sprinkled it, he puts down the soil and sand in the Cātvāla saying, "Thou art Vibhu, thou art Pravahana, protect me with Rudra's army. O Agni, do thou nourish me, do thou not injure me."
6.29.8	He makes the Dhishniya mound circular.
6.29.9	Then he makes it smooth with sand.
6.29.10	Then he pours down the Dhishnya-grasses in the inner chamber, beginning with the Hotri's, with the formula, "Thou art the first fire, the bearer of oblations."
6.29.11	"Thou art the dog, the wise one," to the right of the Maitrāvaruṇa.
6.29.12	"Thou art Tutha, the knower of all," to the left of the Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin.
6.29.13	"Thou are the Ushaj, the wise one" to the left of Potri.
6.29.14	"Thou Art Anghari, the bearer of Bambha," to the left ofthe Nestr.
6.29.15	"Thou art Avayu, the giver of wealth," on the north side of the Acchavaka.
6.29.16	Then on the southern end of the altar he places the Marjalin mound, saying, "Thou art the purifier, the Marjalin."
6.29.17	He places it in all (the mounds), following the Rudra (mound).
6.29.18	He places it at the end of the Agnidhra mound, for the purpose of being near water.
6.29.19	He places it, saying, "He obtained eight."
6.29.20	Then he offers eight oblations in the intermediate directions.
6.29.21	"He stands by the Ahavaniya with the formula, "Thou art the lord, the shining one."
6.29.22	"He stands near the Asravaṇa with the formula, "Thou art the Parisadi, the Pavamana."
6.29.23	"He goes to the Cātvāla with the formula, “Thou art the Pratakva, the shining one.”
6.29.24	"He stands at the place of offering of animal-sacrifice with the formula, "Thou art the unoffered, the eater of oblations."
6.29.25	Then, standing at the door of the assembly hall, he worships the Udumbara tree with the verse, "You are the abode of truth, the abode of light."
6.29.26	"You are the abode, the abode of Brahman."
6.29.27	Then, standing here itself, he worships Garhapatya with the verse, "You are the goat, the one-footed one."
6.29.28	"You are a serpent, the one to be worshipped."
6.30.1	Then, standing here only, he gives the directions: "Spread the sacrificial grass, give the vow, call the ones who have not yet taken the vow, spread the many-layered seat, spread the many layers at the sacrificial post and the sacrificial grass, O Upholder, place the Vāyavya offerings in the Dronakalaśa and the Dasāpāvitra, place them in the Patnīśāla, O Agnīd, place the clarified butter, O Pratiprasthātṛ, cleanse the ladles and bring the curds for the Pṛṣadājya."
6.30.2	They do as they are told.
6.30.3	Then at the end of the southern altar, he strews a handful of grass, saying, "O divine grass, I strew you with wool and flax, for the welfare of the gods."
6.30.4	They go forward, strewing the grass in abundance.
6.30.5	Then having taken the clarified butter and the oblations for the inner hall, and having given them to the attendants, the Brahman gives the king to the Brahman.
6.30.6	The Brahman, having taken it, stands to the north.
6.30.7	Standing towards the north, he makes the Agni move forward with the verse, "O Agni, standing up, do thou rise up to me, in union with all the divine and sacrificial deities. Do thou place the sacrificer in the heaven world. Do thou not be absent at the time of the offering which we are about to make."
6.30.8	Then he places the kindling wood.
6.30.9	They prepare the Upopayamanis from the Catvāla.
6.30.10	Having taken up the oblations in the ladle, he offers the oblations at the door of the house with the formulas, "O Soma, you are the protector from the enemies created by others. You are the protector from those created by others. Svāhā."
6.30.11	With the ladle he pours out the melted butter, saying, "May the one who is eager to enjoy the butter enjoy it, svāhā."
6.30.12	Taking another four spoonfuls, he gives the instruction, "Recite the Agni-Soma verses as they are being carried forward."
6.30.13	They take up when the verses have been recited three times.
6.30.14	They proceed under the control of the Hotṛ.
6.30.15	Now indeed it is said,
6.30.16	They carry the Agni-fire in front, and bring in the wife. The Anvāsas (priests) proceed in succession.
6.30.17	Whatever weapon there is here, they first use it to approach the fire.
6.30.18	Then they proceed with Agni at the head, with the Agnis, with the Ajyas, with the Anvagnas, with the Vāyavyas,
6.30.19	The former (Agni) goes out by the door. May this Agni be our protector. May this one go forth, breaking the foes. May this one conquer the enemies, rejoicing. May this one win the prize, for the sake of winning the prize.
6.30.20	Having gone around the Sadas from the north, having placed the fire in the Agnidhra house, he offers at the Agnidhra place with the Naya-verse, "O Agni, lead us on the good path, O god, knowing all the ways, do thou unite us with the most extensive oblation. We offer unto thee the most extensive praise, svāhā."
6.30.21	Here only they place the Grava-vessel in the north and then proceed. With the king and the clarified butter.
6.30.22	He offers a spoonful on the Ahavaniya with the verse, "O Vishnu, do thou extend thyself far, do thou extend for our prosperity. Drink the ghee, O ghee-born one, do thou go to the lord of sacrifice. Svāhā."
6.31.1	Then he rises with the Prokṣaṇī water.
6.31.2	He sprinkles the kindling wood.
6.31.3	He sprinkles on the altar.
6.31.4	He sprinkles the sacrificial grass.
6.31.5	Having sprinkled the sacrificial grass near the fire, having brought it near, he takes up the wooden sword with the end of the sacrificial grass in front.
6.31.6	Having spread the sacrificial grass in five layers, having taken the wooden sword in hand, having approached towards the east, he places the enclosing sticks made of wood of the Caru tree.
6.31.7	He places the two kindling woods upright.
6.31.8	He places down the sacrificial grass of the Aksha tree in a slanting position.
6.31.9	Having held the ladle, the Prāstara.
6.31.10	On the Prāstāra, the Juhu.
6.31.11	The Barhis is superior.
6.31.12	Having touched them with the formula, "They have sat down," and having touched water, he takes the king of Brahmans and leads him to the Havirdhana through the eastern door with the verse, "Soma, the knower of the path, has reached the place of the gods, the seat of truth."
6.31.13	Then he spreads the black antelope skin on the southern Havirdhāna cart, with the formula, "Thou art the seat of Aditi."
6.31.14	"Thou sittest on the seat of Aditis" - on the black antelope skin, the king.
6.31.15	Then he hands him over to the deities with the formula, "This Soma belongs to you, O divine Savitr. Protect him, lest he should be harmed by you.
6.31.16	"He stands up with the tradition, 'Thou, O Soma, hast approached the gods; I, a man, have approached men, with offspring, with prosperity.'
6.31.17	He makes the salutation towards the east with the formula, 'Salutations to the gods.'
6.31.18	He makes a downward movement towards the south with the formula, ‘Svāhā to the Pitrs.’
6.31.19	Then he comes out with the formula, “I am released from Varuna’s noose.”
6.31.20	Then he attends upon the Ahavaniya with the verse, "I seek to reach the heaven, the fire of all beings, the light."
6.31.21	Then he dismisses the sacrificer to the intermediate consecration: "O Agni, lord of vows, you are the lord of vows. Whatever form of mine was in you, that is here in me. Whatever form of yours was in me, that is there in you. As befits us, O lord of vows, the vows of us who are vow-holders."
6.31.22	Then he instructs him: "Release the girdle, loosen the knots, hand over the staff to the Maitrāvaruṇa, give the staff to the sacrificer." Let them call your name. May Subrahmaṇya call you in the Subrahmaṇyā rite.
6.31.23	He does all this in the same way.
6.31.24	Then having offered the oblation to the sacrificial post, he makes the sacrificial post with a Yajus formula.
6.31.25	He makes the sacrificial post hole with a Yajur formula.
6.31.26	This is the extent of the sacrificial post hole.
6.32.1	Then having covered the sacrificial post, one raises the sacrificial post.
6.32.2	Having released the sacrificial post reaching the heaven, one prepares the animal for Agni-Soma.
6.32.3	Having performed the Vapa rite, having thrown the Vapaśrapaṇī, having gone out, they cleanse themselves in the Cātvāla.
6.32.4	Then he asks for the pot which has been broken.
6.32.5	Taking it, he goes out between the Cātvāļa and the mound, facing north, to the place where there is water.
6.32.6	He does not go beyond the limit of the flowing water.
6.32.7	He takes it from the moving water, not from the standing water.
6.32.8	Standing facing the east, he takes it.
6.32.9	At the junction of shade and sunlight, he takes it, saying, "These waters are full of oblations, the god is full of oblations. The sacrifice is full of obulations. May the sun be full of oblations."
6.32.10	Then having taken them, having gone round by the right, having placed them on the left shoulder, having returned by the same way, having gone round the Āgnīdhriya mound by the north, having gone round (the mound) by the north, and having entered the shed by the eastern door, having placed them near the Garhapatya, having touched the Upa-sada-vedi, he places them with the formulas, "I place you in the seat of Agni, the house-holder, for good will, for good will. May you be good-willed towards me."
6.32.11	Then he offers the Pasupurodāsa oblation.
6.32.12	The Pasupurodāsā oblation is concluded with the Iḍāntas.
6.32.13	The animal sacrifice is concluded with the Patnīsaṃyājas.
6.32.14	Some say that it is concluded with the Hṛdayaśūlas.
6.33.1	Then, while about to remove the Vasatīvarī waters, he says, "Move away, do not come in my way."
6.33.2	The sacrificer sits down at the sacrificer's place.
6.33.3	The wife sits behind the Garhapatya.
6.33.4	Then having taken them, having taken them out by the southern door, having placed them on the left shoulder, having gone around the Sadas by the right, having taken the Marjalyana Dhishniya by the right, and having placed them touching the southern sacrificial post, he says, "You are the share of Indra and Agni."
6.33.5	Then having taken them, having turned towards the north, having placed them on the right shoulder, having returned by the same route by which he had gone, having touched the sacrificial post at the southern end of the Upavasatha altar, he places them with the formula, "You are the share of Mitra-Varuna."
6.33.6	Then having taken them, having taken them out through the eastern door, having placed them on the southern shoulder, having gone around the Sadas along the north, having taken them around the Agni-dheya mound along the north, he places them touching the northern sacrificial post with the formula, "Thou art the share of all gods."
6.33.7	Then having taken them, having gone round by the right, having placed them on the left shoulder, having returned by the same way, having touched the Agnidhra-throne with the back, he places them with the verse, "At the sacrifice, at the vigil".
6.34.1	Then they prepare the milk-products for the Visas, the Soma-drains, for the Adhvaryu, curds for the Dadhigra, for the sacrificer, for the Amikṣa, for the wife, for the Ashira, milk and barley-meal, for the Shratāṅgya, curds for Aditya-graha, cakes for the Purorasa, for the Dhānas, for the Hāriyojana, four vessels, three Udanas, one vessel, three Avamānas, eleven Paramas, four Rasanas, four Vapa-strainer, two kinds of sacrificial grass and wood, and the great Pari-dhis of Udumbara wood. The Subrahmanya should call out to the Subrahmanya.
6.34.2-9	They do as they are told. Then he brings in the water-pots. The Ādhavanīya pot is placed on the northern Havirdhāna mound. The Pūtabhṛt pot is placed on a cart. They have a common water-pot. The Agnīdhra has one water-pot. The Mārgālīya has one water- pot. The Agnidhra spends the night with the sacrificer.
6.34.10	The king is protected in the Havirdhana hall.
7.1.1	Now, then, they become aware of the great night.
7.1.2	The priests instruct the Adhvaryu, the Hotṛ, the Brahman, the Udgātṛ, the Pratiprasthātṛ, the Prastôtṛ, the Praśâstṛ, the Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin, the Acchavâka, the Neṣṭṛ, the Prâstôtṛ, those who are members of the assembly, the Unnetṛ, the Agnidh, the Gravastut, the Subrahmaṇya, the Pratihârin, and those who are other assistants.
7.1.3	Having washed their hands and feet, they approach the sacrificer in the Agnidhra chamber.
7.1.4	Then the Adhvaryu touches his hands, saying, "May I be able to perform the rite for you, O gods."
7.1.5	Then standing here only, he says to the Hotṛ, "Do thou place the drops of Soma in the Vāyavya vessel, having poured them into the ten-fold strainer. The Agnīdhra should place clarified butter in front of the southern Havirdhāna vessel. The Pratiprasthātṛ should cleanse the spoons and bring curds for the Pṛṣadājya."
7.1.6	They perform as they are directed.
7.1.7	Then the Adhvaryu touches the Agnidhra with the Agniyesti verse, "Agni is the head of heaven."
7.1.8	With the Vaishnavati verse, the Havirdhana, "O Vishnu, you are our last refuge."
7.1.9	With the Agniyesti, the ladles, "This Agni is a thousandfold."
7.1.10	With the Vayuvatti, the Vayu offerings, "O Vayu, a hundred of your steeds."
7.1.11	"The Indras have increased the world by the Indra-way."
7.1.12	Then, having taken up the clarified butter with the sacrificial grass, he rises up with the sprinkling water.
7.1.13	He sprinkles the wood.
7.1.14	He sprinkles on the altar.
7.1.15	He sprinkles upon the sacrificial grass.
7.1.16	Having sprinkled the sacrificial grass near the altar, and having brought it near, he takes up the Prastara in front.
7.1.17-20	Having spread the sacrificial grass in one way, with the Prāstara in his hand, he approaches the east and places the big Uḍumbara cups in a circle, with the constant placing of the cups. Then he yokes them with the yoke. "He yokes thee with the earth and light," (saying) to the middle one. "I yoke thee with the wind and the sky," (saying) to the southern one.
7.1.21	I unite speech with the sun, that is the northern one.
7.1.22	Then he touches the ladles with the formula, "I unite the three separate parts of the sun, that are."
7.1.23	Then having touched water, he says, "Come, O sacrificer."
7.1.24	Having entered the Havirdhāna shed by the eastern door, he spreads the skin with the neck towards the east and the hairy side upwards, saying, "The sacrifice stands firm" or silently.
7.1.25	Having placed the Gravas in front of him, he brings the king to the middle of the southern Havirdhana chamber, saying, "To the heart thee, to the mind thee, O Soma, king, come down" with two verses.
7.1.26	Then he announces him to the Udgātṛs.
7.1.27	They perform there whatever they know.
7.1.28	Then having touched water, he says, "Come, O sacrificer."
7.1.29	Having run to the Āgnīdhra (shed), having taken four spoonfuls in the spoon, having mentally followed the Pañcahotṛ, he offers in the Āgnīdhrā shed, when the sacrificer has begun, with "Svāhā."
7.1.30	Having taken another four spoonfuls, he offers in Āgnīdhara, when the Āsaniya has begun, with, "Protect me from any curse, Svāhā."
7.1.31	Then he places a piece of wood smeared with ghee on the Ahavaniya silently.
7.1.32	Then standing here only, he gives the instructions:
7.2.1	"O Hotṛ, recite the Prātaryāva prayers to the gods. O Brahman, restrain speech. O Subrahmaṇya, invite the Subrahmaṇyā. O Agnīdh, pour out the Savanīya oblations. O Pratiprasthātṛ, yoke the vessels on the Khara."
7.2.2-7	They do as they are told. The Hotṛ recites the Prātaranuvāka as he is directed. The Brahman releases speech. The Subrahmaṇya calls out to the Subrahmaṇyā. When she is called, the Brahman releases speech. The Agnīdhra pours out the eleven Indrāṇī vessels.
7.2.8	He offers the oblation of rice.
7.2.9	They take up barley.
7.2.10	Then the Pratiprasthātṛ yokes the vessels on the cart.
7.2.11	He places the Upāṃśu-cup in the eastern half of the cart with its mouth towards the south, the Upāṃshu-vessel towards the south and the Antaryāma-vessel towards the north, touching each other.
7.2.12	If it is for one who is not touched, he places them touching each other.
7.2.13	Then the two-deity vessels are placed in order, the Indra-Vayu vessel, the Maitra-Varuna vessel, and the Asvin vessel.
7.2.14	Then the bright and the dark vessels are placed in the middle, the bright vessel on the right and the dark vessel on the left.
7.2.15	The Ritupatra vessel is placed in front of the dark vessel.
7.2.16	The Agrayanasthali vessel is placed at the back.
7.2.17	On the southern side of the Khara-shronyā, the Āditya-sthālī with its accessories.
7.2.18	On the northern side of the Khāra-shronyā the Ukthya-sthālī, with its accessories. 
7.2.19	In front of the northern Havirdhāna, the Dhruva-sthālī is placed on the support, unbaked.
7.2.20	Between the Pūtabhṛt and the Adhavanīya, the bowls are placed.
7.2.21	Behind the southern Havirdhāna-vessel he places the axle, the Droṇa-vessel, and the ten-purified vessel.
7.2.22	Then he touches them with the formula, "Agni is the deity, the Gāyatrī metre, you are the vessel of Upāṁshu." With ten formulas.
7.2.23	Then the Adhvaryu either enters the ritual or sits down watching the rites.
7.3.1	Then when the Hotṛ knows that the dawn has risen, the Agni who is to be deposited has been placed, the two immortal Raths have been yoked, the two strong ones, the two who are to be worshipped, the two who know the way, the two who have been yoked by the two who know, the two who go to the two who know. The two who are to go to the two, the two who will go to the two. The two who will go. The two who know the two. The one who knows the two. The three who know the two, the three who know the three. The three who will know the three. Translation: Then when the Hotri knows that the dawn had risen, the Agni which was to be deposited had been placed, the immortal Raths had been yoked, those who are strong, those who are to be honoured, those who know the way had been yoked by those who know, those who are going to those who know, the ones who will go to those who know. The ones who will go. Those who know those two. The one knowing those two. Those who know the two; those who know the three; those who will know the threes. The three who are to know the three.
7.3.2	Having taken another four spoonfuls, and having taken the sacrificial grass, he instructs (the Maitrāvaruṇa and the Adhvaryu) to run with the Maitrāvaruṇa's and the Adhvaryu's cups, the single-cup-bearer, the Prastotṛ, and the wife, and the Agnīdhra with the Hotr's cup and the Vasatīvari waters, to stand in the Cātvāla with the support.
7.3.3	They do as instructed.
7.3.4	He brings the wife, the water-pot, and the ladle, saying, "Come, let us go," with this formula.
7.3.5	Then he makes her go out by the eastern door, and having gone round the Sadas by the north, and having gone around the Agni-dheya mound by the north, he goes out by the middle of the Catvāla and the Utkara, and goes to the place where there is water.
7.3.6	Then he offers on the Barhis in water with the verse, "The divine waters, the waters, the wave of waters, the most powerful, the most intoxicating, that is for the gods, for the gods, he places it. The bright one for the bright ones, for whom your share is, svāhā."
7.3.7	He sprinkles the oblation with the Maitrāvaruṇa goblet with the verse, “May this be for you, free from sin, free from injury."
7.3.8	Having covered the two sacrificial grass-blades, he takes them up with the formula, "I take you up for the ocean, for the inexhaustible."
7.3.9	Then he takes up the single-holed ones with the formula, “I take you for Indra, for what is dear to him” or silently.
7.3.10	Then he takes the Pannijani-waters, saying, "For the Vasus, Rudras, and Adityas, for all the gods, I take the Pannijani waters. For the sacrifice I take the Pannijani waters."
7.3.11	Having handed them over to the wife, they go away.
7.3.12	When the sacrifice has begun, the sacrificer, having returned by the same route by which he had gone, touches the Hotr's goblet and the Maitrāvaruṇa's goblet in the Catvāla chamber and then takes out the Vasatīvari waters.
7.3.13	He fills the Hotr' goblet.
7.3.14	He pours the water from the Maitrāvaruṇacup into the Hotr' cup.
7.3.15	Then having placed the Hotr's goblet, the Vasatīvarī goblets and the Maitrāvaruṇa's goblet together, he anoints the Pratistoma with the verse, "May they be united with light, may the bright ones be united with brightness, may the offerings be united with offerings, may the lord of sacrifice be united with blessings."
7.3.16	Then the wife, having come back by the same route, places the (bricks) on the Upasad altar, touching them with her hips, silently.
7.4.1	Then the Adhvaryu approaches the Hotṛ.
7.4.2	The Hotṛ asks the Adhvaryus, "O Adhvaryu, have you seen the Apas?"
7.4.3	The other replies, "I have seen the one who is not seen and these (bricks)."
7.4.4	If it is an Agniṣṭoma, he offers with the verse, "O Agni, the mortal whom thou hast chosen in the contests, in the races, he is the leader of eternal gifts, svāhā."
7.4.5	If it is an Ukthya, he cleanses the middle enclosing stick with this very formula.
7.4.6	If it is a Atiratra, he recites this very formula while approaching.
7.4.7	The Brāhmaṇa passage is: "By the exclusion of the sacrificial rites."
7.4.8	Then, having taken the Hotr's and the Udgātṛ's cups, he places them between the southern and northern Havirdhāna sheds.
7.4.9	Then, having placed the Adhvaryu's cup upside down, he places the Maitrāvaruṇa's cup around it.
7.4.10	He places the third cup of the Vasatīvarī waters.
7.4.11	He places one cup of the Ekadhana waters.
7.4.12	He places the Puro-aksas and Vasat-varis in front.
7.4.13	The Ekadhanas are placed behind the Aksas.
7.4.14	Then, sitting between the Havirdhana and the Sadas, he asks for a wooden vessel with four corners.
7.4.15	Having placed the two sacrificial grass-blades in it, he takes up the Prajapati-graha of curds with the formula, "Thou art taken with a support. For Prajapati, for the luminous one, I take thee, the luminous one. For Daksha, for the increasing Daksha, for Rta, for the Agni-tongued gods, for the swift ones, for Indra-chief, for Varuna-king, for the wind-dwellers, for the rain-souled ones."
7.4.16	Having taken up the two sacrificial grass-blades, he rises with the formula, "For heaven thee, for atmosphere thee, for earth thee."
7.4.17	He goes out through the eastern door with the formula, “O Indra, do thou cast away the mind of the haters, of the envious ones, of him who hates us. Do thou cast him away.
7.4.18	Having come, he offers on the Ahavaniya fire when the sacrificer has begun, saying, "For Prāṇa thee, for Apāna thee, for Vyāna thee, for Sat thee, for Asat thee, for the waters thee, for the plants thee, for all beings thee, from whom the unfailing progeny is born, to him thee, to Prajapati, to the all-pervading, to the luminous one, I offer the luminous one, svāhā."
7.4.19	Then he pours out the water for rinsing (the Soma).
7.4.20	Baudhāyana says, one should give a cow or a bull.
7.4.21	Āñjīgavi says, one should offer twelve heifers.
7.4.22	Kaṭya says, a bull.
7.4.23	Rāthītaras says, a gem and an earring.
7.5.1	Then having taken the Hotr's cup and having placed it between the two sacrificial posts, he places it on the skin.
7.5.2	On these cups, he makes the sacrificer recite the formula, "O Nigraha, O Devashruta, may my life be satisfied." Having responded, he says, "May the groups not be thirsty for me."
7.5.3	Having handed them over to the sacrificer, he takes up that one among them which is like a good-looking man, with the formula, "I take thee in the impulse of god Savitr, with the arms of Asvins, with the hands of Pusan."
7.5.4	Taking it, he recites: "O stone, the maker of sacrifice, make this deep sacrifice for the gods. With the highest purity, for Indra, the well-pressed Soma, sweet, full of milk, bringing rain."
7.5.5	Then having stretched him out towards the east, having relaxed him, he should pour down the king of juices, the Upāṃśusavana, with the formula, "For Indra, the slayer of Vṛtra, for Indra, the subduer of Vṛtra; for Indra, the slayer, of foes; for Indra, for Aditya; for Indra, who has all the gods."
7.5.6	Five times with the formula.
7.5.7	Five times silently.
7.5.8	The king is measured ten times the length of the half-space.
7.5.9	Then, having bound the remaining king with the turban, having taken him out between the southern and northern Havirdhāna sheds, he throws him down on the mound.
7.5.10	Then he makes the king drink the Hotr's cup with the verses, "The wives of the immortal, the destroyers of enemies, the givers of wealth, the goddesses, may they place this sacrifice in the presence of the gods. May they be invited, while Soma is being drunk. May your Soma be invited to drink."
7.5.11	Then he makes him go forward with the verse, "Whatever light of thine is in heaven, whatever is on earth, whatever is in the sky, thereby do thou, O Soma, be the thigh of the sacrificer, the thigh of the giver, for the giver."
7.5.12	He touches the skin with the two pieces of wood with the verse, “O Dhishana, do thou be firm, do thou be steady, do thou bestow strength, do thou bestow on me strength, may I not injure you, may you not injure me.”
7.5.13	Then he recites the verses, "May your growth be without injury, well-born, born of truth, may we be blessed with you. The goddesses, the plants, united with Indra, may they consent to the Soma pressing."
7.5.14	The Pratiprasthātṛ places six strands in the left hand of the satisfied king.
7.5.15	Then he takes the Upāṃśu vessel with the same hand.
7.5.16	Then he anoints the king who has been afflicted with eight strokes.
7.5.17	When the two parts are gone, he recites: "May I be free from misfortune, with offspring, with prosperity, may my strength and vigor not be destroyed."
7.5.18	Then he strikes with a handful of grass silently.
7.5.19	The Pratiprasthātṛ priest covers it.
7.5.20	The Adhvaryu brings the first two portions with the verse, "O Vājas, flow for Vācaspati."
7.5.21	These two portions are brought together.
7.5.22	The king who has been thus consecrated is sprinkled eleven times with the second portion.
7.5.23	Here the Adhvaryu does not recite the two portions when they are poured out.
7.5.24	He strikes the palms of his hands silently.
7.5.25	The Pratiprasthātṛ covers it.
7.5.26	The Adhvaryu brings the Soma with the two middle Anśus, with the verse, "The bull with the rays of the bull, purified by the rays, has come to the sacrifice."
7.5.27	These two Anśus are indeed the two Anśus.
7.5.28	In the same way, he sprinkles the king who has been brought near, twelve times with the third Anśu.
7.5.29	Here he does not recite the Anśus when they are exhausted.
7.5.30	In the very same way, he strikes the Anjali silently.
7.5.31	The Pratiprasthātṛ priest makes it disappear.
7.5.32	The Adhvaryu priest brings it with the two upper Anśus, saying, "You are the divine purifier of the gods, you are the share of those for whom you are the share, to them you belong."
7.5.33	They join these Anśus together.
7.5.34	Then, having wiped it with the ten-fold purifier at the Upāṃśusavana, he places it in the eastern half of the skin, with the head towards the south.
7.5.35	Then he takes up the Graha for the Pratiprasthātṛ with the formula, "Thou art taken up by me."
7.5.36	He takes up the Graba.
7.5.37	He looks at it with the formula, "Make the honey-yielding plants."
7.5.38	Then he smears it upwards with the formula, “For all the divine and earthly Indras.”
7.5.39	Taking it, he rises with the formula, ”Thou art the mind of Tvaṣṭṛ.
7.5.40-43	Having come, he offers on the Āhavanīya fire, when the sacrificer has begun, with the formula, "Svāhā to thee, O Su-bha, for Surya." Having offered, he breathes out. He makes the sacrificer recite the formula, "Thou art Bhū, the best of rays, the protector of life. Protect my life."
7.5.44	Then having wiped it downwards, he smears it with the palm of the hand on the middle of the garment, with the formula, "For the gods, for the rays."
7.5.45	Then having turned around to the right, he pours the remnant of the cup into the Āgrayana vessel with the formula, “This is thy womb.”
7.5.46	Then he puts the ray into this Upaṁśu vessel.
7.5.47	Then he places him in contact with the Upāṁshusavana rite on the right side, with the formula, "For Prāṇa thee."
7.5.48	He touches the Upāṁshu-savana rite with the formula, “For Vyāna thee.”
7.6.1	The Pratiprasthātṛ, while the Adhvaryu is performing his functions, makes two offerings of the Soma-juice to the Rājanya-deity, saying, "To that thy Soma, O Soma, which is called Ādābhya, to that thy Soma, to Soma svāhā." "To that thy, to that thy in Soma."
7.6.2	Then, while about to offer the Soma-juice, all sit around the king.
7.6.3	Then the Adhvaryu sits facing east.
7.6.4	The sacrificer follows his right arm.
7.6.5	The Pratiprasthātṛ sits to the right.
7.6.6	The Agnidhra sits to the north.
7.6.7	The one who sprinkles the fourth (person) sits between the Pratiprasthātr and the Agnidhra.
7.6.8	Then he says to the Unnetr, "Bring and sprinkle."
7.6.9	The Udgātṛ pours the water from the Adhvaryu's cup.
7.6.10	They sprinkle the ends of the grass on the half of the Hotr's cup, towards the east, towards the west, towards the north, towards the south, saying, "May these directions flow towards thee, O water, without any obstruction."
7.6.11	This is the Nigrābha.
7.6.12	They make it grow.
7.6.13	They remove it.
7.6.14	They sprinkle it.
7.6.15	They take up the Nigrābha.
7.6.16	They nourish.
7.6.17	They remove.
7.6.18	They sprinkle.
7.6.19	They take up the Nigraha.
7.6.20	They nourish.
7.6.21	They take away.
7.6.22	They sprinkle,
7.6.23	and do not take up the Nigrahā at the fourth.
7.6.24	Then having collected it well in the collection-place, he gives it to the Uddhatṛ.
7.6.25	The Unnetr pours it into the Adhavanīya vessel.
7.6.26	In this way the second round is completed.
7.6.27	In this manner the third round is completed. 
7.6.28	The Unnetr hands over the Rgīsa, after wrapping it with the Dasāpavitra.
7.6.29	The Unneta washes it in the Adhavanīyâ vessel, presses it, carries it between the southern and northern Havirdhâna vessels, and places it on the skin.
7.6.30	Having placed the sieves in front of him, he removes the chaff from the sieves in four directions.
7.6.31	Then the Udgātṛ or the Prastôtṛ, having approached the southern Havirdhāna, places the Dronakalaśa with sieves facing east.
7.6.32	They spread the sieve with ten holes facing north.
7.6.33	When this is done, they wait for the rising of the sun.
7.6.34	When the sun has risen, he takes up the Antaryama cup. It is taken up with the formula, "Thou art taken up with a support. O Maghavan, protect the Soma. Mayest thou prosper. Do thou offer the oblation. I place thee within the heaven and earth. Within the heaven, within the earth, within the firmament, in union with the gods, the lower and the higher, do thou delight in the Antaryama, O Maghavan."
7.6.35	"You are taken by me." He takes the graha.
7.6.36	Then he looks at it, saying, "Make the honey-flowing plants."
7.6.37	Then he wipes it upwards, saying, "For all the divine, earthly, and heavenly Indras."
7.6.38	Then, taking it, he rises, saying, "May I be your mind."
7.6.39	"Go along the sky."
7.6.40	Having come, he offers on the Ahavaniya fire when the sacrificer has begun, with "Svāhā to thee, O well-born, to Surya, Svāhā."
7.6.41	Having offered, he says, "Anvapā."
7.6.42	He recites, "Thou art the best of rays, the remover of exhalations. Protect my exhalations."
7.6.43	Then, having wiped it upwards, he wipes it with the palm of his right hand, stretched out, on the middle enclosing stick, with "To the gods, to thee, the rays."
7.6.44	Then, having circumambulated clockwise, he pours the Soma juice from the Graha vessel into the Āgrayana vessel, saying, "This is your birthplace."
7.6.45	Then he places it, touching it with the Upāṁshusavana vessel, saying, “For your downward movement.”
7.6.46	He touches the Upāṁshu-savana vessel, saying "For your upward movement."
7.6.47	Then he says to the Unnetr, "Be attentive, continuously, I shall take up the cups in a low voice."
7.6.48	Then he takes up the cup for Indra-Vayu.
7.6.49	It is placed in the Rasna-vessel with the Parigrivi.
7.6.50	He takes it up with the verse, "O king Ati Pavamana, do thou be adorned for Vayu, the drinker of pure (Soma). Thou art taken with a view to being offered to Vayu, I take thee agreeable to Vayu."
7.6.51	Then he takes it again, saying, "These are the Soma-pressings for Indra and Vayu." Having recited this, he says, "You are taken with the taking for Indra and Vāyu. I take you agreeable to Indra and Vāyū."
7.6.52	Having wiped it, he places it, saying, "This is your birthplace, for those who are in harmony with you."
7.6.53	Then he takes the Maitrāvaruṇa vessel.
7.6.54	It becomes like a scab.
7.6.55	Then he takes up the Atipavamāna king with the formula, "This is yours, O Mitra-Varuna." Having followed it, he takes it up with the formula, “Thou art taken up with the offering; I take thee dear to Mitra-Varuna.”
7.6.56	Having covered the two darbha-blades, he anoints it with milk.
7.6.57	Having taken out the two sacrificial grasses, he cleanses them with the ten-fold purifying formula and places them, saying, "This is your place; for the truthful ones."
7.6.58	Then, having gone to the Upați, he takes up the Soma-cup and the Sukra-cup.
7.6.59	This is made of birch or palāśa wood and is smooth.
7.6.60	He takes it with the formula, "This is the king of Ati Pavamāna. This Vena has urged him." Having followed it, he places it with the formula "Thou art taken with a support; I take thee for Sandhi."
7.6.61	Having wiped it, he places with the formula, “This is thy birth-place; protect the manly."
7.6.62	Then he takes the churning vessel.
7.6.63	It is made of Vikaṅkata wood and is smooth.
7.6.64	He takes it with the formula, "I take thee, O Maruts, for Maruts, the king of Atipavamāna, that is thine in the Prānastha."
7.6.65	Having covered the sacrificial grass, he sprinkles it with flour.
7.6.66	Having removed the sacrificial grass, and having wiped it with the ten-fold strainer, he places it with the formula "This is thy birth-place; protect the creatures."
7.6.67	Then he takes up the Āgrayana vessel.
7.6.68	With that he takes up the Atipavamāna king, reciting the verse, "Those gods who are in heaven, eleven in number," and then, "Thou art taken with a support; I take thee for the Visve Devas."
7.6.69	Then he strikes it three times.
7.7.1	"Hūṃ hūṃ hūm! Soma is flowing, Soma is flowing, he flows for this Brahman, he flows for the Kshatra, he flows for his clan, he flows for food, he flows for strength, he flows for water, he flows for plants, he flows for trees, he flows for heaven and earth, he flows for good growth, he flows for brahmic glory, he flows for him who offers, he flows for me." Having recited this in a low voice, he recites loudly, "He flows for the eldest."
7.7.2	Then he addresses it, "Thou art the foremost, thou art the foremost, do thou stimulate the sacrifice, stimulate the lord of sacrifice, do thou protect the pressing (of Soma), do thou protect the presser. May Vishnu protect thee, may thou protect the Vishnus. By the power of Indra."
7.7.3	Having wiped it, he places it (in the pan), saying, "This is thy place; for the All-gods."
7.7.4	From the one that is audible, he takes the Grahas, thirty and three, the Rujans are singing.
7.7.5	The Rujana-verse is to be recited for the sake of overcoming the enemy. So says the Brahmana.
7.7.6	Then he takes up the Ukthya-vessel.
7.7.7	With that he takes up the Atipavamāna (cup) with the formula, "Thou art taken with a support; for Indra thee, for the bountiful, for the one who is to be praised, for the one worthy of praise. That thy great bountifulness, for that I take thee, the agreeable."
7.7.8	Having wiped it, he places it with the formula, “This is thy birth-place; for thee, for Indra, for the one to be praised.”
7.7.9	Then he takes up the Dhruvasthali vessel.
7.7.10	He says, "Those who have come through the eastern door, may they go out. Those who have come through western door, may they come out. May I not obstruct you."
7.7.11	Having gone round the Somapourers and the Unnetr-priest, he takes up the ladle from the north with the verse, "The head of heaven, the navel of earth." Having followed it with the verse, he takes it up with the formula, "Thou art taken up with a desire; I take thee agreeable to Agni Vaiśvānara.
7.7.12	Then he addresses him (with the formula), "Thou art firm, thou art the firm earth, thou art the most firm of the firm, thou art most firm of the unmoving."
7.7.13	Then having brought it back as it was taken, he places it on the support in front of the northern Havirdhāna, on the unbaked (bricks) with the formula, "This is thy birth-place; for thee to Agni Vaiśvānara."
7.7.14	He places the king of Soma on the firm (ground).
7.7.15	Then having thrown the vessel full of water into the half-filled Drona-vessel, he recites the formula, "The drop has fallen, that drop of thine, which is thy drop."
7.7.16	Then he says to the Upadekara-priest, "Do thou make the Soma-juice pure and ready for taking."
7.7.17	Having heard this, the Purohita, having spread out the sacred grass in the pit, brings two or three royal oblations.
7.7.18	Then, when the Purohita is empty, he takes the Grahas of Pavamāna, saying, "You are taken with a purpose; for Prajapati you." He touches the Dronakalaśa.
7.7.19	"For Indra you," he says, touching the Ādhavanīya.
7.7.20	For all the gods, for the gods of heaven, for the gods who are in the sky, for the gods in the sky, thus for the gods of the sky, for all the gods, thus for the Pūtabhṛt gods.
7.7.21	Then he says, "O Unnetr!" and says, "Pour the king facing east, the Pūtabhrīta, with ten Ādhavanīya ladles, having cleansed it, and then let it be turned upside down."
7.7.22	He does it like that.
7.7.23	Then having touched water, taking the sacrificial grass, he moves forward.
7.7.24	The Udgātṛ follows him as he moves out.
7.7.25	The Prastôtṛ follows the Udgātṛ.
7.7.26	The Pratihartṛ follows the Prastôtṛ.
7.7.27	The Yajamāna follows the Pratihartṛ.
7.7.28	The Brahman follows the Yajamāna.
7.7.29	The Pratisthätṛ moves out as the seventh.
7.7.30	When they have moved out, he offers a spoonful of clarified butter on the Āhavanīya.
7.8.1	May Agni, the all-pervading, the all-nourishing, protect us at the morning pressing. May he, the purifier, bestow wealth on us. May we be long-lived and have food together. Svāhā. The Adhvaryu and Pratiprasthātṛ offer with this.
7.8.2	The others offer according to their knowledge.
7.8.3	Then they move towards Pavamāna.
7.8.4	The Adhvaryu, bowing down, first goes forward, carrying the sacrificial grass, with speech leading the way. May she go straight to the gods, bestowing fame on me. May the vital breaths be in the animals, and may progeny be in me and in the sacrificer.
7.8.5	Then they sit down in their respective places.
7.8.6	Then he gives the two sacrificial grass-blades to the Udgātṛ or the Prastôtṛ, with the formula, "Thou art the spreading of the Rk and the Sāman, for the begetting of the pair." Or silently.
7.8.7	Then he recites the Upākaraṇa verse: "Vayu is the reciter, Agni is the chanter, Prajapati is the Sama, Brihaspati is the chanter, the Visve Devas are the sub-chanters, the Maruts are the responders, Indra is the concluder, those gods who sustain life should place life in me. Oṃ, praise him."
7.8.8	This Trivṛt (three-fold) is the Bahiṣpavamāna (verse).
7.8.9	When the fifth one is recited, he recites, "You are a hawk, the Gayatri metre, I am following you, may you protect me with welfare."
7.8.10	Here he explains the Dashahotar.
7.8.11	When the Saman is chanted, he gives the instruction: "Agnidh, arrange the fires, spread the sacrificial grass, decorate the sacrificial cakes, O Pratiprasthātṛ, let the animal be near."
7.8.12	They do as they are told.
7.8.13	Then, having touched water, he says, "Come, O sacrificer!"
7.8.14	Having entered the Havirdhāna shed through the eastern door, he attends upon the entire king with the verse, "O Viṣṇu, you are our last refuge."
7.8.15	Then he gives the Āsvina vessel.
7.8.16	It has two corners.
7.8.17	He takes it from the Drona-vessel into the vessel with the formula, "O ye two, who are in the ladle." Having followed it with the formula, he says, "Thou art taken with the Upāṁśu formula; I take thee dear to the Asvins."
7.8.18	Having wiped it around, he places it with the formula "This is thy birth-place; for the Madhu-pair."
7.8.19	Having touched water, he says, “Come, O sacrificer.”
7.8.20	Having approached the Āhavaniya fire, having taken four spoonfuls in the ladle, having followed the Saptāhotāra hymn mentally, he offers on the Āhavaniye fire, when the sacrificer has begun, with "Svāhā."
7.8.21	Then he moves around with the verses, "Paribhuḥ Agni, Paribhuḥ Indra" with this Anuvāka.
7.8.22	Then he takes nine times in the Pracaraṇyā vessel.
7.8.23	Then the Agnidhra, in order, spreads the embers on the Dhishnyas from the Agnidhra-place.
7.8.24	Then, sitting facing east, he pours the embers on the spread out Dhishnyas with the mantras as prescribed.
7.8.25	If he offers according to the prescribed procedure, then he offers seven times at the end in the Agnidhra.
7.8.26	If one were to offer at the end with "svāhā" and "svāhā", then one would offer at the end of the Āgnīdhra fire for the purpose of being near the water.
7.8.27	Then he places the Pracarani on the top of the northern Havirdhāna.
7.8.28	Then he spreads the Prṣṭhyā path with the Samkāśin path, continuously from the Garhapatya to the Āhavanīya.
7.9.1	Then the Adhvaryu, holding the rope, approaches the sacrificial post.
7.9.2	Having drawn the eastern cord, he draws it towards the navel. Having drawn it, he says, "Recite while being drawn."
7.9.3	Having released the wooden post, he prepares the animal for Agni.
7.9.4	The rite is similar to the one at the Pravara.
7.9.5	He chooses the Hotṛ as prescribed.
7.9.6	Then he announces: "Let them listen! Let them listen! The Adhvaryu and the Pratiprasthātṛ are the Adhvaryus. We two, the human ones."
7.9.7	He takes the name of the Pratiprasthatṛ.
7.9.8	Then he announces: "Listen! Listen! Mitra and Varuna are the Praśāstṛs. We two, human ones."
7.9.9	The Maitrāvaruṇa takes his name.
7.9.10	Then he announces: "Let them listen! Let them listen! Indra is the Brahman, the Brahman is from the Brahmanas." This is the human one.
7.9.11	He takes the name of the Brahmanaschansi.
7.9.12	Then he announces: "Listen! Let them listen!" The Maruts are from the Potri." This is the man.
7.9.13	He takes up the name of the Potri.
7.9.14	Then he announces, "Let them hear! Let them hear! Let us hear! From the Hotṛ." This is the human (Hotṛ).
7.9.15	He takes the name of the Hotṛ.
7.9.16	Then he announces, "May they hear! May they hear! Let us listen! From the Agnīdhra." This is the (Agnīdhra).
7.9.17	He takes (the name of) the Agnīdhras.
7.9.18	He offers the oblations of the Pravargya rite as soon as they are prepared.
7.9.19	The Adhvaryu and the Pratiprasthātṛ offer with the verses, "May I be acceptable to speech, may the Stoma be accomplished, may the god Surya protect me from the gods."
7.9.20	The others offer according to their knowledge.
7.9.21	Then he announces, "Let it be heard! Let it be heard! Agni, the leader of the divine clans, is pouring out (Soma) for the sacrificer, the leader of human clans. Their fire is not distant, shining brightly. There are a hundred winters, two summers. They are united, not separated, in their bodies."
7.9.22	The same rite as for the Vapa.
7.9.23	Having performed the Vapa rite, having placed the Vapa-strainer, having jumped over and having cleansed in the Cātvāla,
7.9.24	he places the wooden chips of the sacrificial grass on the mound for the sacrificer.
7.10.1	May the spade, the axe, the wedge, the axe, and the sacrificial post be auspicious to us. May the sacrificial grass, the sacrificial grass-holder, the sacrificial grass, and the sacrificial grass-cutter be auspicious to us.
7.10.2	Then he worships the Ahavaniya fire with the words, "Salutations to Agni, the destroyer of sacrifices, may I not be deprived of the glory of the sacrifice."
7.10.3	He worships the Agnidhra fire with the words "Salutations to Rudra, the destroyer of sacrifice, may I be protected by saluting you."
7.10.4	He worsips the Hotri fire with the words "Salutations to Indra, the destroyer of the sacrifice, may I not lose my strength and energy."
7.10.5	Then, having turned towards the east, he recites: "You are firm, you are loose, you are in order, protect me from the darkness of the sun. May the god Surya protect me from the heavenly darkness, Vayu from the sky, Agni from the earth, Yama from the ancestors, Sarasvati from humans."
7.10.6	Then, having turned clockwise, he touches the eastern doors of the assembly hall, saying: "The divine doors, may they not burn me."
7.10.7	Then he approaches the assembly-hall, saying, "Salutations to the assembly-hall! Salutations to the lord of the assembly-hall ! Salutations to the eye of the leaders of the friends ! Salutations to heaven ! Salutations to earth !"
7.10.8	Then he throws out the grass from the seat outside the assembly-hall with the verse, "Standing here, O son of Dadhi, may he who is more worthy of our offerings sit in his seat."
7.10.9	He sits down, saying, "May I go up and down."
7.10.10	Then he looks at the sky, saying, "Let not the sky and earth fall today."
7.10.11	Then he gazes at the southern half, saying, "Come, may I be with you, O fathers, as a father. May you be with me, O fathers, with good offspring."
7.10.12	Then he glances at the northern half.
7.11.7	Thus, having placed the two seats outside the sacrificial enclosure on the grass,
7.11.8	the Adhvaryu sits down leaning against the right door-post,
7.11.9	and the Pratiprasthātṛ against the left.
7.11.10	Thus they examine (the seats).
7.11.11	Thus they look at the right half and the left half.
7.11.12	Because of being located towards the north.
7.11.13	Then the Vasat-callers, beginning with the Ahavaniya, stand thus:
7.11.14	Thus they stand by the Agnidhraya.
7.11.15	They go around it on the north.
7.11.16	Thus they stand at the Hotra.
7.11.17	Thus they recite, turning towards the east.
7.11.18	Thus they turn to the right and touch the two doors of the assembly-hall.
7.11.19	Thus they enter the assembly-hall.
7.11.20	Having gone around the southern end of the southernmost fire-altar, having gone around the northern end of the northernmost fire-altar and having gone around the southernmost end of the northern most fire-altar, they go around the northern end (of the northernmost fire altar) and having gone around it, they throw the grass outside the seats.
7.11.21	They sit down on their respective fire-altars.
7.11.22	They look at it thus.
7.11.23	They look towards the southern half and the northern half thus.
7.11.24	Because of the position to the north.
7.11.25	Then all the Udgātṛs, the Brahman, and the Sadasya, the Avṛṣṭakartṛs, approach the Āhavaniya fire and so on, saying, "Obeisance to the Āhavaniye."
7.11.26	In the same way, they approach the Agnīdhriya fire.
7.11.27	They go around it from the north.
7.11.28	In the same manner, they approach the Hotṛya fire.
7.11.29	Having turned towards the east, they recite.
7.11.30-34	Having thus circumambulated the Sadas, having gone around it on the north, they touch the two doors of the Sadas. Thus they enter the Sadas. Thus they throw the grass outside the seats. The Udgātṛs sit around the Udumbara (tree). Brahman and the Sadas-members sit facing the north, towards the south.
7.11.35	Thus they look at it.
7.11.36	Thus they look at the southern and northern half.
7.11.37	"The position of being on the northern side is called "Udaṅstha"."
7.11.38	Now their movement is in disorder.
7.11.39	Between the Hotr's and the Brahmanaschin's Adhishnya, those who are Adhishnya.
7.11.40	Then those who have Adhishnya move around their own Adhishnya from the north to the north.
7.11.41	When the Savana is over, they go away as they have come.
7.12.1	Knowing that they have gone away, the Adhvaryu asks for the Savaniya Purasas.
7.12.2	Then the Agnidhra sits down behind the Garhapatya and spreads the oblations in five places in the vessel.
7.12.3	He places the oblation of the middle Purus in the vessel and pours clarified butter over it.
7.12.4	The Dhana-grasses are placed in front.
7.12.5	The Karambha-grasses on the right.
7.12.6	The Parivap-grasses at the back.
7.12.7	The AamikSa-grasses on north.
7.12.8	Having taken them around, he takes them out through the eastern door, goes around the Sadas along the north, takes them around the Agnidhra-throne along the north and places them within the altar.
7.12.9	Then the one who is spreading the Juhu and Upasthala says, "Recite for Indra the Puronuvākyās of the morning offerings of cakes."
7.12.10	He offers the cake twice.
7.12.11	He offers the cooked rice twice.
7.12.12	He pours the Karamba twice.
7.12.13	He sprinkles the Parivāpa twice.
7.12.14	He mixes the Amikṣā twice.
7.12.15	He anoints it.
7.12.16	He cleanses it.
7.12.17	Then, in the Upabhrti vessel, at the Svistakrt offering, he offers all the portions once each from the right half.
7.12.18	He pours clarified butter over it twice.
7.12.19	He does not smear it.
7.12.20	Having stepped across, he makes the announcement, "For Indra, the Prastha-saman offerings have been prepared. They are to be offered."
7.12.21	He offers at the Vasat-utterance.
7.12.22	Then, while pouring the oblations, he says, "Recite to Agni."
7.12.23	Having called out, he says, "For Agni, the messenger."
7.12.24	Having omitted the first half of the eastern half, he offers the first oblations.
7.12.25	Then, having stepped forward towards the north, having placed the ladles in their respective places, having placed the Idā in the vessel, he offers the Purorāśas towards the west.
7.12.26	Some indeed offer them in succession, saying, "The animals are connected with Idā."
7.12.27	Then, having gone forward, he says, "Recite the Vāyu and Indra-Vāyu hymns."
7.12.28	Having heard this, he takes the Indravayu cup to be offered in return, from the Dronakalaśa, by pouring it into a vessel, from the vessel of the Adityasthali, into the vessel of the Upaśaya, with the formula, "Thou art taken with a support. Thou art the abode of speech. I take thee with the supports of speech and of the sacrifice, with the supports of the firm sacrifice."
7.12.29	Having taken the cups, he goes out.
7.12.30	As soon as he has gone out, the Adhvaryu takes up the Grahas.
7.12.31	He stands to the north and hands over the Pratiprasthātṛ to be taken up.
7.12.32	Now indeed it is said:
7.12.33	"Having taken up the Indra-Vayu (graha), one should offer the Aghāra libation."
7.12.34	Having taken up the Indra-Vayu cup with the spoon from the vessel of clarified butter, he offers the first libation with the formula, "This is the sacrifice, this is the offering. May the gods be pleased with this offering. May the plants be pleased with this. May the cattle be pleased with this, may the people be pleased with this for all beings. This is the sacrifice. Do thou swell with clarified butter, O divine Soma. Svāhā."
7.12.35	Then he makes the call, "Let it be heard! Let it be heard! The Vāyu and Indra-Vāyu are being sent."
7.12.36	When the Vasat is uttered, the Adhvaryu offers first.
7.12.37	When the second Vasat is uttered both offer together.
7.12.38	Having offered, he recites: "He who is hostile to Indra and Vayu, the enemy, the one who is greedy, the one who has evil intentions, I press him down with this (oblation) so that I may be superior to him like Indra."
7.12.39	Then the Pratiprasthātṛ pours the Graha's overflow into the Adhvaryu's vessel.
7.12.40	The Adhvaryu pours half of the Graha into the Pratiprasthatṛ's vessel.
7.12.41	The Pratiprasthātṛ pours it into the vessel placed on the Āditya stone with the formula, "For the gods thee."
7.12.42	Then the Adhvaryu, having turned by the right, having hastened towards the west, having handed over the vessel to the Hotṛ, having gone forward, says (to the Hotṛ), "Recite for Mitra-Varuna."
7.12.43	Having heard this, the Maitrāvaruṇa priest takes the Pratiprasthātṛ's share from the Dronakalaśa, pouring it into a vessel from the Aditya-sthālī, into the Upaśaya vessel. "He takes it with the formula, "Thou art the holder of truth. I take thee with the eyes of the sacrifice, with the eyes of truth, with the eyes that are the holders of the sacrifice, for the presiding of this sacrifice."
7.12.44	Having taken up the Grahas, he goes out.
7.12.45	As soon as he has gone out, the Adhvaryu takes up the Grahas.
7.12.46	He stands to the north and hands over the Grahas to be taken up by the Pratiprasthātṛ.
7.12.47	Then he announces, "Let it be heard. Let it be heard. Do you announce to Mitra-Varuna that the offering is being made."
7.12.48	At the Vasat-utterance, both offer together.
7.12.49	Having offered, he recites: "He who harms us, O Mitra-Varuna, the enemy, may he be crushed. May the one who is auspicious be the lord. I press down that one below, so that I may be superior and have the will of Indra."
7.12.50	Then the Pratiprasthātṛ pours the excess of the Soma from the Adhvaryu's vessel into the Pratiprasthatṛ's vessel.
7.12.51	The Adhvaryu pours half of the Soma from both vessels into the Pratiprathatṛ's vessel.
7.12.52	The Pratiprasthātṛ pours it into the vessel placed on the Āditya-stone with the formula, "For the Viśve Devas."
7.12.53	Then the Adhvaryu, having turned by the right, having hastened towards the west, having handed over the vessel to the Hotṛ, having gone forward, says (to the Maitrāvaruṇa), "Do you recite (the hymn) for the Asvins."
7.12.54	Having heard this, the Pratiprasthātṛ takes the Pratiprastha-graha from the Dronakalaśa, pouring it into the vessel from the vessel placed in the Āditya-sthālī, saying, "Thou art taken with a formula. Thou art taken with a verse. Thee, O Agni, I take with the formulas of the Srutis and the Srotriyas, with the formulas of Kratus and the Kratus, with the formulas for this sacrifice, with the formulas to be recited at the Dhruva."
7.12.55	Having taken the Grahas, he goes out.
7.12.56	As soon as he has gone out, the Adhvaryu takes up the two cups.
7.12.57	He stands to the north and hands over the cup to be taken up by the Pratiprasthātṛ.
7.12.58	Then he announces, "Let it be heard. Let it be heard. Do you say 'Srausat' (to the Hotṛ). Let the Hotṛ recite for the Asvins."
7.12.59	At the Vasat-utterance, both offer together.
7.12.60	Having offered, he recites: "O ye two Asvins, who attack us, our enemy, the one who is envious, the one who has evil intentions, I press him down, as Indra, with my mind, the lower one, and may I be the higher one."
7.12.61	Then the Pratiprasthātṛ pours the Graha's overflow into the Adhvaryu's vessel.
7.12.62	The Adhvaryu pours half of the Graha into the Pratiprasthatṛ's vessel.
7.12.63	He pours it into the ladle placed on the sun-stone, with the formula, "For all the gods thee."
7.13.1	If the half-portion of the pot is left over by these offerings, he covers it with this vessel.
7.13.2	If it is not half, then having made it half from the Drona-vessel, he puts it in the same vessel with the formula, "This Soma is for thee, O Viṣṇu of great strides. Protect it. May thy ill-visioned enemy not see it."
7.13.3	Then the Adhvaryu, having turned by the right, having hastened towards the west, having handed over the vessel to the Hotṛ, having gone forward, having caused the Hotr to recite, having caused the Hotṛ's goblet to be raised, having caused the goblets to be made bright on both sides, having caused the goblet of the Acchāvāka to be raised, he says, "Do not you, O Unneṣṭha, and the Pratiprasthāt, take up the goblets with four pieces of wood, sprinkled and unsprinkled."
7.13.4	They do as they are told.
7.13.5	They first take from the pot of Drona.
7.13.6	Then from the pot of Pūtabhṛt.
7.13.7	Then from pot of Drona
7.13.8	They are both bright.
7.13.9	They first bring the Hotr's goblet.
7.13.10	The others as they are available.
7.13.11	Having brought them, they place them on the northern altar.
7.13.12	Then the Pratiprasthātṛ consecrates two of the four portions.
7.13.13	Two remain unconsecrated.
7.13.14	Having covered the consecrated ones, they take up the unconsecrated ones.
7.13.15	The Adhvaryu takes up the Sukra Soma;
7.13.16	the Pratiprasthātr takes up the Manthin Soma.
7.13.17	Having taken up the two Grahas, they go out.
7.13.18	The Adhvaryu, stepping out, touches the right door-post.
7.13.19	The Pratiprasthātṛ, stepping out, the left door-post.
7.13.20	They join the two Grahas at the southern end of the northern altar. They join life, may they bless me with that. They join the breath, may they bless that for me. They join the out-breath, may they bless it for me. They unite the through-breath, may it bless me. They join sight, may it bless that for me, They join hearing, may it bless it for me."
7.13.21	Having united with the six uniting (Grahas), they depart.
7.13.22	The gods, the fathers of men, have praised thee. May the gods, the fathers, who are the givers of bright food, bestow on thee bright food. Go forth, O bright one, to the bright one. The Adhvaryu goes around the Uttaravedi on the right side.
7.13.23	The gods, the givers of wealth, have praised thee. May the gods, the giuers of wealth, lead thee to prosperity. May the offspring be prosperous. May the offspring prosper. Go to the giver of wealth, to the giver of light. The Pratiprasthātṛ moves around the northern altar from the north.
7.13.24	They run towards the northern altar from in front. We are united with Indra, we conquer the enemies, destroying the foes, the Dāsa, the enemies, the Vrtra.
7.13.25	"Whatever is your splendour, O Agni, by that may I be lustrous. Whatever is your radiance, O Agni, may I be radiant by that. Whatever is your brilliance, O Agni, be brilliant by that."
7.13.26	Then, between the sacrificial post and the Havaniya fire, he joins the Grahas with the formula, "You are life, do you bestow life on me, do you bestow on the sacrifice, do you bestow it on the lord of sacrifice. You are Prāṇa, do you bestow Prāṇa on me, do bestow it on the sacrifice, bestow it on the Lord of sacrifice. You belong to Apāna, do you bestow Apāna on me, do it bestow on the sacrifice bestow it on the master of sacrifice. You pertain to Vyāna, do you besto Vyāna on me, bestow it on sacrifice, bestow it to the master of sacrifice, You belong to sight, do you bestow sight on me, bestow on the sacrifice and bestow on the master of the sacrifice. You belong the hearing, do you bestow hearing on me, bestow to the sacrifice and bestow to the master of the sacrificer."
7.13.27	Having arranged the six kinds of union, they depart.
7.14.1	Those two gods, Shukra and Manthin, arrange the divine classes and arrange the human classes, bestow strength and energy upon us, life in the animals, offspring in me, and the sacrificer.
7.14.2	Then they throw the two unsprinkled pieces outside the altar.
7.14.3	The Sanda is driven away with the Amune. The Adhvaryu, thinking of the person whom the sacrificer hates, places it on the fire.
7.14.4	The Marka is driven away with Amune. The Pratiprasthātṛ, thinking of the sacrificer hates him, places it on fire.
7.14.5	Then having touched water, they place the two (kindling woods) after sprinkling.
7.14.6	The Adhvaryu says, "This is your bright kindling wood. Kindle it with it. Svāhā."
7.14.7	"This is thy kindling-wood, O Manthin, with it kindle thyself, svāhā," says the Pratiprasthātṛ.
7.14.8	At this time the Camasādhvaryus take up the cups.
7.14.9	Then the Adhvaryu, standing facing east, calls out, "Let it be heard! Let it be heard! In the morning, the Soma juice of the bright one, the sweet one, the one who flows with honey, is being sent forth to Indra. Let it be sent forth."
7.14.10	When the Vasat-call is uttered, both of them offer together. That first one is Samkṛti, the creator of all. That first one, Mitra, Varuna, Agni, that first one, Brihaspati, the healer, from him I offer the Soma to Indra, Svāhā.
7.14.11	When the Vasat-calls are uttered, they offer twice.
7.14.12	In the same way, they offer twice for each cup.
7.14.13	Then he says (to the Hotr), "Let the cup of the Hotr go forth, let the cup of the Brahman go forth, let that of the Udgātṛ go forth, let those of the sacrificer, the Sadasya and the Hotr-officiating priests go forth." The Adhvaryu, having taken up the cups from the Dronakalasa one by one, should return. "O Hotr-officiants, wait. O Pratiprasthātṛ, offer the Savanīya Soma at the northern half of the Āhavanīya fire."
7.14.14	They do as they are told.
7.14.15	Then, having circumambulated clockwise, he pours the remnants of the cup into the Hotr's cup, saying, "We pour you, the offered, into the offered, the nourishing for the gods, the sweet for humans." Or silently.
7.14.16	Then the Pratiprasthātṛ offers the flowing Soma from the churning of the Ahavanīya with the verse, "This is your share, O Rudra, which you have begged for. May you enjoy it. May you be the protector of the cattle, the nourishment of wealth, good prosperity, and the welfare of the year. Svāhā."
7.14.17	Then having touched water, he places the Sukra vessel and the churning vessel in their respective places on the ground.
7.14.18	These are the cups of the great priests.
7.14.19	Then the Hotrādhvaryus, having taken up the cups of the Hotrakas once each from the Dronakalaśa, return.
7.14.20	Having taken up the Maitrāvaruṇa cup and announced, he says, "O Praśāstṛ, do you offer."
7.14.21	He offers twice at the Vasat and Anuvṣat calls.
7.14.22	"O Brahman, O Pot-bearer, O Nestr, O Agnid, O Yajé, having offered the five Hotrás, having turned to the right, having run towards the west, he sits down in front of the Hotar, saying, 'O Yajé, O Agnid.'
7.14.23	The Hotar says, 'He who will make us drink the Soma king, he will do good.'
7.14.24	Then the Hotar gives the Indra-Vayu vessel.
7.14.25	The Adhvaryu takes up the offering-material as soon as it is taken up.
7.14.26	Having taken up the offering-materials, the Hotr, having offered the Upāhutis, eats it as he knows.
7.14.27	Similarly, having taken up the offering materials, the Adhvaryu, having offered the Upahuti, eats it, saying, "May Vasu be in me, may Vasu be in front, may the Vasu of speech protect my speech."
7.14.28	Then the Hotr eats.
7.14.29	Then the Adhvaryus eats.
7.14.30	Then he hands it over to the Hotṛ.
7.14.31	The Hotṛ places it in its proper place.
7.14.32	Then the Hotṛ takes up the Maitrāvaruṇa vessel.
7.14.33	The Adhvaryu takes it up in succession.
7.14.34	Having taken it up in succession, the Hotṛ, having invoked the Hotṛ, eats it as he knows.
7.14.35	Having thus begun the Hotr-chant, the Adhvaryu, having offered the Upasthya-oblation, eats it with the formula, "May Vasu, knowing Vasu, protect my eye."
7.14.36	He then hands it over to the Hotr.
7.14.37	The Hotr places it in its proper place.
7.14.38	Then the Hotr takes up the Asvin-vessel.
7.14.39	The Adhvaryu takes it up and begins the chanting.
7.14.40	When the Adhvaryu has begun, having offered the Upāhuta to the Hotṛ, he consumes it as he knows.
7.14.41	When the Hotṛ has begun, the Adhvaryū offers the Upāhutam and consumes it, saying, "May Vasu, the possessor of wealth, the protector of hearing, protect my hearing."
7.14.42	One should consume the Āśvina in all directions. This is the Brāhmaṇa.
7.14.43	Then he hands it over to the Hotṛ.
7.14.44	The Hotr places them in their respective places.
7.14.45	Then, having touched water, the Hotr and the Idâ-bearer take up the Idâ.
7.15.1	When the Idâ is being invoked, they take up the cups.
7.15.2	When the Ida has been invoked, the Agni-bearer has not yet placed (the cup).
7.15.3	Then he makes the cups belonging to the two deities empty.
7.15.4	He puts the portion of the cake in the vessel for Indra-Vayu.
7.15.5	The cooked rice in the vessel for Mitra-Varuna.
7.15.6	The grains in the vessel for Asvins.
7.15.7	Having taken them around, he takes them out through the eastern door and puts them in the Havirdhana shed through the western door and places them on the northern side of the southern Havirdhana shed.
7.15.8	They remain till the third pressing.
7.15.9	Then the Agnidhra places (the Soma) in six portions.
7.15.10	They ask.
7.15.11	They sprinkle.
7.15.12	They consume the cups that have been invoked, saying, "Come to me and enter me." Having run after the long consumption, he says, "O Soma, the god of the Vasu clan, you who know the mind, I consume the morning pressing, which is of the Gayatri metre, Indra-drunk, sweet, and invoked, having been invoked."
7.15.13	These three consume the Hotr's goblet together, having invoked it.
7.15.14	As the goblets, so the goblet.
7.15.15	They touch themselves, saying, "Bless me."
7.15.16	They make the goblets swell, saying, "Grow, may it be united."
7.15.17	The Nārāśaṃsa verses swell, and they hang down below the southern Havirdhāna, for Indra and Agni.
7.15.18	Then the Acchavaka stands in front of the assembly.
7.15.19	He places a large piece of the Purorasa before him and says, "O Acchavaka, speak what you have to say."
7.15.20	When the Acchavaka knows that the Brahmanas are near, he says, "O Hotr, this Acchavaka desires to be invoked. Invoke him."
7.15.21	The Hotr calls him with a verse.
7.15.22	Then, having gone forward, he says to the Adhvaryu who is carrying the cup of the Acchāvāka, "Carry the cup of the Acchavasaka and make it bright on both sides."
7.15.23	He does so.
7.15.24	Then, going forward, he takes the cup of the Achasaka, and having announced, says, "O Acchavasaka, offer."
7.15.25	Having offered at the Vasat and Anvasat calls, he carries the oblation for consumption.
7.15.26	If the Acchāvāka wishes to invite him, he invites him.
7.15.27	But they do not consume together.
7.15.28	The Nārāśamsa of him who has been nourished, sinks down.
7.15.29	Then he says, "Acchāvāka, sit down. The Adhvaryu should announce to the Acchāvaaka when the Nestr has taken his wife to the Udanīya."
7.15.30	This Acchāvākasinks down behind his own sacrificial post.
7.15.31	He brings the wife, taking the water-pot, with the formula, "Come, O dear one, come."
7.15.32	Then having led her out by the eastern door and having brought her in by the western door, having placed her in the Sadas, having placed the Pannijani-grass at the rear of the Adhvaryu's Dhishniya in the path of the Sama-chant, he says, "I place the Pannijani for the Vasus, Rudras, Adityas, all gods. I place the Pannijanis for you for the sacrifice."
7.15.33	Then the Agnidhra says, "The Acchāvāka is seated; the Acchāvākas are seated." The Acchāvākin sit down on the spread grass.
7.15.34	At this time the sacrificer eats the sacrificial cakes at the Agnidhra.
7.15.35	If he eats, the wife eats in the wife's hall.
7.16.1	Then they take up the seasonal vessels, the Adhvaryu taking the right one and the Pratiprasthātṛ the left one.
7.16.2	The Adhvaryu first takes up from the Vāyavya vessel with the formula, "Thou art taken with a support. I take thee dear to Madhu."
7.16.3	Then the Pratiprasthātṛ takes up with the formula, “Thou art taken with support. I take you dear to Madhu.”
7.16.4	Having taken up the cups, they go out.
7.16.5-10	The Adhvaryu, stepping out, leans against the right door-post. The Pratiprasthātṛ, stepping out, rests against the left door-post. Then the Adhvaryu calls out, "Do thou call out, let him hear, let him say, 'Let it be offered at the proper time.' He offers at the Vasat-utterance. The Prāṭhātṛ steps out. The Adhvaryu approaches.
7.16.11	He takes it with the formula, "Thou art taken with a support. I take thee for Sukra."
7.16.12	Then the Pratiprasthātṛ calls out, "Do thou call out. Let him hear. Do thou announce. Let him announce. Do thou announce."
7.16.13	He makes the offering at the Vasat-utterance.
7.16.14	The Adhvaryu comes out.
7.16.15	The Pratiprasthātr approaches.
7.16.16	He takes it with the formula, "Thou art taken with a support. I take thee for the pure one."
7.16.17	Then the Adhvaryu makes the call, "Do thou call out, let him hear, let him say 'Yes', let him be sent forth with the Rtu."
7.16.18	He makes the offering at the Vasat-call.
7.16.19	The Pratiprasthātṛ goes out.
7.16.20	The Adhvaryu approaches.
7.16.21	He takes it with the formula, "Thou art taken with a support. I take thee for the sky, for thy dear."
7.16.22	Then the Pratiprasthātṛ calls out, "Do thou call out. Let him hear. Do thou announce. Let him announce. Do thou announce, 'Let him announce.' Let him announce, 'Let us announce.' Let him hear. Let him hear."
7.16.23	He offers at the Vasat-utterance.
7.16.24	The Adhvaryu comes out.
7.16.25	The Pratiprasthātr approaches.
7.16.26	He takes it with the formula, "Thou art taken with a support. For the sky thee, I take thee agreeable."
7.16.27	Then the Adhvaryu calls out, "Do thou call out, let him hear; do thou announce, let him hear. Do thou announce, let them hear. Let him hear. Do you announce, let them (hear). Let them hear. Do thou call out, do thou announce, do thou announce."
7.16.28	At the Vasat-utterance he makes the offering.
7.16.29	The Pratiprasthātṛ comes out.
7.16.30	The Adhvaryu turns the vessel upside down and approaches.
7.16.31	He takes it with the formula, "Thou art taken with a support. I take thee for Isha."
7.16.32	Then the Pratiprasthātṛ calls out, "Do thou call out. Let him hear. Do thou announce. Let him announce. Do thou announce."
7.16.33	He makes the offering at the Vasat-utterance.
7.16.34	The Adhvaryu comes out.
7.16.35	The Pratiprasthātr approaches, turning the vessel upside down.
7.16.36	He takes it with the formula, "Thou art taken with a support; I take thee for energy."
7.16.37	Then the Adhvaryu makes the call, "Do thou call out; let him hear; do thou call out to the Rtu-s to proceed."
7.16.38	He makes the offering at the Vasat-call.
7.16.39	The Pratiprasthātṛ comes out.
7.16.40	The Adhvaryu proceeds.
7.16.41	He takes it with the formula, "Thou art taken with a support. I take thee, O friend, for thy own self."
7.16.42	Then the Pratiprasthātṛ calls out, "Do thou call out. Let him hear. Let him call out. Let us call out. Let them hear. Let us call. Let them hear."
7.16.43	At the Vasat-call he makes the offering.
7.16.44	The Adhvaryu comes out.
7.16.45	The Pratiprasthātr enters.
7.16.46	He takes it with the formula, "Thou art taken with a support. For the one to be enjoyed together, I take thee, agreeable."
7.16.47	Then the Adhvaryu makes the call, "Do thou call out. Let him hear. Let him call out. Let us call out. Let it be heard. Let him call. Let us call. Let it be called. Let him call."
7.16.48	At the Vasat-call he makes the offering.
7.16.49	The Pratiprasthātṛ comes out.
7.16.50	The Adhvaryu turns the vessel upside down and approaches.
7.16.51	He takes it with the formula, "Thou art taken with a support. I take thee for Tapas."
7.16.52	Then the Pratiprasthātṛ calls out, "Do thou call out. Let him hear. Let him call out. Let us call out. Let them hear. Let us call. Let them hear."
7.16.53	At the Vasat-call he makes the offering.
7.16.54	The Adhvaryu comes out.
7.16.55	The Pratiprasthātr takes up the vessel, turning it upside down.
7.16.56	He says to him, "O Pratiprasthātṛ, enjoy with this vessel."
7.16.57	Then the Adhvaryu announces, "O Srausat, let Srausat listen. Let him send forth with the Rtu."
7.16.58	The Prastotar says, "O Adhvaryus, perform the sacrifice."
7.16.59	The Adhvaryu says, "O Hotar, perform this."
7.16.60	He offers at the Vasat call.
7.16.61	He approaches the Pratiprasthātr who is seated there.
7.16.62	The Pratiprasthātṛ first takes it, saying, "Thou art taken with a formula; I take thee for Tapas.
7.16.63	Then the Adhvaryu takes it, saying "Thou art taken up with a formula; thou art Samsarpa; I take thee dear to Anhaspati."
7.16.64	Having taken up the two cups, they go out.
7.16.65	The Adhvaryu, stepping out, supports the right door-post.
7.16.66	The Pratiprasthātṛ, the left one.
7.16.67	The Prāstātṛ announces here: "Let it be heard! Let it be heard! May the Rtu be heard! Let the Hotr recite."
7.16.68	The Prastātṛ says to the householder: "May you perform the sacrifice."
7.16.69	The householder says to the Hotr: "May you sacrifice this."
7.16.70	At the Vasat-utterance, both offer together.
7.16.71	Then the Pratiprasthātṛ pours the remnant of the cup into the Adhvaryu's vessel.
7.16.72	He says, "O Pratiprasthātr, take up the Indra-Agni cup in this vessel."
7.16.73	Then the Pratiprasthātṛ takes up the Indra-Agni cup from the Dronakalaśa, pouring it into the vessel with the formula, "The Soma has come to Indra-Agni." Having followed it, he places it with the formula, “Thou art taken with a support; I take thee dear to Indra-Agna."
7.16.74	Having wiped it, he places the cup with the formula, "This is thy birth-place; for Indra-Agni thee."
7.16.75	Then the Adhvaryu, having turned by the right, and having hastened towards the west, consumes this vessel with the Hotṛ, saying, "With the Rtu (season) drunk." With the Hotṛ, Potṛ, Neṣṭṛ, Agnīdhra, Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin, Maitrāvaruṇa.
7.16.76	Then, having turned back, he consumes the vessel four times with the Hotṛ alone, saying, "Drunk with the Rtus." With the Hotri, Potṛ, Nestr, and Udgātṛ.
7.16.77	Then, having turned around, he twice drinks from the vessel, saying, "For the Rtu-god who has drunk."
7.17.1	Then he asks the Hotṛ, "Will you chant the Prāṇava and the Upāṃśuśaṃsa?"
7.17.2	Having heard how the Hotṛ replies to him, he turns away, holding the vessel, after having heard.
7.17.3	He recites the Yajus as far as "Ida Devahu" (is recited).
7.17.4	The Hotri calls him.
7.17.5	The Adhvaryu responds.
7.17.6	He praises.
7.17.7	He responds.
7.17.8	What is recited in a low tone, that is responded to in a low tone.
7.17.9	What is praised loudly, that is responded loudly.
7.17.10	Either continuously or in a broken manner.
7.17.11	Having offered the well-known Upavasatha-cup, having gone forward, he takes up this Indra-Agni cup.
7.17.12	The Nārāśamsa cups are taken up in succession.
7.17.13	Then he announces: "Let it be heard, let there be hearing. Let the Utkhaśa priests recite the hymn. Let Soma be offered."
7.17.14	At the Vasat and Anuvṣat calls, he offers twice.
7.17.15	In the same way, the Nārāśaṃsa cups are shaken twice.
7.17.16	This is the vessel of the Nārāśaṃsa hymns.
7.17.17	One drinks the Soma juice after the libation, saying, "Indra and Agni have drunk."
7.17.18	The Hotṛ and the Adhvaryu consume this cup together with the Nārāśaṃsa draught. The Nārāśamsa draught is Soma. O god, I consume the Nārāsaṃsa draught, which is of the Gayatra metre, which is drunk by the fathers, which is sweet, which is invited, having been invited.
7.17.19	These three together invite and consume the Hotṛ's goblet.
7.17.20	As the cups are filled, so are the cups.
7.17.21	They touch themselves, saying, "Fill me."
7.17.22	They fill the cups, saying, "Be filled, be united."
7.17.23	The Nārāśaṃsa verses are recited as the cups are filled. They are placed below the southern Havirdhāna, one below the other, for the Viśvedevā deities.
7.17.24	Then, having gone forward, taking up the Soma-vessel, he says (to the Maitrāvaruṇa), "When we shall take up this Vaiśvadeva cup, then do thou pour down the king Pūtabhṛt from above, and cleanse the Dronakalaśa ten times and place it upside down."
7.17.25	He does it thus.
7.17.26	He takes the Vasat-cup from the pitcher with the verse, "O Soma, thou art taken with a support; thou art taken with the Vasat-call. Thou art taken for the All-gods."
7.17.27	Having wiped it, he places it with the verse, “This is thy birth-place; for the All-Gods thee.”
7.17.28	Then having sprinkled himself, having taken the two sacrificial grass-blades, and having restrained speech, he turns towards the west and begins the Stotra.
7.17.29	He recites the Stotra for the Visve Devas.
7.17.30	The Hotṛ recites the Uttara-sāman.
7.17.31	After the Hotṛ's time, the Adhvaryu turns away.
7.17.32	The Hotri calls him.
7.17.33	The Adhvaryu responds.
7.17.34	The Hotar praises.
7.17.35	The Advaryu responds.
7.17.36	Having offered the well-known Upavasatha-cup, having gone forward, he takes up this Vaiśvadeva cup.
7.17.37	The Nārāśamsa cups are taken up in succession.
7.17.38	Then he announces: "Let it be heard, let there be hearing. Let the Upavasatha cup be offered."
7.17.39	At the Vasat and Anuvṣat calls, he offers twice.
7.17.40	In the same way, the Nārāśaṃsa cups are shaken twice.
7.17.41	This is the vessel of the Nārāśaṃsa hymns.
7.17.42	"The drinking of the after-drink is with all the gods."
7.17.43	The Hotṛ and the Adhvaryu consume this cup together with the Nārāśaṃsa draught. The Nārāśamsa draught is Soma. O god, I consume the Nārāsaṃsa draught, which is of the Gayatra metre, which is drunk by the fathers, which is sweet, which is invited, having been invited.
7.17.44	These three together invite and consume the Hotṛ's goblet.
7.17.45	as the cups.
7.17.46	They touch themselves, saying, "Do thou nourish me."
7.17.47	They do not nourish the cups.
7.17.48	All eat together and cleanse themselves.
7.17.49	Then he says, "O Pratiprasthātṛ, having cleansed the cups for the Caturhotra sacrifice and the Sukra cup in the Marjālīya vessel, pour them into the vessels."
7.17.50	He does so.
7.17.51	Then, going forward, he says,
7.18.1	"Carry the Maitrāvaruṇa goblet forward. The Soma-pourer should recite the Pravâya-verse."
7.18.2	They carry forward the Maitrāvaruṇachamasa first.
7.18.3	The others as they are available.
7.18.4	Having carried forward, they place them on the northern altar.
7.18.5	Then having taken the Ukthya-vessel, he places the Upaśaya-vessel.
7.18.6	At that time this king takes the third portion of the oblation, which is in the Uthyasthali vessel. "He says, "Thou art taken with a support for the gods, for the Uthyas for the life of the sacrifice, for Mitra-Varuna, I take thee dear to Mitra-Varuna."
7.18.7	He touches the Uthyasthalı vessel again, saying, "Thou art the oblation again."
7.18.8	Having wiped it, he places it down with the formula, "This is your place, for Mitra-Varuna."
7.18.9	Having touched water, having taken the two sacrificial grass-blades, having restrained speech, having turned towards the west, the Adhvaryu begins the Stotra.
7.18.10	He praises.
7.18.11	They say that this is the last (verse) for the Maitrāvaruṇa.
7.18.12	From the time of the Maitrāvaruņa, the Adhvaryu turns away.
7.18.13	The Maitrāvaruṇa calls him out.
7.18.14	The Adhvaryu responds.
7.18.15	He praises.
7.18.16	He responds.
7.18.17	Having responded to the well-known eulogy, having approached towards the east, he takes up this cup.
7.18.18	The cups are taken up in succession.
7.18.19	Then he announces: "Let it be heard. Let there be hearing. Let there be praise. Let there be offering of the Soma cups."
7.18.20	He offers twice at the Vasat and Anuvṣat calls.
7.18.21	Similarly, they offer twice at each of the cups.
7.18.22	Having circumambulated, he pours the remnant of the cup of Maitrāvaruṇa into the Hotr's cup, saying, "We pour thee, the offered, into the offered, the nourishing for the gods, the sweet for men." Or silently.
7.18.23	Here they put down the vessel and run towards the food.
7.18.24	"The drinking of the after-drink is for Mitra-Varuna."
7.18.25	The three of them together call out for the Maitrāvaruṇa goblet and drink.
7.18.26	As for the goblets, so for the gobleths.
7.18.27	They touch themselves, saying, "Do you stimulate me."
7.18.28	They do not stimulate the goblets.
7.18.29	All the eaters of Soma are purified.
7.18.30	Then he says, "O Pratiprasthātṛ, the Grahas should be taken up by you."
7.18.31	Having heard this, the Pratiprasthātr goes forward and says,
7.19.1	"O Brahmaṇācchaṃsins, take up the Soma in the vessel. The Soma is being pressed."
7.19.2	The Brahmaṇācchamsins take up the Soma first in the vessel.
7.19.3	The others take up the Soma as per their turn.
7.19.4	Having taken it up, they place it on the northern altar.
7.19.5	Then, having taken the Uthyasthaliya vessel, they place it in the Upaśaya vessel.
7.19.6	In that (Soma-cup) the king takes half of this (Soma-cup). The Upavasatha-cup is taken with the formula, "Thou art taken with a support; for the gods thee, for the life of the gods, for the Upavasatha, for the life-giving (cup), for Indra thee, I take thee agreeable."
7.19.7	"Thou art the re-offering" - he touches the Upavasathapana with this formula.
7.19.8	Having wiped it, he places it down, saying, "This is your place, for Indra."
7.19.9	Having touched water, taking the two sacrificial grass-blades, and restraining speech, he turns towards the west and begins the praise.
7.19.10	He praises.
7.19.11	The Brahmanaschamsin says, "This is the last."
7.19.12	The Pratiprasthâtar turns away from the Brahmanaschamsins at the proper time.
7.19.13	The Brahman-priest calls him.
7.19.14	The Pratiprasthātṛ responds.
7.19.15	He praises.
7.19.16	He responds.
7.19.17	Having responded to the well-known eulogy, having approached towards the east, he takes up this cup.
7.19.18	The Camasādhvaryus take up the cups.
7.19.19	Then he announces: "Let it be heard. Let there be hearing. Let the Udgātṛs praise the Soma-offerings."
7.19.20	He offers twice at the Vasat and Anuvṣat calls.
7.19.21	Similarly, they offer twice at each of the cups.
7.19.22	Having circumambulated, he pours the remnants of the cup of the Graha into the cup of the Brahman-priest, saying, "We pour thee, the offered, into the offered, the nourishing for the gods, the sweet for men." Or silently.
7.19.23	Here they put down the vessel and run towards the food.
7.19.24	"They eat with the Anusavana-food, saying, "Indra has drunk."
7.19.25	The three Brahmanas chant together and eat the cup of the Brahmanas chant.
7.19.26	As the cups, so the cup.
7.19.27	They touch themselves, saying, "Do thou nourish me."
7.19.28	They do not nourish the cups.
7.19.29	All the eaters of the oblations are purified.
7.19.30	Then, going forward, he says:
7.20.1	"Carry the vessel of the Acchavaka, the Unnetr should carry the king completely, not exceeding (the prescribed limit). O Pratiprasthater, enjoy with this cup."
7.20.2	Having led the sacrificial grass through the eastern door, he spreads the skin with the neck towards the east and the hairy side upwards, saying, "May the sacrifice be established" or silently.
7.20.3	Having placed the stones in front of it, he brings down the king Soma between the two halves of the sacrificial grass of the southern Havirdhāna, saying with two verses, "To your heart, to your mind, O Soma, king, come down."
7.20.4	Then they tell him to the Udgātṛ priests.
7.20.5	They perform that rite in him which they know.
7.20.6	Then he pours down half of the Vasatīvari waters into the Udumbara vessel.
7.20.7	Half of the Ekadhana waters.
7.20.8	He places the Vasatīvarī waters in front of the dice.
7.20.9	The Ekadhana waters behind the dice.
7.20.10	They first take up the Acchavaka vessel.
7.20.11	As befits the occasion, the others.
7.20.12	Having brought the king to the northern altar, they place him there.
7.20.13	Then, having placed the Uthyasthaliya vessel in the northern altar, one takes the vessel for the Upaśaya offering.
7.20.14	In that (Agni) he takes the king of all (sacrifices), which is in the Upavasatha vessel, with the formula, "Thou art taken with a support; for the gods thee, for the life of the gods, for the Upavasathas, for the life-giving Upavasathis, I take thee agreeable to Indra and Agni."
7.20.15	Here he touches the Upavasathaiya vessel with the formula, “Thou art not the oblation again.”
7.20.16	Having rubbed it with ten (fingers), he places it upside down.
7.20.17	Having wiped it, he places it (in the fire) with the formula, "This is thy womb; for thee belonging to Indra and Agni."
7.20.18	Then having touched water, taking the two sacrificial grass-blades, restraining speech, and running towards the west, he begins the Stotra.
7.20.19	He praises.
7.20.20	To the Acchāvāka, they say, this is the last (verse).
7.20.21	The Pratiprasthātṛ priest turns away from the Ācāvāka priest.
7.20.22	The Ācāvākas priest calls him.
7.20.23	The Pratiprasthātr responds.
7.20.24	He praises.
7.20.25	He responds.
7.20.26	Having responded to the well-known eulogy, having approached towards the east, he takes up this cup.
7.20.27	The cups are taken up in succession.
7.20.28	Then he makes the call, "Let it be heard! Let it be heard! O Utkasha, praise the Soma offerings!"
7.20.29	He offers twice at the Vasat and Anuvadat calls.
7.20.30	In the same way, they offer twice each of all the cups.
7.20.31	Then, having circumambulated clockwise, he pours the remnant of the cup into the cup of the Acchāvāka with the formula, "I pour thee, the offered, into the offered, the nourishing for the gods, the sweet for men." Or silently.
7.20.32	Having placed this vessel here itself, they run towards the east with the portions.
7.20.33	"The portion of the draught drunk by Indra-Agni."
7.20.34	These three consume the Acchavahā cup together.
7.20.35	Just as the Acchavahās, so the cups.
7.20.36	They touch themselves, saying, "Do you nourish me."
7.20.37	They do not nourish the cups.
7.20.38	All consume together and then cleanse themselves.
7.20.39	Then the Praśāstṛ says, "The Ukthaśā."
7.20.40	Having consumed the morning Soma-pressing, the Praśāstr says, "Go forth."
7.20.41	The Praśāstŕ says, "Go."
7.20.42	The morning pressing comes to an end.
8.1.1	The Adhvaryu and the Pratiprasthātṛ go to the midday pressing, saying, "The divine doors are opening." From here onwards they go by the eastern way.
8.1.2	Having known that they have gone, the Adhvaryu, going forward, says, "O besprinklers, call the Gravastut. O sacrificer, come."
8.1.3	Having taken the oblations through the eastern door, having sprinkled water from the Vasatīvarī vessels into the Hotr's goblet, and having made the sacrificer recite the same formula as before in the Nigrābha vessels, he gives them back to the sacrificer.
8.1.4	Having taken up another stone for pressing, he takes up the stone for pressing at the Upāṁsusavana.
8.1.5	Having thus stretched out the king in the east, he should press him with the stones, saying, "For Indra, for Indra."
8.1.6	Five times with the formula, five times silently.
8.1.7	Pressing ten times, he presses the king completely.
8.1.8	Having sprinkled with water, he gives the turban to the stone-presser.
8.1.9	The Adhvaryu sprinkles it with water and then the people take away the garment for sleeping.
8.1.10	The king is anointed with the Hotr's verses in the prescribed manner.
8.1.11	He is led forth in the prescribed manner,
8.1.12	He touches the skin and the plank in the prescribed manner;
8.1.13	He recites the Vrddhi verses in the prescribed way.
8.1.14	Here the king does not touch the reins.
8.1.15	They anoint him with the sound of "Here, here, here".
8.1.16	That very same (cow) is being led here, here, here, and here.
8.1.17	Then, when she is being led to the place of collection, she is led here, here and here.
8.1.18	Having collected her well in the place of collection and having taken her up, the Uddhatṛ gives her to the Uddhātṛ.
8.1.19	The Uddhātā leads her to the place of washing.
8.1.20	In this way the second round is completed.
8.1.21	In this manner the third round is completed.
8.1.22	They take up the third ladleful at the third stage, saying, "Great, great, great."
8.1.23	The Unnetr gives it to the Udgātṛ, having wrapped it in the ten-fold strainer after the Rījiṣa.
8.1.24	The Unneta washes it in the Adhvaniya, presses it, and having taken it between the southern Havirdhāna and the Sadas, places it on the skin.
8.1.25	Having placed the ladles in front of him, he removes the four parts of the rice-gruel from the ladles.
8.1.26	The Udgātṛ or the Prastôtṛ, having approached the southern Havirdhāna, places the Dronakalaśa containing the rice-gruels at the back of the axle.
8.1.27	In that very way, having spread out the tenfold purity of the ten directions, he takes the two Soma-grahas, Sukra and Manthin.
8.1.28	Then with the seasonal vessels, he takes the Marutvatiya Soma-grahas.
8.2.1	With two verses: "O Indra, protector of the Soma, you are the bull, the lord of the Maruts, the one who has grown."
8.2.2	Then having brought the Āgrayana from above, he takes it below.
8.2.3	Having thrice recited the Abhihiṅkāra formula, he places it after rubbing it.
8.2.4	He takes the Ukthya.
8.2.5	He places the king with the Ukthya.
8.2.6	Then he places the vessel containing the drops in the upper half of the Dronakalaśa and recites the formula, "The drop has fallen, the drop that is yours, the drop that belongs to you."
8.2.7	Then he says to the Upavasata-priest, "Prepare the Pūtabhṛt vessel and the Grahas of Pavamāna for me to take."
8.2.8	Then, when the Pūtabhṛt is empty, he takes up the Grahas of Pavamāna, saying, "Thou art taken with a formula; for Indra thee." He touches the Dronakalaśa.
8.2.9	"For Indra thee" - he says while touching the Ādhavanīya.
8.2.10	"For Indara thee" - he touches the Pūtabhaṛt.
8.2.11	"Thus he says, 'Pour the king who is going forward, the pure-bearer, with ten (cups) of Soma, having pressed the Soma, and having turned it upside down.'
8.2.12	He does it thus.
8.2.13	Having thus sprinkled himself, and taking the two sacrificial grass-blades, he moves forward.
8.2.14	When they have thus begun together, he offers a spoonful on the Āhavanīya fire.
8.2.15	The All-gods, the Maruts, and Indra may not forsake us at this second pressing. Speaking the truth, we may be in the good opinion of the gods. With this (verse) the Adhvaryu and the Pratiprasthātṛ offer.
8.2.16	The others offer according to their knowledge.
8.2.17	Then, having turned around to the right, they enter the assembly hall and crawl towards Pavamāna.
8.2.18	and in the assembly they sit down according to their respective places.
8.2.19	He gives the two sacrificial grass-blades to the Udgātṛ or Prastôtṛ, saying, "Thou art the covering of the Rk and Sāman, for the begetting of the pair." Or silently.
8.2.20	He murmurs the invocation, saying, "Vayu makes the sound."
8.2.21	This is the fifteenth midday Pavamâna.
8.2.22	When the eighth (day) comes, he recites, "You are Suparna, the Tristubh metre, I begin with you, may you protect me with welfare."
8.2.23	Here he explains the four Hotṛs.
8.2.24	When the Sāman is chanted, he gives instructions: "Agnīd, arrange the fires, spread the grass, decorate the cakes, Pratiprasthātṛ, bring curd for Dadhigra."
8.2.25	As directed, they do so.
8.2.26	Having sprinkled water, he says, "Come, O sacrificer."
8.2.27	Having entered the Havirdhāna shed through the eastern door, he attends to the king in the same way.
8.2.28	He moves around in the same way as the space.
8.2.29	He takes it nine times in the Pracaraṇyā vessel.
8.2.30	Similarly, the Agnidhra places the embers in the Dhishnyas in order, beginning from the Agnidhra-Dhishniya.
8.2.31	Similarly, sitting facing east, he spreads the embers on the Dhishnyias.
8.2.32	Similarly, he places the Pracarani ladle on the northern side of the Havirdhana.
8.2.33	Then he strews the Prṣṭhyā line with the Sāṃkāśya grass, continuous from the Garhapatya to the Āhavanīya.
8.3.1	Then, having sat down between the two sacrificial posts, he asks for curds for the curds-burner.
8.3.2	He examines the curds brought to him, saying, "You are the light, the shining fire, milked for the Pṛṣṇi."
8.3.3	Having covered the two sacrificial grass-blades, he takes it in a vessel of wood or of metal, saying, "As far as the heaven and earth are great, as far as the seven rivers are spread, so much of thy strength, O Indra, I take in the vessel, which is spread."
8.3.4	Having taken out the two sacrificial grasses, he then consecrates him with the formula, "May speech and mind consecrate thee; may Prāṇa and Apāna consecrate thee; May sight and hearing consecrate thee; may strength and power consecrate thee; Ojas and Sahas consecrate thee; Age and life consecrate thee; Self and body consecrate thee. Thou art consecrated, thou art consecrated, for the consecrated thee, for the consecrated ones, I consecrate thee."
8.3.5	Then he says, "O Hotṛ, speak what you have to say."
8.3.6	Taking it, he rises and says, "The oblation has been heard."
8.3.7	Having stepped across and announced, he says, "Let them offer the Dadhigharma."
8.3.8	When the Vasat-call is made, he offers with the formula, "To that Indra whom they call Varuna, whom they call Mitra, whom they call Satya, who is the deity of deities, born of Tapas, to him thee, to them thee, svāhā."
8.3.9	Having offered at the Anuvṣat-call, he takes up the portion for himself.
8.3.10	The sacrificer himself eats the flesh of the animal after having offered the invocation to the priests of the Pravargya rite. "May that great power be in me, may the skill be in me, the wisdom be in me, in me the bestowal of good heroism, may the three-fold heat shine upon me."
8.3.11	With the intention, with the mind, with the radiance, with the sacrifice, with the milk, with the Brahman, with the lustre, with the nobility, with the fame, with the truth, with the austerity, we have enjoyed its milking, we have enjoyed the pleasure of it, we have enjoyed eating it. That which Indra has drunk, which is sweet, which has been invoked, I eat having been invoked.
8.3.12	Having wiped the vessel, he gives it.
8.3.13	He asks for the Savanīya cakes.
8.3.14	Having cut them in the same way, he says, "Do you recite the formula for the Savanīsya cakes being cut for Indra at the Madhyamdina Savana."
8.3.15	Having cut from the front half, he cuts from the rear half.
8.3.16	He pours clarified butter over it.
8.3.17	He smears it.
8.3.18	Similarly, at the Upasad and Svishtakrit offerings, he offers from the right half of all (the oblations) once each.
8.3.19	He pours twice.
8.3.20	He does not smear (the oblations).
8.3.21	Having stepped across, he announces, "Do you offer the Indrani oblations that have been prepared for the Madhyamdina Savana."
8.3.22	At the Vasat-utterance, he offers.
8.3.23	Similarly, while pouring down (the oblations), he says, "Do you recite the Anusavana for Agni."
8.3.24	Having called out, he says, "For Agni, the messenger."
8.3.25	Having omitted the first half of the eastern half, he offers the first oblations.
8.3.26	Having stepped forward towards the north, having placed the ladles in their respective places, having poured the Idā into the vessel in the same way, he offers the Purorāśas towards the west.
8.3.27	Some indeed offer the animals in the same way. They say, "For the animals, Idā."
8.3.28	Then, having gone forward, he says, "Recite while the (Soma) is being poured down."
8.4.1	"Carry the Hotr's goblet forward, make it bright on both sides. O Adhvaryu of the Acchāvāka's goblet, you also carry it forward. The Pratiprasthātṛ should take up the goblet with four pieces, sprinkled and unsprinkled."
8.4.2	They do as they are told.
8.4.3	The procedure is the same as in the Āśrāvaṇa rite.
8.4.4	The Āśrāvaṇī rite alone is performed.
8.4.5	Then the Adhvaryu, standing towards the east with his face towards the west, announces: "Let it be heard, let it be heard. Let the Adhvaryus announce the Soma juice that has been pressed for Indra, the Soma juice that is pure, the Soma juice of the Madhyamdina pressing, the Soma juice for the single portion, the Soma juice which is bright, the Soma juice from which the honey has been squeezed."
8.4.6	When the Vasat-call is uttered, both the Hotr and the Brahman offer together. The first one is called Samkrti, the second one is called Vishvakarman.
8.4.7	When the Vasat-calls are uttered, they offer twice.
8.4.8	Similarly, they offer twice for each cup.
8.4.9	Similarly, he gives the instruction: "Let the Hotr's cup go forth, let the Brahman's go forth."
8.4.10	Then, having circumambulated in a clockwise direction, he pours the remnant of the cup into the Hotr's cup, saying, "I pour thee, the offered, into the offered, the nourishing for the gods, the sweet for men." Or silently.
8.4.11	In the same way, the Pratiprasthātṛ offers the remnant of the churning at the northern half of the Āhavanīya.
8.4.12	Then having sprinkled, he places the Soma-vessel and the vessel for churning in their respective places.
8.4.13	These are the vessels of the chief priests.
8.4.14	The Hotrāgas, having taken up the vessels of the Hotrakas, come back after pouring from the Dronakalaśa.
8.4.15	Having taken up the Maitrāvaruṇa vessel, he announces, "O Praśāstṛ, do thou officiate."
8.4.16	"O Brahman, O Pot-bearer, O Nestr, O Shavashaka, O Agnid, offer!"
8.4.17	Having offered the six-fold Homa, having turned to the right, having run towards the west, he sits down in front of the Hotar, saying, "O Agnid, I am not a thief."
8.4.18	The Hotar says, "He has done well," meaning, "He who will make us drink the Soma king."
8.4.19	Then having sprinkled, they take up the Idā for the Hotṛ.
8.4.20	When the Idā is being invoked, they take up their bowls.
8.4.21	When the Ida has been invoked, the Agnīdhra places the six Avatsas.
8.4.22	They eat.
8.4.23	They cleanse themselves.
8.4.24	They consume the cups of Iḍa, saying, "Do thou enter into me." Having run after the long-drawn out consumption, they say, "O Soma, the god, thou knowest the mind. At the midday pressing, the metre is Tristubh. Thou art drunk by Indra. Thou art sweet. Thou art invoked. I consume thee, the invoked."
8.4.25	These three invoke together and consume the Hotr's cup.
8.4.26	as the cups, so the cups.
8.4.27	They touch themselves, saying, "May we be nourished."
8.4.28	They nourish the cups, saying, "Be nourished, may it be united."
8.4.29	The Nārāśaṃsa verses are recited, nourishing (the Soma), below the southern Havirdhāna, for the third Marutvatīya (verse).
8.4.30	At this time the sacrificer eats the sacrificial cakes in the Agni-shed.
8.4.31	If he is not eating, then his wife eats them in the wife's shed.
8.5.1	Then he asks for the oblations, the vessel of ghee, the spoon, and the garment.
8.5.2	At the end of this garment, there is a golden plate attached.
8.5.3	Having taken this, he says, "O sacrificer, come."
8.5.4	Having gone around along the north of the Āgnīdhriya mound, having gone around along the northern side of the Sadas, having entered the shed through the eastern door, having made the participants in the rite enter, having covered them, having melted clarified butter over the Garhapatya fire, having taken four spoonfuls, having taken up the ladle with the handle of the Vasanī grass, having offered on the Garhapaty fire with the two Sūrya verses, "They carry that Jātavedas, the god, the Sun, for all to see. Svāhā."
8.5.5	Taking another four-fold portion, he offers on the Garhapatya with the verse, "The variegated army of the gods has risen, the eye of Mitra, Varuna and Agni. He has brought the heaven, earth, atmosphere, sun, the self of the moving and standing world, svāhā."
8.5.6	Then having run to the Āgnīdhra (shed), having taken four spoonfuls in the spoon, having taken the spoon-handle to the end of the garment, he offers on the Naya-vaty-arcā in the Āgnīdhrā with the verse, "O Agni, do thou lead us by the good path, O god, knowing all the ways, do thou unite us with great wealth. Do thou remove our sin. We offer unto thee. Most abundant is thy praise. Svāhā."
8.5.7	Then he says, "O Suva, go to heaven!" and having offered gold, he takes it up.
8.5.8	The Dakshina is distributed between the Sadasi and the Garhapatya, between the Sadasi, the Agnidhra, and between the Cattrala and the Utkaras.
8.5.9	Thus they proceed towards the east.
8.5.10	Having circumambulated them, he approaches with the verse, "I approach your form with my form, your age with my age."
8.5.11	Then he divides them with the verse, "May Tutha, the knower of all, divide them in the highest heaven."
8.5.12	Then he approaches the assembly hall with the verse, "This is your gift, O Agni, that has fallen from Soma. May it be led by the path of Mitra, by the path of Varuna. May those who lead the Dakshina of the Moon, the path of the sacrifice, lead us to prosperity."
8.6.1	Then the Ātreya sits in front of the assembly.
8.6.2	He approaches him, saying, "Today I am approaching the Brāhmaṇa, the Rishi, the one who belongs to the Rishis, the one who has fathers, the one who is connected to fathers, the one with good lineage and Dakṣiṇā."
8.6.3	Having stepped up to him, he asks, "Who is Ātreya?"
8.6.4	The other replies, "This is me."
8.6.5	He asks the second one in the same way, "Who is Atreya?"
8.6.6	The other one replies, "I am he."
8.6.7	He asks the third one in the same manner, "Who is here?"
8.6.8	The other replies, "I too am he."
8.6.9	Placing gold in his hand, he says, "May the moon be yours," and whatever else is available.
8.6.10	Then having gone to the Agnidhra, he gives the golden-mouthed one to the Agnidhr.
8.6.11	Then having come to the assembly, he gives to the Brahman, to the Hotri, to the Udgātṛ.
8.6.12	Then having gone to the Havirdhāna, he gives to Adhvaryu, to those who are near him.
8.6.13	Then having come to the Sadas, he gives to the Prastotṛ, the Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin, the Agnidh, the Potṛ, the Neṣṭṛ, the Gravastut, the Unnetr, the Subrahmaṇya, the Pratihartṛ, respectively.
8.6.14	To the Prasarpaka priests as they are mentioned.
8.6.15	Then he says, "O Yajamāna, come."
8.6.16	Having run to the Āgnīdhra (shed), having taken four spoonfuls in the spoon, he offers five oblations to Viśvakarman at the Āgnīdhrā shed with the formulas, "The sages have afflicted the lord of sacrifice."
8.6.17	Then he performs the Atikrama and Atimoka rites with the formulas, “With Agni, the god, with the gods who are the killers of sacrifice."
8.6.18	Then he looks at the sacrificer facing east, saying, "Look at the heaven, look at the sky."
8.6.19	Then he makes him sit down among the Sadasyas, saying, "Strive with the Sadasyas."
8.6.20	Then he directs the gifts, saying, "May the gifts go to the gods for us, may they be sweet. May they enter the giver. May they not take us away. May they lead us on the path to the gods. May they find a good place in the world. May that be done for us."
8.7.1	Then, going forward, he says, "Recite to Indra associated with Maruts."
8.7.2	Having heard that, the Pratiprasthātṛ, having taken the Grahas, comes out.
8.7.3	While he is coming out, the Adhvaryu takes the Grahas.
8.7.4	He stands to the north and gives one to the Pratiprasthatṛ.
8.7.5	Then he announces, "Let it be heard! Let it be heard! To Indra with the Maruts, to the one who is to be invoked."
8.7.6	When the Vasat-call is made, both offer together.
8.7.7	Then the Pratiprasthātṛ pours the remnants of the Soma into the Adhvaryu's vessel.
8.7.8	He says, "Pratiprasthātā, take the third Marutvatīya cup with this vessel."
8.7.9	With that (verse) the Pratiprasthātṛ takes up the third cup, the Marutvatīya, from the Dronakalaśa with the ladle, with the verse, "O Indra, the bull, for fighting, the Maruts have followed thee." Having taken it, he says, "Thou art taken with a support; for Indra, for the Maruts, I take thee, agreeable."
8.7.10	Having wiped it, he places it with the formula, "This is thy birth-place; for Indra, thee, for the Marutvat."
8.7.11	Then the Adhvaryu, having turned by the right, and having hastened towards the west, consumes this vessel with the formula, "Drunk by Indra with the Maruts."
8.7.12	Then, having taken hold of the vessel, he turns towards the west with the formula, “O Ida, invoked by the gods.”
8.7.13	He murmurs it as long as the text of the formula extends.
8.7.14	The Hotṛ calls him.
8.7.15	The Adhvaryu calls out.
8.7.16	He praises.
8.7.17	He responds.
8.7.18	Having responded to the well-known eulogy, having approached towards the east, he takes up this third cup, the Marutvatīya.
8.7.19	They take up the Nārāśamsa cups.
8.7.20	Then he announces: "Let it be heard, let it be heard. Let the Udgātṛs praise. Let them praise. Let them recite the yajus. Let them recite. Let them recite."
8.7.21	He offers twice at the Vasat and Anuvṣat calls.
8.7.22	In the same way they shake the Nārāśaṃsa twice each.
8.7.23	This is the vessel of the Nārāsaṃsa.
8.7.24	"He drinks the remnant, saying, "Drunk by Indra with the Maruts."
8.7.25	The Hotṛ and the Adhvaryu consume this cup together with the Nārāśaṃsa draught. The Nārāśamsa draught is Soma. O god, I consume the Nārāsaṃsa draught, which is of the Madhyamdina pressing, of the Tristubh metre, drunk by the fathers, sweet, invited, with the words, 'I am invited, I consume.'
8.7.26	These three together invite and consume the Hotṛ's goblet.
8.7.27	as the cups are filled, so are the cups.
8.7.28	They touch themselves, saying, "Fill me."
8.7.29	They fill the cups, saying, "Be filled, be united."
8.7.30	The Nārāśaṃsa verses are recited, the cups are filled. The cups are placed below the southern Havirdhāna, one below the other, for Indra.
8.8.1	Then, having gone forward, taking up the Soma-vessel, he says (to the Maitrāvaruṇa), "When we shall take up this Maheendra cup, then do thou pour down the king Soma from the Putabhrit vessel towards the east, and pour down the king from the Putabhara vessel towards the west. Having cleansed the Drona vessel ten times, pour it down."
8.8.2	He does so.
8.8.3	He takes it in the Sukra vessel from the Mahendra pitcher with the verse, "O Indra, the great, who are strong," and follows it with the verse, “Thou art taken with the call of offering; I take thee for Mahendra, agreeable to him."
8.8.4	Having wiped it around, he places it with the verse,"This is thy birth-place; for thee, O Mahendra."
8.8.5	Then having sprinkled himself, having taken the two sacrificial grasses, having restrained speech, having turned towards the east, he commences the Stotra.
8.8.6	He recites the Stotra for the Mahendra.
8.8.7	When the Sama is being sung, he gives the instructions: "The sprinklers sprinkle, the Agnidh (priest) places the ladle, the Uddhatṛ (priest) lifts up the mortar, O Pratiprasthātṛ, offer the Varuna cake on one potsherd, prepare the Soma."
8.8.8	They do as they are told.
8.8.9	The Hotṛ says, "This is the last (verse)."
8.8.10	After the Hotṛ's time, the Adhvaryu turns away.
8.8.11	The Hotri calls him.
8.8.12	The Adhvaryu responds.
8.8.13	He praises.
8.8.14	He responds.
8.8.15	Having responded to the well-known eulogy, having approached from the front, he takes up this Maheendra cup.
8.8.16	They offer the Nārāśaṃsa libations.
8.8.17	Then he announces, "Let it be heard! Let it be heard! The eulogy is being recited. Offer to Soma."
8.8.18	He offers twice at the Vasat and Anuvṣat calls.
8.8.19	Similarly, they shake the Nārāsaṃsa libations twice.
8.8.20	This vessel moves along with the Nārāshaṃsa libations.
8.8.21-22	The Soma which is drunk by Indra is drunk by the Nāsatyas. The Hotṛ and the Adhvaryu drink this cup together, saying, "The Soma which is drunk at the Nāsatyās is drunk by the Narāśaṃsa. I drink the Soma which is drunk in the Narāśamsa." "The Soma which is to be drunk by the Pitrs, which is sweet, which is invited, I drink the invited Soma."
8.8.23	These three consume the Hotr's goblet together, having invoked it.
8.8.24	As the goblet, so the goblets.
8.8.25	They touch themselves, saying, "Bless me."
8.8.26	They do not replenish the goblets with Soma.
8.8.27	All consume together and then cleanse themselves.
8.8.28	Then he proceeds with the three recitations of the Ukthya hymn, saying, "For Indra, for Indra."
8.8.29	Then the Adhvaryu, having taken up the Soma-juice, says (to the Maitrāvaruṇa), "Do thou recite the yäjyä for the offering of the Soma-juice." The Maitrāvaruṇa recites the yäjyā for the offering of Soma-juice. The Adhvaryu makes the offering at the Vaşat-utterance. The Adhvaryu makes the offering at Vaşat-ufterance. The Adhvaryu makes the offering. The Adhvariyu makes the offering.
8.8.30	Having entered the Havirdhāna-shed by the eastern door, he sprinkles the Adhvanīya vessel with the entire Vasativari water.
8.8.31	The entire Vasativari waters are used in one vessel.
8.8.32	Having sprinkled the Puroḍāśa-vessel, he places it upside down.
8.8.33	The one at the back is for the Ekadhana.
8.8.34	The vessel of the Acchavaka is taken up first.
8.8.35	The others are taken up as they are ready.
8.8.36	Having taken up the king of Soma in its entirety, they place it on the northern altar.
8.8.37	Then the vessel of the Upaśaya Soma is taken up from the Ukthya vessel.
8.8.38	In that (Soma) the king is grasped in every way, which is in the Ukthya-sthalya.
8.8.39	It is indeed Indra himself.
8.8.40	Having received the Madhyamdina Savana, the Prashashtri says, "O Vac, sing the Uktha."
8.8.41	The Prashashtra says, "It moves."
8.8.42	The Madhyamdina savana is concluded.
8.9.1	They move forward to the third pressing, saying, "The goddesses move forward through the doors."
8.9.2	Knowing that they have moved forward, the Adhvaryu, moving forward, says, "O Agnīdh, bring the covering cloth. O Pratiprasthātṛ, bring the grass. Bring the curd for the Aditya-graha. Come, O sacrificer."
8.9.3	Having taken the oblation-vessel through the eastern door, and having poured the liquid from the Upāṁshu-vessel into the Rīṣi-vessel, and having taken up a stone, and having said to the Unnetr, "Bring and pour",
8.9.4	the Unnetr pours it from the Adhavanīya vessel with water.
8.9.5-9	Having poured it out in an unlimited quantity, he gives it to the Unnetr, having collected it in the Su-sambhṛtā vessel. The Unnetr pours it into the Adhavanīya vessel. In this way the second round is concluded. In this manner the third round is concluded. The Unnetr gives it to the Adhvaryu, having wrapped the Rgīsa at the end with the Dasāpavitra.
8.9.10	Having washed and pressed the ladle in the water, having taken it from between the southern Havirdhāna and Sadas, having taken it to the place of the nest, he scatters it.
8.9.11	They cover the eastern and western doors.
8.9.12	Then he takes the vessel for the Upaśaya offering from the Āditya-sthālī.
8.9.13	At that time this king takes the third portion of the Soma, which is in the vessel placed on the sun. Having recited the verse, "Thou art never without a covering," he takes it with the formula, "Thou art taken with a view to being offered; I take thee agreeable to the Adityas."
8.9.14	Having covered the two sacrificial grass-blades, he grinds with the Śrītaṅka ladle, saying, "Never do thou forsake me." Having recited the Anudruta formula, he takes it up with the formula, "Thou art taken with a support; I take thee agreeable to the Ādityas.
8.9.15	Having taken out the two sacrificial grasses, he takes up the half-portion of the king with the formula, "The sacrifice of the gods returns with good will." Having recited this formula, he takes up with the formula, “Thou art taken with a desire to be taken; I take thee agreeable to the Adityas.
8.9.16	Then he anoints him with the Upamshu-sutra, saying, "This is thy Soma-drink, O shining Aditya, therewith be pleased, therewith be satisfied, may we be satisfied, we who are thy satisfiers. The heavenly rain, therewith I anoint thee."
8.9.17	Then he takes him up.
8.9.18	Here he attains to knowledge. If it were to flow forth at once, the rain would be timely.
8.9.19	If the rain is delayed for a long time,
8.9.20	then the Brahman does not pacify it.
8.9.21	Then, wrapping the Upāṃśusavana with the Dasāpāvitra, he sprinkles the vessel below with it, making waves, without spilling.
8.10.1	Prajapati, from the ocean, from the sky, Indra, the Maruts, let them rain, let them inundate the earth, let them break this heavenly firmament. Let the lord of heaven give us the opening. Let the lord release the covering.
8.10.2	Then, having wiped him with the ten-purifying grass, he releases him into the troughs.
8.10.3	They open the eastern and western doors.
8.10.4	Then, having covered this Graha with the grass in his hand, and rising, he says, "For the Adityas, the beloved, the ones with a beloved abode, the ones with beloved vows, the lords of the great ocean, the rulers of the sky, the overseers, recite."
8.10.5	Having crossed the Āśrāvyāha, he says, "To the beloved Ādityas, to those who are dear, to those who have a dear abode, to those who follow a dear vow, to the lords of the great ocean, to the overseers of the sky, to the messengers."
8.10.6	Having performed the Vasat-utterance, he offers the plants to Agni and the Ādityas only once.
8.10.7	He does not look back after offering.
8.10.8	The Pratiprasthātṛ takes the vessel only after turning around.
8.10.9	At this time the Pratihartṛ (the Adhvaryu) takes the pure vessel and spreads the Pavitra (grass) in the pit and brings two or three Rajjudhanas (grains of Rajju).
8.10.10	The Adhvaryu takes the Āgrayaṇa vessel.
8.10.11	The Pratiprasthātṛ takes the Āditya vessel along with the ladle.
8.10.12	Having brought the Āgrayana pot from above the three or four streams, he takes it below.
8.10.13	Having made it thrice with the Abhihinna sound and having wiped it, he places it.
8.10.14	Having taken up the purifying grass, he places it on the head of the sacrificer, with the head bent down, when the wife has begun (to recite the Anuvāka). With four Anucchada verses, "The gods have healed us for beauty."
8.10.15	Having taken up the purifying grasses, he consecrates the drops in the pit.
8.10.16	He takes up two Soma-grahas of Pavamāna.
8.10.17	"Thus he says, 'Pour the king who is going forward, the pure-bearer, with ten (cups) of Soma, having pressed the Soma, and having turned it upside down.'
8.10.18	He does it thus.
8.10.19	Having thus sprinkled himself, and taking the two sacrificial grass-blades, he moves forward.
8.10.20	When they have thus begun together, he offers a spoonful on the Āhavanīya fire.
8.11.1	This is the third pressing of the poets, who have brought the cup with the Ritu. They, the good-natured, seeking the good, may lead us to prosperity. Svāhā. The Adhvaryu and Pratiprasthātṛ offer with this.
8.11.2	The others offer according to their knowledge.
8.11.3	Then, having turned around in the proper direction, they enter the Sadas and move towards the Pavamāna.
8.11.4	So they sit down in the assembly according to their respective places.
8.11.5	So he gives the two sacrificial grass-blades to the Udgâtri or Prastôtṛ, saying, 'Thou art the covering of the Rik and Sâman, the union for procreation;' or silently.
8.11.6	So he mutters the invocation, saying, 'The wind makes the sound "hiṅg".'
8.11.7	This is the seventeenfold Pavamâna of the Ârbhavas.
8.11.8	When the ninth (verse) is recited, he recites, "May I desire the Jagati metre, may I be blessed, may I be protected."
8.11.9	Here he explains the five Hotṛs.
8.11.10	When the Sāman has been chanted, he gives the instructions: "O Agni, let the Sala-grass be spread, let the grass be strewn, let the sacrificial cakes be adorned, O Pratiprasthātṛ, let the animal be offered."
8.11.11	They do as instructed.
8.11.12	Then having touched water, he says, "O sacrificer, come."
8.11.13	Having led the oblations through the eastern door, he attends to the entire king.
8.11.14	Here he does not move around in the space.
8.11.15	Similarly, he takes up the Pracaraṇyā nine times.
8.11.16	Similarly, the Agnidhra moves the wooden supports in the Dhishnyas in order, starting from the Agnidhra Dhishnya.
8.11.17	So also, sitting towards the east, he spreads the sacrificial grass.
8.11.18	So also, he places the ladle on the top of the northern Havirdhāna.
8.11.19	So also he spreads the Prṣṭhyā line with the Saṃkāśin path, continuously from the Garhapatya to the Āhavanīya.
8.12.1	Then he performs the animal sacrifice, beginning with the Manotā and ending with the Neḍa.
8.12.2	So also one asks for the Savanīya cakes.
8.12.3	Having thus cut them, he says, "Do thou recite the yajus for the Indran offerings of the third pressing, which are being cut."
8.12.4	Having cut from the front half, he cuts from the rear half.
8.12.5	He pours clarified butter over it.
8.12.6	He anoints it.
8.12.7	Similarly, in the case of the Upamushti and the Sviṣṭakṛt offerings, he cuts from each of the rear halves of all (the oblations).
8.12.8	He pours clarified butte over it twice.
8.12.9	He does not anoint it.
8.12.10	Having crossed over, he says (to the Hotṛ), "Do thou recite (the Mantra) for Indra, the sacrificial dishes of the third pressing are being taken up."
8.12.11	He offers at the Vasat-utterance.
8.12.12	Similarly, when pouring down (the Soma), he says, "Do thou recite to Agni."
8.12.13	Having called out, he says, "For Agni, do thou send forth."
8.12.14	Having crossed over the eastern half of the northern half, he offers the eastern oblations at the Vasat utterance.
8.12.15	Then having stepped over towards the north, having placed the ladles in their places, having poured the Idā into the vessel as before, he offers the cakes towards the west.
8.12.16	Some indeed offer them in succession, saying, "The animals are offered to Idā."
8.12.17	Then, having gone forward, he says, "Recite the Anuvāka while the cups are being filled." "Carry the Hotr's cup." "Make the blessings strong." "The Uddhatṛ should make the Soma flow."
8.12.18	They carry the Hotr' cup first.
8.12.19	The others as they are available.
8.12.20	Having carried them, they place them on the northern altar.
8.12.21	Then having approached the east, having taken up the Hotr's goblet, having announced, he says, "For the third pressing, for the one who is honoured, the one who is worshipped, the one who rules, the one who has strength, the one who belongs to Savitr, the one who possesses Brihaspati, the one who owns all the gods, the one who bestows the fierce blessings, for Indra, the Soma-juices that have been sent forth, let them be offered."
8.12.22	At the Vaṣaṭ-utterance, he offers, saying, "To the hawk, the one who goes, svāhā."
8.12.23	"May the Hotr priests be satisfied with the Anuvṣat-recitation, with honey and ghee, svāhā."
8.12.24	He offers twice at the Vṣat-recital and Anuvṣat.
8.12.25	In the same way, they offer twice each of all the cups.
8.12.26	Thus he says the invocation: "Let the cup of the Hotri go forth, let the cup of the Brahman go forth, let that of the Udgâtri go forth, let those of the sacrificer, of the Sadasya, and of the Hotr-officiating priests go forth. Having taken them once each, with the benediction, let them return."
8.12.27	These are the cups of the great officiating priests.
8.12.28	Similarly, the Hotr-priests, having offered the cups of the Hotr-officiating priests, each with a benediction, return.
8.12.29	Having taken the cup of Maitrāvaruṇa, and having announced, he says, "O Prašāstṛ, do thou offer."
8.12.30	At the Vaşat-utterance, he offers, saying, "To the firm Dharma, svāhā."
8.12.31	"To the enclosing, to the fame of the people," say the Brahmanācchaṃsin priests.
8.12.32	"To the Hotr of the Udgitha" (says the Potri).
8.12.33	"To the Hotr who offers the Payas" (says the Neshtri).
8.12.34	"For Prajapati, the Manes" (says the Acchavaka).
8.12.35	"The Rta, the Rta-knowers, the good, the bad" (says the Agnidhra).
8.12.36	He makes the Anuvshaka say "To the cup, to the cup" and "May the Hotrs be satisfied with honey and ghee, svāhā!"
8.12.37	The seven Hotṛ-priests, having offered the Sāṁyājy-libations, turn around to the right and run towards the west, and sit down in front of the Hotṛ-priest, saying, "The Āḍa is the Āgnīdhra."
8.12.38	The Hotṛ-priest says, "He who will make us drink the Soma-king, he will do well."
8.12.39	Having touched water in this way, they take up the Iḍā-oblation.
8.12.40	When the Iḍā is being invoked, they take up their goblets.
8.12.41	When the Ida has been invoked, the Agnidh puts in six Avats.
8.12.42	They eat.
8.12.43	They cleanse themselves.
8.12.44	They consume the cups of Iḍa, saying, "Do thou enter into me." Having run after the long-drawn out consumption, they say, "O Soma, thou art the god, thou knowest the mind, of the third pressing, of the Jagati metre, of the Indra-drinking, of the sweet-drinking, of that which is invoked, I consume the invoked."
8.12.45	These three invoke together and consume the Hotr's cup.
8.12.46	as the cups, so the cups.
8.12.47	They touch themselves, saying, "Thou hast filled me."
8.12.48	They fill the cups, saying, "Be filled, be united."
8.12.49	The Nārāśaṃsa cups are placed on the lower part of the southern Havirdhāna, having been filled, for the Vaiśvadeva offering.
8.12.50	Having placed three pieces of cake for each cup, he places them.
8.12.51	The nine cups of the Hotṛ.
8.12.52	He addresses them with the same formula, "O Fathers, do you distribute yourselves according to your shares."
8.12.53	At this time the sacrificer eats the cakes in the Agnidhra chamber.
8.12.54	If he eats, the wife eats in the wife's chamber.
8.13.1	Then, having gone forward, he says, "O Pratiprasthātṛ, recite for Savitr. Having taken the Savitr cup from the Āgrayana cup, and having taken the Savitr Graha, let it be placed."
8.13.2	Having heard that, the Pratiprasthātṛ takes up the Savitrī cup from the Āgrayana vessel with the verse, "O Savitr, this is the left-hand offering." Having recited the verse, he takes it up with the formula, "Thou art taken up with the offering for Savitr, I take thee dear to the god Savitr."
8.13.3	He does not place it down. This is the Brāhmaṇa.
8.13.4	Having taken it out without having placed it down, he says, "For Savitr, the god, to be invoked."
8.13.5	He offers at the Vasat-call.
8.13.6	Now indeed it is said:
8.13.7	"One takes from the pot of Savitr, the Kalasha, the Visvedeva (offering) and takes Soma from Soma."
8.13.8	He takes the Soma from the Savitr-vessel into the Visvedevya vessel from the pot. He takes Soma from Soma. "Thou art taken with a support. Thou art well-protected, thou art well-established. To the great-milked one, salutations to all the gods. I take thee agreeable to all the gods."
8.13.9	Having wiped it, he places it, saying, "This is thy place. To all the gods."
8.13.10	Then the Adhvaryu, having turned by the right, having hastened towards the west, having looked at the Hotṛ, turns towards the east with the formula, "O Ida, the invocation of the gods."
8.13.11	He murmurs it as long as the text is completed.
8.13.12	The Hotṛ calls him.
8.13.13	The Adhvaryu responds.
8.13.14	The Hotri praises.
8.13.15	The Advaryu responds.
8.13.16	Then when the Hotṛ recites, "I know by one and by ten my own nature," then the Pratiprasthātṛ, having cleansed the two-deity vessels in the Marjālīya (fire), pours the Soma into the vessels.
8.13.17	Then when the Hotṛ knows, "The heaven and earth are praised by the Yajus for the growth of truth," then he recites the other-intoxicating (verses) from there, saying, "Otha, indeed, is the intoxicating, indeed, is intoxicating."
8.13.18	Then when the Hotṛ recites, "Today, O Savitr, the most desirable," he recites it twice, from "Mada" to "Mada" up to the end of the verse.
8.13.19	Having recited the well-known eulogy, having approached the east, they take up this Vaiśvadeva cup.
8.13.20	The Nārāśaṃsa hymns are taken up in succession.
8.13.21	Then he announces, "Let it be heard! Let it be heard! The praiseworthy hymn is to be recited. Let the Soma be offered."
8.13.22	He offers twice at the Vasat and Anuvṣat calls.
8.13.23	In the same way, they shake the Nārāśaṃsa twice each.
8.13.24	This vessel follows the Nārāsaṃsa.
8.13.25	"The drinking of the remnants is with all the gods who have drunk."
8.13.26	The Hotṛ and the Adhvaryu consume this cup together with the Nārāśaṃsa draught. The Nārāśamsa draught is Soma. O god, I consume the Nārāsaṃsa draught, which is of the Jagatī metre, which is drunk by the Pitrs, which is sweet, which is invited, having been invited.
8.13.27	These three together invite and consume the Hotṛ's goblet.
8.13.28	as the cups.
8.13.29	They touch themselves, saying, "Do thou nourish me."
8.13.30	They do not nourish the cups.
8.13.31	All eat together and cleanse themselves.
8.14.1	Then he asks the Hotṛ, "Will you perform the Soma-offering? Or will you not perform the Soma- offering?"
8.14.2	Having heard what the Hotṛ replies to him, he approaches the Soma-offering.
8.14.3	Then, having taken four spoonfuls in the ladle, having crossed (the altar), having announced (the offering), he says, "Do thou offer to Ghrta."
8.14.4	He offers at the Vasat-utterance.
8.14.5	Having spread (the oblations), he cuts off from the two ends.
8.14.6	Having cut off from the front half, he cuts off from (the remaining) half.
8.14.7	He pours clarified butter over (the oblations).
8.14.8	He does not smear (the oblations with clarified butter).
8.14.9	Having crossed (the altar) and having announced (the offerings), he says, "Do thou offer to Soma."
8.14.10	When the Vasat-call is made, he offers to the south-east corner, facing eastwards.
8.14.11	Then he offers to it with the Vaisnavya-verse and a spoonful of clarified butter, with the verse, "O Vishnu, thou art our last refuge."
8.14.12	If the Hotri were to offer to Agni with the Vaisna vya-verse, it would be a complete offering.
8.14.13	Having brought clarified butter to it, he looks at it.
8.14.14	The Soma-offering is indeed purifying.
8.14.15	They purify themselves.
8.14.16	He who does not see himself, he is dead.
8.14.17	Having made the offering, he looks at it.
8.14.18	Having brought more ghee, he looks at (the fire) and says, "Whatever my mind has gone away from, or whatever has gone away from me, may we have that with the king Soma in us."
8.14.19	He places the mind in himself. He should not be without mind. This is the Brahmanical text.
8.14.20	Then they take him to the Udgātṛs.
8.14.21	They perform that rite in him which they know.
8.14.22	Then, going eastwards, he says, "O Pratiprasthātṛ, having taken the Pātnīvata cup from the Āgrayana cup, and having taken the Āgrayana, let it be placed in front of the Āgrayana."
8.14.23	Having heard that, the Pratiprasthātṛ takes the Pātnīvata cup from the Āgrayaṇa cup with the Upāṁśu cup, saying, "You are taken with the Upāmaṅga formula. I take the Pātnîvata cup of Indra, the son of Brihaspati, endowed with strength and Indra's power."
8.14.24	Having covered the two sacrificial grass-blades, he anoints with ghee. "He says, "I have covered from above, I have covered from below, I have covered darkness with light. That which is the atmosphere, that became my father. I saw the sun from both sides. I shall be the best among the equals."
8.14.25	Having removed the two sacrificial grass blades, one should not place them down. This is the Brahmanical statement.
8.14.26	Having taken it out without having consumed it, he says to the Agnidh, "Do you offer the Pātnīvata offering."
8.14.27	At the Vasat-utterance, he offers, with "Do thou drink Soma together with the god Tvaṣṭr, svāhā." Having offered at the Anuvṣat-utterance and having taken the portion,
8.14.28	If the Agnidh desires to invite him, he invites him.
8.14.29	But they do not consume together.
8.14.30	Then he says, "The Adhvaryu has approached the Hotṛ's place. The Nestr has approached the wife's place. Let the Udgātṛ and the Pratihartṛ chant in unison. Let the Upabarhas approach with their thighs. Let them approach with their thighs after having bared them. Let the Hotr's goblet be brought forward. Let the Unnetr bring forward the entire king. Let the Pratiprasthātṛ make room for the Dhruvā in the Hotr' goblet. Come, O sacrificer!"
8.14.31	Having led the oblation-holder through the eastern door, he places the sacrificer at the Dhruva post, with the formula, "Thou art the past, do thou protect me. Thou art the face, do thou be my face."
8.14.32	They first take up the Hotr's goblet.
8.14.33	The others in due order.
8.14.34	Having taken up all the king-cups, they place them on the northern altar.
8.14.35	Then having sprinkled himself, having taken the two sacrificial grass-blades, having restrained speech, having turned towards the east, he begins the praise.
8.14.36	He praises with the Yajñāyajñiya hymn.
8.14.37	Here he explains the seven Hotṛs.
8.14.38	The Udgātṛ, having recited the Sāman, makes the wife recite the verse, "O Agni, may I be able to see all thy forms, all thy worlds, all thy powers. May I be able to know all thy seeds. May I be a friend to the gods. May the gods be a friend to me. May the gods and the goddesses be a friend to us. May the gods who are friends to us be a friend to this sacrificer. May the blessings offered with Svāhā be accomplished. May the Gandharva stand in the ocean. May the Iḍa be praised along the path of the wind."
8.14.39	When the Udgātṛ recites the Sāman, then the wife, having made her thigh naked, pours the clarified butter.
8.14.40	Having made the thigh naked, she pours the clarified butter
8.15.1	They say that this is the Hotr's turn.
8.15.2	The Adhvaryu turns away from the Hotr' s time.
8.15.3	The Hotr calls him.
8.15.4	The Adhvaryu responds.
8.15.5-7	He praises. He responds. Then when the Hotṛ knows that the Soma is sweet, he responds to the Udbhid and the Udbhid-sāman with the Udbhid. "The Udbhid is the first Sāman. "The Hotṛ responds to the Udbhida with the Udbhiḍa. "The Hotr responds to the Ubdhid with the Udbhida. "The Pratihartṛ responds to the Pratihārya with the Pratihāryā. "The Adhvaryu responds to the Adhvaryu with the Adhvaryū. "The Brahman responds to the Brahman with the Brahman. "The Agnīdhra responds to the Agnīdhra with the Agnīdhre. "The Maitrāvaruṇa responds to the Maitrāvaruṇa with the Maitrāvaruṇe. "The Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin responds to the Brāhmaṇacchaṃsin with the Brāhmaṇa-cchaṃsin. "The Unnetr
8.15.8	Then when the Hotṛ recites the verse, "Stretching the thread, he seeks the light of the thread," the Pratiprasthātṛ takes up the Dhruva with the formula, "I take thee with Dyāvāpṛthivi."
8.15.9	Then he releases it with the formula, "May all the Viśve Devas release thee."
8.15.10	Then he places him (in the Hotr's cup) with the verse, "He firmly places the gods in heaven, the birds in the atmosphere, and the earthly ones on earth."
8.15.11	Then he places him in the Hotr' cup with the verse, "We lead Soma with the firm oblation to the firm. May all this world be free from disease and well-disposed towards us.
8.15.12	Just as Indra, the sole lord, makes all the clans of men of one mind, just as all the directions are ours alone, so may all the directions be ours alone.
8.15.13	Having recited the well-known eulogy, he approaches the east and takes up this Hotr's goblet.
8.15.14	The other goblets are taken up.
8.15.15	Then he announces, "Let it be heard! Let there be hearing! Let the eulogy be heard! Let the Soma be offered!"
8.15.16	At the Vasat and Anuvṣat calls he makes two offerings.
8.15.17	In the same way they make two offerings to all the cups.
8.15.18	Then they run towards each other for the Bhaksas.
8.15.19	"He says, "I partake of the Bhaksas of the Soma that has been drunk by Agni Vaisvānara, the Maruts, the sweet one, the invited one, as an invited one."
8.15.20	These three consume the Hotr's goblet together, having invoked it.
8.15.21	As the goblets, so the goblet.
8.15.22	They touch themselves, saying, "Bless me."
8.15.23	They do not fill up the goblets.
8.15.24	All consume together and sprinkle themselves.
8.15.25	Having filled these goblets with water, he places them north of the Ahavaniya, either facing east or north.
8.15.26	He throws three knots of Dūrvā grass and a bunch of Darbha grass for each of them.
8.15.27	Then the Praśāstṛ, having received the third pressing, says, "Oktā vācīndrāya" (The speech has been uttered to Indra).
8.15.28	The Praśāstŕ says, "It moves."
8.15.29	The third pressing is concluded.
8.16.1	Then he says (to the Agnidhra), "O Agnidhra, bring the sacrificial grass, the sacrificial grass-blades, the sacrificial wood, the sacrificial grass, and the sacrificial grass-twigs. O Upayashtri, sit down. O Brahman, we are about to depart. Having placed the kindling wood, O Agnidhra, do you touch the fires one by one."
8.16.2	They bring the sacrificial grass and other things from the Agnidhra.
8.16.3	He scatters them in front of the Hotr.
8.16.4	The Upayasta (priest) approaches (the Hotr) with the third ladleful from the anus.
8.16.5	Then the Adhvaryu, having churned the clarified butter, having brought it to the Juhu, having approached, having announced, says, "Do thou send forth to the gods."
8.16.6	At the Vasat-utterance he offers, saying, "Send forth, send forth."
8.16.7	Having offered the eleven Anuyājas, having gone forward towards the north, having placed the ladles in their places, he arranges the ladles with the Vājavatī verses.
8.16.8	Having strewn the Prastara and the Pariṣṭara with the Śamyu grass, having sprinkled them, having released the ladles, he says to the Unnetr, "O Unnetr, your Graha is proceeding."
8.16.9	Having heard that, the Unnetr priest takes up the third cup of Soma from the Drona vessel, saying, "You are taken with a formula, you are Hari, the cause of Hari, the protector of Hari, the holder of the thunderbolt, the one who has gone to the Prsni. For that god, for the one who is praised in the Soma sacrifice, for the one praised in the Stoma, for the one whose praise is good, I take the cup belonging to Hari."
8.16.10	Having covered the two sacrificial grass-blades, he offers the oblation with the formula, "O Indra, the oblation of the tawny ones, the tawny ones."
8.16.11	Having taken out the two sacrificial grass blades, he stands up and says, "O Indra the tawny one, recite the Soma verses for the oblations."
8.16.12	Having placed the head on the ground and having advanced, and having announced, he says, "O Soma, the oblations for Indra the tawny one have been sent forth."
8.16.13	When the Vasat-call is made, he offers with "To Indra, svāhā, together with Soma."
8.16.14	Having offered at the Anuvṣat-call, he takes the portion.
8.16.15	The Unnetr divides the cooked food among the priests.
8.16.16	Having offered the Upāhuta to the Unnetr, they partake of each portion.
8.16.17	He binds them together mentally.
8.17.1	"O god Soma, I partake of the Soma that has been offered to thee, that has been praised, that has been sung, that has been eulogized, that has been drunk by Indra, that is sweet, that has been invoked, I partake of it."
8.17.2	Then having sprinkled them, they place them on the northern altar, saying, "Fill up, fill up me with progeny and wealth."
8.17.3	The sacrificer, while placing them, recites three Dhānas.
8.17.4	Then he asks for the wooden sword, water-pot and sacrificial grass.
8.17.5	Taking these, he says, "Come, O sacrificer!"
8.17.6	Having gone around by the right side of the Havirdhāna, having taken up the grass with the tip towards the south, having sprinkled it with water, he says, "May the Fathers sprinkle, may the Grandfathers sprinkle, may the Great-Grandfathers sprinkle."
8.17.7	Then he gives three portions of food, saying, "This is for you, for your father, and for those who follow you. This is for you, your grandfather, and for those following you. This is your great-grandfather, and for those that follow you."
8.17.8	Having said, "Here, O Fathers, do ye partake according to your share," he turns towards the north and explains the six Hotr verses.
8.17.9	Then, having turned around, having sprinkled with water as before, having returned in the same way, he offers two spoonfuls on the Āgnīdhra fire with these two verses: "Whatever evil has befallen me, Agni has given me back my sight."
8.17.10	Then they offer on the Ahavaniya fire with Shakalas (i.e. with the formula) "Thou art the expiation for the sin committed by gods, svāhā. Thou art the expiation of the sin committed by men, svāhā, Thou art the expiatory of the sin committed in the world of the ancestors, svāhā."
8.17.11	Then, having sat down around the Soma-juice, they consume it with the Avagraha formula, "O Soma, thou art consumed by the Fathers, thou art consumed in the waters. O Soma, thou art the guest of the Fathers, thou hast been invited by the Fathers. I consume thee, invited, of that which has been consumed and invited by the Fathers."
8.17.12	Then having led them, they rise up and stand facing the sun.
8.18.1	"We have become immortal through the Soma of the waters. We have seen the light, we have known the gods. What has the enemy done to us? What has the weapon done to the mortal?"
8.18.2	If the sun has already set, they stand facing the Ahavaniya with this verse.
8.18.3	Then, having gone to the Agnidhra, they consume the drops of curds at the Agnidhra. "They say, "I have done what was to be done for the curds."
8.18.4	Then, while releasing the friendship, they recite, "Both the young poets are true, the lords of truth. O lord of truth, we release the bonds of friendship."
8.18.5	Then the Adhvaryu, having turned by the right, having hastened towards the west, having offered the Patnīsaṁyājya offerings, having approached towards the east, having swollen the Dhruva vessel, offers six Rg-inspired oblations, with the formulas, "May Dhatr, Rati, Savitr accept this."
8.18.6	Three Yajus-formulas, "O sacrifice, go to the sacrifice. This is thy sacrifice, O lord of sacrifice. The gods know the path."
8.18.7	Then, having taken four spoonfuls in the ladle, he offers the tenth oblation to Ayurda with the verse, "O Agni, accepting the oblation, do thou grant me life."
8.18.8	At this time, the sacrificer places the black-horned animal in the sacrificial pit, saying, "You are the womb of Indra, I place you in the womb of the sacrifice." Or silently.
8.18.9	Then the Pratiprasthātṛ takes the wife to the Cātvāla. She places the peg there silently.
8.19.1	Here they place the Avabhṛtha rite, either in front of the Āgnīdhra or on the skin.
8.19.2	From the wife's room they take the Varuna-vessel, with the oblations poured over it, the ladle with butter, the spoon, the sacrificial grass, the garments for the resting place, the Udumbara-wood, the royal seat.
8.19.3	The Udumbara-seat, the Udumbarastick, the Maitravaruna-staff.
8.19.4-5	The two Havirdhāna-carriers, the two Adhvaryus, the two Pratiprasthātrs, the two Upagâtrs, the two Sadas-priests, the two Nestrs, the two Acchāvākas, the two Brahman-priests, and the two Hotras, the two Soma-pressers, the two Soma distributors, the two Soma strainers, the two Grāvasthe priests, the two Grāmṇas, the two Soma carriers, the two Soma offerers, the two Stomas, the two Soma cups, the two Soma vessels, the two Soma ladlers, the two Soma pots, the two Soma bowls, the two Soma pitchers, the two Soma jars, the two Soma spoons, the two Soma filters, the two Soma sieves, the two Soma baskets, the two Soma cloths, the two Soma stones, the two Soma plants, the two Soma grasses, the two Soma leaves, the two Soma flowers, the two Soma fruits, the two Soma trees, the two Soma woods, the two Soma roots, the two Soma herbs, the two Soma juices, the two Soma waters, the two Soma streams, the two Soma ponds, the two Soma lakes, the two Soma rivers, the two Soma oceans, the two Soma clouds, the two Soma rains, the two Soma lightning, the two Soma thunder, the two Soma winds, the two Soma fires, the two Soma lights, the two Soma lamps, the two Soma stars, the two Soma planets, the two Soma suns, the two Soma moons, the two Soma days, the two Soma nights, the two Soma fortnights
8.19.6	The others take up the potsherds, and carry away the offerings to Vayu.
8.19.7	Having taken this (pot), he says to the Prastôttr, "O Prastôttr! sing the Sâman."
8.19.8	The Prastôttr responds with the Sâman.
8.19.9	He concludes thrice.
8.19.10	"A man concludes with a man," says the Brâhmana.
8.19.11	Then, between the sacrificial post and the mound, they go out towards the north, saying, "The king Varuna has made a wide path for the sun to follow. We have stepped on the foot-print to be placed back. The one who speaks is the one who knows the heart."
8.19.12	At the equinox, they perform the second Nidhana.
8.19.13	He recites the water-verse, "O king, a hundred physicians, a thousand, deep, may your good counsel be, may you overcome hatred, may you drive away ill-luck. May you release whatever sin we have committed."
8.19.14	They conclude the third section at the end of the water.
8.19.15	Then they stand at the end of water, saying, "The noose of Varuna is bound."
8.19.16	Then he places the sacrificial grass in the water, saying, "Agni has entered the waters, protecting the waters from the non-watery, in each place, in each place. O Agni, I shall offer the kindling wood."
8.19.17	Then he offers it with the ladle, saying, "May your tongue lick the ghee. Svāhā!"
8.20.4	He sprinkles.
8.20.5	Having gone beyond, he says (to the Hotṛ) "Do thou recite (the Mantra) for Varuna."
8.20.6	He offers at the Vasat-utterance.
8.20.7	Having spread (the cake) all around, he places the Varuna cake and says (to the Hotr) "Do thou commence the Svishtakrit offerings to Agni and Varuna."
8.20.8	Twice he pours clarified butter (over the cake).
8.20.9	Having called (the Hotr), he says (to him) "Do thou offer to Agni and Varūna, the Svishtakṛt deities."
8.20.10	Having recited the Vasat-call, he offers the two oblations in the eastern half of the northern half, leaving out the eastern half.
8.20.11	Then having taken four spoonfuls in the ladle, he offers two Anuyājas on the Barhis.
8.20.12	Then he places the ladle in water with the formula, "Thy heart is in the sea, in the waters."
8.20.13	Then he fills it with water, with the verse, "May the plants enter thee, and the waters."
8.20.14	He offers the waters in the waters with the verse, "O Agni, we offer thee, O lord of sacrifice, with oblations, with the verse of praise and the verse of salutation. Svāhā!"
8.20.15	Here they scatter the Avabhṛtha. Whatever is smeared with Soma, it is Avabhṛtha, the Avabhṛthā, the Avabhārī. The Avabhṛtha has been performed by the gods. The sin committed by the gods has been removed. The Avabhārī has been performed by men. The sin committed against men has been removed. O god, protect us from sin.
8.20.16	Then he strikes with folded hands, saying, "May the waters and plants be friendly to us."
8.20.17	He directs his gaze towards the direction in which his enemy may be. He says, "May my enemies become hostile to him who hates us and whom we hate."
8.20.18	Then having sprinkled water, they sprinkle this flour together with the black antelope skin, saying, "O ye goddesses, this is your embryo. We have placed it well-pleased and well-preserved for you. Let the well-done ones among the gods tell it."
8.20.19	He touches the drops.
8.20.20	He does not eat.
8.20.21	Then the two who are not equal to each other run on each other's back, and having put on the garment to be worn while running, they say to the leader, "Lead us!" or "Lead us!"
8.20.22	They go up with three verses, "We go up with the three, we go up with the four, we go up to the five, we go up." "We go up to the six, we go up, we go up. We go up to the seven, we go up," "We go up, we rise up, we go beyond the darkness, we go up the bright one."
8.20.23	Then he goes to the end of the waters, saying, "The noose of Varuna is released, the noose of Varunya is released."
8.20.24	Then they go without waiting.
8.20.25	For the disappearance of Varuna.
8.20.26	They make the kindling woods on the path, saying, "May we be kindled by the kindler."
8.20.27	Having come, he places them on the Āhavanīya fire, saying, "You are the kindling wood, you are the brilliance, bestow brilliance on me."
8.20.28	Then they attend upon the Ahavaniya (fire) with the verse, "I have followed the waters, I have united with the juice, I have come to the Agni with milk, may that unite me with splendour."
8.20.29	They remove the enclosing sticks.
8.20.30	They turn the two Havirdhana sheds, the right one to the right and the left one to the left.
8.21.1	The Pratiprasthātṛ, while the Adhvaryu is performing his rites, prepares the Udayanīya cake.
8.21.2	This is the Veda, this is the ladle, this is the sacrificial grass.
8.21.3	Having taken out the pot of cooked rice and having washed it, he cooks the Udayanîya cake.
8.21.4	When that is being cooked in the same way, he carries the Stambayajus on the southern side of the Garhapatya on the Upavasatha altar.
8.21.5	This is well known as the Pāuroḍāśika.
8.21.6	Three times with the Yajus, silently the fourth.
8.21.7	He takes up the Paribhṛti first.
8.21.8	He mutters the Karana.
8.21.9	He lifts it up.
8.21.10	The Agnidhra lifts it up three times from the lifted up (Agni).
8.21.11	The rite is the same as that of the Pravargya.
8.21.12	The only difference is this.
8.21.13	Here one offers the Pathya oblation first, and then the Upottama oblation.
8.21.14	They do not deviate from the directions.
8.21.15	Then he offers the Sruva-oblation before the Sviṣṭakṛt oblation, with the verse, "All the kindling woods that are thine, O Agni."
8.21.16	By means of the Upasthāna and Abhighāraṇa they cut off the Dhruva-clarified butter.
8.21.17	Some offer the Samitsya-yajus.
8.21.18	The Udayaniya comes to an end with the Sāṁyuva.
8.21.19	Here he places the full vessel within the altar.
8.21.20	Then having taken the clarified butter along with the Pṛṣadājya, he offers the Vasa of Maitrāvaruṇa.
8.21.21	Having performed the Prāyascitti rite for him, having offered the Payas oblation, and having shaved off the hair and beard at the end of the southern altar,
8.21.22	he cuts the nails.
8.21.23	They perform all the rites for the animal.
8.21.24	If he does not obtain a cow, he cooks the Maitrāvaruṇī oblation of milk on the Garhapatya fire and offers it on the Āhavanīya fire.
8.21.25	The rite concludes with the offering of the Keda oblation along with the Ajyabhāga oblations.
8.22.1	Then having brought the fires from the Āraṇya fire, having performed the Udasava rite, having churned out the fires, having performed the Vihara rite, he offers the Iṣṭi of the Aṣṭākapāla Agniyeya oblation as the Udasava oblation.
8.22.2	Having roasted, he places (the oblations).
8.22.3	It has fifteen kindling verses.
8.22.4	There are five Prayāja offerings.
8.22.5	The two Ajyabhaga offerings are for Vartraghna.
8.22.6	Then (the Adhvaryu) says, "O Agni, do thou today accept this oblation, for thou art Agni."
8.22.7	The two Samyājas are in Tristubh metre.
8.22.8	Having placed the Anvāhārya-vessel, he gives away a bull.
8.22.9	The Iṣṭi comes to an end as prescribed.
8.22.10	Then having brought the fires from the Āraṇyaka fire, having performed the Udasava rite, having churned out the fires, having performed the Viharana rite, he offers the first oblations to the deities, a cake on twelve potsherds to Anumati, a cake to Raka, and a cake to Dhātrī.
8.22.11	Having placed the Anvāhārya portion, he gives a calf with a young one.
8.22.12	The Iṣṭi comes to an end.
8.22.13	Then, having spread out the Prsthya (bricks), having offered the water-libations, he offers the subsequent oblations to the goddesses, viz. a cake on twelve potsherds to Sinivalli, a cake to Kuhvi, and a cake to Dhatri.
8.22.14	Having placed the Anvähärya (vessel) (within the altar), he gives a calf of better quality.
8.22.15	The Iṣṭi comes to an end in the prescribed manner.
8.22.16	Then having placed the fires in the Āraṇyaka fires, having determined his own fire-places, having churned out the fires, having wandered about, he offers the Agnihotra in the evening and morning.
8.22.17	The Agniṣṭoma is concluded. The Agniṣṭoma comes to an end.
9.1.1	One who is going to perform the Pravargya rite procures a wooden ladle made of Khadira, Udumbara, Vaṭa, or Vaikaṅkaṭa wood, of the size of a fathom or a cubit, with two handles, clay well-kneaded, a black antelope skin, a boar-killed, an anthill-covered, a grass-stalk, a bamboo-stalk, or a reed-stalk, milk of a she-goat, a potsherd, sand, black paint, goat hair, black antelope hair, a loom, a skilled weaver, a bamboo rod, and a Madanti plant.
9.1.2	Then, having performed the sacrifice with the New-Moon oblation or with the asterism, they perform the first appeasement with the formula, "Salutations to speech."
9.1.3	Then he digs a pit the size of a bow in front of the sacrificial hall.
9.1.4	He smears it with well-prepared clay.
9.1.5	He makes it even with the pit.
9.1.6-7	He places it on the ground, saying, "The boar-struck anthill, the anthill-hill, the anthill, the mound, the mound of grass, the mound of reeds, the mound of bamboo, the mound of wood, the mound of stone, the mound of earth, the mound of clay, the mound of sand, the mound of gravel, the mound of soil, the mound of dust, the mound of ash, the mound of chaff, the mound of straw, the mound of leaves, the mound of moss, the mound of bark, the mound of wool, the mound of cotton, the mound of flax, the mound of jute, the mound of hemp, the mound of reed, the mound of lotus, the mound of water, the mound of cow-dung, the mound of mud, the mound of dung, the mound of excrement, the mound of urine, the mound of pus, the mound of blood, the mound of fat, the mound of marrow, the mound of bone, the mound of hair, the mound of skin, the mound of flesh, the mound of sinew, the mound of tendon, the mound of nail, the mound of tooth, the mound of tongue, the mound of palate, the mound of throat, the mound of heart, the mound of lungs, the mound of liver, the mound of spleen, the mound of kidneys, the mound of small intestines, the
9.1.8	Then he throws out the sand with the wooden sword towards the north and scatters sand.
9.1.9	He makes it round and hard.
9.1.10	Then he makes it smooth with sand.
9.1.11	Then he covers it with fresh Kusha grass and Dūrvā grass. Then they cover it.
9.1.12	They make the door towards the north.
9.1.13	He puts together the sacrificial grass, the potsherds, sand, black mustard, powdered black gram, goat-hair, black antelope-hair, the wooden sword, the place of performance, the skilled carpenter, and the bamboo-piece.
9.1.14	Then he places the Madanti waters on the Garhapatya fire.
9.1.15	He places the wooden sword inside the altar.
9.1.16	They cover the doors.
9.1.17	They cover their wives in the wives' quarters.
9.1.18	They spread (the grass).
9.1.19	Brahma and the sacrificer sit down to the south.
9.1.20	Here they perform the first peace for those who have not performed it.
9.1.21	Having melted clarified butter over the Garhapatya fire, having taken four spoonfuls in the ladle, he offers Savitr on the Ahavaniya fire, when the sacrificer has begun.
9.2.1	They yoke the mind, they yoke the thoughts, the seers, the wise, of the great seer. He alone has established the office of Hotr, the praise of the great god Savitr. Svāhā!
9.2.2	He offers for one who is not initiated.
9.2.3	He mutters for one who is initiated.
9.2.4	Then he takes the ladle, saying, "For thee taken by the impulse of the divine Savitr, by the arms of the Asvins, by the hands of Pusan."
9.2.5	Taking it, he recites: "You are the ladle, you are the woman, you are the performer of rites for the gods."
9.2.6	Then, taking it, he rises, reciting: "Rise, O Brahmaṇaspati, we desire you, may the Maruts approach, the givers of good gifts. O Indra, be the protector."
9.2.7	May the Brahmanaspati go forth, may the goddess go forth, may truth go forth. May the gods lead the sacrifice to the hero, the man, the Pankti-slayer.
9.2.8	Then he stands on the prepared clay, saying, "May the goddesses Heaven and Earth be favourable to me."
9.2.9	He strikes with the pestle, saying, "I may prosper today at the head of the sacrifice."
9.2.10	He carries it away, saying, "For the sacrifice to thee."
9.2.11	"He places the black antelope skin on the head of the sacrifice, having taken it up, with the formula, "For the head of the sacrificial rite thee."
9.2.12	In the same way he takes the second one.
9.2.13	In the same manner the third one.
9.2.14	He silently takes the fourth one and places it on the head of him who is to be honoured.
9.2.15	Then he stands by the boar-struck (victim) with the formula, "Thou art the foremost.">
9.2.16	He strikes with the formula, “May I prosper today, at the head of the sacrifici
9.2.17	"For the sacrifice thee!" he carries (the pot) away.
9.2.18	"For the head of the sacrifice thee!" having taken up the pot, he pours it down on the black antelope skin on the north side, and takes up the pot for the Upastanam.
9.2.19	In the same way he carries away the second (pot).
9.2.20	In the same manner the third.
9.2.21	Silently the fourth.
9.2.22	He places it on the ground.
9.2.23	Then he stands by the pot of the anthill, reciting, "The goddesses, the ants, are the firstborn of this being, the truthful ones."
9.2.24	"He strikes with the ladle, saying, 'May I prosper today at the head of the sacrifice.'
9.2.25	He takes it, saying, 'For thee, O sacrifice.'
9.2.26	He pours it on the black antelope skin to the north, saying, 'At the head of the sacrificial rite for thee.' Having taken up the support,
9.2.27	he takes the second one in the same way.
9.2.28	He takes the third one in the same manner.
9.2.29	He takes silently the fourth one.
9.2.30	He places it on the skin of the animal that has been turned around.
9.2.31	Then he places the Utikas and the Vadasa bundles, saying, "Thou art Indra's strength."
9.2.32	He strikes with the thunderbolt, saying, "May I prosper today at the head of the sacrifice."
9.2.33	He carries (the bundles) saying, "For thee, O sacrifice."
9.2.34	He pours them on the black antelope skin to the north, saying, "For the head of the sacrificial session." He carries the Upastanam.
9.2.35	In the same way he carries the second one.
9.2.36	In the third way he carries the third one.
9.2.37	He silently performs the fourth Pravargya rite.
9.2.38	Then he attends upon the Cāgāpayā (rite) with the verse, "Thou art Agni, the lord of creation, the semen."
9.2.39	He places the wooden sword with the verse, “May I prosper today at the head of the sacrifice."
9.2.40	He carries it with the verse, "For thee, O Makha."
9.2.41	He pours it on the black antelope skin placed to the north with the verse, "For thee, O head of Makha." Having taken up the Upasthāna, he says (to the sacrificer), "Do thou come." The sacrificer comes.
9.2.42	In the same way he pours out the second.
9.2.43	In the same way the third.
9.2.44	Silently the fourth.
9.2.45	Together with the fourth, he pours all this melted ghee into the pot with the ladle.
9.2.46	Here they pour the remaining water.
9.2.47	Here they scatter it.
9.2.48	Or they put it in a basket for expiation.
9.3.1	Then they take up the Pravargya, with their faces bent down and not breathing.
9.3.2	They do not place the Pravargya between the sun and themselves.
9.3.3	It is known that many carry it.
9.3.4	Then they bring it, saying, "May Brahmanaspati come, may the goddess come, may the truth come, may the man, the hero, the one who gives the Pankti come. May the gods lead the sacrifice to us."
9.3.5	Then he makes him take it up, saying, "Give life, give breath, give out-breath, give through-breath, give sight, give hearing, give mind, give speech, give the self, give the support, give me, give in me."
9.3.6	Then he mixes it with the skull of a victim, with sand, with flour of black mustard, with the hair of a goat, with the hair from a black antelope skin, and with the Madanti plants, saying, "May honey make thee sweet."
9.3.7	He makes a ball, saying, "Thou art the head of the sacrifice."
9.3.8	He holds it with the thumbs, saying, "Ye stand on the place of the sacrifice."
9.3.9	Then, having cut off the third part of the clay, he makes three balls.
9.3.10	He gives one of them to the maker, saying, "You are Gayatra."
9.3.11	He makes his foundation with it, saying, "I make you with the Gayatra metre."
9.3.12	He gives half of the remaining clay to the one who is left over, saying, "Thou art Trishtubh."
9.3.13	With that he makes its middle, saying, "With the Tristubh metre I make thee."
9.3.14	He gives the last handful of earth, saying, "Thou art the Jagat."
9.3.15	With that he makes its bottom, saying, "I make thee with the Jagat metre."
9.3.16	He makes it a span in size, with a broad bottom, and fixed in the middle.
9.3.17	Then with a bamboo tube he pierces it twice.
9.3.18	This is his swelling.
9.3.19	Then he places the cord at three or four inches (from the end), saying, "The cord of the sacrifice."
9.3.20	Then he takes hold of its hole, saying, "Aditi takes hold of thy hole with the Paṅkti metre."
9.3.21	Then he touches it with the sun, saying, "With the heat of the sun."
9.3.22	Then he puts it in the basket,
9.3.23	He places it with the formula, "Thou art the sacrifice."
9.3.24	In the same way he makes the second Mahāvīra.
9.3.25	In the same manner the third.
9.3.26	Silently he places the Pinvana, the Rauhiṇakapaala and the vessel of clarified butter.
9.3.27	Then with the clay that remains over, he smears the Pratilepana in a windy place.
9.3.28	In those fires, prepare twenty-one pellets of the horse's dung, a wooden stick, and Agni as the cook.
9.3.29	Then, lighting the horse dung, he fumigates the main Mahāvīra with the verse, "You are the dung of the horse Vṛṣṇi. May Varuna, the upholder of vows, fumigate you for the firm law of Mitra and Varuna."
9.3.30	Having fumigated it both inside and outside, he places it.
9.3.31	In the same way, he fumigates the second great hero.
9.3.32	In the third way.
9.3.33	Silently, in the Pinvana, in the Rauhinakapaala, and in the ghee vessel.
9.3.34	Then he digs a pit north of the hall, like a well.
9.3.35	Having covered it with the cooking pot, he places the great heroes either towards the east or the west.
9.3.36	In front, in the Pinvana.
9.3.37	Behind, in the Rauhinakapaala and the ghee vessel.
9.3.38	Then having covered them with the cooking pot from above, he smears it with clay.
9.3.39	He burns it for lighting from the four directions, leaving a space of four fingers.
9.3.40	Then he fasts.
9.4.1	"To the light of thee!" in front.
9.4.2	"To the shining of thee!" on the right.
9.4.3	"To thy light!" behind.
9.4.4	"To thine heat!" on the left.
9.4.5	They are cooked by day or night.
9.4.6	If one fasts in the morning, one approaches in the evening.
9.4.7	If in the evening, in the morning.
9.4.8	When they are ripe, he prepares them, namely, milk, curd, butter, ghee, and whey.
9.4.9	Having taken this, he came to this world with his greatness, Mitra became the illuminator, and with his fame, the earth.
9.4.10	The friend of the divine Savitar, the holder of the people, has taken the shining, most brilliant, most famous, most excellent, most glorious, most excellent, and most famous, most brilliant, and most excellent, most famous, and most excellent.
9.4.11	Then he takes up Dhṛṣṭi, saying, "For success to thee."
9.4.12	With that he scatters the glowing coals from the chief Mahāvīra, saying, "May the god Savitar scatter thee with his right hand, with his right arm, with his right strength."
9.4.13	Then he raises it with the verse, "Rise up, O great one, stand firm, stand upright, be firm."
9.4.14	Then he establishes it in the ground with the verse, “Expanding, I fill the directions and the quarters on the earth.”
9.4.15	Then he examines it with the verse,"I examine you with the eye of the sun, for uprightness, for goodness, for good stability, for prosperity.
9.4.16	Then he encloses him with dung, saying, "I enclose him, so and so, son of so and so, with cattle, with lustre, with Brahman."
9.4.17	Then, having taken him with tongs, and having placed him on the heated iron, he cleanses him with the milk of a she-goat, with the verse, "I cleanse thee with the Gayatri metre, I cleanse thee with the Tristubh metre, I cleanse Thee with the Jagati metre. May speech cleanse thee, may Urja cleanse thee, may the oblation cleanse thee. Accept speech, accept Urja, accept the oblation. O god, do thou go before me. May I be thy companion."
9.4.18	And having made it clean inside and outside, he pours it with cow's milk.
9.4.19	In the same way, he cleans the second great hero.
9.4.20	In the third way.
9.4.21	In silence, in the Rohinika pot, and in the ghee vessel.
9.4.22	If a white spot or a boil appears, he sprinkles it with a mixture of ash and cow-dung and strikes it with a wooden stick, reciting the two verses, "If you strike the white spot or the boil, with anything other than this, you will be afflicted."
9.4.23	It indeed grows.
9.4.24	If, however, he breaks it completely, then he should grind the pieces of the potsherd and mix them with the clay that is kept aside for expiation. Having made it, cooked it, and broken it, he should place it.
9.4.25	When they have ceased to breathe, then he puts them in a cart, covers them with a black antelope skin, and hangs them in the northern part of the shed.
9.4.26	So that the wife does not see them.
9.4.27	They remain there for some time.
9.4.28	Then they perform the northern peace-rite, saying, "May the wind blow for our welfare, may the mother-goddess be favourable to us."
9.5.1	"On the next day the king will buy (the sacrificial requisites). Prepare an umbrella of Udumbara wood, a seat of Udumbara for the king, a post of Udumbara, a milking stool, a peg of Udumbara to tie the goat, a ladle of Udumbara. Two ladles of Udumbara should be without holes. Two Rôhiṇi-cups, two Dhristis of Udumbara and three Dhitis of Udumbaras with handles of Udumbara."
9.5.2	Some say that it is the staff of Vāmana.
9.5.3	six pieces of Udumbara wood, a piece of wood from the Vaikankata tree, thirteen pieces of wood from the Vaidankata tree, a ladle made of the Vaidankata wood, a piece made of Karshmarya wood, two golden and silver vessels, two milking vessels, a cow and a goat, two Kusha grass, one Veda made of Muñja grass, a rope made of Muñjagrass, a bridle made of Muñjā grass, flour made of Rauhina grains, sand from the Khara mountain.
9.5.4	Then he performs the Pravargya rite.
9.5.5	Having performed the Pravargya, he performs the Pada rite.
9.5.6	Having perfored the Pada rite, he purchases the king and performs the Atithya rite.
9.5.7	Having perforned the Atithya, they perform the first Sāntī rite, saying, "Salutations to speech."
9.5.8	Then having spread grass in front of the Garhapatya, they arrange all this in a circle.
9.5.9	Here the king's seat, here the post for milking the cows, here the peg for the goat."
9.5.10	Then, having dug out with a wooden spade to the north of the Garhapatya, he scatters sand.
9.5.11	He makes it about the size of a span, round, and rough.
9.5.12	Then he makes it smooth with sand.
9.5.13	Then, having taken it up with the wooden sword to the north of the Ahavaniya fire, he scatters sand.
9.5.14	He makes it a hard lump the size of a span.
9.5.15	Then he makes it a lump of sand.
9.5.16	Then, having taken it with the wooden sword on the northern branch, he scatters the sand.
9.5.17	He makes it a heap of chaff, with four corners, and with the chaff of the grains.
9.5.18	Then he makes it a heap with sand.
9.5.19	Then the Adhvaryu, having taken the great sacrificial grass to be spread, with the two blades, places it on the heap of chaff to be spread.
9.5.20	Then he covers it with a woolen cover.
9.5.21	Then having carried around the stool towards the east of the Ahavaniya, he places it towards the south.
9.5.22	On it he spreads the black antelope skin with its neck towards the east and with the hairy side upwards.
9.5.23	Having taken the two sacrificial posts, the Mahāvrī, towards the east of Ahavaniya, having carried them around, he places them towards the south, towards the stool, towards the black antelope skin, with their roots towards the east.
9.5.24	Then having carried around this wooden sword towards the east of the Ahavaniya, he places it on the black antelope skin on the right side of the Samrāḍāsandī.
9.5.25	Then having carried around this remaining clay towards the east of Ahavaniya,he places it on the right side on the black antelope-skin on the Samrāḍāsandī.
9.5.26	Then, having taken the post for milking the cow and the peg for the goat, and having gone around the Garhapatya on the right side, having taken it out through the southern door, having struck the post in the sight of the Hotṛ, they bind the calf with a woolen rope to the post for milking.
9.5.27	Having struck the peg for the northern goat, they bind the goat.
9.5.28	He makes the goat face upwards.
9.5.29	Then, having returned by the same route by which they had gone, they lead out the Vrṣalas.
9.5.30	They summon the Hotṛ.
9.5.31	They summon Brahman.
9.5.32	They summon Pratiprasthātṛ.
9.5.33	They call the Prastôtṛ.
9.5.34	They invite the Agnidh.
9.5.35	They close the doors.
9.5.36	They close their wives in the wives' quarters.
9.5.37	They spread (the grass).
9.5.38	Brahma and the sacrificer sit down to the south.
9.5.39	Here they perform the first peace-offering, for those who have not performed it.
9.6.1	Then the Adhvaryu, taking the Prokṣaṇī water with the Pavitra, says (to the Brahman), "We shall proceed with the Pravargya rite, O Hotṛ, praise the Gharma, O Agnīdh, place the two Rāuhiṇa cakes, O Pratiprasthātṛ, spread out the Pravargya, O Prastôtṛ, chant the Sâmans."
9.6.2	May Brahma bestow it, united with the Yajus, anointed with the Sāmans. Thou art praised by all the gods, approved by the Maruts, traversed by the Dakshinas, to be crossed over, may the bards carry thee, rejoicing, may he bestow on us light, not to be despised, earth, heaven, heaven, Om, those who have Indra go forth.
9.6.3	Then the Adhvaryu sprinkles the great Vīra which is to be carried forward, with, "For Yama thee! For the sacrifice thee! For the sun's rays thee!"
9.6.4	Sprinkling the successive heaps of wood, he approaches them.
9.6.5	The Pratiprasthātṛ moves the Pravargya.
9.6.6	Then he places the enclosing sticks of wood of the Khadira tree on the Ahavaniya fire.
9.6.7	He places on it six pieces of Udumbara wood, a twig of Vaikankata, and a twig of Gārhapatya, thirteen pieces of Vaikankta wood, two golden and silver plates, and Muñja grass, and flour of Rāuhiṇa grain.
9.6.8	Then the Agnidhra, having sat down behind the Garhapatya, having drawn out the embers with the Dhristis, places the two Rôhiṇî-cups on them.
9.6.9	Then having mixed the flour with wood, he places the two Râuhikî-cakes.
9.6.10	Then he pours out the clarified butter.
9.6.11	Then he places the clarified butter.
9.6.12	Having heated both, he cooks the two Rāuṇḍa cakes.
9.6.13	At this time, the Pratiprasthātṛ consecrates the sacrificial vessels for the Homa with a woolen Veda - the Mahāvīra ladle, the Pinvana ladle, the Rauṇḍa ladle, and the Upayamanī ladle.
9.6.14	Then the Pratiprasthātṛ, having melted the clarified butter, having placed the two Rāuhiņa cakes on the spread and sprinkled (with clarified butter), having taken them around with the Rāuhiņa ladle, places them within the altar.
9.6.15	One (cake) along the southern junction of the enclosing sticks.
9.6.16	The other along the northern junction of the enclosing stick.
9.6.17	The two (cakes) facing east at the morning pressing.
9.6.18	The two facing west at the afternoon pressing.
9.6.19	Then the Adhvaryu, having taken the great hero to be offered in the fire, with the two horns, and having turned it around in his left hand, offers seven continuous oblations to the Garhapatya fire with ghee from the ghee vessel, once sprinkled, with the formula, "To Prāṇa svāhā, to Vyāna svāhā, Apāna svāhā. To the eye svāhā, To the ear svāhā, Sarasvatī svāhā."
9.6.20	The four additional ones are as per the order of the deities. To Dakṣa svāhā, to Kratu svāhā, Ojas svāhā, and to Bala svāhā.
9.6.21	Then he anoints him with ghee, saying, "May the god Savitr anoint you with honey."
9.6.22	At this time, the Pratiprasthātṛ places the silver coin in the skin of a black antelope, saying, "Protect the earth with austerity."
9.6.23	Then he places the Muñja grass and the Prāvalā grass, and lights them, saying, "You are light, you are radiance, you are brilliance, you are heat."
9.6.24	Having scattered them on the Prāvalī grass, he places the Mahāvīra grass among them.
9.7.1	"Settle down, you are great, shine, you are free from gods. Let the smoke of the tawny Agni, the one to be worshipped, spread out, the praised, the visible one."
9.7.2	Then he fills it with clarified butter, with the verse, "The sages, while anointing him, do not injure him, nor does the fire, while burning him. The son of the father, the most dear, has approached. The heat has settled down with Agni, the knower of truth."
9.7.3	Then he points out the directions with the size of his palm, with the verse: "Agni is the lord of the directions, not to be injured. May he give me life." In front.
9.7.4	"May I have a son" (is recited) towards the south, under the lordship of Indra. "May I have offspring" (is recited towards the south).
9.7.5	"May I have life" (is recited to the west), under the lordship of the god Savitar. "May I be long-lived" (is recited in the west).
9.7.6	"May my hearing be good" (is recited toward the north), under the lordship (of the gods) Mitra and Varuna. "May I hear" (is recited northward).
9.7.7	May the Lord of the Upper Region, in the lordship of Brihaspati, grant me Brahman, grant me Kshatra, grant me splendour, grant me lustre, grant me fame, grant me penance, grant me mind. Thus above.
9.7.8	Then he touches this (earth) with the verse, "Thou art the horse of Manu, having many sons, protect me from all evil spirits. Be thou favourable to me. Do not injure me."
9.7.9	Then he puts the coals from the Dhṛṣṭi-sticks towards the north, with the verse, "O Agni, do thou burn the enemies between us and the Parāsuas. O Vasu, do thou burn those who are hostile to us. Do thou burn those who have not thought of us. May they stand away from thee, without age and without fatigue."
9.7.10	He encircles him with them, moving towards the right, with the verse "Be thou enclosed. Be thou enclosed. Be saluted. Be thou saluted. Be thou enclosed by the Maruts."
9.7.11	Then they encircle him with thirteen Vaitanati (stakes) - the Adhvaryu and the Pratiprasthâtri.
9.7.12	The Adhvaryu says, "Thou art Ma."
9.7.13	The Pratiprasthâtṛ says, "Thou are Prama."
9.7.14	They thus alternate with each other: "Thou art Pratima, thou art Samma, thou art Vima, thou art Unma."
9.7.15	Then he places it on the thirteenth layer, with the tip pointing upwards, towards the south, saying, "You are the covering of the atmosphere."
9.7.16	Then he covers it with a golden plate, saying, "Protect the heaven with austerity."
9.7.17	Then he stands up to it with these verses, "Your other bright one deserves to hold the arrows in the bow."
9.7.18	When the fire is burning, he draws out the gold.
9.8.1	He takes up the two whisks, saying, "Thou art Gāyatrī," over one; "Thou art Trisṭubh," over the other; "Thou art Jagatī," over the other.
9.8.2	With them he shakes him from behind, facing east, above the knees, with the formula, "Honey, honey."
9.8.3	Standing to the north, he gives two whisks to the Pratiprasthātṛ.
9.8.4	He gives one of them to the Agnidhra.
9.8.5	Then they circumambulate it thrice, shaking it at each step.
9.8.6	Having circumambulated thrice, they stand towards the north.
9.8.7	Then he takes the two twirling sticks.
9.8.8	Standing towards the north beyond the one who has circumambulated, he gives two twirling sticks to the Pratiprasthātṛ.
9.8.9	He gives one of them to the Agnidhra.
9.8.10	Then they sit around him.
9.8.11	The Adhvaryu sits behind, facing east.
9.8.12	The Pratiprasthâtri sits in front, facing west.
9.8.13	The Agnidhra sits on the north, facing south.
9.8.14	They sit thus, fanning with the Prâna-verses, and increasing the torches, the great hero.
9.8.15	Then when the Hotṛ knows that he has released the Vartikā which had been swallowed, then having risen up, the Adhvaryu and the sacrificer, with this Anuvāka, recite, "Ten in the east, ten in the south."
9.8.16	Then when the Hotṛ recites the verse, "The Asvins have spoken to us the truth," then they take up the wooden spoons.
9.8.17	Then when the Hotṛrecites the verse, “The dawn has shone forth, the tawny one, the best,” then having said, “The heat has shone forth,” they return the way they came, thrice, having placed the wooden spoons.
9.8.18	The cows, looking at us from their places, stand up and say, "We see the cowherd." We say, "We have seen you. Do not harm us."
9.8.19	Then he attends on the Garhapatya (saying), "O Agni, thou art the lord of houses, of all human beings. Protect with a hundred shields the most excellent one from injury. The hundred snows are for the one who kindles the fire, the one who is diligent, the one who has a heart. May the nights be here.
9.8.20	When the Pratiprasthātṛ has disappeared, he makes the wife recite the Veda, saying, "May she be blessed with Tvashtri." From the end of the section.
9.8.21	At this time, the Pratiprasthatṛ offers the right-side Rauhina oblation, saying, "The day, the light, may it be accepted with the banner, the well-lit, the light of lights, svāhā."
9.9.1	Then he takes up the girdle, with the formula, "In the impulse of the divine Savitr, with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of Pusan, I take thee."
9.9.2	Having taken it up, he recites over it, "Thou art the girdle of Aditi."
9.9.3	The Pratiprasthâtri, having gone round along the front, recites (over the milk) "Thou art the milking, thou art the churning."
9.9.4	Then, three times in a low voice, he calls her with the names of the gods, "Come, Indra! Come, Aditi! Come, Sarasvati!"
9.9.5	Three times loudly, having gone out by the southern door, with whatever name she has, he says, "Come, this one! Come, this one!"
9.9.6	Then he ties her with a string, saying, "You are the turban of Aditi."
9.9.7	Vayu is his calf. He touches the calf of the cow that yields milk in summer.
9.9.8	Then he releases it, saying, "Pusha releases you; may it be given to the Asvins."
9.9.9	He recites the verse, "The teat of yours, O Goddess, which is the source of light, by which you nourish all things, which is the giver of gems, the knower of wealth, the bountiful one, O Sarasvati, that you may bestow here, O Goddess."
9.9.10	When the cow is let loose, he says, "O Usra, let loose the heat. Protect the heat. Let loose for the heat."
9.9.11	Having appointed, having bound, he sits down. May Brihaspati sit down for you.
9.9.12	He touches the breasts, saying, "O Dānava, be firm, surrounded by red all around."
9.9.13	Then when the Hotṛ knows that (the Soma) is to be pressed, he presses it in the pressing-stone, saying, "To the ten Savitrīs," and, "Press for the Asvins, press for Sarasvatī, press for Pūṣan, press for Brhaspati, press for Indra, press for Indra."
9.9.14	He presses what is left over in the pot.
9.9.15	At this time the Pratiprasthātṛ silently pours the Pinvī-grasses into the Pinvī vessel.
9.9.16	Then when the Hotṛ knows that (the Adhvaryu) is rising, he says, "O Brahmanaspati!" Having handed over the milk to the Pratiprasthātṛ, he returns by the same way and takes up the two spoons, saying, "Thou art Gayatra" for one, "Thou art Traiṣṭubha" for the other, and "Thou art Jāgata" for the Upayamanta spoon.
9.9.17	Then when the Hotṛ knows that the milk-seller is coming, he recites the verse, "The milk-seller comes with the milk." When the milk is being brought, he recites, "Come with the share of strength, Indra and Asvins, drink the hot milk, the essence of honey. The Vasus, the sacrificers, have come."
9.9.18	Then, sitting facing each other, the Adhvaryu and the Pratiprasthātṛ pour the milk into the Mahāvīra vessel.
9.9.19	The Adhvaryu first pours down the milk of the cow, saying, "Svāhā! I offer thee to the ray of the sun, to the bestower of rain."
9.9.20	Then he looks at the fire, saying, "Thou art sweet oblation, the heat of the sun."
9.9.21	At this time the Pratiprasthātṛ pours down the milk from the goat silently.
9.9.22	Having brought both together, the Adhvaryu pours down the third portion.
9.10.3	Then, taking him, he rises, saying, "May I be able to rule you, approved by the gods and the ancestors."
9.10.4	He carries it forward, reciting, "Thou art brilliance; thou art brilliance. May Agni protect me from the earth, Vayu from the atmosphere, Surya from the sky. May he not injure me who touches the sky, may he not injure me, who touches the atmosphere, may he not injury me, who touches earth. Thou art gold; give me gold. Protect the heaven; protect me from the heaven."
9.10.5	Then he explains the names of the winds: "To you, O Wind, to the Wind, svāhā" - five times.
9.10.6	In the same way, two more times.
9.10.7	Six more (offerings) as explained. To Agni thee, to the lord of wealth, svāhā. To Soma thee, to the ruler of the Rudras, svāhā; to Varuna thee, to the Aditya-ruler, svāhā, to Brhaspati thee, to the Vishvadevas-ruler, svāhà; to Savitr thee, to the mighty, to the all-pervading, to the lord, to the Vāja-ruler, svähä; to Yama thee, to the Angiras-ruler, to the father-ruler, svähä.
9.10.8	"All the quarters are seated to the right." He looks at the Brahman seated to the right.
9.10.9	"All the gods have come here." He says this to the Hotṛ seated behind.
9.10.10	He crosses over with the left foot and murmurs, "Drink the sweet Soma of the Agni whose oblation has been offered. O Asvins, svāhā! To Agni who is worthy of sacrifice, svāhā!"
9.10.11	The sacrificer recites the verse, "O Asvins, drink the Hotu-offering, the one who is in the heart, with the rays of the day, may heaven and earth be pleased with your help."
9.10.12	After loudly proclaiming, he says, "Sacrifice to the Hotu."
9.10.13	At the Vaṣaṭ-utterance, he offers, saying, "Svāhā to Indra."
9.10.14	Having offered the oblation with the formula, "Svāhā to Indra and Vāḍi," he recites the formula, "The heat has fallen, the Asvins have fallen, the day has fallen, the heaven and earth have fallen in accordance with your intentions. May they fall as they are. Obeisance to heaven, obeisance to earth. May you place this sacrifice in heaven. May you place the sacrifice in heaven. Go to heaven, go to the atmosphere, go to the earth, go to the five directions. Go to the gods who drink Soma, go to the ancestors who drink Soma."
9.10.15	At this time the Pratiprasthātṛ, having taken up the Pinvana vessel, pours it into the Maha Vīra vessel which is to be used.
9.10.16	Then the Adhvaryu and the Pratiprasthātṛ, having gone round along the inside of the altar, sprinkle him together with the Iṣe-sprinkle for strength, sprinkle for Brahman, sprinkle for the nobility, sprinkle for the waters, sprinkle for the plants, sprinkle for the trees, sprinkle for heaven and earth, sprinkle for good growth, sprinkle for Brahmic lustre, sprinkle for the sacrificer, sprinkle for me. Having said this in a low voice, he says loudly, "Sprinkle for the eldest."
9.10.17	Then he anoints himself in the direction of the sun, saying, "For the shining, for the splendour, for the strength, for the prosperity."
9.10.18	Herein he pours the milk of the great hero into the ladle.
9.10.19	Then having stepped over towards the north, he places the ladle with its mouth towards the east within the altar.
9.10.20	At this time the Pratiprasthātṛ places the golden coin on the Udvāsaniya ladle.
9.10.21	He places the Mahāvīra on the Pracaraṇīya ladle.
9.11.1	"O Dharma, O Sudharma, O Brahmins, do thou hold the Kshatriyas, do thou hold (the people of) the village. Let not the wind scatter thee."
9.11.2	If he is to perform a rite of sorcery, he says, "I place you in the breath of so-and-so. Go to a useless place together with him. He who hates us and whom we hate."
9.11.3	Then, having touched water, he asks for six pieces of wood from the Udumbara tree.
9.11.4	Having tied them with each one, he sprinkles the eastern half of the Āhavanīya fire with the formula, "To Pūṣan, the sharer, svāhā."
9.11.5	Then he places it, touched by the middle enclosing stick, in between the two fires.
9.11.6	In the same way, having sprinkled the first half of the Ahavaniya fire with the second ladle, he sprinkles it with the formula, "To the stones svāhā."
9.11.7	He places it, touched, in between the middle enclosing stick.
9.11.8	In the same way, having sprinkled the middle part of the Āhavanīya fire with the third sprinkling, he offers with the formula, "To the Pratiras, svāhā."
9.11.9	He places it in between the two layers of ashes.
9.11.10	In the same way, he sprinkles the other half of the Āhavaneya fire with the fourth sprinkling, offering with the formula, “To Heaven and Earth, svāhā.”
9.11.11	Then he places the upward-smeared one in the ashes.
9.11.12	In the same way, having sprinkled with the fifth ladle from the Upayamana, he sprinkles the right half of the Ahavaniya with the formula, "To the Fathers who drink Soma, svāhā."
9.11.13	Then he places the outward-smeared one touching the right enclosing stick.
9.11.14	Then he pours the sixth piece of wood, which is equal in size to all the pieces of wood, on the last of all the smears, having cut it off at the end, and pours it on the northern half of the Āhavanīya with the formula, "Svāhā to Rudra, the priest of Rudra."
9.11.15	Then he throws it away beyond the northern side of the shed, without looking back, with the formula, “Go to the useless place along with him who hates us and whom we hate.”
9.11.16	Then having touched the remaining pieces of wood with water, he strikes them on the Ahavaniya.
9.11.17	At this time the Pratiprasthātṛ offers the Rauhiṇa oblation towards the north with the verse, "May the light of the day be accepted with the banner, may it be well-lit among the lights, svāhā."
9.11.18	Here he silently places this kindling wood in the middle of the Ahavaniya.
9.11.19	When it is burning, he offers twice towards the front, saying, "Bhuḥ svāhā."
9.11.20	Then, having placed this ladle within the altar with its mouth towards the east, and having performed the Agnihotra ritual in it,
9.11.21	Having offered the invocation to the priests of the Pravargya rite, the sacrificer himself directly partakes of the oblation. The oblation is offered, the oblation is sweet, in the Agni most dear to Indra. You are our father, do not harm me. We have drunk your divine Gharma, sweet, full of strength, full of father, full of Angiras, full of self-existence. We have drunk you, do not harm us."
9.11.22	Then the Upayamanas are performed. The Agnidhra, having cleaned the bones in the bone-heap, places them within the altar with the mouth towards the east. Having placed gold and silver in them, he brings the Madanti waters and cleanses them with waters containing gold.
9.12.1	With the four verses, "Golden-coloured, pure, shining," etc.
9.12.2	Here only, having brought the waters to be drunk, he offers the oblations of the Gharm-expiations with the ladle of the vessel of clarified butter, with the formulas, "To Praṇa svāhā, to Pūṣan svāhā." With these two Anuvākas.
9.12.3	Then having placed this Upayamana-vessel with its mouth towards the east within the altar, he pours all the melted ghee into it, saying, "Recite after me when the ghee is being heated."
9.12.4	Then having carried this Upayamani-vessel around the Ahavaniya fire to the right, he places it on the black antelope skin on the southern side of the Samraḍ-seat, with its mouth towards east, saying, "Svāhā to thee from the rays of the sun."
9.12.5	Then they perform the northern peace-offering, "May the wind, the mother of all, blow for our welfare."
9.12.6	Then in the afternoon he proceeds with the afternoon Pravargya.
9.12.7	Whatever is prescribed for it, that is prescribed for him.
9.12.8	The rite is the same as that of the offering to the southern Rohini.
9.12.9	Then he offers to the southern Rohini, with the verse, "May the night, the light, enjoy with the banner, the well-luminous, the light of lights, svāhā."
9.12.10	In the same way, he offers to the northern Rohini.
9.12.11	The rite is the same as in the offering of the Samidha.
9.12.12-13	Here he places this kindling-wood in the middle of the Āhavanīya fire, with the formula, "Protect me from the day, protect me from the night. This is thy kindling-wood, O Agni; with it kindle thyself, give me life, and do not injure my lustre." In the evening, with the formula "Protect me from night, protect me from day." In the morning, he places it with the formula "In the morning, with the morning formula, he places it above the morning."
9.12.14	With the evening formula at the evening (libation).
9.12.15	When it is burning, he offers twice facing the east with the formulas, "Agni is light, light is Agni, svāhā" in the evening.
9.12.16	"Sun is light, light Sun, svāhā," in the morning.
9.12.17	The rite is similar from the announcement.
9.12.18	Then having taken this Upayamanī ladle, having gone around in front of the Ahavaniya, having placed it on the southern side of the Samadya, having placed the ladle with its mouth turned towards the north on the black antelope skin, he says, "Svāhā to the stars."
9.12.19	Then they perform the northern Śānti rite, saying, "May the wind blow for our welfare, O Matarisvan."
9.12.20	He performs the Pravargya rite for three days, six days, twelve days, and a year.
9.12.21	For four months in the Tapashchitta fire.
9.12.22	Having consumed the Pravargya, one should not eat meat for a year.
9.12.23	One should not approach a woman.
9.12.24	One should drink in a non-clay vessel.
9.12.25	One should make one's wife drink the leftovers.
9.12.26	The Brahmanical text says that it is indeed the brilliance that shines.
9.13.1	One who is about to perform the Pravargya rite prepares three bundles of wood, three hundred pots of water, curd mixed with honey, a handful of Gru grass, a load of Avaka grass, twenty Udumbara twigs, Muñja grass, Rāuṇḍa flour, sand from a heap, and sand from a river.
9.13.2	Here they perform the first Śānti rite, saying, "Salutations to speech."
9.13.3	Then having spread grass in front of the Ahavaniya fire, they place all the Parigha-fire together.
9.13.4	Here the royal seat, here the pillar, here the milking stool, here the peg for the goat."
9.13.5	Then having filled the two troughs with different kinds of grass, they place them here together.
9.13.6	Then the attendant, or the Agnidhra, having collected the bones of the animal that has been sacrificed, carries them out through the southern door, and throws them down in the place for the Marjalis.
9.13.7	Then, having returned by the same way as they came, they take out the Vrṣalas.
9.13.8	They call the wife.
9.13.9	They call (the sacrificer) to the Hotṛ.
9.13.10	They call to the Brahman.
9.13.11	They call for the Pratiprasthātṛ.
9.13.12	The Prastotṛs call out.
9.13.13	The Agnidhras call out.
9.13.14	They close the doors.
9.13.15	Then they put the wife to sleep with her head towards the north, covered with a garment.
9.13.16	They strew (the ground).
9.13.17	The Brahman and the sacrificer sit down towards the south.
9.13.18	Here they perform the earlier Śānti for those for whom it is not performed.
9.13.19	Then having melted the Gārhapatya ghee, he pours it out.
9.13.20	At this time, the Pratiprasthātṛ kindles a bundle of grass on the Āhavanīya fire, holding it near his mouth, and stands facing east with his face turned away.
9.13.21	The Adhvaryu, standing behind, facing east, offers the Sravahuti-oblation with the formula, "O Gharma, that heat of yours which is in heaven, which is in the Gayatri metre, which is in Brahman, which is in Havirdhana, I offer that to you with this (oblation). Svāhā."
9.13.22	Having placed it here itself, lighting another one, and holding it over the navel, he stands facing east, facing west.
9.13.23	The Adhvaryu, standing behind him facing the east, offers with the Sruva-oblation, "O Gharma, whatever heat is in the atmosphere, whatever is in the Tristubh metre, whatever is in royalty, whatever is in Agnidhra, I offer that with this (oblation). Svāhā."
9.13.24	He places it here itself, lights another one, and holding it at the height of the knee, stands facing the east with his face turned towards the west.
9.13.25	The Adhvaryu, standing behind (the sacrificer) facing the east, offers with the Sruva-spoon the oblation of the Homa, saying, "O Gharma, that heat of thine which is in the earth, which is in the Jāgara metre, which is in a Vaishya, which is in an assembly, that I have removed with this (oblation). Svāhā!"
9.13.26	Having placed it here only, having opened the doors, and having taken the Pravargya, they go out by the eastern door, reciting the two verses, "May Anu-mati favour us today; may you favour us, O Anumati."
9.13.27	Having then stepped on the great altar, he says to the Prastotar, "O Prastotar, sing the Sama."
9.13.28	The Prastotar follows with the Sama.
9.13.29	He concludes thrice.
9.13.30	The man goes to the place of the man. Thus is the Brahmanical text.
9.13.31	Then they advance.
9.14.1	"O Heaven, O Earth, O Sky, protect me with your bodies. We follow you with the law of Earth. For the new prosperity."
9.14.2	At the equinox, they perform the second Nidhana.
9.14.3	Then they advance, reciting, "For thee, O Brahman, for the protection of the Brahman, do I protect the forms of the Kshatra. We follow thee with the law for the sake of a new union."
9.14.4	At the time of the third twilight, they perform the third Nidhana.
9.14.5	Then they advance, reciting: "For thee, for the protection, of the life, do I protect thy forms of the eye and ear. We follow thee for the sake of the law for the new union."
9.14.6	Then they go to the north of the northern altar.
9.14.7	He says to the strong one, "Pour three times clockwise with a continuous stream of water from this pitcher."
9.14.8	He does so.
9.14.9	While being sprinkled, he makes the sacrificer recite, "You are charming, the child of the mother of the good, you will give peace and also protect."
9.14.10	Having placed the pot as before, he again goes around three times.
9.14.11	Then he touches the navel with the formula, "The navel is the seat of truth, having four corners, the abode of all beings, the shelter, the protector, free from hatred and fear. May I be in the same vow as the other."
9.14.12	Then he scatters the two thorns towards the north of the northern navel.
9.14.13	He makes it long and hard with the two Dhṛṣṭi-sticks.
9.14.14	Having placed gold and silver in it, he spreads the black antelope skin with its neck towards the east and with the hairy side upwards.
9.14.15	Having sprinkled it with flour of Rāuhiṇa grains, he sprinkles it with Muñja grass and sand.
9.14.16	Then the Adhvaryu, having taken the great hero to be used in the Pracaraṇa rite, fills it with curds mixed with honey, saying, "This is your food, this is your dung. Therewith grow and increase. May we grow and increase."
9.14.17	Then he fills it with the formula, "Thou art the milk of the earth, assigned to the gods, thou art the light of the plants, the juice of the plants, thou art the strong one, we, the strong ones, have brought thee."
9.14.18	Then he places it in the eastern part of the skin with the verse, "The mind is directed upwards to heaven."
9.15.1	Then, having taken up these two great heroes, having filled them with curds mixed with honey, he places them in the Agnihotra fire, touching the great hero to be offered first.
9.15.2	Then, having filled this offering with curds mixed wit honey, he places it on the great heroes, with its opening facing downwards.
9.15.3	Then he places the two golden (pieces) in the two holes, touching the great hero, with curds mixed with honey, and with the string.
9.15.4	Then having filled the two holes with curds mixed wit honey, he places them in the two holes touching the great hero.
9.15.5	Then he spreads the Mauñja grass, mixed with curds and honey, with the tip towards the east, touching the great heroes, with the tip facing west.
9.15.6	Then he places the two blades of grass, mixed with curd and honey, with their tips towards the east, with the tip of one touching the other, touching the great hero, with the tip pointing towards the south.
9.15.7	Then he places the two Rauhiṇahāvany twigs, smeared with honey and curds, with their tips touching each other, pointing towards the west.
9.15.8	Then he spreads the ten Udumbara twigs, smeared with curds and honey, with their tips pointing towards the west, touching each other, at the rear of the Rauhiṇahāvanī twigs.
9.15.9	Then he spreads out this Kusha-grass-made Veda, having smeared it with curds mixed with honey, and having placed it with its head towards the west, he spreads it out touching the great hero.
9.15.10	Then he places these two posts, having smeared them with curds mixed wit honey, with their heads towards the west, touching the two ends.
9.15.11	Then having filled the Upayamana with curds mixed with honey, he places it in the hole of the post, facing westwards.
9.15.12	Then having loosened the rope-substance, he mixes it with curds mixedwith honey and pours it into the Upayamāna.
9.15.13	Then, having tied the wooden wedges, the wooden ladle, and the wooden spoon with curds mixed with honey, he spreads them on the upper part of the ladle, with their tips pointing towards the east, touching each other.
9.15.14	Then, having tied the wedge with curds mixed wit honey, he places it on the lower part of the post, with its tip pointing towards the east and touching it.
9.15.15	Then he places the two Dhṛṣṭis with the ends of the two cords mixed with curds and honey, touching each other, facing westwards.
9.15.16	Then he places the two Dhavitris with the ends of two cords mixed with curd and honey, touching the Dhṛṣṭīs at the rear.
9.15.17	Then he spreads the ten Udumbara-sticks, smeared with curds mixed with honey, with their tips towards the south, touching each other.
9.15.18	Then having filled the vessel of clarified butter with curds mixed wit honey, he places it touching the ladle with its tip towards the south.
9.15.19	Then having tied the grass with curds mixed with honey, he covers the vessel of clarified butter with it.
9.15.20	Then having tied the two pieces of wood with curds mixed in honey, he places them touching the vessel of clarified-butter with the lower part.
9.15.21	Then having filled this ladle with curds mixed with honey, he places it with its handle towards the south, touching the rim of the ladle of clarified butter, with its mouth towards the north.
9.15.22	Then having spread this grass-blade, he binds it with curds mixed witḥ honey, and spreads it with its handle to the south, touching its tip, with its mouth to the north.
9.15.23	Then he places the stool, having spread it out, with the mixture of curds and honey, touching the northern end.
9.15.24	Then he pours the remaining clay, mixed with curds and honey in between the two thighs.
9.16.1	This is your food, this is your excrement. By it, do you grow and flourish. May we grow and flourish.
9.16.2	Then, having scattered him with sand, he anoints him with Muñja grass, having scattered him again with roasted barley flour, he anoints with a black antelope skin, with the neck towards the east and the fur towards the north.
9.16.3	Or, it may be said to be the great hero who is to be worshipped all around, like the circle of the sun.
9.16.4	Then he addresses him: "You are the one who is in the form of a man, you do not stand in the mouth, nor above, nor sideways. I have followed your rule. You have followed my rule. You are what you are, I am what I am. I ascend the heaven together with the sacrificer."
9.16.5	Then, taking a handful of grass, he sprinkles it with curds mixed with honey, saying, "May heaven and earth be sprinkled, may the young bull and the cows be sprinkled. May the world be sprinkled. May sacrifice be generated. May the unborn be born. May the born be born again. The bull is born from the sprinkled. May we be born from the sprinkled."
9.16.6	Then he addresses the Prastôtṛ (the chanter of the Sâman) thus: "O Prastôtṛ, chant the Vârsahara Sâman and the Iṣṭahotra Sâman."
9.16.7	He says to the strong one: "With this pitcher of water, sprinkling three times in a clockwise direction with a continuous stream, you should sprinkle."
9.16.8-9	When the sacrificer is being sprinkled, he makes him recite the Gandharva-formulas, "You are named Ranti, a divine Gandharva." Having placed the pot, he returns thrice as before.
9.16.10	Then he approaches him with this (verse): "O Agni, thou hast approached the gods; I, a man, approach men. May I drink Soma with them. Be with me, with offspring, with prosperity."
9.16.11	Then he strikes him with the joined palms of his hands, with the verse: "May the waters and plants be friendly to me.
9.16.12	He directs his gaze towards the direction in which his enemy may be located with the words, "May those who are hostile to me and whom I hate be in that direction."
9.16.13	Then having touched water, he worships the sun with the verse, "We rise above darkness."
9.16.14	Then covering him with a bundle of grass, he instructs the guardian, "Protect the great hero from the young ones."
9.16.15	The Prastotar recites the Syama verse.
9.16.16	Then having returned by the same route, he offers two spoonfuls on the Garhapatya with the same verse, "That bright one has risen for us."
9.16.17	Then they stand near the Ahavaniya with the verse, "This Agni, the new, the giver of wealth, the singer of the Gayatri metre, has been proclaimed by the gods among us."
9.16.18	Then having gone to the place of the Āgnīdhra, they perform the northern Śānti rite, saying, "May the wind blow for our welfare, O Matarisvan."
9.17.1	Now we shall explain the expiations for the Gharma.
9.17.2	If the Pravargya has not been performed and the sun has set, one should offer three oblations on the Garhapatya, saying, "Earth, Bhuvaḥ, Suvaḥ."
9.17.3	Having performed the Upasads, he should perform the Pravargya on the next day.
9.17.4	If the sun sets while the Pravargya is being performed, one should offer three oblations with the ladle on the Garhapatya fire, saying, "Bhūr Bhuvah Suvar."
9.17.5	Then, at the other door, having fastened gold with a thread, one should perform.
9.17.6	If, while being offered, it falls into the Garhapatya, one should offer three oblations with the ladle, saying, "Bhūr Bhuvah Suvar."
9.17.7	Then he raises it, saying, "Upward, O Agni, upward, O Agni, protect us from above, from above." With two verses.
9.17.8	Then he fills it with ghee, saying, "The sages anoint him, the Pravrittas, to make him grow."
9.17.9	If a white spot or a boil appears, he sprinkles it with a mixture of ash and cow-dung and strikes it with a wooden stick, reciting the two verses, "If you strike the white spot or the boil, with anything other than this, you will be afflicted."
9.17.10	It indeed grows.
9.17.11	If, however, it breaks completely, then he mixes the broken potsherds with the clay that is kept aside for expiation, makes it into a pot, bakes it, and puts it aside.
9.17.12	Then he makes another pot to be used.
9.17.13	If they go beyond the prescribed limit while being careless, one should offer three spoonfuls of oblations on the Garhapatya fire, reciting, "Bhūr Bhuvah Suvar."
9.17.14	Then they again return with the verse, "Again with energy and wealth."
9.17.15	If the fire-wood falls down while being lifted up, one should offer the three spoonfuls of offerings on the Garhaptya fire, reciting "Bhūr Bhuvaḥ Suvar."
9.17.16	Then he touches him with the formula, "Do not injure us, O heat! Do not injure us. Do not injure us with our prayers and hymns." With two formulas.
9.17.17	If the heat-milking cow or the great hero were to leak semen, one should wash them with warm water with the formula, “O Mitra-Varuna, come to us.”
9.17.18	Then he should offer nine oblations with the ladle on the Garhapatya fire: "This is mine, O Varuna. I seek you. You, O Agni, are our protector. You, O Agnīdh, are our protector." "You, O Agni, have come. We have risen from darkness. We have risen to the bright world. The Suparnas (birds) are the bright ones."
9.17.19	If one does not find a cow to be milked for the Gharma, one should milk another cow.
9.17.20	If he does not find a goat, he should milk a cow.
9.17.21	If he does not find even a cow, he should proceed with the milk of the Arka plant.
9.17.22	If he cannot find the milk of the Arjuna plant, he should mix barley flour, rice flour, and Shyamaka flour with water and proceed with that.
9.17.23	If he can't even find water, he should proceed.
9.17.24	But he should not proceed without anything.
9.17.25	The earth is your milk, is said, the great hero's descent.
9.17.26	The sky has covered the earth, is said, when the sky has covered.
9.17.27	If lightning strikes, one should offer a ladleful oblation on the Garhapatya with the verse, "The lightning that strikes in front," according to the form.
9.17.28	"To Prāṇa svāhā, to Pūṣan svāhā." These are the expiations for the Gharma.
9.17.29	Whatever is required for the rite of Gharmā, one should offer these oblations. "Om, salutations to you, O Gharmā, the lord of the earth, svāhā. Om, salutations to the lord of the universe, svāhā." "Om, salutlations to the lord of beings, svāhā to Gharmā, svāhā, to the Ashvins, svāhā Indra, svāhā Brihaspati, svāhā Prajapati, svāhā Brahma."
9.17.30	Then he places the bricks of the summer season and the Kulayinī brick on the northern side of the three-lined Aṣāḍha brick.
9.17.31	"The sun rises from his heat." This is the summer brick.
9.17.32	"Those are your moist wombs, O Agni." This is the Kulayinī.
9.17.33	Having placed the fire collected, having worshipped it with the Sāman hymns, standing at the end of the buttocks with the Uktha hymn, he touches the fire with the formula, "Thou art Agni, thou art Vaiśvānara." With this Anuvāka.
9.17.34	Here he gives the Dakṣiṇā of Agni to the Adhvaryu, a hundred, a thousand, or according to his means.
9.18.1	At the Soma-sacrifice called Pravargya, they consume the Dadhi-gharma (curd-hot-liquor) with this Anuvaka: "Bhuvah, Suvah, may that great power be in me."
9.18.2	Then he directs the terrible body.
9.18.3	"Those terrible bodies of yours, O Agni, are Snik, Snihish, and Snihish." These are the terrible bodies.
9.18.4	Dhuni and Dhvanat are the Rajasuyika group.
9.18.5	Ugra and Dhuni are the two Agni-cittis.
9.18.6	If a thief steals the cow or the bull, one should offer a spoonful of oblation on the Garhapatya fire, reciting the verse, "May the day and night proclaim you."
9.18.7	Or one may recite the verse, "The words are harsh."
9.18.8	If a cow is killed, one should recite the following verse, "O Indra, go away and destroy the killer."
9.18.9	Then he should throw a burning torch at him, saying, "O Agni, may you be united with Agni, O Death, may you be joined with Death."
9.18.10	Then he should stand near him, saying, "Once I bow to you, O Agni, twice I bow to you. Three times I bow to you."
9.18.11	If a vulture should cry out, he should recite this mantra, "With blood on its face, it is not visible."
9.18.12	If a dog barks, he recites over it, "What has become of the wolf?"
9.18.13	If a crow or a pigeon is seen, he recites, "If one is desired, if one is self-willed."
9.18.14	If a jackal is seen, he chants over it, "Long-faced, difficult to handle."
9.18.15	If an owl or an owl-like bird should cry, one should recite over it, "Thus the owl has fallen."
9.18.16	If a mad woman should speak, one should recite to her, "What are these beings that have entered you?"
9.18.17	If a person should fall on a hot-milking cow or a great hero, one should recite, "Stretching out your legs, you fall."
9.18.18	If worms should attack the heated pot or the great hero, one should wash them with water, saying, "I strike the worms with Atri."
9.18.19	If an enemy were to attack a ritual in progress, one should offer a ladleful of oblation on the Garhapatya fire, saying, "May the enemy be destroyed."
9.18.20	Then one who is about to recite the following verses.
9.18.21	He should address him thus: "I curse you with Brahma."
9.18.22	Then he should move the right door-post of the one he hates, saying: "Shake and fall down."
9.18.23	And if anyone else is to be cursed, he should throw a blazing torch at him from both sides, saying: "Strike and fall down."
9.18.24	If the wind blows as if to blow away the fire, he recites this verse: "Bhuḥ, Bhuvaḥ, Suvaḥ, Bhuḥ, Bhuva, Suvaḥ. May the wind blow, may the wind blow, let the wind blow."
9.18.25	If one enters a hut that is covered, one should enter with these verses: "Whatever is not deficient here, whatever is not deficient here."
9.18.26	If one has already begun, then with this alone.
9.19.1	Now we shall explain the intermediate initiation.
9.19.2	Having shaved off the hair on the head and beard, having performed the rites as before, having gone out towards the east or the west from the village, having placed the fire on the ground covered with grass, having spread it around, having placed the Madanti-bricks, having performed the Sānti rite with the first Anuvāka, he prepares seats for the Pravargya deities with Darbha grass.
9.19.3	In front of the fire, I consecrate for Pravargya, for Gharmā, for Mahāvīra, for Samrāṭ.
9.19.4	On the right side of the fire, for Brahmā, for Prajāpati, I consecrate.
9.19.5	On the left side of the fire for the sages, for the creators of mantras, for the lords of mantras, I consecrate; for the gods who drink Gharmā, I consecrate.
9.19.6	Then, facing the south, with the sacred thread passing over the left shoulder, he consecrates himself to the Pitrs, the Hotras, Yama, and the Angiras, the fathers.
9.19.7	Then, having touched water, facing the north, with the sacred-thread passing over the right shoulder, he consecraes himself to Rudra, the Rudra-priest.
9.19.8	Then, touching water, he consecrates to all the deities of the Pravargya.
9.19.9	Having circumambulated the fire, having sprinkled (water), having placed the sacrificial twigs with the Vyāhṛtis, he propitiates the deities of Pravargya with the Madanti verses.
9.19.10	"He says, "I propitiate the Pravargya in front of the fire, I propitiate the Gharmā, I propitite the Mahāvīra, I propititate the Samrāṭ."
9.19.11	To the right of the fire, he offers to Brahma, the Prajapati.
9.19.12	To the left of the fire, one offers to the sages, the creators of mantras, the lords of mantras, and to the gods who are the sons of Agni.
9.19.13	Then, facing east, one offers to Yama, the son of Agni, the lord of the Pitrs, the son of Angiras, the lord of Pitrs.
9.19.14	Then, having touched water, wearing the sacred thread over the right shoulder, he offers libation to Rudra, the Rudra-priest, with the formula, "I offer libation to Rudrāṇī, the Rudra priest."
9.19.15	Then, having touched water again, he offers libations to all the deities of the Pravargya rite with the formula,
9.19.16	He places four Samit twigs of Udumbara wood, with their ends not completely dried, anointed with ghee, reciting the mantras, "Pṛthivī is Samit" and so on, in sequence.
9.19.17	Then the deity approaches him: "O Agni, lord of vows, I shall observe the bright vow. May I be able to do it, may it succeed for me." "O Vayu, lord of vows... O Aditya, lord of vows..." "I shall observe the bright vows. May I be capable of it, may it be successful for me."
9.19.18	Then he makes him recite the first and last of these sections.
9.19.19	Then he instructs him, saying, "Control your speech and close your eyes."
9.19.20	Then he covers his head three times clockwise with a new cloth, saying, "O Agni, be covered by the Maruts."
9.19.21-23	Having circumambulated the fire and sprinkled it, having placed the Vaikankati kindling woods with the Vyahrtis, having gratified the deities of the Pravargya with the Madanti verses, having performed the Shanti with the last Anuvaka, they go to the village when the sun has set. One should remain silent and sit or lie down during this night.
9.19.24	Then, when the sun has risen in the morning, having gone out of the village towards the east or west, having placed the fire on a clean spot, having spread it around, having placed the Madanti plants, having performed the peace with the first Anuvaka, having arranged seats for the Pravargya deities with darbha grass, having released the garment with the verse "O Suparna, the bird,"
9.19.25	Then he shows him the sixfold (group of things): Agni, water, the sun, the cow, the Brahman, and gold.
9.19.26	Having seen the three (fires) at the beginning, having shown the others in due order, having sprinkled the fire clockwise, having placed the Vaikankati kindling woods with the Vyāhṛtis, having gratified the Pravargya deities with the Madantī verses, having performed the Śānti rite with the last Anuvāka,
9.19.27	he should then instruct him in his vow and conduct.
9.19.28	He should not mount a vehicle.
9.19.29	He should not climb a tree.
9.19.30	He should avoid climbing into a well.
9.19.31	He should refrain from carrying an umbrella.
9.19.32	He should abstain from wearing sandals.
9.19.33	He should sleep on the ground.
9.19.34	He should neither speak to a woman nor to a Śūdra.
9.19.35	If he does speak, he should speak to a Brāhmaṇa.
9.19.36	He should eat in the evening.
9.19.37	If he eats in the evening, he should eat while it is still burning.
9.19.38	One should not bathe.
9.19.39	One should observe fast on the eighth day and bathe on that day.
9.19.40	One should remain silent, sit or lie down during that night.
9.19.41	In the sight of unclean, blood, dead bodies, and vessels, one should see the lights.
9.19.42	Seeing impurity, he recites: "The mind is untied, the eye is poor, the sun is the best of lights, may I not be deprived of initiation."
9.19.43	If it rains on him, he recites, "May you give strength, may you give energy, may you give strength, do not destroy my initiation and austerity."
9.20.1	One should observe this vow for a year.
9.20.2	The vow is not to be transgressed for a year.
9.20.3	But one should study in this very year.
9.20.4	If one does not study in this very (year), one should observe the vow for as long as one studies.
9.20.5	When the year is completed, one teaches or makes one listen.
9.20.6	Having performed the rites as before, having gone out towards the east or the west from the village, having placed the fire on the ground covered with grass, having spread it around, having placed the Madanti-bricks, having performed the Sānti rite with the first Anuvāka, having arranged seats for the Pravargya deities with Darbha-grass,
9.20.7	Then he offers the expiation for not having observed the vow, with the two verses, "Whatever evil has befallen me, Agni has given me sight again."
9.20.8	Having sprinkled the fire clockwise, having placed the kindling woods of the Vaikankati kindling woods with the Vyahrtis, having gratified the deities of the Pravargya,
9.20.9	He makes the four Udumbara twigs, with their tips not dried up, smeared with ghee, and makes them recite the following verses, one by one: "The sky is the kindling wood..."
9.20.10	Then the deities attend to him. "O Aditya, the lord of vows, I have observed the vow of purity. I was not able to do it. May you be pleased with me. O Vayu, the lord of the vows, O Agni, the lord of Vratas, the lord of all vows, I have performed the vow of purity, but I was not able. May you be satisfied with me."
9.20.11	Having sprinkled the fire clockwise, having placed the sacrificial twigs with the Vyāhṛtis, having gratified the deities of the Pravargya with the Madantī verses, having performed the Śānti rite with the last Anuvāka,
9.20.12	he should teach the rules for not studying.
9.20.13	One should not study when the sun has set.
9.20.14	One should also not study when the sunrise.
9.20.15	One should neither study when it is raining.
9.20.16	Nor when the sun has changed its position.
9.20.17	not in the shade of a cloud
9.20.18	not at the end of a domestic animal
9.20.19	not at the edge of a wild animal
9.20.20	not at a riverbank
9.20.21	not while looking at green barley
9.20.22	not at a house
9.20.23	not at a body
9.20.24	not after seeing blood fall down
9.20.25	not after eating meat
9.20.26	not after eating at a śrāddha meal
9.20.27	not after shaving hair and beard
9.20.28	not with hair spread out
9.20.29	He should not run.
9.20.30	He should not smear himself.
9.20.31	He should smear himself.
9.20.32	Not wet.
9.20.33	With a wet garment.
9.20.34	Wet.
9.20.35	Then he should study.
9.20.36	Sitting on darbha grass, holding darbha grass, he should study the Veda facing the fire.
9.20.37	If he sees any disturbance anywhere, he should study again after performing the peace rite.
9.20.38	And having learnt, he should go forth from the house to the homeless state, and should not learn anything else without entering a village.
10.1.1	The person who is going to make the Ukhā (mould) should prepare a horse and a donkey, and for them two ropes, either made of Muñja grass or Kusha grass, a spade, a pot of water, gold, the skull of an animal, sand, black clay, black antelope hair, the hair of a goat, a yoke, a pot of gold, a pot of silver, a pot of copper, a pot of wood, a pot of stone, a pot of clay, a pot of iron, a pot of bronze, a pot of lead, a pot of tin, a pot of bell metal, a pot of brass, a pot of earthenware, a pot of bamboo, a pot of reed, a pot of lotus leaf, a pot of palm leaf, a pot made of the leaves of the Palāśa tree, a pot made from the leaves of the Udumbara tree, a pot of the leaves of a tree, a pot with a lid, a pot without a lid, a vessel made of the leaves, a vessel made from the leaves, a pot made by a potter, a pot made in a village, a pot made outside a village, a vessel made by a potter in a village, and a vessel made by one who is skilled in making pots.
10.1.2	Then having performed the New-moon sacrifice, he digs a pit in the house where the sacrificial grass is spread, with the asterism at the beginning.
10.1.3	He smears it with well-prepared clay.
10.1.4	He makes it even with the pit.
10.1.5	He places near it the skin of black antelope, lotus leaf, yoke, water-pot and gold.
10.1.6	Then, having dug out the ant-hill with the sacrificial grass, he places it.
10.1.7	The Vaishya, protecting it, sits to the right.
10.1.8	Then, having dug out a piece of the northern part of the shed with the sacrificial grass at the front, he scatters sand.
10.1.9	He makes it round and hard.
10.1.10	Then he makes it smooth with sand.
10.1.11	Having covered it with fresh kuśa grass and with knots of dūrvā grass, they then cover it.
10.1.12	They make the door face north.
10.1.13	He places there the skull of a cow, sand, black mustard, black salt, black sesame, black beans, black gram, black mustard, and black salt, black wool, black antelope skin, a black antelope skin, the black antelope skin, and a black antelope skin.
10.1.14	Then the two horses and donkeys stand in front of the hall, tied with ropes.
10.1.15	He places the wooden sword within the altar, at the northern end of the altar, on the rope.
10.1.16	They spread (the grass).
10.1.17	The Brahman and the sacrificer sit down on the right side.
10.1.18	Then having melted the clarified butter in the Garhapatya fire, having purified it, having taken four spoonfuls in the ladle, he offers the Savitrī verses in the Āhavanīya fire when the sacrificer has begun.
10.2.1	The six verses beginning with "Joining the first mind" are uninterrupted. The verse "O god Savitr" is a Yajus. This is the verse "O god, Savitr, this one" is a Yajur verse.
10.2.2	He offers with a verse or with a formula.
10.2.3	Having offered the ninth oblation, he stands up with the verse, "May the Stoma be accomplished."
10.2.4	Then he takes the wooden sword with the four formulas, "By the impulse of the divine Savitr..."
10.2.5	Having moved it around in front of the Āhavanīya fire, he gives it to the Brahman seated to the right.
10.2.6	Then he takes up the rein, reciting, "I have taken up this rein of truth."
10.2.7	With it he directs the horse, reciting, "Swiftly, O steed, run."
10.2.8	In the same way he takes up the second rein.
10.2.9	With it he guides the donkey, reciting, "Join the donkey, join it in the yoke, in every yoke, you are the best." With two verses.
10.2.10	They lead the horse first.
10.2.11	He addresses him with the verse, "Come hither, O Agni, with thy heat, come hither, O Agni. Come hither, O Agni."
10.2.12	"Come hither, O horse, with the Pushan, with the companion, from the place of union with the earth, Agni, the domestic, like Angiras."
10.2.13	They circumambulate the Vaishya.
10.2.14	The Vaishya asks, "What do you want?"
10.2.15	"The others reply, 'We shall offer to Agni, the domestic, like Angiras.'
10.2.16	Then he addresses the mound of earth, saying, 'We shall carry Agni, the domestic and like Angiras.'
10.2.17	Then he makes the Agnihotra-offering with the formula, "Agni has known the foremost of the dawns, the first-born Jātavedas has followed the days, the rays of the sun in many ways, and the heaven and earth which are spread out."
10.2.18	Then he makes the horse step on the ground towards the east with the formula, “Having come, O horse, having crossed the path, having crossed the earth, O horse."
10.2.19	Then the sky is wiped on his back: "Thy back is the earth, thy abode is the sky, thy body is the ocean, thy womb is the ocean. Thou standest forth with thy eye, thou art the most distant."
10.2.20	Here the sacrificer meditates on the one whom he hates as being under the feet of the horse.
10.2.21	Then he makes him step forward with the two verses, "He stepped forward, he stepped forward."
10.2.22	Then he sprinkles this foot-print with water,
10.3.1	"Sprinkle the divine waters, sweet and free from disease, for the sake of the creatures. From their place have sprung the herbs, very fragrant."
10.3.2	Then having taken four spoonfuls in the ladle, having placed gold in the right corner of the skin, having spread it around, he offers with the verse, "I offer Agni with mind and ghee."
10.3.3	Having taken another four-fold portion, having placed the gold in the northern intermediate space, having strewn it around, he offers with the verse, "I am offering thee with speech and ghee."
10.3.4	Having removed the gold, taking the wooden sword, he draws a line around with the three verses, "The wise lord of wealth has drawn around thee, O Agni, we have drawn around thee. Thou, O Agni, with thy lustre,"
10.3.5	"He digs with the formula, "In the impulse of god Savitr, I dig thee, O Agni, shining, well-directed." With two formulas.
10.3.6	Then having placed the materials on the northern side with their tips towards the east, he spreads the Kṛṣṇājina with its neck towards the east and its hairy side upwards.
10.3.7	Then he takes up the lotus leaf with the formula, "Thou art the back of waters.
10.3.8	Then having placed it on a black antelope skin, he touches it with the two verses, "May you be protected, may you be nourished."
10.3.9	Having removed the lotus leaf, he takes the clay with eight verses.
10.4.1	"You are the one who is purified, the bearer of all burdens."
10.4.2	Of those, four are in the Gāyatrī metre and four are in the Tristubh metre.
10.4.3	He takes the clay in handfuls with the verses beginning with "Vaiśvānara."
10.4.4	Or else, with eight (verses), he takes up a single lump.
10.4.5	Then, having filled this pit with earth, he sprinkles it with water, saying, "May the wind, the son of Aditi, grant you peace. The heart that was torn out for the one who is stretched out, and the one who moves with the breath of the gods, to him, O goddess, let there be Vasat and to you."
10.4.6	Then, having placed a lotus leaf on the soft ground and having collected it, he fastens the ends of the black antelope skin with a yoke. "He says, "May Sujata and Jyotisa together find the excellent protection of the Agni, the garment of all forms, O Agni, may you be radiant."
10.4.7	Then, taking it, he rises up, saying, "Rise up, O Agni, the one who is self-luminous, rise up, O Agni who is to be praised, rise up, the one who has the highest praise."
10.4.8	Then he brings it (to the fire) with the verse, "The embryo born, the shining, the beautiful, Agni, borne in the plants, the variegated child, enveloped in darkness, has moved up from its mothers."
10.4.9	Then he places it on the skin of a she-ass with the verse, "Be firm, be strong, be swift, be a steed, be a swift horse, be wide, be well-seated, O Agni, the bearer of the excrement of Agni."
10.4.10	Then he addresses him with the verse, "Be auspicious to the human beings, O Angiras, do not be angry with the heaven and earth, do not be hostile to the atmosphere and the plants."
10.4.11	They lead the horse first.
10.4.12	He chants the verse, "Let the horse go, neighing."
10.4.13	The donkey, following the ass, has borne the Agni of the house, may he not go before the end of his life.
10.4.14	The ass, well-yoked, has roared for you, the messenger, the swift one, has brought your Agni of the house from here.
10.4.15	Bearing the bull, the Agni, the bull, the embryo of the waters, the ocean-born, O Agni, come to the purified ones.
10.4.16	Then they considered, "Truth, truth."
10.4.17	They circumambulate the Vaishya.
10.4.18	The Vaishya asks, "What do you carry?"
10.4.19	The others reply, "We carry Agni, the domestic fire, like Angiras."
10.4.20	Then the plants take him away. He should receive him, saying, "Let the plants rejoice in this Agni." With two verses.
10.4.21	Having sprinkled with water, they release the horse and the donkey.
10.4.22	They sprinkle water on the rope. Having sprinkled with water, he eats.
10.5.1	Then he loosens it with the verse, "May he be loosened by the broad path of the sun."
10.5.2	Then he sprinkles it with water with the three verses in the Anucchada metre, "The waters are firm, the waters are bountiful."
10.5.3	Then he mixes it with the skull of a victim, with sand, with flour of black mustard, with the hair of a goat, with the hair from a black antelope skin. "He mixes it with the formula, "The friend mixes (it). I mix the earth for thee for freedom from consumption." With two formulas."
10.5.4	Then he collects it with the formula "The Rudras have collected the earth."
10.5.5	He makes a ball with the formula, "Thou art the head of the victim."
10.5.6	They stand in the place of sacrifice. With the thumbs he holds (the pot).
10.5.7	Then, having cut off a third part of the clay, he makes three balls.
10.5.8	Of them, he gives one to be made into a pot, saying, "Mixed with Vasus and Rudras."
10.5.9	He recites, "May the Vasus make you with the Gayatri metre."
10.5.10	He gives half of the clay to the one who is to be the most excellent, saying, "To the one with good head-dress, O Sinivāli."
10.5.11	He instructs her, saying, "May the Rudras make you with the Tristubh metre."
10.5.12	At the end, he gives all the clay to her, saying, "May she make the ladle with the Sakti."
10.5.13	The Adityas, with the Jagati metre, and the All-gods, with the Anushtubh metre, shall make thee whole.
10.5.14	Now indeed it is said:
10.5.15	He makes it with other (verses) than those with which he makes it; for the purpose of union.
10.5.16	He makes it three-fold, it is said.
10.5.17	In that he takes it three times and anoints it three times, therefore it is three-fold.
10.5.18	He makes it one span in height, unlimited in width.
10.5.19	Then he attaches a tassel to it, three or four inches long, saying, "Thou art the tassel of Aditi."
10.5.20	Then he places eight tassels on its sides.
10.5.21	He makes eight nipples at the joints of the tassels and at the joints of tassels.
10.5.22	The Brāhmaṇa says that one should make the nine-cornered (fire-pan) for one who is practising sorcery.
10.5.23	He makes the ninth (fire-pan).
10.5.24	Then he takes its hole, saying, "Aditi takes your hole, with the Paṅkti metre."
10.5.25	Then he places it on the heap, saying, "Having made the earth a pan," from the end of the Anuvāka.
10.5.26	In the same way he makes the second and the third. He makes five bulls and three circular bricks silently.
10.6.1	Then with the remaining clay he smears the windward side.
10.6.2	There he arranges twenty-one balls of cowdung, a chisel, Agni and the cooking pot.
10.6.3	Then having heated the horse-dung, he fumigates the principal pot with the verse, "May the Vasus fumigate thee with the Gayatri metre." Having started, he fumigates with the verse, “May Varuna fumigate thee.” From within and without.
10.6.4	Having fumigated well, he places it.
10.6.5	In the same way he digs the second and the third time silently. He digs five bull-bricks and three circular bricks.
10.6.6	Then he digs a pit to the north of the hall like a hole in a wall, saying, "May the goddess Aditi, accompanied by all the gods, dig you in the pit as Angiras did."
10.6.7	Having covered it with the cooking-pot, he puts the principal potsherd on it, with the verse, "The goddesses, the wives of the gods, the goddesses of all gods, having placed thee in the abode of the earth, may the Angirasas place thee in the potsherd."
10.6.8	In the same way he puts the second one, and in the same way the third one. Five bulls and three circular bricks are silently put.
10.6.9	He spreads them towards the east or towards the west.
10.6.10	Then he covers them from above with a pot and smears them with clay.
10.6.11	He burns them at a distance of four fingers in each direction for lighting.
10.6.12	Then he fasts.
10.7.1	"Dhishana-s are yours," he says towards the east; "Gnas are yours," he towards the south; "Varutrayas are yours," he to the west; "Janayas are yours," he in the north.
10.7.2	Then he gives them away, saying, "This is the pot, this is the cooking pot, this is not to be broken, I give it to you for the sake of not being broken."
10.7.3	They are cooked in a day or a night.
10.7.4	If one fasts in the morning, one goes in the evening; if in the evening, in the morning.
10.7.5	Among them he prepares the cooked food: milk, curd, butter, ghee, whey, buttermilk, meat, fish, and the skin of a black antelope.
10.7.6	Having taken this, he comes to this earth with his greatness, Mitra became luminous, and with his fame, the earth.
10.7.7	The friend of Mitra, the holder of the people, the fame of the god, the most famous, the most brilliant, the most glorious.
10.7.8	Then, taking the Dhṛṣṭi, he scatters the embers on the chief pot, saying, "May the god Savitar scatter thee with good hands, good fingers, and good arms, for the sake of strength."
10.7.9	Then he raises her with the formula, "Rise up, be great, stand firm, be firm."
10.7.10	Then he places her in the receptacle with the formula, “Thou art the earth, thou art the direction, thou art the quarters, thou art the waters."
10.7.11	Then having taken her with the tongs and having placed her on the heated iron, he anoints her with the fat of a sheep.
10.8.1	May the Vasus take thee with the Gayatri metre. Thus having taken it, may all the Visve Devas, the Vaivasvatas, take thee with the Anushtubh metre. Thus having gone beyond, from within and without,
10.8.2	Having made it pure, he pours it with cow's butter.
10.8.3	In the same way he lays down the second and the third (layer). He lays down five layers of bricks in the shape of bulls and three layers of bricks in a circle.
10.8.4	If there is a crack or a hole, he sprinkles the ash with cow-dung and covers it with the same. He then strikes it with a wooden mallet.
10.8.5	It indeed grows.
10.8.6	If, however, he breaks it completely, then he should grind the pieces of the potsherds and mix them with the clay that remains for the expiatory rite. Having made it, baked it, and broken it, he should place it.
10.8.7	When they stop breathing, then having put them in a cart, having covered them with a black antelope skin, he hangs them in the northern part of the shed.
10.8.8	They remain there till the time.
10.9.1	Then on this very first half of the month, he performs the Vāyavya animal sacrifice.
10.9.2	He makes it as a rule that when one is about to sacrifice with an animal, the heads of a horse killed in battle and a Vaishya are used.
10.9.3	They cook a bull, a Vrishni, and a goat.
10.9.4	They bring this (animal) with the head of a snake.
10.9.5	Now on the previous day, the altar for the animal sacrifice is measured out for him.
10.9.6	Having spread it, he carries the Stambayajus.
10.9.7	This is well-known as the Purodasa.
10.9.8	Three times with the Yajus, silently the fourth.
10.9.9	He takes up the Parigraha first.
10.9.10	He murmurs the Karana.
10.9.11	He lifts it up.
10.9.12	From the lifted up (Parigraha) the Agnidhra carries it three times.
10.9.13	The Agnidhra thrice takes it up, then he draws a line around the Cātvāla.
10.9.14	Having covered the Uttaravedi, he pours down the Uttaravedi.
10.9.15	Having covered up the Uttaranaḍi, he carries the Agni towards the Uttaravedi.
10.9.16	Having taken up the northern enclosing stick with the formula, "Thou art Agni," having gone around, having placed the transverse piece of wood, he gives out the call, "Do thou place the Prokṣaṇi-water; do thou place the sacrificial grass and the sacrificial post; do thou cleanse the spoon, the wooden sword and the ladles; do thou silently take up the ladle for the Pṛṣadājya; do thou bind the wife; do thou bring clarified butter and curds; do thou pierce the heads of the animals, O Pratiprasthātṛ."
10.9.17	The Adhvaryu performs the well-known rites connected with the animal sacrifice.
10.9.18	Then the Pratiprasthātṛ asks for twenty-one Masas, a leaf-twig, a lump of clay, a water-pot, a spoon, a grass-blade cut into seven pieces, a mound of earth, and a pair of tongs.
10.9.19	Taking these, he approaches the head of the animal.
10.9.20	The head of a man lies to the south, with its front towards the other heads.
10.9.21	Having put on the sacred thread, he scatters the head of a man with seven beans and drags it three times with a leaf-twig in the opposite direction.
10.10.1	Vaisvānara, taking away the cow, horse, man and the world every day, is not satisfied with the five human beings. Yama says this.
10.10.2	The dead are dragged by the seven others. Those men are judged by Yama, the king of death, those who desire truth here and those who speak untruth.
10.10.3	The dead are dragged by seven others. O king, they are judged here. Then they go to you and the gods and those who honour the Brahmanas.
10.10.4	Then he takes up the skull of a man with the right hand and the tongs with the left.
10.10.5	Having united the vital airs with the vital airs, he places the skull of a mound in the heart.
10.10.6	Then having sprinkled this human head, having scraped it, having washed it, having smeared it with clay, he smears the vital airs.
10.10.7	Then the other three (sacrifices) are performed with only three (sacrifices). Having scraped and washed, they smear with clay, not smearing (the body).
10.10.8	Then he places them in water, sprinkling them.
10.10.9	They remain there till the time.
10.11.1	Then the procedure of the oblations for the animal sacrifice.
10.11.2	"Obeisance to you, O Vāja, who are invincible." Eleven verses.
10.11.3	The ten verses beginning with "May the seasons, O Agni, increase thee"
10.11.4	Having taken out the verse containing the word "light", he places nine verses in the light.
10.11.5	Then he places the verses containing the word "Pṛthupāja".
10.11.6	Then he places this verse: "Do thou yoke the divine messengers."
10.11.7	When recited in the reverse order, they make twenty-four.
10.11.8	He offers the Jyotishmati (oblation) as the best. Then he offers the oblation with the formula, "Hiranyagarbha, the golden embryo, has come forth first."
10.11.9	Now the discussion of the Apraina oblations.
10.11.10	The kindling woods are placed above. There are twelve of them.
10.11.11	Having removed the Tanunapati kindling wood, he places the kindling wood of the Vasishthas.
10.11.12	Having taken out the Nārāśaṃsa and Tānūnaptri, of other clans.
10.11.13	Then, "May we obtain food and wealth through him" is for the Vapa, "He who gives life, who gives the self" is for the Pasupurodāśa, "May Vayu lead us with his messengers" is for the Havis.
10.11.14	Thus, if it is mixed.
10.11.15	If it is entirely dedicated to Vayu, then the two verses are: "May we obtain wealth and food, may we obtain the food of the lord of wealth." These two verses are for the Vapa, two for the Pasupurodāsa, and two for the oblation.
10.11.16	If it is entirely dedicated for Prajapati, then the two are: "He who gives life, he who gives the self." These two verses belong to the Vapa, and two to the Pasupurodasa, and two to oblation.
10.11.17	They make the entire form of the animal.
10.11.18	Then he puts these animal heads, which have been burnt around, on the pegs in the northern part of the shed.
10.11.19	Then he binds the head of the snake with a string and fastens it with a peg.
10.11.20	They remain until the time.
10.12.1	Then the other half of the month begins.
10.12.2	He prepares bricks and sacrificial fees. If he is to be given for a night,
10.12.3	If he is to be paid for a year, then one should not mind the long time.
10.12.4	He prepares the sacrificial grass, the sacrificial grass is of the length of a span and the tips are of the length of two fingers. It is tied with a string of Muñja grass. It is spread with wooden planks and smeared with clay. The Muñja grass is tied in a knot and is mixed with ghee. There are two kinds of sacrificial grass - one made of Vaikankati and the other made of Sami wood. There are seven kinds of sacrificial grass made of Udumbara wood, three kinds of sacrificial grass from different trees, and twenty-one kinds of gold.
10.12.5	The Agniṣṭoma-sacrifices are well-known.
10.12.6	A hall is built at a place where sacrifices are performed.
10.12.7	Then having brought him from the river and having purified him, he performs the Iṣṭi of Agni-initiation with three oblations, namely, the cake on eleven potsherds to Agni-Viṣṇu, the rice cooked in ghee to Aditi, and the cake on twelve potsherds to Vaiśvānara.
10.12.8	As many as there are for the Diksaniyā, so many are offered to her.
10.12.9	Then the Adhvaryu, having turned by the right, having hastened towards the west, having offered the Patnīsaṁyājya, having approached towards the east, having filled the Dhruva vessel, having taken up the oblation from the Juhu vessel with the spoon of the Upabhṛt vessel, offers the oblations to Agni and Dikṣā.
10.13.1	Agni, the instigator of counsel, Svāhā! Agni, the instigator, the mind, the intellect, Svāhā ! Agni, the instigating consciousness, Svāhā; Agni, the instigation of speech, Svāhā. To Prajapati Manu, Svāhā ; to Agni Vaisvānara, Svāhā.
10.13.2	Then, having taken four spoonfuls in the ladle, and having filled the ladle with clarified butter, he offers the Udgrahana oblation with the verse, "May all men choose friendship with the leader of the gods. May all be eager for wealth. Choose the splendour. You prosper. Svāhā."
10.13.3	Here he places the full vessel inside the altar.
10.13.4	Then, having gone around in front of the Ahavaniya fire, he gives it to the sacrificer.
10.13.5	Then he asks for the principal potsherd.
10.13.6	Having strewn the potsherds and the purified grass, he pours the clarified butter into the potsherd on the end of the fire-altar with the two formulas, "Do not be broken, be firm."
10.13.7	Then he hands it over to him with the verse, "This potsherd is yours, may it not be broken. I am handing it over to you, may it not break."
10.13.8	Now indeed it is said:
10.13.9	If it were to break, one should repair it with the same potsherds.
10.13.10	If it breaks, one should grind the same potsherards, mix it with the clay that is kept aside for expiation, make it, cook it, and place it.
10.13.11	Then one makes another.
10.13.12	Now indeed it is said:
10.13.13	He should place it on the fire for one who desires food, from Ambarīṣa.
10.13.14	Now indeed it is said:
10.13.15	"If one desires, 'May I generate a rival sacrificer for him,' one should place it after taking it from another."
10.13.16	Now indeed it says:
10.13.17	"If he has lost his prosperity, one should place it having churned."
10.13.18	Now indeed they say:
10.13.19	He who desires prosperity should offer it to the Ukhā. It should be his alone.
10.13.20	He places the Muñja grass on that which is produced from the heat of the Ukhā, saying, "The vigorous form of yours, O Agni, which has entered the plants, I offer it with this (grass). Svāhā!"
10.13.21	Then he puts down the Krmuka-twig smeared with ghee with the verse, "O Agni, thou art the food, the ghee, the nourishment."
10.13.22	Then he puts down the twigs of the Vaikankata and the Sami trees with the verses, "On the highest of the worlds" for the Vaikankati twig and "On the highest, the highest of the world" for the Sami twig.
10.13.23	Then he consecrates the child with three verses, "Do thou sit on the lap of this thy mother."
10.13.24	Then he lays down five Samidhs of Udumbara wood.
10.14.1	"Whatsoever Agni eats, whatever it is, and what it eats with its tongue, night after night, without ceasing, the armies of the earth which are the destroyers, "thus he says."
10.14.2	Then he worships him with the five-verse Rakshas-destroying hymn, "Do thou, O Agni, make the path easy to traverse, the earth, the wide one, "thus he recites.
10.14.3	Then he places three twigs of different trees, reciting, "With the fangs, the Malimbas," (he places) the twig of the ashvattha tree; "The Malimbas among the people," (he places the twig of) the vaikankata tree; "He who is hostile to us," (he places a twig of) the shalmali tree.
10.14.4	Then, reciting the verse, "May my firm Brahmanic power be superior to these arms," he places the Udumbara wood on the fire.
10.14.5	He makes the sacrificer recite on the black antelope skin.
10.14.6	He does not make a fist and does not restrain speech.
10.14.7	Then he places the stool with loose straps and ropes at the rear of the sacrificial post.
10.14.8	In that pot he places the Ukhā, having surrounded it with the Indras.
10.15.1	"Just as a mother holds her son, so does the Earth hold the Agni-pot in its own womb. May Prajapati, the creator of all, unite it with all the gods and seasons."
10.15.2	Then, while seated, he releases the golden object towards the north, saying, "The golden one is seen."
10.15.3	Then he releases the noose of the snare, releasing all forms. The wise one, with the two verses, "For the night and the morning..."
10.15.4	Silently, the black antelope skin is placed on top.
10.15.5	Then he looks at him, saying, "Thou art Suparna, the Garutman, thy head is three-fold, thy eye is the Stoma, thy body is the Sama, thy body is Vamadevya, thy wings are Brihat and Rathantara, thy tail is the Yagyayajniya, thy limbs are the metres, thy joints are the sacrificial posts, thy names are the Yajuses."
10.15.6	Then he takes it up with the verse, "Thou art Suparna, Garutman, go to heaven, O lord of wealth."
10.15.7	In front of him are made long nooses of leather.
10.15.8	He steps on it or lifts it up.
10.16.1	The verse of Vishnu, the destroyer of enemies, mounts the Gayatri metre, and conquers the earth. He who is devoted to him whom we hate, with four verses in succession.
10.16.2	In the third, he repeats the fourth.
10.16.3	He does not proceed to the fourth.
10.16.4	One does not go to the Ahavaniya.
10.16.5	Then he recites the verse, "Then he cries out." He turns to the right shoulder and recites the four verses, "O Agni, turning back, O Agni Angiras, again with energy and wealth."
10.16.6	Then, turning to the north, releasing the black antelope skin, he releases the noose of the sling, reciting the verse, "Release the highest noose of Varuna from us."
10.16.7	Then he brings it with the two verses, "I have brought thee, O great one, thou hast stood up among the dawns."
10.16.8	Here he whom one desires to be a king and have a kingdom, should mentally think of him.
10.16.9	He indeed becomes a king and has a kingdom.
10.16.10	Then he places him within the altar, having brought him back as he was brought, with the four Sāṁsā formulas, "Do thou sit on the lap of this mother."
10.16.11	Here he makes a fist and restrains speech.
10.16.12	Then, about to give him the vow, he places the Annapatiya twig or mutters, "O Lord of Food, give us food."
10.16.13	Then he kindles the fire-pan with the verse, "By which the gods of light have ascended upwards."
10.16.14	He does so only when he is about to give the vow. He places the fire-pan on the ground and recites the verse, "The fire-pan is kindled by the gods."
10.16.15	Then, when the sun has risen in the morning and the speech has been released, he stands up with the Vatsapra (hymn), with this eleven-verse hymn: "Agni was born first around the heaven."
10.16.16	He proceeds in the same way on the previous day and stands up on the following day.
10.16.17	Then on his Upavasatha day, the Vatsapras are completed for him.
10.17.1	Now, then, the deliberation on the departure.
10.17.2	The initiated one, having obtained the blessings of the gods, is released from the vow.
10.17.3	They bind the calves of the two cows that give the vow.
10.17.4	What is to be placed is placed: the Garhapatya in the nest, the Ahavaniya in the Prāg.
10.17.5	Then they raise the Ukhā, saying, "The All-gods raise you."
10.17.6	Then he places him on the lap of the mother with four verses, "Do thou sit on the lap of this mother."
10.17.7	Then they fasten the legs of the couch to the planks as best they can.
10.17.8	They attach a noose of grass to the middle bamboo.
10.17.9	Having ascended the two fires, he goes forth, saying, "Go to the good, go to the better." With two (verses) he says, "O Agni, go with light."
10.17.10	If he releases the dice, he recites this verse, "He cried out."
10.17.11	Then, when the ghee-besmeared kindling-wood has been placed, he places it with the verse, "The kindling-wood and Agni are to be worshipped with ghee. May the guest be awakened. Offer oblations to him. Svāhā." With the Gāyatrī metre for the Brāhmaṇa, "May Agni listen to the Bharata king." With the Tristubh metre for the Rājanya.
10.17.12	When one is about to go on a journey, one does all this.
10.18.1	Now, then, the investigation of ashes that have become too much.
10.18.2	If the ashes have become too much, he prepares a piece of iron and tongs.
10.18.3	Taking this, they go to where there is water, and make it hot.
10.18.4	Then, having taken this Agni with tongs, and having placed it in a vessel, he introduces the ashes into water with a ladle, with the three verses in anuṣṭubh metre: "The divine waters receive the ashes. This is thy womb, O Agni, this is thy seed, this is thy place among the plants."
10.18.5	Then he covers him with the two Jyotishmatī verses, "May the ashes be settled again, may the womb be settled again, and the house." With two verses.
10.18.6	Then he rises again with the two verses, "Again with energy, with wealth."
10.18.7	Then he kindles the fire again with the verse, "May the Adityas, Rudras, Vasus kindle you again.
10.18.8	Then, having brought it back as it was taken, standing in the place of the sacrificer, he attends to it, saying, "Be enlightened! Be enlightened!" from the end of the Anuvaka.
10.18.9	He does all this just as much as the ashes increase.
10.18.10	Then from here he retires for the night, from the preparations.
10.19.1	Then from this day onwards, the Upavasatha (day) of the purchase (of Soma) begins.
10.19.2	He prepares five hundred bricks, an unlimited number of bricks for the southern quarter, three black ones cooked in chaff, ashes, dung, dust and sand.
10.19.3	On the day of fasting, he determines the divine sacrifice with the two verses, "This is the path of the gods, the path of the righteous, the path that leads to heaven."
10.19.4	Then he measures out the great altar, having measured out the steps of the sacrificial post, and having measured out the space for the altar by the span, he measures it around with the span.
10.19.5	He measures it around with a string.
10.19.6	Then he measures out the fire-altar, facing east, from the post-hole of the sacrificial post and the hole of the stake, with a bamboo of the size of a man, with even wings and tail.
10.19.7	The wings are longer by the span.
10.19.8	He may be of six kinds, seven kinds, twelve kinds, or as many kinds as he may be intended to be.
10.19.9	Then, having measured him with a measuring-rod, he encloses him on all sides with a line.
10.19.10	He draws a line along the line.
10.19.11	Having removed the line, they dig the furrow.
10.19.12	They raise the posts.
10.19.13	And the southern and western ones are the youngest.
10.19.14	This much is the work done on this day.
10.19.15	They spend this night.
10.19.16	Then the Adhvaryu, having hastened at the end of the night, instructs (the sacrificer), "Do you milk the cow with three udders."
10.19.17	Then having placed this Agni on the ground, they kindle it on the southern side and sit down.
10.19.18	Then he smears the fire-place with a ball of cow-dung.
10.19.19	In it he lays four bricks lengthwise, two in front and two behind.
10.19.20	Then he encloses it on the right side with thirteen bricks.
10.19.21	He draws lines between the bricks.
10.19.22	Having removed the bricks, they dig out the trench.
10.19.23	The fires are raised up without (the help of) the sky.
10.19.24	They make the fires in the south and in the west smaller.
10.20.1	Then he takes Agni in himself with two verses, "I take Agni first in myself, Agni who is ours."
10.20.2	He mutters the Svayambhuva verse, "Those are thy kindling woods, O Agni, those are thy abodes."
10.20.3	Having touched the white horse, he places this (brick) with a hole in it with the formula, "May Prajapati place thee; may it be firm like Angiras with that deity."
10.20.4	Here he places the materials with the formulas, "Thou art the ash of Agni," "Thou art the dung of Agni," "thou art the sand," "Thou art what is to be desired." "May what is to bedesired be in me."
10.20.5	Then he joins them together, "May your dear bodies be joined together, may your dear hearts be joined together, your soul be joined together. May your bodies be joined together."
10.20.6	Then he arranges them, "May heaven and earth be arranged, may the waters and plants be arranged, may Agni be arranged separately for my supremacy, with the same vows."
10.20.7	Then he lays down the Upadha bricks with the verse, "May the Cit, Paricita and Upadha bricks be firm, may they be firm with that deity, like Angiras. May they be firm."
10.20.8	Then he arranges them with the verse, “May you grow.” With the Gayatri verse for the Brahman, “May your streams of milk be united.” With the Tristubh verse for the Rajanya.
10.20.9	He arranges them as well as he can, as much as he can.
10.21.3	Two (bricks) at the back, the one on the right is called 'Samachi', the one on the left is called 'Parichi'.
10.21.4	Then he encloses it with thirteen Lokamprana bricks, turning to the right: 'Fill the world, fill the gap, be thou gracious. Indra and Agni have settled thee in this womb, and Brihaspati.'
10.21.5	With that deity he makes it; with that deity it becomes firm like Angiras.
10.21.6	Then he performs the Sudadohasam (i.e. the offering of milk to the Sudadohas). Those Sudadohas churn the Soma, the shining ones, the birth of the gods, in the three luminous regions of heaven.
10.21.7	Then having approached and touching the black horse, he places it with the body and excreta, saying, "Pressed in heaven."
10.21.8	Having made that the deity, he performs the Sūda-dohāna. Thus the first layer is completed.
10.21.9	In the same way, the second is completed, the third, the fourth, and the fifth.
10.21.10	If one wishes, when the sun rises, the Adhvaryu, silent, is followed by the sacrificer.
10.21.11	The Adhvaryu takes up the Ukhā, the Pratiprasthātṛ takes up the Prati-sāmedha.
10.21.12	They put down the Ukhā and the Prati-sămedha in front of each other with four verses.
10.21.13	Then he puts the Ukhā into the Sikatā.
10.22.1	Like a mother her son, the earth has placed Agni, the protector, in his own womb, in the cauldron. May Prajapati, the creator of all, the one who knows all seasons, release it.
10.22.2	They say, "Do not look at it," for it is indeed a source of misfortune.
10.22.3	While looking elsewhere, he drops curds on it, saying, "I place this pure curd on you" or silently. Having filled it with sand, he covers it with curd and places it in the northern part of the shed.
10.22.4	In the same way, he fills the second one, and the third one.
10.22.5	They remain until the time.
10.22.6	Then he takes up the girdle of Vaishvānara (fire) with the verse, "That bright light which has arisen beyond the world, may that protect us from the enemy."
10.22.7	Then he asks for the following things: three black beans cooked in chaff, a stool, a piece of gold, and a water pot.
10.22.8	Having taken this, he goes out by the southern door, and goes in that direction where his own created pit or hole is clearly visible.
10.22.9	He places this lasso-like noose, saying, "O Agni Vaisvānara, svāhā!"
10.22.10	He places the noose of the snare towards the south, saying, "Salutations to thee, O Nirriti, of various forms. The goddess Nirriti has bound thee. I offer to thee, O cruel one, of this one."
10.22.11	He sits on the stool, holding the golden thread.
10.22.12	Then he stands up with the two verses, "I desire to worship the goddess Nirriti, the giver of wealth, the giver of food."
10.22.13	Then having sprinkled water, they return without looking back at the vessel.
10.22.14	Having washed their hands and feet, they return by the same way and stand by the Garhapatya with the verse, "The dwelling place, the meeting place of riches."
10.22.15	Some people perform the Upasad rites in front of the Ahavaniya fire, saying, "This will be the Garhapatya fire hereafter."
10.23.1	He performs the Prāyaniya rite.
10.23.2	Having performed the Prāyaniy a rite, he performs the Pada rite.
10.23.3	Having perforined the Pada rite, he purchases the king and offers the Atithya oblation.
10.23.4	Having performed Atithya rite, he performs with the first two rites of Pravargya and Upasad.
10.23.5	Then having gone out, he says to the Subrahmaṇya, "Invite the Subrahmaṇaṇyā and give the Triṣṭanavrata."
10.23.6	The Subrahmaṇyā is invited.
10.23.7	The Triṣṭanāvrata is given.
10.23.8	He first takes four steps backwards from the tail, then the fifth step towards the south.
10.23.9	He places the spade.
10.23.10	This is the time for the Uparava-stones.
10.23.11	Then from the northern end of the altar, he measures twelve steps towards the west, and thirteen towards the east.
10.23.12	The Agnidhra sits down there.
10.23.13	This is time for the mound.
10.23.14	Then from this time for the Upavasatha-stones, he carries the Stambayajus.
10.23.15	This is well known.
10.23.16	The Purodāsa is offered three times with the Yajus, and once silently.
10.23.17	He takes up the Parigraha first.
10.23.18	He recites the Karana.
10.23.19	The Agnidhra takes it three times from the Uddhat.
10.23.20	When the Agnidhra has taken it three times, standing in front of the Sāla, he gives the order: "The makers of the altar make the altar."
10.23.21	They do as they are ordered.
10.23.22	Then they put on the sandals, saying, "Thou art the mind of the sacrifice," the Adhvaryu; "Thou art the accomplished sacrifice," the Pratiprasthātṛ; "Thou art of the mind of the Tapas," the Brahman; "Thou art Tapas," the sacrificer; "Thou art accomplished, thou art accomplished," all (say).
10.23.23	Or else, he may request silently, the bow, the arrow, the four stones, the brick for Indra, the division, the water-pot, the bunch of darbha-grass, the dūrvā grass, the vessel of clarified butter with the strainer.
10.23.24	Taking this, they place it at the end of the northern hip.
10.23.25	Then with two (verses) he takes Agni in himself, with the words, "I take Agni first in myself; Agni who is ours."
10.23.26	He mutters the Svayambhuva verses, "Those thy kindling woods, O Agni, those thy abodes;
10.23.27	Having touched the white horse, he places this (horse) with the bones inside. Prajapati should settle you. May you be settled with that deity like Angiras.
10.23.28	Then he takes up the bow and four stones with arrows.
10.23.29	Taking this, he goes around the fire with his right side towards it, and standing in front of the stake of the sacrificial post, he places the bow with the string attached and the arrow with the point towards himself.
10.24.1	"He strikes it, saying, "Thou art Indra's thunderbolt, the slayer of Vrtra, the protector of our bodies, the repeller of our enemies."
10.24.2	Having removed the stone, he places it down with the formula, "May he who harms us from the front meet this stone."
10.24.3	Then on the right side of the right wing, he strikes the arrow with a stone-pellet.
10.24.4	Having removed the stone, one places it down with "May he who hurts us from the right side..."
10.24.5	Then he throws the arrow with the tip of the stone towards the tail of the tail, towards the future.
10.24.6	He places the stone with the formula, "He who is behind us."
10.24.7	Then he throws the arrow towards the northern part of the northern wing, towards the future, with the tip of a stone.
10.24.8	He places a stone with the formula "He who is to the north of us."
10.24.9	This is the Brahmaṇa concerning the placing of the stones in the directions.
10.24.10	Having made her the deity, he performs the Sūda and Doha rites.
10.24.11	Then he places the Indra-brick for the purpose of stepping on it, with the verse, "Protect this (brick), O Indra, who is the most vigorous, the most powerful, the most brilliant, the bull, the most intelligent, the one who breaks the lineage, the wielder of the thunderbolt, the most tawny, the one who binds the variegated horses, the most brilliant."
10.24.12	Having made it the deity, he performs the Sūdadohas.
10.24.13	Then he places the Vibhakti on the right side, saying, "O Agni, come with the Vītayas."
10.24.14	Having made it the deity,
10.24.15	Then having approached, he takes out the peg which is made of his own mother's wood, and having placed the water-vessel, he places the darbha-bunch, saying, "May speech place thee in the ocean." Or silently.
10.24.16	Then he offers it with five oblations with the ladle, saying, "The year with its companions has come."
10.24.17	Then he lays down the Dūrvā grass, with the verse, "May the Dūrvās grow with flowers, in the path or in the shelter, or may there be a lake with lotuses."
10.24.18	Having made it the deity, he performs the Sūda and Doha rites.
10.24.19	Then for her, a yoke of ploughs made of Udumbara wood is prepared in front of her.
10.25.1	It is either six-oxen or twelve-oxen.
10.25.2-5	He touches his plough with the verse, "May the ploughs be united, may they be united, may the ploughs be joined together. May the ploughs be yoked together." With two verses. He yokes the ploughs with the verse, “The ploughs are yoked, the ploughs are yoking, the ploughs and ploughs are yokable. May the plough be yoked to the ploughs.” With two verses.  He ploughs with the plough with the verse,“May the plough be yokable, may the plough be yokeable. May the plough plough the furrows.” With two verses.
10.25.6	He ploughs three furrows from the tail towards the east.
10.25.7	Three furrows towards the right shoulder from the left shoulder.
10.25.8	Three furrows from the left shoulder towards the right shoulder.
10.25.9	Three towards the left wing from the right wing.
10.25.10	Then, having released them, having circumambulated to the right, having sprinkled them with water, he releases them towards the north.
10.25.11	These become the Adhvaryu's if one performs with Dakshina.
10.25.12	If the fire is for a Sattra, they release it according to the cattle.
10.25.13	Where there are oxen, there is a yoke and a plough.
10.25.14	Then on this side of it, in the Udumbara pot, he puts all the herbs mixed with curds and ghee.
10.25.15	He first sows three rows towards the east, beginning from the tail, with the verse, "Those herbs that have been born," with three verses in the Anucchada metre.
10.25.16	Towards the north, on the shoulder, he sows three times towards the right shoulder.
10.25.17	The right shoulder is touched with three (verses).
10.25.18	The left shoulder is touched with five (verses).
10.25.19	One who offers the sacrifice with fourteen (verses) is a Brahman.
10.25.20	Then he mixes the clods from the directions.
10.25.21	Having run towards the east, he takes a clod from outside the gravel.
10.25.22	He places it inside the gravel.
10.26.1	"May the one who is born from the earth not harm us."
10.26.2	Then, running along the right wing, he takes a stone from outside the gravel.
10.26.3	Placing it inside the gravel, he says, "Return, O Earth."
10.26.4	Then, having run along the tail, he takes a lump of earth from outside the gravel.
10.26.5	He places the one with the ashes inside, with the verse, "O Agni, whatever is bright and whatever is bright in you."
10.26.6	Then, having followed the northern half of the sacrificial ground, he takes two clods outside the ashes, with the verse "I take the strength and energy from here."
10.26.7	He places one of them with the ashes inside with the verse, “May it enter our cows and plants."
10.26.8	He excludes the other direction in which his enemy may be. He says, "I abandon the direction of the evil ones."
10.26.9	One should advance towards that direction. This is one view.
10.26.10	One should change the direction by reciting the Yajus. This is another view.
10.26.11	Then from the northern end of the Mahāvedi, he measures three steps towards the west, along the edge of the Vedi, and one step towards the north.
10.26.12	He draws the line around the Cātvāla, which is covered.
10.26.13	He spreads the Uttaravedi, which is covered, with sand.
10.26.14	Having levelled the northern navel, he scatters sand with the six Anucchada verses beginning with "O Agni, your fame is our fame."
10.26.15	Then he lays down the Upadha bricks with the verse, "May the Cit, Paricita and Upadha bricks be firm, may they be firm with that deity, like Angiras. May they be firm."
10.26.16	Then he arranges them with the verse, “May you grow.” With the Gayatri verse for the Brahman, “May your streams of milk be united.” With the Tristubh verse for the Rajanya.
10.26.17	He arranges them as well as he can, as much as he can.
10.27.1	Then he lays down this great altar, either in front of the hall or on a raised platform, on a skin, twenty-two bundles of darbha grass, sprinkling with milk, sprinkling with ghee, a horse, the northern altar, the requisite materials, twelve jars with the Barhaspatya bricks, as many gold plates, a hundred pitchers of water, a lotus leaf, gold, a golden man, two ladles, the head of a serpent, all the self-sown plants, ten bundles of reeds, and whatever else is to be laid down. He also has curds mixed with honey, a tortoise, a wooden mortar and pestle, all herbs, a wooden trough, and the heads of animals.
10.27.2	He sprinkles the fires with twenty-two Darbha grass-blades, having dipped them in milk, saying, "I sprinkle the fires for the fires, for the agreeable ones," or silently.
10.27.3	"May Agni be kindled by Agni," while sprinkling with clarified butter.
10.27.4	Then he gives the instruction, "Recite while the fires are being led out."
10.27.5	If the Hotṛ does not desire, the sacrificer himself recites this one verse three times: "The fires are the purifiers." Then they proceed with Agni at the head.
10.27.6	Then he runs towards the east with that horse.
10.28.1	"He has overcome all enemies,"
10.28.2	Then he instructs him as he steps on the right shoulder: "When you cried out first being born,
10.28.3	They place it on the northern end of the thighs.
10.28.4	Then he takes Agni on himself with two verses, "I take Agni first on myself, Agni who is ours."
10.28.5	He murmurs the Svayambhuva verse, "Those are thy kindling woods, O Agni, those are thy abodes."
10.28.6	Having touched the white horse, he runs forward with the formula, "This is the way of the waters, salutations to it." With two formulas.
10.28.7	Then he places the hundred at the junction of the tail and the junction of the self.
10.28.8	Then he pours water from the pot.
10.29.2	In the same way, having filled it up and having placed it thus, he places the Anusīta brick in the northernmost layer of bricks, in the third and fourth layers.
10.29.3	In the same way, having filled it up and having placed it thus, he places the Anusīta brick in the middle of those bricks which are drawn towards the right side of the naturally perforated stone, on the fifth and sixth days.
10.29.4	In the same way, having filled it up and having placed it thus, he places the stone of his own accord which is drawn from the northern shoulder at the equinox, on the seventh and eighth days.
10.29.5	In the same way, having filled it up and having placed it thus, he places the Anusīta brick in the middle of those bricks which run from the southern wing to the naturally perforated one, on the ninth and tenth days.
10.29.6	Similarly, having filled it and having placed it, he places the Upadadhā-bricks in the northern half of the altar, in the middle of the northern half of that altar, in the southern half of the northern half, in the middle, in the northern half, and in the southern half.
10.29.7	In the middle of those (bricks) he places the one pertaining to Brhaspati with the verse, "May you be in heaven, may you be in the atmosphere, may you be born in the earth. You are Brahmavamsa; for Brahmavamsa you are."
10.29.8	The Brāhmaṇa says, "He places it after having sown."
10.29.9	Having made it the deity, he performs the Sūdadohasa rite.
10.30.1	Then he adorns the northern altar with the northern altar.
10.30.2	Then on the northern altar, he places a lotus leaf, saying, "You are the back of the waters."
10.30.3	Having made that the deity, he offers the Sūdadohasas.
10.30.4	Then on the northern altar he places the golden image of the northern direction, with the verse, "Brahman, the unborn, the imperishable, the lord of all creatures."
10.30.5	Then he sprinkles it with fivefold water, with the verse,"Do thou make the earth firm and strong."
10.30.6	Then on the right side he places the golden man facing east, with the verse "Hiranyagarbha, the golden embryo, was born first."
10.30.7	Then he touches him with the verse, "The drop has fallen down."
10.30.8	Having made him the deity, he performs the Sūda and Doha rites.
10.30.9	Then at the time of the subsequent step, he places the two ladles, filled with ghee, made of Kārṣmarya wood, filled with curds, made of Udumbara wood, the southern one made of Kārshmarya wood, the northern one made of Udumbāra wood, saying, "This one is of Kārṣmrya wood," and "That one is of Udumbara," mentally.
10.30.10	Having made it divine, he performs the Sūdadohas.
10.30.11	Then on the right forehead he places the head of the serpent with the three verses, "Let there be salutations to the serpents."
10.30.12	Or if one thinks that the fear of the people of the country is from the serpent,
10.30.13	Having made it the deity, one performs the Sūdadaohasa.
10.31.1	Then he makes it with the Yajus, "Thou art firm, thou art the firmest, thou art spread by the all-creator, thou art well-made. May not the ocean drown thee, may not the Suparna (eagle) injure thee. Thou spreadest the earth without injury."
10.31.2	Then having made her smell the horse, he places her on the fire together with the ignorant Brāhmaṇa, reciting the verse, "May the breaths of this man be united with the breaths, may they not be separated. May Prajapati place thee on the earth." Having recited this, he recites, "May Agni protect thee with the great, with prosperity, with the most peaceful, with that deity, may it be firm like Angiras."
10.31.3	Having placed the first layer of grass, he breathes in, saying, "I place the first layer of the grass."
10.31.4	He breathes in.
10.31.5	Then this Brahman gives a boon.
10.31.6	Then, having taken four spoonfuls in the ladle, he offers in the space of the self-made layer, saying, "Offering to the mind with ghee."
10.31.7	With the two thumbs he recites the Anvarohana verse, "I have stepped on the earth, may the vital breath not leave me."
10.31.8	On the other side of the pit, he places a golden brick, reciting, "You are brilliance, grant me brilliance, grant the earth, protect me from the earth."
10.31.9	At the time of stepping down, he places the Mandaleṣṭaka brick on the ground, with the formula, "May the earth be the receptacle of food."
10.31.10	To the right, he places the Retahsik brick, with the formula "The earth is the receptacle of semen. May it deposit semen for me. May it generate semen for me."
10.31.11	Having made it the deity, he performs the Sūdadohas.
10.32.1	Then he lays down these ten Skandhyas in the eastern direction: two Rtavyas, two Dviyajus, Viraj, Visvajyoti, Sayuj, Ashadha, and two Samyanis.
10.32.2	He lays down the Rtavyas with the verses, "Madhu and Madhava."
10.32.3	He lays down Avaka with the verse, "Thou art the womb of Agni."
10.32.4	Then he lays down the two bricks of the Dviyajus formula, with the verses, "Growing from one end to another, she who extends herself by a hundred," and "The two Dūrvā bricks."
10.32.5	Then he lays down the brick with the golden head, with the verses "Those thy rays, O Agni, in the sun, those thy rays, O gods, in the sun."
10.32.6	And the Viraj and the Vishvajyoti, the Viraj and Jyoti, Brihaspati has supported. Let Brihaspati place thee.
10.32.7	Then he places the Sayuj (brick) with the formula, "I yoke thee with Indra and Agni, with the Sayuj and Yuja."
10.32.8	Then he places on the northern end the Ashada brick marked with three lines with the formula, "Thou art Ashada, the supporter."
10.32.9	Then he places the two (bricks) of the vehicle, with the formulas, "O Agni, thou art the vehicle of the gods; O Agni, thou art of the gods."
10.32.10	Having made it the deity, he performs the Sūdadohas.
10.33.1	Then, sitting to the north of the three-lined (brick), he asks for curds mixed with honey and a tortoise.
10.33.2	He anoints him with curds mixed with honey, with the three verses in anuṣṭubh metre, "The wind blows for the truth-speaking one, the wind blows for the truthful one, the wind is the truth-speaking wind."
10.33.3	Then, having encircled him with a bundle of grass, he places him in front, facing west, with two verses, "May the great heaven, the earth, and the four directions move as fires."
10.33.4	Then he strikes him with stakes all around, to prevent him from moving away.
10.33.5	Having made him the deity, he performs the Suddohasam.
10.33.6	Standing here only, he asks for a wooden mortar and pestle and all herbs.
10.33.7	The mortar is of the size of a span, and the pestle is of the size an arm-span.
10.33.8	In it he places all the herbs, saying, "This is the share of strength, this is the purifying of strength, strength is food, for the sake of food."
10.33.9	Then he places it at the northern end of the path, saying, "That is Vishnu's supreme abode."
10.33.10	He makes the pestle at the northern end.
10.33.11	Having made it the deity, he performs the Soodadoha.
10.33.12	Then he asks for the chief and the mouth.
10.33.13-16	In that (fire-pan) which is the receptacle of the waters, he offers two oblations with the ladle. "He offers in the southern pit with the formula, "O Agni, do thou yoke those who are thine," and in the northern pit with the formula "Do thou yoke those who have been invoked by the gods." Then he places it on the northern side at the time of moving forward with the formula, "Thou art firm, O Earth, do thou bear the foe." He makes the other one on the northern side with the formula, "Thou art the receptacle of the world."
10.33.17	Having made that the deity, he performs the Sūda and Doha.
10.33.18	Then he asks for the head of a man.
10.33.19	He places gold plates on his vital breaths.
10.33.20	"Drapsa has fallen," on the mouth.
10.33.21	"This was the strength of the universe," on the right nostril.
10.33.22	"Of Agni Vaisvānara," on the left.
10.33.23	Agni is the light, the luminous one. This is on the right eye.
10.33.24	The bright one is the radiance, the radiant one. This is the left eye.
10.33.25	"O Richi, to you." This is on the left ear.
10.33.26	"O Ruche, to you." The right ear.
10.33.27	Then taking four spoonfuls in the ladle, he offers on the right eye, "The bright army of the gods has risen."
10.33.28	Having taken another four spoonfuls, he offers on the northern axle with the verse, "The variegated is the gods."
10.33.29	He offers with the same verse. This is the Brahmanical statement.
10.33.30	Then he fills it with curd mixed with honey with the verse, "The rivers flow together like the Dhenus," up to the end of the chapter.
10.33.31	Then he places it in the pan with the mouth facing east.
10.34.1-3	Having recited the verse, "Aditya, the embryo, is being united with milk," and having recited the verse, “Do not harm this two-footed animal,” he releases the pure (fire) in the direction of the wild goat. He places a golden brick on the forehead, reciting, "Vishvakarman, the lord of directions."
10.34.4	Then, having sat down facing east with his back towards the fire, he places the head of the horse within himself, reciting, "The swiftness of the wind, the navel of Varuna." Having recited this, he says, "Do not harm this one-hoofed animal of the animals."
10.34.5	He releases the pure (animal) reciting, "I direct you to the wild cow."
10.34.6	He places a golden brick on the forehead, reciting, "Prajapati, the lord of the directions."
10.34.7	Then, having sat down facing east, he places the head of the bull within himself, reciting the verse "The ever-flowing, reddish, and moving Indra" and then "This ocean with a hundred streams, this lake".
10.34.8	He releases the pure (water) reciting the verse "I offer you the wild gavaya (animal)."
10.34.9	He places a golden brick on the forehead, reciting the verse "Rudra, the lord of the directions."
10.34.10	Then, having sat down facing the south, he places the head of Vṛṣaṇi within himself, reciting, "The head of Vṛṇa, the navel of Tvaṣṭr and Varuna." Having recited this, he releases the wool of Varuna's illusion.
10.34.11	He releases the wool, reciting, "I follow the wild camel in your direction."
10.34.12	He places a golden brick on the forehead, reciting, "Varuna, the lord of directions."
10.34.13	Then, sitting to the north facing south, he places the head of the sheep within himself, reciting, "The Agni who is born from Agni's heat," and then, "The sheep was born from Agni' s womb."
10.34.14	He releases the sheep, saying, "I follow the wild sheep."
10.34.15	He places the golden brick on the forehead with the verse, "Agni is the lord of directions."
10.34.16	Having placed it at the ends, one should place it in the middle. This is the Brahmanical text.
10.34.17	Having made it the deity, one performs the Sūdadohas.
10.35.1	Then he places the Apasyā brick.
10.35.2	"I place thee in the water." Having thus placed five bricks towards the east, five towards the south, five towards the west, five towards the north, he places the five bricks of the Chhandasya.
10.35.3	Having made it a deity, he performs the Soodadohas.
10.35.4	Then he lays down the Prāṇabhṛt (brick) with the verse, "This is the eastern quarter, its Prāṇa is Bhāuvāyana, the spring, the Prāṇāyana, the Gāyatrī, the spring, to Gāyatrī the Gāyatra, from Gāyatra the Upāṃśu, from Upāṃśus the Trivṛt, from Trivṛt the Rathantara, from Rathantara the sage Vasiṣṭha. With thee taken by Prajāpati, I take Prāṇa for the subjects."
10.35.5	He extends ten towards the east, saying, "This is the self-born, this is the southern, this is the Vishvakarman."
10.35.6	He extends ten towards the south, saying, "this is the self-grown, this is the western, this is the Visvavyacha."
10.35.7	He extends十 towards the west, saying, " this is the self-generated, this is the northern, this is the Suvar."
10.35.8	He extends 十 towards the north, saying, " This is the self-produced, this is the upper, this is the Mati."
10.35.9-13	He makes the offering in the eastern direction. He makes the offering in a clockwise manner from the eastern direction. He makes the offering from the eastern direction, then from the southern direction, then from the western direction, then from above, then from the northern direction, then from below, then from the eastern direction again. He makes offerings in the eastern direction, in the southern direction, in the western direction, in the northern direction, in the southeastern direction, in the southwestern direction, in the northwestern direction, in the northeastern direction, in the upper direction, and in the lower direction. He offers in the eastern direction ten times in a clockwise manner. The Brahmana text says, "He places the eyes." Having made it the deity, he performs the Soodadohasa. Then he places the Samyata, saying, "I extend the life and breath." Three times in each of the three directions, not in the middle. Having made it a deity, he performs Soodadohasa.
10.35.14	Then he lays down the Apānabhṛt brick, with the verse, "The eastern direction, the spring season, Agni the deity, the Brahman as wealth, the Trivrt stoma, it has fifteen steps, the three-fold age, the wind blowing in front, the wind with the ocean, the sage."
10.35.15	He recites, "The fathers, the grandfathers."
10.35.16	To the south, he extends ten lines towards the west, saying, "The self-sprout towards the southern direction."
10.35.17	To the rear, he extends ten towards the north, saying, "the self-sprout to the northern direction."
10.35.18	To north, he extends ten to the east, saying, "self-sprout to eastern direction."
10.35.19	With the ten Pranabhṛt bricks he lays down the Svayambhuva brick towards the east, towards the upward direction.
10.35.20	With the ten Pranabhrit bricks he encloses it from above in the reverse direction.
10.35.21	This is the Brahmaṇa text.
10.35.22	The Citī is obtained with the Apānabṛt bricks.
10.35.23	Having made it the deity, he performs the Sūdadohas.
10.35.24	Then he piles up Agni with all the faces.
10.36.1	He places the Gayatri verse in front, the Tristubh in the south, the Jagati in the west, the Anushtubh in the north, and the Pankti in the middle.
10.36.2	Having made it the deity, he performs the Soodadohas.
10.36.3	Then he lays down the limbs of Agni: "I place thee in the eastern direction, with the Gayatri metre, with Agni as the deity, I lay down the head of Agni, the head of Agni. I place thee in the southern direction, I place thee in thee western direction, I place tee in the northern direction, I place the in the upward direction, with the Paṅkti metre."
10.36.4	Having made it the deity, he performs the Sūdadohas.
10.36.5	Then he places the Prajapatya in the north, saying, "The image of the year."
10.36.6	He places the bull facing east at the end of the advance, towards the rear, saying, "You, O Agni, the bull, the wise."
10.36.7	Having made it the deity,
10.36.8	Then he lays down the Lokampranas (bricks) with the verses, "Fill up the world, fill up the void, and then be settled. Thou art auspicious. Indra and Agni have settled thee in this womb. Brihaspati has settled thee in this abode."
10.36.9	He makes it his deity. With that deity he settles himself firmly like Angiras.
10.36.10	Then he performs the Sudadohas. These Sudadohas press Soma for him. The Prashnas, the birth of the gods, in the three luminous (regions) of heaven.
10.36.11	Here he pours out with the Locmapranaya towards the east.
10.36.12	They cover Agni with the eastern ones.
10.36.13	He draws it around with a Palasha branch, saying, "Fill the world, fill the hole."
10.36.14	Then he touches the Citti-bricks with the formula, "The Citti and the Acitti, the knowing one has piled up."
10.36.15	Having touched the Citti-brick with the Gayatri verse addressed to Agni, he runs with two verses, "Speech was my friend, the giver of life."
10.36.16	Then he performs the evening Pravargya and Upasads.
10.36.17	This much of the rite is performed on this day.
10.36.18	They spend the night here.
10.37.1	Then on the second day, when the sun has risen, he proceeds with the Pravargya and Upasads.
10.37.2	Then the Adhvaryu and the sacrificer put on the black antelope skin. Then with two (verses) he takes Agni in himself, with the verses, "I take Agni first in myself; Agni who is ours,
10.37.3	He recites the Svayambhuva verse, "Those are thy kindling woods, O Agni, those are thy abodes."
10.37.4	Having touched the black horse with excrement, he places it with the verse, "Pressed in heaven."
10.37.5	Having made it the deity, he performs the Sūdadohasa rite.
10.37.6	Then he proceeds with the evening Pravargya and Upasads.
10.37.7	This much of the rite is performed on this day.
10.37.8	They spend the night here.
10.37.9	Then on the third day, when the sun has risen, he proceeds with the Pravargya and Upasads.
10.37.10	All of them put on black leather sandals.
10.37.11	Then he asks for a vessel of clarified butter with a ladle, a vessel for Vibhakti, a water pot, five bundles of grass, and whatever else is to be deposited.
10.37.12	Having taken this, they place it at the end of the thighs.
10.37.13	Then with two (verses) he takes Agni on himself, "I take Agni first on myself, Agni who is ours."
10.37.14	He murmurs the Svayamciti verse, "Those are thy kindling woods, O Agni, those are thy abodes."
10.37.15	Having touched the white horse, he proceeds with the formula, "This is the path of the waters, salutations to it." With two formulas.
10.37.16	Having proceeded, he offers the oblations collected in the first (Agnihotra) with the formulas, "O Agni, O ocean, I approach you."
10.37.17	He places the Vibhakti on the right side with the formula, “I choose Agni as the messenger.”
10.37.18	Having made it the deity, he performs the Sūdadohasa.
10.38.1	Then he lays down these five Skandhyas in the east, two Rtavya, two Sayuja, and one Samyani.
10.38.2	He lays down the Rtavya ones with the verses, "Bright and pure."
10.38.3	He lays down Avaka with the verse, "Thou art the womb of Agni."
10.38.4	Then he lays down the two connected ones with the two enclosing sticks, with the formula, "I unite thee with the two connected ones, with the two yoked ones, with thy lustre."
10.38.5	Then he lays down the connecting one with the formula, "Thou art the path of Vayu."
10.38.6	Having made it the deity, he performs the Sūdadohas.
10.38.7	Then he lays down the Ashvini bricks with the verses, "Firmly established, of firm origin" (the five bricks) one each in the directions and one in the middle.
10.38.8	Having made it a deity, he performs the Sūdadohas rite.
10.38.9	Then he lays down the Rtuvya bricks with the verses "Joining with the seasons, joining with the laws" (the five) one each in directions and one in middle.
10.38.10	The Samaanas and others are born. This is the Brahmanical Section.
10.38.11	Having made it the deity, one performs the Soodadohas.
10.38.12	Then he places the Pranabhrits, saying, "Protect my inhalation, protect my exhalation." One each in the five directions and one in the center.
10.38.13	Having made that the deity, one does the Soodadoha.
10.38.14	Then he lays down the five Nirrti-bricks, saying, "Thou art the rain, thou art the moisture, thou art the plants, thou art the growth." One in each of the four directions and one in the middle.
10.38.15	He lays them down in succession. So says the Brāhmaṇa.
10.38.16	Having made it the deity, he performs the Sūdadohas.
10.38.17	Then he lays down the four bricks beginning with the Mūrdhanvatī, saying, "We are the support," and the four Hamsapātinī in front.
10.38.18	Having made that the deity, he performs the Sūda and Doha.
10.38.19	Then he places the Vasas.
10.38.20	He places five Vasas on the southern hip with the verse, "We are the three-fold, we are the five-fold." He places five on the northern hip with the verse "We are the five-folds, we are the seven-folds."
10.38.21	He places one Vas on the southern shoulder with the verse "Vas is the bull."
10.38.22	He places another on the northern shoulder with the verse, “Vrsni is the bull.”
10.38.23	He places the Vyagra (stone) on the right wing.
10.38.24	The Simha (stone) on left wing.
10.38.25	The Purusha (stone) in the middle.
10.38.26	The Citi is obtained with the Purusha.
10.38.27	Having made it the deity, he performs the Soodadohas.
10.38.28	Then he builds the fire with all faces: The limbs of Agni, the bull of Prajapati, the Lokampranas,
10.38.29	The Udicya (priest) pours it out with the Lokampṛṇā (verse).
10.38.30	They cover the fire with the Udicya verses.
10.38.31	He draws it around with a Palāśa branch, reciting, "Fill the world, fill the gap."
10.38.32	Then he touches it with the Cittiklpti verse, "The one who knows the Citti and Acitti, he who knows well, he who knows the Cittis, he who knows all the Cittis, may he know us."
10.38.33	Having touched the Agniya layer with the Tristubh verse, he runs with two verses, "May speech be my friend, may breath be my friend."
10.38.34	Then he proceeds with the Apūrna and Pravargya rites of the afternoon.
10.38.35	This much of the rite is performed on this day.
10.38.36	They spend this night.
10.39.1	Then on the fourth day, when the sun has risen, he proceeds with the Pravargya and Upasads.
10.39.2	The placing of the potsherds is similar.
10.39.3	Then on the fifth day, when the Sun has risen, he performs the Pravargya-Upasads.
10.39.4	All wear black leather shoes.
10.39.5	Then he asks for the vessel of clarified butter with the ladle, the Vibhakti-vessel, the water-vessel, and all the grass that is to be spread out himself, and ten bundles of grass and the Avaka-grass, and whatever else is to be placed on it.
10.39.6	Taking this, they spread it out at the northern end of the shoulder.
10.39.7	Then with two (verses) he takes Agni in himself, with the words, "I take Agni first in myself; Agni who is ours."
10.39.8	He mutters the Svayambhuva verse, "Those thy kindling woods, O Agni, those thy abodes."
10.39.9	Touching a white horse, he runs forward, with the two verses, "This is the way of the waters; salutations to them."
10.39.10	Then, having approached the second (fire), he offers the accumulated oblations, saying, "O Agni, the swift one, I come to you."
10.39.11	He places the Vibhakti on the right side, saying, "Agni is kindled by Agni."
10.39.12	Having made it the deity, he performs the Soodadoha rite.
10.39.13-15	Then having caused the horse to smell the naturally-perforated (brick), he places it with the formula, "O Indra-Agni, the uninjured, the one who is not injured, the one who does not injure, the one who has not been injured, the one not to be injured, the one to be worshipped, the one to whom oblations are offered, the one to whose oblations are offered." Having recited this formula, he places the second brick with the formula, “The wind may protect you with the great, with prosperity, with the most auspicious, with that deity, may it be firm like Angiras." Having placed the second brick, he says, "May I breathe in and out."
10.39.16	That is Vyāna.
10.39.17	Then this Brahman gives a boon.
10.39.18	Then, taking four spoonfuls in the ladle, he offers in the self-spread space, reciting, "I offer the mind with ghee."
10.39.19	Reciting "I have ascended the atmosphere, may my offspring not be lost," he offers with the thumbs.
10.39.20	Others place the golden brick in a hole, saying, "Thou art light, grant me light, grant me the atmosphere, protect me from the atmosphere."
10.39.21	He places the circular brick at the end of the passage, towards the rear, saying, "The sky is above, the atmosphere is below, the Brahman is spread out."
10.39.22	He places the Retahsik (seed-bestowing) brick on the south with the formula, "May it bestow seed on me. May it generate seed for me." Mentally alone.
10.39.23	Having made it the deity, he performs the Soodadohasa rite.
10.40.1	Then he extends the ten Skandhyas towards the east, four Rituviya, Samrajan, Visvajyoti, two Sayujas and two Sayanies.
10.40.2	He places the Rtava (bricks) with the verses, "The sky and the firmament."
10.40.3	He places the Avakā (brick) with the verse, "Thou art the womb of Agni." The Iṣa and Urja (bricks) are placed with the verse, "Thou art the womb."
10.40.4	"He places the Avaka (brick) with this verse. "Thou art the Womb of Agni." The Samraj and Visvajyoti (bricks) are laid with the verse, "The All-worker has placed thee."
10.40.5	Then he lays down the two (bricks) called Sayuja, with the text, "I yoke thee with thy own lustre, with the hymns."
10.40.6	Then he lays down the bricks called Samyajna, with the text "Thou art the vehicle of the gods, thou art the vehicle of Vayu, thou art the carrier of the atmosphere."
10.40.7	Having made it the deity, he performs the Sūdadohas rite.
10.40.8	Then he lays down the directions, with the formula, "Thou art the queen, the eastern direction." Five in each direction, one in the middle.
10.40.9	Having made it the deity, he performs the Sūdadohasa rite.
10.40.10	Then he lays down the life-supporting bricks, with the formula "Protect my life, protect my breath." Ten in the east, facing east.
10.40.11	Of these, the last one is luminous.
10.40.12	Having made it the deity, he performs the Sūdadohas.
10.40.13	Then he lays down the twelve Bṛhatī verses, beginning with "May the Chanda" (be favourable to us) towards the south, "May the earth be the Chanda" towards the west, and "May Agni be the deity" towards the north.
10.40.14	Having made it the deity,
10.40.15	"He lays down seven bricks towards the east with the formula, "Thou art the head of the king.", seven towards the west with the formula, "Thou art the yoke of the king."; seven towards the east with "Thou art a wheel of the king.".
10.40.16	The altar is built with the Valakhilyas.
10.40.17	Having made it divine, he performs the Sūda and Doha rites.
10.40.18	Then he builds the fire-altar with all faces. The limbs of Agni, the bull of Prajapati, the Lokampṛṇās,
10.40.19	The eastern one is spread with Lokampṛṇā.
10.40.20	They cover Agni with the eastern ones.
10.40.21	He draws it with a Palāśa branch, saying, "Fill the world, fill the gap."
10.40.22	Then he touches it with the Cittiklpti, saying, "The one who knows the Citti and the Acitti, he who knows the Citta, he who knows."
10.40.23	Having touched the Citi with the Jagati verse to Agni, he runs with two verses, "May speech be my friend, may breath be my friend."
10.40.24	Then he proceeds with the Apūrna and Pravargya rites of the afternoon.
10.40.25	This much of the rite is performed on this day.
10.40.26	They spend this night.
10.41.1	Then on the sixth day, when the sun has risen, he proceeds with the Pravargya and Upasads.
10.41.2	The placing of the potsherds is similar.
10.41.3	Then on the seventh day, when the Sun has risen, he performs the Pravargya-Upasads.
10.41.4	All wear black leather shoes.
10.41.5	Then he asks for the ladle with clarified butter, the spoon, the dividing stick, the water-pot, five bundles of grass, and the sacrificial grass, and whatever else he is going to place.
10.41.6	Taking this, they place it at the northern end of the altar.
10.41.7	Then he takes Agni upon himself with two verses: "I take Agni first upon myself, Agni who is ours."
10.41.8	He recites the Svayambhuva verse: "Those are your kindling woods, O Agni, those are your abodes."
10.41.9	Having touched the white horse, he runs forward with the two verses: "This is the way of the waters, salutations to them."
10.41.10	Having run forward, he offers the third oblation with the two verses collected together: "O Agni, I come to you with that knowledge."
10.41.11	He places the Vibhakti on the right side with the verse, "Agni has shattered the foes."
10.41.12	Having made it the deity, he performs the Soodadoha rite.
10.41.13	Then he extends the five Skandhyas towards the east, two Rtavya, two Sayuja and one Samyani.
10.41.14	He places the Rtavya with the verse, "Sahas and Sahasya."
10.41.15	He places the Avakā brick with the formula, "Thou art the womb of Agni."
10.41.16	Then he places the two bricks in union with the formula, “I unite thee with Stoma in union, I unite thee with Chanda in union."
10.41.17	Then he lays down the Samyani brick with the formula "Thou art the aerial path of the gods."
10.41.18	Having made it the deity, he performs the Sūdadohasa rite.
10.42.1	Then he lays down the Aṣṭomīya bricks.
10.42.2	He lays down the Trivṛt brick in front, the Vyom Saptādaśa brick on the south, the Dhruva Ekavimśa brick on west, and the Bhānta Pañcadaśa brick on north.
10.42.3	He lays down the Pratiurti brick with eighteen (bricks) in front, the Abhivarta brick with twenty in the south, the Varca brick with twenty-two in the west, the Tapa brick with nineteen in the north.
10.42.4	He lays down the Yoni brick with twenty-four in front, the Garbha brick with twenty-five in the south, Ojas brick with twenty-seven in the west, Sambharana brick with twenty-three in the north.
10.42.5	The thirty-first is the sacrifice; he places it in front. The thirty-fourth is the height of the Brahman; he places it on the right. The thirty-third is the support; he places it behind. The thirty-sixth is the heaven; he places it north.
10.42.6	"Thou art the portion of Agni," he places it in front; "thou art the portion of the men," on the right; "thou art a portion of Mitra," on the back; "thou art portion of Indra," on the left.
10.42.7	"You are the share of the Vasus," he places (the pot) in front. "You are the Vasus' share," he places (it) on the right side. "You are Aditi's share," he places it on the back. "You are Savitar's share," (he places it) on the left side.
10.42.8	The four-fold Dhātr is placed in front, the Rbhūṇām is placed on the right, the Vivarta is placed on the left, and the Aṣṭācatvāriṃśa is placed in the north.
10.42.9	This is the Brahmanical explanation of the placing of the bricks in a different order.
10.42.10	Having made it the deity, one performs the Sūdadohas.
10.42.11	Then he lays down the creations with the verse, "The creatures were created by one who praised." (He lays down) seventeen.
10.42.12	He lays down four on the right shoulder, then three, then three, and then four.
10.42.13	He extends the right hip from the right shoulder.
10.42.14	Having made it the deity, he performs the Sūdadohas.
10.42.15	Then he lays down the Vyuṣṭi bricks, saying, "This is the one which first shone forth." There are fifteen.
10.42.16	Three in each of the three directions, three in the middle.
10.42.17	The Vyuṣṭis are obtained by the Citī.
10.42.18	Having made it the deity, he performs the Sūdadohas.
10.43.1	Then he builds the Agni with all faces, Agni's limbs, the bull of Prajapati, the Lokampṛṇās.
10.43.2	The Udicya (priest) pours it out with the Lokampṛṇā (verse).
10.43.3	They cover the fire with the Udicya verses.
10.43.4	He draws it around with a Palāśa branch, reciting, "Fill the world, fill the gap."
10.43.5	Then he touches it with the Cittiklpti verse, "The one who knows the Citti and Acitti, he who knows well, he who knows the Cittis, he who knows all the Cittis, may he know us."
10.43.6	Having touched the Agniya-layer with the Anushtubh-verse, he runs with two verses, "May speech be near me, may the breath be near me."
10.43.7	Then he proceeds with the Apūrṇikā and Pravargya-Upasads of the afternoon.
10.43.8	This much of the rite is performed on this day.
10.43.9	They spend this night.
10.44.1-4	Then on the eighth day, when the sun has risen, he proceeds with the Pravargya and Upasads. The placing of the embers is similar. Then on the ninth day, when the Sun has risen, he performs the Pravargya rite and the Upasads. All wear black leather shoes.
10.44.5	Then he asks for the vessel of clarified butter with the ladle, the Vibhakti-vessel, the water-vessel, all the grass that is to be spread out by himself, seven bundles of grass, and the sacrificial grass, and whatever else is to be placed.
10.44.6	Taking this, they spread it out at the northern end of the altar.
10.44.7	Then with two (verses) he takes Agni in himself, with the words, "I take Agni first in myself; Agni who is ours."
10.44.8	He mutters the Svayambhuva verse, "Those thy kindling woods, O Agni, those thy abodes."
10.44.9	Touching a white horse, he runs forward, with the two verses, "This is the way of the waters; salutations to them."
10.44.10	Then having approached the fourth (layer), he offers the accumulated oblations, saying, "O Agni, I come to you, O Agni, the one with the sharp edge."
10.44.11	He places the Vibhakti stone to the south, saying, "I praise Agni."
10.44.12	Having made it the deity, he performs the Soodadoha rite.
10.44.13	Then he lays down these seven Skandhyas in the eastern direction: two Rtavyas, Svaraj and Visvajyoti, one Sayuja, two Samyanis.
10.44.14	He lays down the Rtavyas: Tapas and Tapasya.
10.44.15-16	He places the Avakā brick with the formula, "Thou art the womb of Agni." The one who is the lord of the self and the lord of all lights, the lord of the lights, has placed the light. May Prajapati place thee. With the verse, "May the lord of the earth, the lord of all beings, the lord of heaven, the lord of men, the lord of cattle, the lord of plants, the lord of waters, the lord of rivers, the lord of streams, the lord of oceans, the lord of clouds, the lord of rain, the lord of wind, the lord of space, the lord of light, the lord of darkness, the lord of day, the lord of night, the lord of dawn, the lord of twilight, the lord of stars, the lord of constellations, the lord of planets, the lord of directions, the lord of seasons, the lord of years, the lord of sacrifices, the lord of oblations, the lord of gods, the lord of manes, the lord of beings, the lord, the lord of truth, the lord of falsehood, the lord of good, the lord of evil, the lord of wealth, the lord of poverty, the lord of happiness, the lord of sorrow, the lord of life, the lord of death, the lord of birth, the lord of destruction, the lord of creation, the lord of dissolution, the lord of time, the lord of eternity, the lord of past, the lord of future, the lord of present, the lord of this world, the lord of other world
10.44.17	Then he lays down the two Samyānyā bricks with the formula, "Thou art the atmosphere; for the atmosphere thee."
10.44.18	Having made it a deity, he performs the Sūdadohasa rite.
10.45.1	Then he lays down the Asapatna bricks.
10.45.2	He places the bricks with the formulas, "O Agni, do thou drive away our enemies born together." He places them in front. With the formula, "Do thou drive away those born together." He puts them at the back. With the formula "The Stoma of forty-four." He puts them on the south. With the formula,"The Stoma of sixteen." He puts them to the north.
10.45.3	He puts the one containing the earth's dust in the middle with the formula, "This is the dust of earth, the name of water."
10.45.4	Having made it the deity, he performs the Sūdadohasa rite.
10.45.5	Then he lays down the Viraj verses, saying, "The Varivash verse is the Varivash verse." Forty verses, ten in each direction, not in the middle.
10.45.6	This is the Brahmanical explanation of the verses laid down in the directions.
10.45.7	Having made it the deity, he performs the Soodadohas.
10.45.8	Then he lays down the Stomabhāga bricks with the formula, "Thou art the ray, I invoke thee for the attainment of the goal." In the three directions, seven each, and three in the middle.
10.45.9	Having made it a deity, he performs the Sūdadohasa rite.
10.45.10	Then he lays down the Nākasada bricks with the formula "Thou art the queen, the eastern direction, the Vasus are thy presiding deities." Five each in the directions, one in the middle.
10.45.11	Having made that the deity, he performs the Sūda and Doha.
10.45.12	Then he places the five Chodas above the Nakasadas, this Harikesha in front, the Sun-ray in the east, one each in the directions, and one in the middle.
10.45.13	Among them, he places the eastern one as the highest one at the back.
10.45.14	Here, the sacrificer mentally contemplates the one whom he hates.
10.45.15	Having made that the deity, he performs the Sūda and Doha.
10.45.16	Then he lays down the metres, beginning with "Agni is the head of heaven" from this text, three by three as mentioned.
10.45.17	He lays down the Gāyatrī metres in front, the Tristubh metres on the right, the Jagatī metres behind, the Anuṣṭubh metres on top, and the Brihatī metres in the middle.
10.45.18	He places the Uṣṇīṣa in front, the Paṅktis on the right, the Aksara Paṅktis behind, the Atichandas on the left, and the Dvipadā in the middle.
10.45.19	Or the Atichandas in the middle, the Dvipadās on the left.
10.45.20	Having made it the deity, he performs the Sūdadohas.
10.45.21	Then on the right shoulder he places the Kṛttikās, saying, "You are named Ambā, you are named Dulā." The seven are made of grass.
10.45.22	Having made it the deity, he performs the Sūdadohas.
10.45.23	Then he places the rain-bringing stones, saying, "You are the wind-bringing stone, you are the cloud-bringing stone." Five in each direction, one in the middle.
10.45.24	The Brahmana says, "He places them in sequence."
10.45.25	Having made it the deity,
10.45.26	Then he lays down the bricks of the sun, saying, "For thee to Salila, for thee to Sarnika." Eight, two each in the directions, not in the middle.
10.45.27	Having made it the deity, he performs the Soodadohas.
10.45.28	Then he lays down the ghee bricks, saying, "To thee to Richi, to thee to Ruci." Five, one each in the directions and one in the middle. He lays them down in succession.
10.45.29	This is the Brahmana.
10.45.30	Having made it the deity, he performs the Sūdadohas.
10.45.31	Then Yashoda places (the bricks) saying, "I place you Yashoda in fame." One each in the five directions and one in the middle.
10.45.32	Having made it the deity he performs the Sūdadohas.
10.45.33	Then Bhūyaskrit places (the bricks), saying, "You are Bhūyaskṛt, you are Varivaskṛt." One each in five directions and one at the centre.
10.45.34	Having made it the deity, he performs the Sūdadohasa.
10.45.35	Then he places the Apasusa stone, saying, "You are Apasusa, you are Shyenasad." Five in each direction and one in the center.
10.45.36	Having made it the deity,
10.45.37-40	Then he lays down the Draviṇodā bricks with the formula, "I place thee in the earth, in the Draviṇā." Five each in the directions and one in the middle. Having made it a deity, he performs the Sūdadohasa rite. Then he lays down the Ayushyā bricks with the formulas, "Protect my Prāṇa, protect my Apāna." Seven each in the directions, three in the middle. Having made it a deity,
10.45.41	Then he lays down the names of the seasons, seven each in the directions, three in the middle, with the verse, "Those who are the seven, the seven who are the seven."
10.45.42	Having made it the deity, he performs the Sūdadohas.
10.46.1	Then he lays down the Indratanū, with the verse "With Agni, the all-embracing," twenty-two, five each in the directions and two in the middle.
10.46.2	Having made it a deity, he performs Sūdadohas.
10.46.3	Then he lays down the Yajnatanu bricks with the verse, "Prajapati, with his mind, saw the three and thirty. Eight in each of the eight directions, one in the middle."
10.46.4	Having made it into a deity, he performs the Soodadohas.
10.46.5	Then he lays down the Jyotishmati bricks with the verse "I place you as the JyotishmatI." Twelve, three each in the three directions, not in the middle.
10.46.6	Having made it the deity, he offers Sūdadohas.
10.46.7	Then he places the bricks of the Bhuta-s, saying, "To Earth, svāhā; to Antarikṣa, svāhā." Three each in the three directions, not in the middle.
10.46.8	Having made it the deity he offers Sūdadohas.
10.46.9	Then he lays down the Ajyānī bricks, saying, "For Shatayudha, for Shatavīrya." One each in the five directions, one in the middle.
10.46.10	Having made it the deity, he performs the Sūdadohasa.
10.46.11	Then he places the National-supporting (bricks) on the right shoulder, saying, "O Agni, the glorious, thou art the glorious one; do thou place this one in glory." Four in each direction, not in the middle.
10.46.12	Having made it the deity he performs the Sūdadohasa.
10.46.13	Then on the right shoulder he places the Full-moon (brick), saying, "Full behind."
10.46.14	Having made it the deity, he performs the Sūda-dohāna.
10.46.15	Then on the southern shoulder, he places the bricks of the constellation, saying, "The constellation Krittika, Agni is the deity."
10.46.16	Then he adorns them, saying, "O Agni, be radiant! The form of Prajapati, the Soma, to your Rk, to your radiance, to your brightness, to your light."
10.46.17	Then he extends the path of the stars, beginning with Rohini, up to Vishakha.
10.46.18	He extends the right hip from the right shoulder.
10.46.19	Then at the junction of the tail and the junction of the self, he places the new moon, saying, "What the gods have placed for you as your share."
10.46.20	Then he lays down the path of the stars, beginning with Anurādha and ending with Abhijit.
10.46.21	He lays down the northern shoulder of the northern shoulder.
10.46.22	Then he lays down the full moon in the northern shoulder alone, saying, "Full behind."
10.46.23	One should lay down without touching, so says the Brahmana.
10.46.24	The altar is completed with the stellar bricks.
10.46.25	Having made it the deity, he performs the Sūdadohasa.
10.46.26	Then having approached and touched the horse, he places the Tanupurisha on the back, reciting, "Pressed by the heaven."
10.46.27	Having made it the deity he performs the Sūdadohasa.
10.46.28	Here he builds the sixth layer, the layers of Samyag and Praceta, five each in the directions and one in the center.
10.46.29	Having made that the deity, he performs the Sūda and Doha.
10.46.30	Then he builds the fire-altar with all the directions. The parts of Agni are the Lokampṛṇā animals, the bull belonging to Prajāpati.
10.46.31	He spreads the Lokampṛṇa animals towards the east.
10.46.32	They cover the fire with the eastern ones.
10.46.33	Then with the northern ones.
10.46.34	They stand with the eastern ones.
10.46.35	He makes it as long as he wishes.
10.46.36	Then, if the stone is not touched, it becomes a stone for the altar.
10.46.37	He asks for these four stones for himself.
10.46.38	She places them in the directions with the formulas, "For Prāṇa thee, for the eye thee, do thou sit firm in that deity, in the Angiras manner. For Vyāna thee, for the eyes thee, do thou... For Apāna thee, for eyes thee, do you... For speech thee, for the sight thee, do thou..."
10.46.39-41	Then having caused the horse to smell the naturally-perforated stone, he places it with the formula, "I place thee in the seat of gold. May the sun protect thee with the great, with the auspicious, with the most auspicious, with that deity, like Angiras, may it be firm." Having placed the third one towards the south, he says, "Towards the south."
10.46.42	Then this Brahman gives a boon.
10.46.43	Then, taking four spoonfuls in the ladle, he offers in the place where the grass is self-spread, reciting, "I offer the mind with ghee."
10.46.44	Reciting "I have ascended heaven, I have gone to heaven," he offers with the thumbs.
10.46.45	Others place the golden brick in a hole, saying, "Thou art gold, give me gold, give me heaven, protect me from heaven."
10.46.46	He places the circular brick at the end of the passage towards the south, saying, "Heaven, unconquered, is pervaded by immortality."
10.46.47	He places a brick for the semen on the right side, saying, "The heaven is the semen-seeder, may it give me semen, may it generate semen for me."
10.46.48	Having made it the deity, he performs the Sūdadohasa.
10.46.49	Then at the time of the subsequent step, he places the Vikarṇī brick with the verse, "The horse, not finding fodder, has spread out."
10.46.50	Having made it the deity he performs the Sūdadohasa.
10.46.51	Then he places the Lokampṛṇā bricks with the verses, "Fill the world, fill the hole."
10.46.52	Then he touches the Citti-bricks with the formula, "The Citti and the Acitti, the knowing one has piled up."
10.46.53	Having touched the Citti-brick with the formula addressed to Agni, he runs with two formulas, "Speech was my friend, the giver of life."
10.46.54	Then he performs the evening Pravargya and Upasads.
10.46.55	This much of the rite is performed on this day.
10.46.56	They spend the night here.
10.47.1	Then on this very ninth day, for the tenth day, he prepares a thousand gold plates.
10.47.2	Some say that they are unlimited beyond three.
10.47.3	If they are a thousand, then two hundred each are placed in the leaf veins.
10.47.4	Then on the tenth day, when the sun has risen, he proceeds with the Pravargya and Upasads.
10.47.5	The placing of the embers is the same.
10.47.6	Then having brought the grains into the vessel and scattered them, he sprinkles them with two hundred (grains) each, saying, "Thou art the measure of a thousand" (when he sprinkles the grains) before the self-perforated (stone); "Thou art the image of a thousand" when he sprinkles the grains to the right of the self-perforate (stone); "thou art the form of a thousand" to the left of the self-pierced (stone); " thou art the excess of a thousand" towards the north of the self-bored (stone).
10.47.7	Then he sprinkles the middle (part) with two hundred (drops), with the formula, "Thou art a thousand, for the thousand."
10.47.8	Then standing at the end of the right thigh, he makes the bricks the cows, with the formula, “May these bricks of mine be cows, O Agni.” Then he proceeds with the evening Pravargya and Upasads from the end of the Anuvaka.
10.47.9	This much of the rite is performed on this day.
10.47.10	They spend this night.
10.47.11	Then on this tenth day, for the eleventh day, he prepares a leaf of the Arka plant, goat's milk, a cake of Gavīdhuka, a stone with three notches, a pot of water, a frog, Avaka, a branch of the Vetasa tree, a bundle of Darbha grass, a vessel of ghee with a ladle, a long bamboo, and the twelfth.
10.47.12	Then on the eleventh day, when the sun has risen, he proceeds with the Pravargya and Upasads.
10.47.13	Having stretched the ladle on the long handle, he offers the last oblations of the heap, saying, "O Agni, the forest one, I come to you."
10.48.1	As long as the Adhvaryu is engaged here, the Pratiprasthātā goes beyond the last brick of the northern half, which has been turned upside down.
10.48.2	Then, having made a pouch of the leaves of the arka plant, and standing facing north, holding it over his mouth, he says, "Bring the oblation."
10.48.3	When he reaches the place where the bricks are placed, he proceeds there, reciting the entire Anuvaka beginning with "Salutations to you, O Rudra, the angry one," and then the second and third Anuvakas.
10.48.4	At the fourth, where he knows, "Salutations to the Kshatriyas," he offers Svāhā.
10.48.5	Having turned towards the east, holding the ladle at the navel, he proceeds with "To the collectors," and recites the remaining part of the Anuvāka. The fifth and sixth are recited.
10.48.6	At the seventh, where he knows "Salutations to Varshya," he offers Svāhākāra.
10.48.7	He holds it in the right hand, turning it towards the right, and places it on the knee. He recites the remaining part of the Anuvaka, beginning with "Avarshīyāya" and ending with "Navamaṃ daśamam".
10.48.8	At the end of the eleventh verse, where he knows that there are so many and more, he offers the Svāhā.
10.48.9	He holds it at the ankle, reciting, "Salutations to the Rudras on the earth." He makes the sacrificer recite this.
10.48.10	He holds it at the navel, reciting, "Salutation to the Rudras in the sky." He makes the sacrifice recite this.
10.48.11	Holding it at the neck, he recites, "Salutations the Rudras in heaven." He makes the sacrficer recite this.
10.48.12	Here he places the leaf of the Arka plant on the path of him whom he hates, and places the animals on it.
10.48.13	If he does not hate him, he places it in a hole made by a rat.
10.48.14	Here he places the Gavīdhuka oblation on the last brick, saying, "To that Rudra who is in the fire, who is in the water, who is in plants, who is in all worlds, to that Rudra be salutations."
10.48.15	Then he asks for this three-stringed (grass) rope.
10.48.16	Standing at the end of the northern buttock with it, he worships.
10.48.17-18	Or, whatever bow of thine is in front, O Rudra, may the wind blow after it. To that bow of thine, O Rudra. I bow down with the year. Whatever bow of thine is on the right, O Rudra; whatever bow of thine, is behind, O Rudra ; whatever bow of thine lies in front, O Ru dra; whatever bow of th ine is above, O Rudra.
10.48.19	Then this water-pot is placed at the end of his right thigh, touching a stone.
10.48.20	He says to the stronger one, "Sprinkle him with this water-pot, with a continuous stream, three times, going around to the right."
10.48.21	He does so.
10.48.22	When the sprinkling is being done, he makes the sacrificer recite (the formula), "The nourishment that is in the stone, in the mountain, that is spread out, in the wind, in the rain, in Varuna's heat, in the waters, in the plants, in the trees, that is collected, that nourishment and strength you have given, the Maruts are protecting."
10.48.23	Then he places the pot, touched with a stone, with the formula, "May thy hunger be stone, may thy anger reach him whom I hate."
10.48.24	Having placed the pot, he goes back thrice in the same way.
10.48.25	Then he ties a frog, a piece of wood, a willow twig, or a bunch of darbha grass on this long bamboo.
10.48.26	With that he draws out what was previously drawn out for himself, saying, "For the ocean thee, for the frost thee."
10.49.1	With two (verses) in front, with two on the right side, with two behind, with two on (the side) towards the north.
10.49.2	One draws out with eight (verses), so says the Brahmana.
10.49.3	Then they cut off the black antelope skin and the long bamboo and scatter them in the Catvāla.
10.49.4	Then the fire is pacified.
10.49.5	Taking the vessel of clarified butter with the spoon, he offers the offerings to the serpents with the spoon of the vessel of clarified butters that has been melted.
10.49.6	"The eastern direction is called Samīcī." Sitting behind, he offers in the eastern pit.
10.49.7	"The southern direction is called Ojasvinī." Sitting to the north, he offers in a southern pit.
10.49.8	" The western direction is called Prācī." Sitting in front, he offers in an eastern pit.
10.49.9	The northern direction is called Avāsthāvā. Sitting to the south, he offers in northern pit.
10.49.10	Then, having returned by the same route by which he had gone, he offers two oblations at the very place where he had first performed the rite, saying, "You are the mistress, you are the mistress."
10.49.11	Then, having hastened, he establishes the fire with the Sāman chants.
10.49.12	He stands in front of the fire with the Gayatri verse, the right shoulder with the Agnihrdaya verse, the right wing with the Rathantara verse, the right hip with the Varavanti verse, the tail with the Ritusthayajnayajya verse, the left hip with the Shyeti verse, the left wing with the Brihat verse, the middle with the Vamadevya verse.
10.49.13	Then he says, "O Hotṛ, praise Agni with a eulogy."
10.49.14	If the Hotṛ does not desire, the sacrificer himself, having spread the darbha-blades with the tail towards the south, sits upon them and praises Agni with the Upavasatha-hymn. "The father, the lord of rain, the one with the unerring feet, the one with unerring feet, he who fashions the feet, Soma, the knower of all, the leader, leads, Brihaspati praises the hymns, Oṃ, once or thrice he makes him recite the praise and the hymn. The sacrifice is blessed by the Bhṛgus, the blessing by the Vasus. Of that sacrifice, of that which is blessed, may we partake of the wealth here."
10.49.15	Then he proceeds with the Apūrna and Pravargya rites of the afternoon.
10.49.16	Only this much of the rite is performed on this day.
10.49.17	They spend this night.
10.50.1	Now on this very eleventh day, for the twelfth day, he prepares an Udumbara ladle, an Udumbara vessel, an Udumbare strainer, an Udumbari basket, in which there is fivefold ghee, a vessel filled with curds, three Udumbara kindling-sticks, three kindling-sticks of different trees, a bundle of wood of different trees, curds mixed with honey, a handful of grass, a load of wild plants, a stone of Ficus glomerata, ghee-sprinkled, a second Hotar, a reciter of Apatiratha, a pot of melted ghee, two or three pots of rice from Brahmau-danika, all herbs, a red hide, a black antelope skin, milk of a black cow with a white calf, a chariot, a cup for offering, the Shakalas, the enclosing sticks.
10.50.2	Then on the twelfth day, when the sun has risen, he proceeds with the Pravargya and Upasads.
10.50.3	Then, having gone out, he gives the order: "O Subrahmanya, invite the Subrahmanya, and give the half-breast vow."
10.50.4	Subrahmanya invites the Subrahmanya.
10.50.5	He gives the half-breast Vrata.
10.50.6	Then he takes up the five-fold ladle, curds mixed with honey, a handful of grass, and a bundle of sacrificial grass.
10.50.7	Taking these, he sprinkles the sacrificial grass with the five-fold melted butter, reciting the verses: "To the god of men, to the god of waters, to the god in the forest, to the god on the sacrificial grass, to the god who knows the heaven, to the god."
10.50.8	With this same ladle, he offers oblations to Gandharvas with curds mixed with honey.
10.50.9	"He offers, while seated behind, in the eastern pit, saying, "The houses of yours named Hetayas are here."
10.50.10	" "The houses named Nilimpas are here." He offers, while seated to the north, in the southern pit.
10.50.11	"Those who are called 'Vajrin' are your houses in the rear." Sitting in front, he offers in the eastern pit.
10.50.12	"Those who are called Avashthavan are your houses in front." Sitting in the south, he offers in a pit in the north.
10.50.13	Then, having returned by the same way as he came, where he first performed, he offers twice there, saying, "Those who are named Adhipati and Kravy."
10.50.14	Then he says to the Pratiprasthātṛ, "Make this Agni Kūrmāpṛṣanta."
10.50.15	He makes it Kūrmā-pṛṣanta.
10.50.16	He does not stand over what has not been sprinkled.
10.50.17	Then, taking a handful of grass, he sprinkles it with curds mixed with honey, "Those gods who are among the gods, those gods who have attained divine status among the gods."
10.51.1	With two (verses) in front, with those two (verses) on the right side, with those two verses behind, with those two on the left side.
10.51.2	This is the Brahmanical text regarding sprinkling in succession.
10.51.3	Then, having covered him with a load of grass, having instructed the guardian, he proceeds with the evening Pravargya and Upasads until the evening.
10.51.4	Then having gone out, he says to the Subrahmaṇya, "O Subrahmaṇyā, call the Agnīdh. The Pratiprasthātṛ should place the Pravargya vessel for the Pravargya rite to be filled up for the Udvāsana."
10.51.5	They make this place three-fold.
10.51.6	The third is placed on the Garhapatya, the third on the ladle, and the third is placed on it.
10.51.7	Then having taken out the Pravargya, he places it in the fire-chamber. He offers the cake on twelve potsherds to Vaiśvānara Agni and the cakes on seven potsherds to Maruts.
10.51.8	Then having melted the clarified butter over the Garhapatya fire, having purified it, having taken four spoonfuls in the ladle, he offers the Anīkavān oblation on the Āhavanīya fire.
10.51.9	Having recited the verse, "Agni with his bright lustre", he offers with the verse, "May Suvidatra offer to us in the army."
10.51.10	Taking another four spoonfuls, he offers to Vaiśvakarmaṇa on the Āhavanīya.
10.51.11	Having recited the verse, "He who offers these worlds", he offers with the following verse, "Vishvakarman was born as a god."
10.51.12	Having taken another four-fold portion, he offers with the verse, "Obeisance to the eye, the father, O Vishvakarman, with the offering of nourishment."
10.51.13	One offers with two different verses. One places the power of two different verses.
10.51.14	Then he lays down three Samidh-sticks of Udumbara wood, with the formulas, "Lead him upwards, lead him to Indra, make him the foremost. For him we offer the oblation in the house."
10.51.15	Then he lays down the kindling wood.
10.51.16	They prepare the Upasparana-sticks from the sacrificial grass.
10.51.17	Then he says (to the Hotṛ), "Do thou recite the Praṇīta-hymn to Agni being taken forward; do thou, O Agnīd, join (the two ends of the cord) with the single end; the second Hotṛ should recite the Pratiraṭha-hymn."
10.51.18	The second Hotṛ responds, "I am taking up the Pratiratha-hymn, the swift one is singing."
10.51.19	It consists of ten verses. So says the Brāhmaṇa.
10.51.20	Then with that same fire they offer the spotted stone, anointed with ghee, filled with curds, a fig-wood stick, three sticks of different trees, and the Śākalas as enclosing sticks.
10.51.21	Then they lift it up, saying, "The All-gods lift you up."
10.51.22	The Brahman says, "He takes it with six."
10.51.23	Of those two, two are to be taken around.
10.51.24	Then at the time of the Visuvatya Agni-dhra, he places the stone of Pṛśni, with two verses, "This is the measure of heaven, the bull, the ocean."
10.51.25	Then with four verses, he goes up to the tail, "Indra was increased by all."
10.51.26	They support this Agni.
10.51.27	Then he sprinkles the piled-up Agni with ghee.
10.52.1	The Vasus, with the Rudras, protect thee from the east. The Fathers, with Yama as their king, protect thee from south. The Adityas, with all the gods, protect thee from west. The Dyutanas, with the Maruts, protect thee from north. The gods, with Indra as their chief, with Varuna as their king, from below and above protect thee.
10.52.2	Then with that very fire he goes forward, reciting, "Go forward, O wise one, in the eastern direction. Know the path. Go to heaven by Agni. I have ascended the sky and earth. Those who go to heaven do not look back. O Agni, go forward, the first of those who worship the gods." With five verses.
10.52.3	They carry this Agni.
10.52.4-7	Then he offers on the naturally perforated Udumbara wood filled with curds, with the formula, "To the night and morning." Having recited the Puronuvākyā, "To the Night and Morning," he offers with the formula, "O Agni, thou of a thousand eyes." Then, having circumambulated clockwise, he establishes the kindling wood with the formula, "Thou art the bird Garuda." He settles it with three formulas." This is the Brahmanical formula.
10.52.8	Then having made him a sacrifice of the Visrs, he offers him with the oblations of the sacrifice, saying, "May Agni, knowing, lead the sacrifice. May the destroyer of sacrifices not know him. May he be told to the gods. May the sacrifice go forth, may the lord of sacrifice be satisfied. Svāhā." "May Vayu, knowing, lead... May Surya, knowing... May Yajna, knowing, lead. May the destroyer not know him. Svāhā.
10.52.9	Then, having gone around by the right, having taken up the northern enclosing stick, having placed it in the fire, having placed the transverse wooden sword, he gives the instruction: "Bring the sprinkling water, place the sacrificial grass and wood."
10.52.10	Then having approached the Śākalas, having placed the enclosing sticks, having kindled the fire-wood of various trees, having placed it with the Svāhā-utterance, he places three fire-sticks of various trees, saying, "Kindled, O Agni, shine forth in front," the Udumbara one, "We worship thee, O Agni, at thy supreme birth," the Vaikaṅkaṭa one, "The variegated one of Savitr, the desirable one," the Śamī one.
10.52.11	Then he offers two Suvāhutis: "I offer the mind, O Agni, to him today."
10.52.12	Then, having taken four spoonfuls in the ladle, he offers a full ladleful of ghee: "Seven are thy kindling woods, O Agni, seven thy tongues."
10.52.13	Here, while offering, one should meditate on the directions mentally.
10.52.14	He is indeed obtained from the directions.
10.52.15	He offers with curds in front and with ghee above.
10.52.16	He places together his brilliance and his power, so says the Brahmana.
10.52.17	Then standing here itself, he requests the twelve-vessel offering to Vaisvānara Agni and the seven-vessel offering to Maruts.
10.52.18	Having spread everything, he places the Vaisvānaran offering and says, "Recite for Agni Vaisvānará."
10.52.19	He pours twice.
10.52.20	Having stepped across, he says (to the Hotṛ), "Do thou recite (the Mantra) for Agni Vaisvānara."
10.52.21	He offers in the middle with the Vasat-utterance.
10.52.22	Then he offers it with oblations from the ladle, with five (Mantra) beginning with "May the golden heat..."
10.52.23	Then he proceeds with the Maruts.
10.53.1-3	Having recited the Anudruta verse, "May the bright light and the variegated light" he offers. Having recited the Anudruta verse, "May he who conquers truth and he who conquers reality" he offers. Having recited the Anudurta verse, "Truth and reality" he offers.
10.53.4	Having recited the Anuvākyā in the forest, he offers, reciting the Anuvāka in the forest.
10.53.5	Having recited the Anuvākya in the forest, one offers, reciting the Iḍakṣās and the Īḍakṣās.
10.53.6	Having recited Iḍakṣā and Īḍakşā, one offers, saying "The measured and the unmeasured."
10.53.7	and Mitāsa and Samitāsa, and then he offers to the gods who are not followed, and to those who are followed.
10.53.8	He offers Vaiśvānara in between them.
10.53.9	He offers following one group after another.
10.53.10	He calls out loudly for Vaiśvānaran, and offers the Maruts in a low voice. This is the Brahmanical explanation.
10.54.1	Then he pours the flowing (Soma) into the fire, either towards the south or towards the west.
10.54.2	Its eastern half is like a ladle.
10.54.3	So also the middle one.
10.54.4	The bottom is like a goblet.
10.54.5	On it he spreads four layers of grass, saying, "Carefully, continuously bring the stream of Soma. I shall recite the names."
10.54.6	When he reaches the stream of fire, he recites, "O Agni-Vishnu, with your companions, you have reached the end of all the streams of Soma." He offers the remaining Soma juice in the stream of fire.
10.54.7	Here he offers the remaining Soma in the stream of Agni.
10.54.8	Then he offers it with the sprinkling.
10.54.9	Then he cooks the Brahma rice in the remaining ghee.
10.54.10	Four Brahmins eat it.
10.54.11	And to them he should give four cows, says the Brāhmaṇa.
10.54.12	Now this is placed in front of him, in a pot of Udumbara wood, mixed with all herbs, honey and ghee.
10.54.13	With the Udumbara ladle he offers the Vājaprasavīya oblation, with the formula, "The Vāja has generated this (oblation). The Vāja has generated the seven directions." He offers fourteen oblations with the ladle.
10.54.14	For the consecration he prepares the Praraṅa.
10.54.15	Having covered it, he places it in a known place.
10.54.16	Then he offers milk to Krishna and Shvetavachasa.
10.54.17	Then he offers to the six-eight-holding ones, saying, "To the six-eight, to the holder of truth."
10.54.18	"To the lord of the world," he offers five oblations at the chariot-gate.
10.54.19	Then he offers three oblations to the rays of the sun, saying, "O Agni, those rays of yours which are in the sun, those rays of the gods which are in the Sun, grant us radiance among the Brahmanas."
10.54.20	Then having brought ghee in a vessel, he offers the names of the winds with the striking of a handful, saying, "You are the ocean, shining, moist, auspicious, and shining, do you carry me. Svāhā. You are the wind, the group of winds, auspicious, and bright, do you carry me. Svāhā." "You are the wind, auspicious, and brilliant, do you carry 
10.54.21	Some people think that one should offer to Vayu.
10.54.22	Here he places the wooden chips around the fire.
10.54.23	This is the extent of the wooden chips.
10.55.1	Then he joins the Sadas and the Havirdhāna.
10.55.2	Having joined the Sadas and Havirdhāna, he lays down the Adhvara and Dhiṣṇya fires.
10.55.3-5	On them he lays down the Agni-Dhishnya bricks with the verse, "O Agni, may my lustre be in the contests." One Yaajusi brick and seven Lokamprana bricks on the Agni-Dhishu. One Yaajusi brick, eleven Lokamprana bricks, on the Hotr-Dhishu. One Yaajusi and seven Lokampraṇa bricks on the other Dhishus.
10.55.6	Then the Marjālīya, one Yaĵus and five Lokampṛṇā verses.
10.55.7	Then he offers the Agniṣoma oblations.
10.55.8	Having offered the Agniṣoma offerings, he erects the sacrificial post in the enclosure of the post.
10.55.9	Having released the sacrificial post reaching the heaven, he prepares the Agniṣoma animal.
10.55.10	Having performed the Vapa rite, he takes up the Vasatīvarī waters after having offered the Vapa and Vapaśrapaṇī.
10.55.11	Then he offers the Pasupurodāsa oblation.
10.55.12	The eight Devasuva oblations follow it, beginning with "To Agni, the householder."
10.55.13	They are offered separately.
10.55.14	They are cooked separately.
10.55.15	They consist of different grains.
10.55.16	The Purorasa of the Pasupurodasa is to be recited with the words "Do thou recite" and "Sacrifice".
10.55.17	When he is about to pour out the oblation for Varuna, he says, "Do thou recite for Varuna, the lord of Dharma." Then he pours out all the oblations together from the right half of the Upabhrt, which is meant for Svistakrt.
10.55.18	He pours twice.
10.55.19	He does not anoint it back.
10.55.20	Having crossed over, he should offer to Varuna, the lord of dharma, saying, "May Varuna be pleased."
10.55.21	He offers when the Vasat is uttered.
10.55.22	Now indeed it is said:
10.55.23	"Varuna becomes pleased, and the Svishtakrit becomes displeased, then his Brahman priest takes his hand."
10.55.24	When Varuna becomes pleased and the Svishta-krit becomes displeased, and then his Brahman priest grasps his hand,
10.56.1	May Savitar, the bestower of prosperity, Agni, the lord of houses, Soma, the lord of plants, Rudra, the lord of cattle, Brihaspati, the lord of speech, Indra, the lord of the most excellent, Mitra, the lord of truth, Varuna, the lord of righteousness, bestow on you.
10.56.2	All this is said. "Those gods who are in heaven, they bestow this Amuṣyāyana on us, for the great kingdom, for the great lordship, for the great sovereignty."
10.56.3	Then he says to him standing in the place of the sacrificer, "This is your king."
10.56.4	"Soma is our king among the Brahmanas." The others reply.
10.56.5	Then he releases speech with "Bhuvah, Bhuvah, Suvar."
10.56.6	With two (verses) he cleanses the mouth, and then he places the name of the kingdom. All the groups became Varuna's.
10.56.7	He steps on the steps of Vishnu with the Gayatri verses, "You are Vishnu's step, you are Vishnu's traversed, you are Vishnu’s traversed and traversed."
10.56.8	Then he performs the Svishtakrit offering.
10.56.9	He does not offer the Ida of Raudra.
10.56.10	They bring him down to the water, the deepest.
10.56.11	The cakes end with Ida.
10.56.12	The animal sacrifice ends with the Patnisaṃyājas.
10.56.13	Some say it ends with the Heart-stick.
10.56.14	Then, having performed the Vasatīvarī ceremony, they observe the special fast.
10.57.1	Now, then, they wake up at midnight.
10.57.2	The rite is the same, because of the placing of the ladles.
10.57.3	Having placed the ladles, he yokes the fire with the Yoga formula, "Thou art the yoke of the two wings, thou art the yoke of Agni, thou art the union of the two wings; thou art the union, O Agni, thou art born of the ocean." With these three formulas.
10.57.4	Then, having brought the king (Agni) near, he performs the morning recitation.
10.57.5	When the morning recitation is over, he goes to the water.
10.57.6	He goes forth with water.
10.57.7	He approaches the sacrifice.
10.57.8	The sprinkling is well-known.
10.57.9	The Grahas are taken well-known. The Grahas are taken.
10.57.10	The rite is common with the Asvin Graha.
10.57.11	Having taken the Asvin Grahas and taking eleven thongs, he approaches the sacrificial post.
10.57.12	Having released the sacrificial post with the Svārociṣa verse, he dedicates eleven animals, namely, a black-necked one to Agni, a ewe to Sarasvati, a tawny one to Soma, a dark-coloured one to Pūshan, a sheep with a black back to Soma, a craftsman to Brhaspati, a variegated one to the All-gods, a red one to Indra, a mottled one to Maruts, a tawny one with a black head to Indra-Agni, and a black one to Savitr.
10.57.13	Having performed the Vapa rites for them, they proceed to the morning pressing.
10.57.14	It concludes in the straight path.
10.57.15	They proceed to the midday pressing.
10.57.16	Wherever the midday may be, one should fill a golden vessel with honey, look at it with the Citravatī verse, make the horse smell it and give it to the Brahman.
10.57.17	The Abhiṣava is well known.
10.57.18	The Grahas are well known.
10.57.19	There is a common rite for the Dakṣiṇās.
10.57.20	Having offered the Dakṣiṇa oblations, one performs with three Marutvatīya verses.
10.57.21	The Nārāśaṃsa verses are recited. The Dakṣiṇā oblations are offered. The Mahendra oblation is offered below the lower end of the Dakṣiņā altar.
10.57.22	Then he offers six oblations to the directions, beginning with the east, with the formula, "To Agni svāhā, to Soma svāhā."
10.57.23	Then on the place for the sacrificer, he spreads a black antelope skin with its neck towards the east and with the hairy side upwards.
10.57.24	Having seated the sacrificer facing east, and having surrounded him with golden and silver plates, he consecrates him facing west with all herbs.
10.57.25	He sprinkles from the top, and lets it flow down from the mouth.
10.58.1	"In the impulse of the divine Savitr, with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of Pusan, with the instrument of Sarasvati, the controller of speech, I anoint thee with the sovereignty of Agni, with the sovereignty of Indra, with the sovereignty, of Brihaspati."
10.58.2	When the earth is removed, they cry out, "This is so-and-so's son, so-and- so's grandson, so-and so's great-grandson, with the Agni-svāhā."
10.58.3	Then he releases speech with "Bhūr Bhuvah Suvar."
10.58.4	With two (verses) he removes the earth.
10.58.5	He steps on the Gāyatrī and Viṣṇu steps.
10.58.6	Then he offers six oblations after the consecration.
10.59.1	"To Indra svāhā, to Ghoṣa svāhā."
10.59.2	He offers twelve oblations to the spirits, to Pṛthivī svāhā, and to Antarikṣa svāhã.
10.59.3	The midday pressing is concluded in a straight line.
10.59.4	They proceed to the third pressing.
10.59.5	Having performed the Āgrayaṇa rite with the well-known Āditya rite, one performs the Āgrayaṇī rite.
10.59.6	The rite is similar to that of Pavamāna.
10.59.7	Having performed the Pavamāna rite, one performs in one's own abode with animals.
10.59.8	They have different Manotās, different deities, different touchings, different Vasahomas, the same Vanaspati, the same Sviṣṭakṛt, the same Prāṣa, the same Nidā, the same directions.
10.59.9-12	Some say that the directions are many. The rite is the same as that of the Yajñāyajñiya Stotra. The Yajñāyājñiya Stotra is performed with one verse. Then he touches Agni with two verses, "Let there be salutations to you, do not harm me, Udna has broken the ocean." The rite is the same for the Patnīsaṃyājas.
10.59.13	Having offered the Patnīvats, having returned towards the east, having gratified the Dhruva, having offered the Samits and the Samit-yajus, he offers the Dasāgnika offerings with the verses, "From the well-spoken, from the well-flowing," etc.
10.59.14	The rites are similar to those of Avabhṛtha.
10.59.15	Then at this Avabhṛtha (rite) he offers the second Avabhṛtha-oblation with the formula, "Salutations to the ocean, the ruler of the waters, the lord of rivers."
10.59.16	The Avabhṛtha is well-known.
10.59.17	Having performed the Udayanīya Iṣṭi, he dedicates the cow to Mitra-Varuna.
10.59.18	For that (cow) there is a portion of cooked meat to be given to Mitra-Varuṇa.
10.59.19	They perform the final rites for the animal.
10.59.20	Then having melted the clarified butter in the Garhapatya fire, having purified it, having taken four spoonfuls in the ladle, having filled the ladle with clarified butter, he offers the oblation of Agni's release, saying, "This teat of yours, O Agni, is full of strength, the source of nourishment."
10.59.21	Then he stands up to him, saying, "Those fires that are in the ashes..."
10.59.22	Then he worships him with the Apti hymns, "O Agni, with the mind" in nine verses of the Anucchada metre.
10.59.23	Then he performs the Udavasaniya sacrifice.
10.59.24	Then he offers oblations to the gods.
10.59.25	Then he makes the offering to the three worlds.
10.59.26	Then he sacrifices with the Sautrāmaṇī.
10.59.27	For a year he does not descend to any (lower) state.
10.59.28	He does not eat the flesh of the head or the flesh of the young.
10.59.29	One who has not kindled the fire should not approach a woman. One who has kindled the fire should run in the rain.
10.59.30	If one runs, one should turn back.
10.59.31	One should turn back for the sake of food. This is the Brahmanical text.
11.1.1	One who is going to perform the Vājapeya sacrifice.
11.1.2	He prepares a black antelope skin, two golden and silver coins, a woolen blanket, a hundred measures of gold, seventeen gold coins, a golden vessel filled with honey, a wooden wheel of a chariot with seventeen spokes, a wooden pole with seventeen planks, a sacrificial post with four corners and seventeen cubits, a wooden ladle, a turban, a cake, seventeen pots, seventeen wind-shields, seventeen large pots, seventeen measures, a hundred and a woolen garment, seventeen gold coins and seventeen garments, seventeen loads of garments, seventeen chariots, seventeen drums, seventeen elephants, seventeen female slaves, seventeen yokes of oxen, seventeen hundred cows, or seventeen thousand cows.
11.1.3	For in it all the seasons are present.
11.1.4	Twenty-four animals, fifty-one horses, a Khadiri cow with its grass removed, and a bull.
11.1.5	The Agniṣṭoma materials are well-known.
11.1.6	He initiates on the last days of summer, before the full moon of Āṣāḍha.
11.1.7	He has thirteen consecratory rites, three Upasads, and is born on the seventeenth day.
11.1.8	Or he has seventeen consecratory rites, and three Upasads and is born on twenty-first day.
11.1.9	Or there are only three consecratory rites, with three Upasads; and he is born on the seventh day.
11.2.1	Now it is said:
11.2.2	One offers to Savitr before each rite.
11.2.3	When about to offer the Diksaniya oblation, he offers to Savitr, "O god Savitr, do thou promote the sacrifice, promote the lord of sacrifice for Bhaga. The divine Gandharva, the purifier of the banner, may he purify our banner. The lord of speech, Vacaspati, may he today grant us speech. Svāhā."
11.2.4	When about to offer the oblations at the beginning of the consecration, he offers to savitr.
11.2.5	When about to perform the Prayaniya oblation,
11.2.6	When he is about to offer the Antahīraṇya, he offers to Savitr.
11.2.7	He moves on the path.
11.2.8	Having moved on the path, when he is about to perform the Atithya offering after buying the king, he offers to Sāvitra.
11.2.9	When he is about to move on the first two paths of Pravargya and Upasad, he offers to savitr.
11.2.10	At this time the Pratiprasthātṛ digs a pit in the southern part of the shed and pours the Soma juice of the Vājapeya.
11.2.11	One who is going to take possession of the Mahāvedi first offers the Savitrī oblation.
11.2.12	One who intends to carry the Āhavaniya fire offers the Savitrî oblation.
11.2.13	When one is going to join the Rāthavāhana and the Sadas-Havisdhāraṇa fires, he offers the Savitrï oblation.
11.2.14	One who is about to offer the Agniṣṭoma sacrifice offers the Savitrī oblation.
11.2.15	Thus he performed the Dasānta-śāla.
11.2.16	Now, indeed, the Agnidhra will offer.
11.2.17	One who is about to erect the sacrificial post offers the Savitrî oblation.
11.2.18	When the Adhvaryu and the sacrificer are moving forward, facing each other, then the Pratiprasthātṛ moves forward from behind, covering them with garments, or he covers them with the ten-fold garment, or he makes the bow-coverers enter.
11.2.19	At this time the Pratiprasthātṛ makes a ball of wheat-flour, equal on both sides, and ties it with the Upavasatha-thread.
11.2.20	They perform the rites with that.
11.2.21	Having released the sacrificial post at the end of the Svāhābhuj, he offers the Savitrī oblation for the animal to be offered to Agni-Soma.
11.2.22	Having performed the rites with the prescribed oblation, he offers the Sāvitrī oblation for the Vasatīvari water.
11.2.23	One who is going to offer the Pasupurodāsa oblation offers the Savitr oblation.
11.2.24	Three oblations are offered at the end of the Savana.
11.2.25	They make seventeen.
11.2.26	Or one should offer at each Savana. This is another view.
11.2.27	Then he offers the Pasupuroḍāsa oblation.
11.2.28	The eight oblations offered to the gods, beginning with Agni, the lord of the house, follow it.
11.2.29	Their feet are mentioned as like the feet of Agni in the Vidhi.
11.2.30	The Puronuvākyās ending with the Idā syllable are concluded.
11.2.31	The animal sacrifice ends with the Patnisaṃyājas.
11.2.32	Some say that it ends with the Hṛdayaśūla.
11.2.33	Here he places the drums in the directions, five on the southern hip, five on the northern hip, four on the southern shoulder, three on the northern shoulder. Thus he makes the directions speak to him. So says Baudhayana.
11.2.34	The drums should be placed touching the Agnidhra-shed from the front, says Angiras.
11.2.35	Katya says that they should be placed around.
11.2.36	Then, having performed the Vasatīvari rites, they observe the special fast.
11.3.1	Then, they wake up at midnight.
11.3.2	Having taken the clarified butter in the morning, having brought the king (Soma) near, he performs the morning Pravargya rite.
11.3.3	When the morning Pravargva rite is completed, he goes to the water.
11.3.4	The Adhvaryu runs towards the water.
11.3.5-6	At this time the Pratiprasthātṛ, having caused the Soma of the Vājapeya to be pressed, taking it with weapons, having taken it out by the southern door, having gone round the Sadas by the right, having taken it to the Marjālīya Dhishṇiya by the southern door and having brought it to the Havirdhāna by the western door, places the axle of the southern Havirdhāna cart behind.
11.3.7	He approaches all the sacrifices.
11.3.8	The sprinkling is well-known.
11.3.9	The Grahas are taken in the well-known manner.
11.3.10	The rite is similar to the taking of the Agrayaṇa Graha.
11.3.11	Having taken the Agrayaṇa, he takes the five Indra-grahas, the Atigrahyas.
11.3.12	"He takes them with the five formulas beginning with, "Thou art taken with the Upāṁsu-graha, thou art the Nṛṣada, thou art the Druṣada."
11.3.13	Then he places them in the eastern half of the southern half of the skin of a black antelope.
11.3.14	As long as the Adhvaryu is active, the Pratiprasthātṛ purifies the Soma with the eastern end of the skin of black antelope. "May the daughter of Surya purify your Soma that has flowed away by means of the eternal Vāra."
11.3.15	The Adhvaryu takes up the Vāyavya cup; the Pratiprasthatṛ takes up the Upayastha cup.
11.3.16	The Adhvaryu first takes up the Soma-grahas from the Vāyavya vessel, reciting the formula, "Thou art taken with a support; I take thee agreeable to Prajapati."
11.3.17	Having wiped it, he places it with the formula, "This is thy birth-place; for thee Prajapati."
11.3.18-20	Then the Pratiprasthātṛ, having taken the Soma-graha with the formula, "O Indra, do thou be pleased with me," takes the Soma-grahas with the formula, “O Indra, do you be pleased with me." Having recited the formula, "Thou art taken with a support; for Prajapati thee," he places it. "For Prajapati thee" - he places it. He does not make it either agreeable or a womb.
11.3.21	They take up the Soma-grahas in this way, the Adhvaryu takes up the seventeen, the Pratiprasthātā takes up the seventeen.
11.3.22	The Adhvaryu extends the Soma-graha-cups towards the eastern axle, either in two rows or in three rows.
11.3.23	The Pratiprasthātr extends the Sura-graha-cup towards the western axle, either in one row or in two rows.
11.3.24	Then he takes up the Sodashin (Soma-cup) with the formula, "Do thou mount the chariot, O slayer of Vrtra." Having followed it, he places it with the formula, “Thou art taken up with a view to being offered; I take thee for Indra, the Sodashin."
11.3.25	Having wiped it around, he places it upon the mound with the formula, "This is thy birth-place; for Indra, the Sodaśin, thee."
11.3.26	Then he takes up the Ukthya cup.
11.3.27	The rite is common upto the taking up of the Soma-cup dedicated to the Asvins.
11.3.28	Having taken the Ashvina cup and having taken six girths, he approaches the sacrificial post.
11.3.29	Having released the sacrificial post reaching the heaven, he then prepares these animals - the Agniya, the Indra-Agniya, the Indra, the Marut, the cow-sacrifice, the seventeen animals of Prajapati, the black ones of one form, the Sarasvati at the end.
11.3.30	Then he performs the Nirmanthya rite with the Nirmanthyan.
11.3.31	Having thus offered the oblation to Prahâti, he yokes the animals of different deities separately, having yoked them separately with double yokes, and yokes them separately in the triple yokes.
11.3.32	Then he yokes the cattle of the same deity separately, having yokes them separately with double-yokes, and yokes it in one yoke-post. Or he yokes one animal to another.
11.3.33	Having employed the Sarasvati (chant) at the end, he should sprinkle them, offer them, sprinkle them again, and offer them in the Prokṣaṇidhāna vessel.
11.4.1	Then, while taking a fire-stick from the fire, he says, "Recite the Agni Samidhyamāna (hymn) to Agni Samidhyama."
11.4.2	He places the fire-stick.
11.4.3	He arranges the fire-sticks around.
11.4.4	He offers with the Veda.
11.4.5	While the Samidheni verses are being recited, he offers the libation with the spoon.
11.4.6	The two ladles are wiped.
11.4.7	Then, without touching the ladles, he steps forward towards the north and, having tied the animals with the ladle, he settles them. He chooses the Pravaran (verse) for the ladles.
11.4.8	The priests choose as prescribed.
11.4.9	The Hotṛ settles down.
11.4.10	He desires the Prajāpati.
11.4.11	Having taken the oblations from the ladles, having gone around along the front of the Āhavaniya, having caused to announce, he says, "Do thou send forth to the kindling woods."
11.4.12	At the Vasat-utterance he offers, saying, "Do thou, do thou send forth."
11.4.13	Having brought the fourth and eighth oblations together, he brings all together at the eighth.
11.4.14	Having sprinkled the Savaniya oblations with the Savaniya formula, he pours down the Savaniya oblation.
11.4.15	Having offered ten Prayāja oblations, having gone around towards the north, he anoints the animals with the Savarūpa formulas.
11.4.16	These animals, belonging to different deities, have different sounds and different rules.
11.4.17	These animals, belonging to the same deity, have the same sounds and different rules,
11.4.18	The same rite is performed up to the placing of fire.
11.4.19	Then, having placed the animals in the fire, they proceed towards the north.
11.4.20	For them, the northern half belongs to Sarasvati.
11.4.21	The Agniye belongs to the Agniye.
11.4.22	The Adhvaryu alone, with the two ladles, begins the offering to Agni.
11.4.23	The other priests, separately, lead the animals towards the north, one after the other, without mixing them up.
11.4.24	The Adhvaryu, alone, spreads the sacrificial grass for the animal being killed for Agni; the others do so separately.
11.4.25	Then they strike the others, whether in the east or in the west, and says, "Let those who do not know the signs be made to know." Having said this, he returns by the same way as he came and sits down at the place of the clarified butter. "May all the forms of creatures delight in this sacrifice, the knowers of all, the Ghrtachi (goddesses), approaching the Agni Kulaya (fire), may they protect us with milk and ghee."
11.4.26	They say that the signs have been made known.
11.4.27	He offers the oblation with the prescribed formula, "May the animals be released from the noose."
11.4.28	Then the Sāmitāras come near, saying, "The animals are released."
11.4.29	He recites the formula, "Aditi has released these animals from the nooses," while the animals are being released from the nooses.
11.4.30	Separately, with the exception of the Viśākhā verses, he directs this direction, saying, "I make the one who is hostile to us powerless. I release the noose on him whom we hate."
11.5.1	Then the Pratiprasthātṛ leads the wife, raising the water pot.
11.5.2	He gradually nourishes the life of the animals.
11.5.3	The Adhvaryu, having taken out the omentum, proceeds.
11.5.4	The Adhvaryu first takes up the omentum of the Agni-animal; the others take up their omenta in succession.
11.5.5	When the omentum is being roasted, he places the tip of the sacrificial grass on it; the others place their omenta on it.
11.5.6	He offers the Vapa of Agni with the Sruva-offering. They place the Vapa in the Upaveta.
11.5.7	Having performed with the Svāhā-form, and having poured the melted clarified butter over the Vapa, he pours the Vapa of Agnī over the melted clarified butter. They place the Vapa in the Upaveṭa.
11.5.8	Then having offered a spoonful of oblation in the form of Svaha in front, he says, "Recite the names of these animals belonging to different deities and then offer them." He offers the animals with their omenta.
11.5.9	Then, when they are about to pour the fat of the animals of the same deity, he says in a low voice, "To Prajapati," and then loudly, "Recite when the fat of the sheep is being poured out." As much as the ladle can hold.
11.5.10	Then they pour the other (animals) into a vessel with a ladle.
11.5.11	He pours twice.
11.5.12	Having gone beyond the Āśrāvyā, he offers the Vapa with the formula, "To Prajapati, silently." Having gone beyond the Vapa, he offers the Medas with the formula, “The Medas of the sheep have been offered to the messenger, loudly."
11.5.13	At the Vasat-utterance, he offers the Vapā silently. He offers the Vapa to Sarasvati.
11.5.14	Then having offered the oblation in the form of Svāhā above, having thrown the Vapa-holding spoons, having gone beyond, they cleanse themselves in the Cātvāla.
11.5.15	Then he offers the animal oblations. He says, "May the pacifier (offer the oblations)." The oblations to Maruts are not to be offered in the evening. One should offer them from half the distance.
11.5.16	Having offered the Savitr oblation, they proceed for the morning pressing.
11.5.17	It concludes in a straight line.
11.6.1	Having offered Savitr oblation they proceed for the midday pressing. "The divine door."
11.6.2	Therefore, knowing that they have gone upwards, the Adhvaryu, going forward, says, "Place the chariot wheel in the Catvāla, put the chariot in the chariot-shed, put the horses in the pen, put whatever you are going to give as Dakṣiṇā to the south, the sprinklers call out, 'Come, O Gravastuta, come, O Yajamāna!'
11.6.3	The sprinkling is well-known.
11.6.4	The Grahas are well known.
11.6.5	The Grahas are similar to the Aggrayan.
11.6.6	Having taken the Aggrayan, he takes the Sodashin with the formula, "Indra, the bearer, carries." Having followed it, he takes it with the formula, “Thou art taken with a support. For Indra, thee, the Sodashin, I take the agreeable one.”
11.6.7	Having wiped it, he places it down with the formula, "This is your place; for Indra thee, the sixteen-fold."
11.6.8	Then he takes up the Ukthya cup.
11.6.9	The rite is common to the Dakṣiṇā gifts.
11.6.10	One who is going to offer the Dakṣiṇa gifts asks for the vessel of clarified butter with a ladle, a spoon and a garment.
11.6.11-14	The rope is stretched out at the end of this dwelling. Taking this, he says, "Come, O sacrificer." Having gone around along the north of the sacrificial post and having gone around along the northern side of the Sadas, he stands in front of the hall. The Pratiprasthātṛ hands over these implements.
11.6.15	This chariot is placed at the end of the right buttock. The chariot-bearer is placed.
11.6.16	He takes it up with the formula, "Thou art Indra's thunderbolt, the slayer of Vrtra. With thee he shall slay Vritra."
11.6.17	Then they lead him, seized by the demon, into the inner altar, saying, "We invoke with our speech the mother Earth, Aditi, at the impulse of the horse, in whom this whole world is contained. May the god Savitr lead us in the right path."
11.6.18	Then he puts the horses in the water, saying, "In the water is immortality, in the water is healing. In the water are the praises, be ye horses, ye strong ones."
11.6.19	Then he yokes the right horse, saying, "May the wind, or Manu, or the twenty-seven Gandharvas, who first yoked the horse, bestow speed on him."
11.6.20	Then he wipes the back of the yoke with the verse, "The wave, the crest, the swift, the strong, the most powerful, the one who is the best at winning the prize, with that he wins the prize."
11.6.21	In the same way, he yokes the northern yoke. In the same way, the northern yoke is attached to the back of the southern yoke. In the way they are wiped on the back.
11.6.22	All the other yokes are yoked in the same way as this one.
11.6.23	They make the elephants with the greater number of steps.
11.6.24	They put on the loads of clothes.
11.6.25	They weave the ten kinds of clothes without ropes.
11.6.26	The group of people brings the Dakṣiṇā.
11.6.27	Then he offers on the Garhapatya with two Sūrya verses.
11.6.28	He offers on the Agnidhriya with the verse "O Agni, may you lead us."
11.6.29	The Dakṣiṇās are released towards the southern path.
11.6.30	Whatever he gives, he gives gold and silver.
11.6.31	Then he gives clothes, cattle, horses, elephants, and men.
11.6.32	These chariots are given without being given.
11.6.33	They do not run in a race for anyone else.
11.6.34	He gives his own chariot to the Adhvaryu mentally, having mentally determined the Dakṣiṇās.
11.6.35	He performs with three Marutvatīya verses.
11.6.36	The Nārāśaṃsa verses are placed below the southern Havirdhāna, to be extended downwards for Indra.
11.7.1	Then he requests a cake on seventeen potsherds.
11.7.2	It is cooked in milk.
11.7.3	He performs with it, saying, "Recite for Brihaspati, I shall offer to Brihaspati."
11.7.4	Having placed the oblation of what is not desired, he places it in the known (place).
11.7.5	Now this is placed in a basket of Udumbara wood in front of him, mixed with all herbs, honey and ghee.
11.7.6	With a ladle of Udumbara, he offers seven oblations of food, beginning with "The offspring of strength has produced this foremost."
11.7.7	He makes the request for the consecration.
11.7.8	Having covered him, he places him in a known place.
11.7.9	Then, before the consecration, he offers six oblations to Agni, Soma, etc.
11.7.10	Then, at the place of the sacrificer, he spreads a black antelope skin with the neck towards the east and the fur upwards.
11.7.11	Having seated the sacrificer facing east, having worshipped him with golden and silver garments, he sprinkles him with all herbs facing west.
11.7.12	He sprinkles from the top, and lets it flow down from the mouth. "With the impulse of the divine Savitr, with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of Pusan, with the instrument of Sarasvati, the controller of speech, I sprinkle thee with the sovereignty of Agni, I sprinkle thee, with the sovereignty of Indra, I sprinkle thee."
11.7.13	When the earth is sprinkled, they cry out, "This is so-and-so's son, so-and- so's grandson, so-and so's great-grandson, performing the Vājapeya sacrifice."
11.7.14	Then he releases speech with "Bhūr Bhuvah Suvar."
11.7.15	The mouth is sprinkled with two (verses).
11.7.16	He steps in the Gāyatrī and Viṣṇu steps.
11.7.17-20	Then he offers six oblations for the Parthana-s after the consecration, saying, "To Indra svāhā, to Ghoṣa svāhā." He offers twelve oblations for the Bhūta-s, saying, "to earth svāhā,to space svāhā." Here he performs the Sviṣṭakṛt rite for this Brhaspati. Then taking it, he goes out towards the north between the Cātvāla and the mound.
11.7.21	These chariots, yoked, stand to the north.
11.7.22	He makes the horses yoked with the Yajus smell (the grass), saying, "The horses, winners of speed, winners of speed to be won, smelling the share of Brihaspati."
11.7.23	Having covered it, he places it in a known place.
11.7.24	Then he mounts the chariot with the formula, "Thou art the step of Visnu, thou art the stride of Visnu, Thou art the leap of Visnu."
11.7.25	Then he touches the wings of the chariot with the verse, "The two wings on both sides of the chariot."
11.7.26	He stands on the chariot with the verses, "I conquer the prize with the impulse of the divine Savitr, with Brihaspati, the winner of prizes.
11.7.27-29	At this time the sacrificial wheel is set up, and the Brahman ascends it. He recites the following formula: "By the impulse of the divine Savitr, I ascend the highest heaven with Brihaspati, the winner of the prize." Then, standing behind the sacrificer, he makes him recite the following verses: "Agni won speech with the one-syllabled (Om). The seven sages won speech with the seven-syllabled."
11.7.30	Then he gives him the horse-driving (stick), with the formula, "O horse-driving, O horse-driving, in the contests, O horse-winning, may the horses win in the contests."
11.7.31	With it he drives the horses as befits.
11.7.32	"The left one," (he says) to the right one.
11.7.33	"Thou art the leader," (he says to) the middle one.
11.7.34	"The winner," (he says ) to the left one.
11.7.35	Then he announces them to the horses as they are let loose: "O horses, run your race, be victorious in the impulse of the Maruts, you measure out the distance, you remove the obstacles, you go to the goal."
11.7.36	This is the post of Udumbara, set up in seventeen places for the insertion of the pegs.
11.7.37	They call it the wood. Having gone beyond the wood, do not go. Do not return without reaching it. Having made it into a corner, having taken it with the left hand, do not move around with the right hand. Do not move without being born.
11.8.1	Then he says, "O Yajamana, come forward. I shall take up the Mahadendra cup."
11.8.2	When the sacrificer has begun, he takes up the cup for Indra, with the verse, "O Indra, who art great, who art strong, who art mighty, who art the lord of wealth, who art the giver of wealth, who hast the thunderbolt, who art the slayer of Vrtra, to thee, O Indra, I offer this libation."
11.8.3	Having wiped it around, he places it, with the verse,"This is thy birth-place; for thee, O Mahendra."
11.8.4	He places together these five cups for Indra, which are taken up in excess.
11.8.5	Then having sprinkled himself, having taken the two sacrificial grass-blades, having restrained speech, having turned towards the east, he begins the Stotra.
11.8.6	He recites the Stotra for the Mahendra (hymn).
11.8.7	In the present Sāman, the Brahman says, "O Brahman, sing the Sāman of the horses. Let the horses run. Let the drums be beaten. Let the sprinklers sprinkle. Let the Agnīdh sprinkle the ashes. Let the Upabarhas sprinkle the water. Let the Pratiprasthātṛ pour out the Varuna oblation on one potsherd. Let the Soma be pressed."
11.8.8	They do as they are told.
11.8.9	Brahma sings the Sama of the horses.
11.8.10	He who binds them in any way,
11.8.11	The horses run.
11.8.12	They beat the drums.
11.8.13	The voices are heard.
11.8.14	The voices being uttered, he utters the speech to Indra, makes the horse utter Indra, Indra conquered the horse.
11.8.15	Then he addresses the moving chariots with the four verses in the Anucchada metre, "O Vājin, O Vājin, come to the race."
11.8.16	The sounds cease for the offering of the Sastra.
11.8.17	They say that this is the time of the Hotṛ.
11.8.18	The Adhvaryu turns away from the time of the Hotr.
11.8.19	The Hotṛ calls him.
11.8.20	The Adhvayu responds.
11.8.21	He praises.
11.8.22	He responds.
11.8.23	Having responded to the well-known eulogy, having approached the east, he takes up this Maheendra cup.
11.8.24	They take up the other cups.
11.8.25	They take the Nārāśamsa cups.
11.8.26	Then he announces: "Let it be heard, let it be heard. Let the Utkhaśa priests listen. Let them praise Soma."
11.8.27	He offers at the Vasat call.
11.8.28	They offer these five Indra-offerings together with the Atigrahya.
11.8.29	He offers twice at the Vasat and Anvasat calls.
11.8.30	In the same way they shake the Naraśaṃsa twice.
11.8.31	The Mahendra offering is offered twice.
11.8.32	The chariots come.
11.8.33	Seeing the chariots come, he asks for the Ajyasthali with the ladle.
11.8.34	If he tells him of the loss of his chariot, the Agnidhra offers this oblation. "With both (verses) he says, "May he run away from you, may he be driven away."
11.8.35	He offers the Rāthavimocaniya (oblation) with the verse, "May the impulse of strength come to me.
11.9.1	Then he asks for a cake of barley-meal, seventeen potfuls of honey, seventeen gold coins, a bronze vessel full of honey.
11.9.2	Having taken this, he goes out between the sacrificial post and the mound, facing north.
11.9.3	The chariots are yoked and stand to the north.
11.9.4	He makes the horses yoked to the chariot smell these Yajus-formulas, saying, "O horses, winners of speed, winners of speed in the form of speed, flowing with speed, desiring to win speed, you should be at the share of Brihaspati."
11.9.5	Having covered him, he places him in a known place.
11.9.6	Then he addresses the chariots being released with the verse, "This is the truth, the agreement that you have made with Indra."
11.9.7	He addresses the Dundubhi drums being beaten with the verse, “O trees, let us all praise Indra, the strong one, and be released."
11.9.8	He releases the chariot yoked with the Yajus-horses. The others are turned back as they were given.
11.9.9	They approach him, the sacrificer.
11.9.10	He gives them each a black bean.
11.9.11	Having collected them together, he offers them to the Brahman in a golden vessel filled with honey.
11.10.1	The Brahman accepts it and descends.
11.10.2	Then he says, "Having gone to the southern path, having approached the southern hip, you should rest. Having gone around the southern side of the fire-place, having approached the right shoulder, you should rest."
11.10.3	They are obstructed by the measured ones.
11.10.4	Then he says, "Come, O sacrificer!"
11.10.5	Having entered the Soma-shed by the eastern door, he makes the sacrificer place the Soma-grahas.
11.11.1	"Be united with me, unite me with the good."
11.11.2	"Be separated from me, separate me from evil."
11.11.3	Then, taking this Sura with the Sura-grahas, they offer them to the Soma-pressers.
11.11.4	Drinking it, they enjoy and rejoice.
11.11.5	Here, what is not to be given to Marutī, he places between the two (i.e. the sacrificer and the Hotṛ) on the leaves and branches.
11.11.6	They shake it and scatter it.
11.11.7	Then he asks for the vessel of clarified butter with the strainer, and the darbha grass for offering.
11.11.8	Taking this, he says, "Come, O sacrificer!"
11.11.9	The sacrificer follows, with the wife behind him.
11.11.10	He offers on the Āhavaniya fire when the sacrificer has approached, twelve spoonfuls, beginning with "Vāja and Prasava."
11.11.11	Then he makes the sacrificer put on the Tarpaṇa garment, saying, "You are the womb of the Kshatra."
11.11.12	"You are the womb and the birthplace of the Kshatras," he says to the wife, who is made of darbha grass.
11.11.13	Then he stretches the rope from the place of the sacrificer towards the sacrificial post, either east or west.
11.11.14	Then he addresses his wife, saying, "Come, O wife, let us ascend the heaven."
11.11.15	"Let us ascend the heaven," she replies.
11.11.16	"I shall ascend the heaven for both of us," says the sacrificer.
11.11.17	"You ascend the heaven for us both," says the wife.
11.11.18	He makes her ascend by ten means: "May the sacrifice be the means of attaining life."
11.11.19	Having gone inside, he grasps the arms, saying, "I have gone to the gods, I have become immortal, I have become the offspring of Prajapati."
11.11.20	Then he looks back at this world, saying, "May I be united with offspring, may offspring be united with me; may I be united with prosperity, may prosperity be united with me."
11.11.21	Then he descends upon her, saying, "She will be happy as much as she desires."
11.11.22	They strike him with the enclosing sticks.
11.12.1	The Adhvaryu says, "For food to thee!" in front; the Brahman says, "For nourishment to thee!" on the right; the Hotṛ says, "For strength to thee!" behind; the Udgātṛ says, "To win strength!" on the left.
11.12.2	If they do not wish, the Adhvaryu strikes in front, the Pratiprasthātṛ on the right, the Agnīdhra behind, the Unnetr on the left.
11.12.3	Their division is like that of the drums.
11.12.4	Here he places a stool for him to descend on.
11.12.5	On it he spreads a woolen cover, and on the woolen cover a golden piece weighing a hundred mānas.
11.12.6	Then he descends with gold on the right foot, saying, "Thou art immortality."
11.12.7	"Thou art nourishment, thou art generation," on the left foot, on the skin of the calf.
11.12.8	Then they bring him in with this evening prayer.
11.12.9	He goes to the village.
11.12.10	These cups follow him.
11.12.11	Here he invokes the blessing of this Brhaspati.
11.12.12	The Hotṛ and the Adhvaryu consume the Indra-offering, which is called Iḍā, with the Nārāśaṃsa cup.
11.12.13	Here, the sacrificer himself directly consumes the remnants of the Atigrahya cups in the principal vessel.
11.12.14	Alternatively, they may consume them in all the cups. This is another option.
11.12.15	These three consume the Hotr's goblet together, having invoked it.
11.12.16	As the goblet, so the goblets.
11.12.17	They touch themselves, saying, "Bless me."
11.12.18	They do not replenish the goblets with Soma.
11.12.19	All consume together and then cleanse themselves.
11.12.20	Then he proceeds with the three recitations of the Ukthya hymn, saying, "For Indra, for Indra."
11.12.21	The Madhyamdina Savana comes to an end.
11.13.1	Having offered to Savitr, they proceed to the third pressing.
11.13.2	Having performed the rite with the Aditya-graha, he takes up the Agrayaṇa-graha.
11.13.3	Then he takes up the Sodashin-graha with the verse, "O Soma, thou art the seed of Indra." Having recited the Anudruta verse, he takes it up with the verse, “Thou art taken up with a view to Indra; I take thee agreeable to the Sodashin Indra.”
11.13.4	Having wiped it, he places it, saying, "This is your place; for Indra thee, the sixteenfold."
11.13.5	Then he takes the Ukthya (cup).
11.13.6	The rite is the same as in the Pavamana.
11.13.7	Having performed with the Pavamana, he moves in his own abode with the animals.
11.13.8	They have different minds, different deities, different touch, different Vasahomas, the same Vanaspati, the same Svishtakrit, the same Ida, the same directions.
11.13.9	Some say that the directions are different.
11.13.10	The same rite is performed with the Dhruva and the cups.
11.13.11	Having performed the three Ukthya rites with the Dhruva and the Camasa vessels, he performs the rites of Indra-Varuna, Indra-Brhaspati and Indra-Visnu.
11.13.12	Then he performs the Sodashin rite.
11.13.13	Then going forward, he says, "Lift up the Hotr's vessel. The Unnetr should lift up the entire king without spilling it."
11.13.14	They first take up the Hotr's goblet, then the others in due order.
11.13.15	Having taken up all the kings, they place them on the northern altar.
11.13.16	They place them together with the Prajapati-cups.
11.13.17	Then having touched water, taking the two sacrificial grass-blades, and restraining speech, he runs towards the west and begins the praise.
11.13.18	He praises.
11.13.19	This is the twenty-first verse of the Brihat-sāman. They perform it in the Śipiviṣṭa-sāmans belonging to Viṣṇu.
11.13.20	They say that this is the last Hotr.
11.13.21	The Adhvaryu turns away from the time of the Hotr.
11.13.22	He calls him.
11.13.23	The Adhvayu responds.
11.13.24	He praises.
11.13.25	He responds.
11.13.26-31	Having recited the well-known Uktā, having approached towards the east, he takes up this Hotr's goblet. The others take up the other goblets. They take up the goblets. Then he announces: "Let it be heard, let it be heard. Let the Uktā be recited, let the Soma be offered." He offers at the Vasat-utterance. They offer these together as belonging to Prajapati.
11.13.32	He offers twice at the Vasat and Anuvṣat calls.
11.13.33	In the same way they offer twice to all the cups.
11.13.34	Then they run towards each other with the offerings, saying, "The offering is drunk by Prajapati."
11.13.35	Here, in the main vessel of these offerings to Prajapati, they pour the remnants and the sacrificer himself directly partakes of it.
11.13.36	But if they do not want to do so, then they may offer them all in the cups and consume them. This is another option.
11.13.37	Here, what is not to be consumed by the Maruts, that is offered to the priests.
11.13.38	They consume it after dividing it equally.
11.13.39	These three consume the Hotr's cup after offering it together.
11.13.40	As per the cups.
11.13.41	They touch themselves with the formula, "Do thou stimulate me."
11.13.42	They do not fill up the cups.
11.13.43	All eat together and then cleanse themselves.
11.13.44	Then he gives out the call, "O Agni, bring the sacrificial grass, O Upāṁsu, come near, O Brahman, we are going to depart, having placed the kindling wood, O Agnīdh, do thou touch the fires once each."
11.13.45	The Agni-dhr priest brings the embers from the Agni-dhra fire to the Upayaj priest.
11.13.46	He scatters them in front of the Hotr priest.
11.13.47	The Upayaj priest approaches with the three-thirds of the anus.
11.13.48	Here, having divided the three-thirds into eleven parts, the Upayaj performs the offering.
11.13.49	From here onwards, it is common.
11.13.50	The Vajapeya sacrifice concludes.
11.13.51	Having performed the Vājapeya, one should perform the Prātyavarohani Agniṣṭoma.
11.13.52	The Vājapeya comes to an end. The Vājapeya has come to an end.
12.1.1	One who is going to perform the Rājasūya becomes initiated.
12.1.2	He performs the New-Moon sacrifice with the New-Moon oblations before the full moon of Phālguna or Caitra.
12.1.3	He has three consecratory days, three Upasads, and the seventh day is the Prasūta.
12.1.4	The Pravargya rite comes to an end. The Agniṣṭoma sacrifice with four Stotras and a thousand cows as Dakṣiṇā comes to an end with the Upavasatha rite.
12.1.5	Then on the eighth day, he offers the Anumatya oblation.
12.1.6	He releases speech after the Havishkṛt oblation.
12.1.7	The rite is similar up to the pouring down of the oblations.
12.1.8	Having placed (the pot of) water, he places eight potsherds in the southern half of the Garhapatya, one in the north for the Pratiprasthātṛ for Nirṛti.
12.1.9	Giving the grinding stone for the oblation, he says, "The two directions, east and west, are being separated by the pestle."
12.1.10	The Adhvaryu, having placed together the pieces that are being separated towards the east, cooks them in the Anumati pot.
12.1.11	Then the Pratiprasthātṛ, having collected together the pieces of wood which have been cut off from the sacrificial post, and having bound them together, cooks them in the Nīraṃśa (fire).
12.1.12	They take this Nīraṃsa (wood) which has been spread out and sprinkled, a black garment, a black potsherd, the last (piece of wood) from the house, a single torch, and a water-pot.
12.1.13	Taking this, he offers a spoonful of oblation on the Garhapatya with the verse, "Do thou accept the oblation of Svāhā."
12.1.14	Then going out by the southern door, they go in that direction where his own created pit or hole is visible.
12.1.15	Having placed this single torch in front of himself, having spread it out, having taken hold of it with the thumbs, he offers to Nirṛti with the verse, "This is your share, O Nirṛti, you are the bestower of food. Release him from sin, svāhā."
12.1.16	Here he gives a black garment and a black pot.
12.1.17	Then, having sprinkled water, they go back, not looking at the vessel. Having washed their hands and feet, they return by the same way and offer a ladleful of oblation on the Garhapatya fire, saying, "Svāhā! Salutations to him who created this."
12.1.18	Then he performs the consecration with the consent of the sacrificer.
12.1.19	He gives a cow as a gift.
12.2.1	Then on the ninth day, he offers a cake on eight potsherds to Aditya.
12.2.2	He gives the boon.
12.2.3	Then on the tenth day, the Agni-Visņu offering with eleven potfuls.
12.2.4	He gives a bull.
12.2.5	Then on the eleventh day, the Agni Soma offering with eleven potful.
12.2.6	He gives gold.
12.2.7	Then on twelfth day, the Indra offering with eleven potfulls.
12.2.8	He gives an ox.
12.2.9	Then on the thirteenth day, a cake on eight potsherds to Agni, curds to Indra.
12.2.10	He gives a bull.
12.2.11	Then on the fourteenth day, the Upatīkā oblations, rice-pap to Sarasvati.
12.2.12	He gives an ox with a heifer.
12.2.13	Then on fifteenth day, rice-pap for Sarasvata.
12.2.14	He gives the ox with a he-calf.
12.2.15	If the Upavasatha happens to be on the fourteenth day, then he should offer these two Iṣṭis on this day with separate sacrificial grass.
12.2.16	On this day, the calves are driven away for the Visve Devas.
12.2.17	Having milked the milk for the Visvedevas, he observes fast. The Saṁnāyya is prepared silently.
12.2.18	Then, on the next day, having performed the Vaiśvadeva offerings and having performed the Pūrṇamāsa and the Vaimṛdhika offerings, he proceeds as prescribed.
12.2.19	Then, on the next morning, he offers a cake on eleven potshards to Indra Sūtrāmaṇ.
12.2.20	The chariot is described as having two handles, a bronze armour, and yoked with pregnant mares or with mules. The horse is tied to it. He gives it.
12.2.21	On the next day, he offers a cake on eleven potshards to Indra, the remover of distress.
12.2.22	The chariot is not mentioned. It is yoked with mares that are not pregnant, or with horses that are not castrated. The fine is a gold coin. He gives it.
12.3.1	They say that these are the regular fines.
12.3.2	The next day he pays the regular fines.
12.3.3	Thus, the sacrificer, in this manner, goes on for four months, performing the sacrifice of Viparāsa every day, with the two Sāntani sacrifices, with the Iṣṭi, with the animal-sacrifice, and with the Yavāgāra.
12.3.4	When the four months are over, having performed the Sāntani sacrifice, having performed the offerings to Varuna, having performed the Full-moon and New-moon sacrifices, he proceeds according to the prescribed procedure.
12.3.5	Then on the next day he performs with the two Sāntanīs.
12.3.6	Thus the sacrificer, performing the Viparyasam sacrifice with the two Sãntanīs, goes to the other four months, performing the Iṣṭi, the Pasubandha and the Śyāmākāgrayaṇa.
12.3.7	Then, when four months have passed, having performed the Sāntanīya sacrifice, having performed with the Sākamedha oblations, having performed the Full-moon and New-moon sacrifices, he returns according to the prescribed procedure.
12.3.8	Then on the next day, he commences with the Sāntaniyas alone.
12.3.9	Thus, day after day, the sacrificer, by means of the two continuous (sacrifices), goes to the other four months, as he pleases by the Iṣṭi, as he pleases, by the Pāśubandha, as he pleases (by) the Vrihyāgrayaṇa.
12.3.10	Then, when four months have passed, having performed the Sāntanīya sacrifice, having performed with the Shunāsīrīya oblations, having performed the Full-moon and New-moon sacrifices, he proceeds according to the prescribed procedure.
12.3.11	The next day he commences with the Sāntaniya sacrifices.
12.3.12	Thus, the sacrificer, performing the sacrifice in this manner, goes on for seven days. He may go on with the Iṣṭi or with the animal-sacrifice.
12.3.13	On the eighth day, he offers a cake on eight potsherds to Agni-Indra, a rice-pap to Rudra, curd to Indra, and a rice-pap of barley to Varuna.
12.3.14	Having obtained the Anvāhārya, he gives a milch cow.
12.4.1	Then at that very time, he performs the Pañceḍhmiya rite.
12.4.2	Having arranged five kinds of coals, he places five fires - a leaf-made fire in front, a banyan fire on the right, an ashvattha fire in the back, an udumbara fire in the north, and a plaksha fire in the middle.
12.4.3	Then he besprinkles them with clarified butter: "Those gods who are in front, Agni-eyed, destroyers of the Rakshas, may they protect us, may they favour us. To them be salutations, to them be salutations. Svāhā! Those gods who are on the right, those gods who are behind, those gods who (are) on the left, those gods who sit above."
12.4.4	Then he collects the coals with the Upavesha-mantra, "The Rakshas that has been burnt in the collected (coals), I burn the Rakshas here."
12.4.5	Then he offers them with oblations from the ladle, with the five mantras, "To Agni, the destroyer of Rakshas, svāhā."
12.4.6	Here he gives a chariot with a pole.
12.4.7	Then he asks for a leaf-made ladle, Apamārga grains, a garment to be worn while returning, a single-piece garment, and a water pot.
12.4.8	Taking these, he goes out, facing east, and goes in the direction where his own created desert or pit becomes clear.
12.4.9	Having placed this single torch and spread it around, he offers Apāmārga grains with a leaf-spoon, saying, "I offer the killing of Rakshas with your impulse, O god Savitar, with the arms of the Ashvins, with the hands of Pusan, svāhā."
12.4.10	He strikes the spoon with the words, "Rakshas is slain."
12.4.11	He stands up with the words, “We have bound Rakshas.”
12.4.12	Here he gives whatever he wears.
12.4.13	Then having sprinkled water, they go back with their vessels, not looking back. Having washed their hands and feet,
12.4.14	Having come back by the same way, he performs the concluding rite with the Indra-turyā verse.
12.4.15	Then on the ninth day, he offers the oblations to the goddesses, namely, a cake on twelve potsherds to Anumati, a cake to Raka, and a cake to Dhātrī.
12.4.16	Having placed the Anvāhārya portion, he gives a calf with a young one.
12.4.17	Then on the tenth day he offers the northern Devikā-oblations, a cake to Sinīvālī, a cake to Kuhū, and a cake on twelve potsherds to Dhātrī.
12.4.18	Having reached the next day, he gives a calf that is younger.
12.4.19	On the eleventh day, having performed the rites of the three-fold union, he offers the oblations to Agni-Visnu, Indra-Visnu and Visnu.
12.4.20	He gives a bull with a hump.
12.4.21	On the twelfth day, he offers the cake on eleven potsherds to Agni-Soma, the cake on eleven potsheds to Indra-Soma and cooked rice to Soma.
12.4.22	He gives a black (bull).
12.4.23	On the thirteenth day he offers a cake on twelve potshards to Soma-Pūṣan, a cake to Indra-Pūṣa, and a cake to Pūṣan.
12.4.24	He gives a black (animal).
12.4.25	On the fourteenth day he offers a twelve-potshered cake to Vaiśvānara.
12.4.26	He gives gold.
12.4.27	Then on the fifteenth day, he offers a cake on eight potsherds to Agni and Soma.
12.4.28	He gives a horse.
12.5.1	Then they conclude the sacrifice with the New-Moon offering. The recipients of the gifts are seated to the south or to the west or to the east.
12.5.2	When they have concluded, the Brahman becomes the recipient of the southern or the northern half.
12.5.3	Whatever food is served at the sacrifice, it is for the Brahman alone.
12.5.4	Having ascended the fires in the forest and having settled down in the house of the Brahman, having kindled the fires and having performed the rites, he offers a cake on twelve potsherds to Agni and a cake on eight potsherds to Indra in the house of Brahman.
12.5.5	He gives a bull with a sharp back.
12.5.6	Then having placed the fires in the Āraṇya, he proceeds to his own fire-places.
12.5.7	He recites the formula, "May this king, having become the king, slay Vṛtra."
12.5.8	Then, having determined his own fire-places, having churned out the fires, and having moved away, he offers a cake on eleven potshards to Indra Sūtramaṇi.
12.5.9	Then, having milked the milk of his white cow with a white calf, and having mixed it with curd, he keeps it aside.
12.5.10	Then, on the next day, having set up the fires on the Āraṇyaka fires, having gone to the house of a Kṣatriya, having churned out fire, having performed the rites, he offers a cake on eleven potshards to Indra in the house of a Ksatriya.
12.5.11	He gives a bull.
12.5.12	Then, having set up fires on the Āranyaka fires, he proceeds to his own fire-places.
12.5.13	He recites the same formula as he is being led away.
12.5.14	He who performs the sacrifice in whose house, he recites the formula, "May this king, having become a king, slay Vṛtra."
12.5.15	Having decided upon his own fire-places, having churned out the fires, having performed the rites, he offers a cake on eleven potshards to Indra, the slayer of Pāka.
12.5.16	He knows that this day is for the white cow with a white calf. Having milked her, he puts the milk in a vessel and keeps it aside.
12.5.17	On the third day, he offers a cake on eight potsherds to Aditya in the house of a woman.
12.5.18	He gives a cow.
12.5.19	On the fourth day, he offers to Bhaga a cake on eight potsheds to Vāvāta in the house of one who has a variegated calf.
12.5.20	He gives an excellent cow.
12.5.21	Then on the fifth day, he offers a cake on five potsherds to Nirriti in the house of a soldier, made of black grains, broken with nails.
12.5.22	He gives a black pot.
12.5.23	Then on the sixth day, he offers an eight-pot cake to Agni in the house of the commander-in-chief.
12.5.24	He gives gold.
12.5.25	Then on seventh day, he offers ten pot cakes to Varuna in the house of an army officer.
12.5.26-32	He gives the Mahāniṣṭha. Then on the eighth day, the Marut, with seven potfuls, in the house of the village chief. He gives the Pṛṣṇi. Then on ninth day, the Savitra, with twelve potfuls, in a warrior's house. He gives what is suppressed. Then on tenth day, the Āṣāḍha, with two potfuls, in an accountant's house. He gives what is with the Vātyas.
12.5.33	Then on the eleventh day, a cake on eleven potsherds to Pūṣan at the house of Bāgadughas.
12.5.34	He gives a dark-coloured (cow).
12.5.35	Then on the twelfth day, a cake of barley to Rudra at the house of Akṣāvāpas.
12.5.36	He gives an uneven-coloured (cow) with a gate.
12.5.37	It is well known that on this day he milks the cow Śvetayā for Śvetavatsa and keeps it aside.
12.5.38	On the thirteenth day, it is dedicated to Mitra and Brhaspati.
12.6.1	It is said:
12.6.2	To the white cow, to the white calf, to the milk, to the self-existent, to the self churned ghee, to the four-cornered vessel of the ashvattha tree, to the branch that is self-poured, one should separate the grains from the chaff.
12.6.3	Then it is said:
12.6.4	The altar is self-made, the sacrificial grass is self-spread, the wood is self-gathered.
12.6.5	The king himself is worshipped by his own deeds.
12.6.6	He himself makes the altar, himself arranges the kindling wood and grass, himself makes a four-cornered vessel of ashvattha wood, himself separates the grains from the chaff of the leaves, and himself separates the grains of rice from the chaff.
12.6.7	Now indeed it is said:
12.6.8	Those who have ears are in the milk, those who have no ears are in the clarified butter, those who have ears are the Maitravaruna.
12.6.9	Then having placed a new vessel on the embers mixed with ashes to the north, having brought the clarified butter covered with a strainer, having poured the clarified butter without ears, he covers the Barhaspatya with it.
12.6.10	He places that covered vessel inside the altar.
12.6.11-14	The Prāyajas are similar. Having offered five Prāyajas, having gone forward towards the north, having poured the Barhaspatya with the Srasrava, he pours the Maitra. He proceeds with the former Barhaspatya, then with the Maitra. He offers the former Barhaspayya in the Svishtakrit, then the Maitra. 
12.6.15	He offers the oblation of the Brhaspati-Soma. Then he offers the oblation to Mitra.
12.6.16	Having brought the Anvāhārya-rice, he gives the white cow with a white calf.
12.6.17	The oblation to Mitra-Brhaspati is concluded.
12.7.1	Then on this very new moon day, he initiates for the Upavasatha of the Abhisecanīya Soma.
12.7.2	His initiation is unlimited, and the Upasads are six.
12.7.3	He buys the king in such a way that he thinks, "May the Soma-pressing be accomplished on the new-moon day for me."
12.7.4	It is accomplished for him by that (Soma-pressing).
12.7.5	Then he performs the Pravargya rite.
12.7.6	Having performed the Pravargya, he performs the Pada rite.
12.7.7	Having perfoṟmed the Pada rite, he buys the king on the red skin and offers the Atithyesti.
12.7.8	He performs the Atithyas and the Upavasatha rites every day.
12.7.9	Then he places the Ahavanīya fire.
12.7.10	Having placed the Ahavanīyā fire, he joins the Rāthantara, Sadas and Havirdhāna fires.
12.7.11	Having joined the Rāthantaras, Sadas and the Havirdhāna, he places the fires of Agni and Soma.
12.7.12	Having placed Agni and Soma, he erects the sacrificial post within the enclosure.
12.7.13	Having released the sacrificial post with the Svāhā-utterance, he prepares the animal for Agni-Soma.
12.7.14	Having performed the offering of the oblation, he takes the Vasatīvari waters.
12.7.15	Then he offers the Pasupurodāsa oblation.
12.7.16	The eight Havis offerings for the gods follow it, beginning with "Agni, the lord of the house."
12.7.17	The procedure of their feet is as stated in the Vidhā.
12.7.18	The Purorāśas ending with the Ida are completed.
12.7.19	The animal sacrifice ends with the Patnīsaṃyājas.
12.7.20	Some say that it ends with the Hṛdayaśūla.
12.7.21	Here he places these drums in the directions.
12.7.22	Then, having removed the Vasatīvarī waters, they observe fasting with special care.
12.7.23	Now, they become aware only at midnight.
12.7.24-30	Having taken the morning butter, having brought it near the king, he performs the morning recitation. When the morning recitation is over, he goes to the water. He goes to the water with water. He approaches the Ukthya sacrifice. The pressing is well-known. The Grahas are taken well-known. The rite is common with the Grahas of the Asvins.
12.7.31	Having taken up the ladle for the Asvins and having taken up two Rasana ladles, he approaches the sacrificial post.
12.7.32	Having released the post reaching to heaven, he prepares the animal for Agni.
12.7.33	For him this is the Agni-upalabhya (animal).
12.7.34	Having performed the Vapa rites of these two animals, they proceed towards the morning pressing.
12.7.35	It concludes in a straight line.
12.7.36	They move for the midday pressing.
12.7.37	The pressing is well known.
12.7.38	The Grahas are taken well known.
12.7.39	(The rites) are similar to those at the Dakṣiṇā offerings.
12.7.40	One who is going to offer the Dakṣiṇa offerings asks for a vessel of clarified butter with a ladle, a spoon and a garment.
12.7.41-44	The rope is stretched out at the end of this dwelling. Taking this, he says, "Come, O sacrificer." Having gone around along the north of the sacrificial post and having gone around along the northern side of the Sadas, he stands in front of the hall. The Pratiprasthātṛ hands over these implements.
12.7.45	This chariot is placed at the end of the right buttock. The chariot-horse is placed.
12.7.46	He takes it up with the formula, "Thou art Indra's thunderbolt, the slayer of Vrtra. With thee he shall slay Vritra."
12.7.47	Then they lead it towards the interior of the altar, holding it firmly, silently.
12.7.48	Then he plunges the horses into water silently.
12.7.49	Then he yokes the right yoke-halter with the formula, "I yoke thee in the sway of Mitra-Varuna, the rulers, in the sway of sacrifice."
12.7.50	Then the back is wiped silently.
12.7.51	In the same way he yokes the left yoke-halter.
12.7.52	In the similar way he yokes its back-halter on the left side.
12.7.53	In the manner of the two, the back is wiped.
12.7.54	All this is yoked together in accordance with this (Sutra).
12.7.55	They make the elephants more than the prescribed number.
12.7.56	They put on the loads of clothes.
12.7.57	They weave the ten kinds of clothes without ropes.
12.7.58	The group of Dakshina comes in.
12.7.59	Then he offers on the Garhapatya with two Saura verses.
12.7.60	He offers on the Agnidhra with the verse "O Agni, may you lead us to wealth."
12.7.61	The gifts are given to the south.
12.7.62	Whatever he gives, he gives gold.
12.7.63	Then clothes, then yoked oxen, horses, elephants, men, at least.
12.7.64	These chariots are not given.
12.7.65	They do not run in a race for another.
12.7.66	He gives his own chariot to the Adhvaryu with his mind.
12.7.67	The Brahman directs the four-footed field with his mind.
12.7.68	Having directed with his mind, he moves with three Marutvatīya oblations.
12.7.69	The Nārāśaṃsa oblations are offered, the oblations of the southern Havirdhāna are nourished, and the lower and lower oblations are offered to Mahendra.
12.8.1	Then he requests the Vaitana vessel, the Drona vessel, and sixteen Vayavya oblations.
12.8.2-3	Now, before this (Agni), the sixteen-fold waters are collected from the directions, and are deposited on the southern Havirdhāna, from the eastern axle to the western support.
12.8.4	He offers to the flowing goddesses, the goddesses who have been established, the goddesses who are sweet, who have been taken, who are full of strength, who are for the Rajasuya, who have been prepared, by whom Mitra and Varuna consecrated, by whom Indra was led beyond the enemies.
12.8.5	"O Goddesses, give the kingdom, give the kingdom. Svāhā!"
12.8.6	"He takes it with the Palasa-twig, saying, 'Thou art the lord of the people; thou givest the kingdom to him who is the lord of the kingdom, to him who is of such and such a name, to the son of such and such, to the grandson of such and such.'
12.8.7	'Thou art the lord over the waters,' (he says) to those whose names are 'lord of the waters,' or to those whose names end in 'sāmudra.'
12.8.8	'Thou hast the form of a bull,' (he says to) those whose names end with 'ūrma.'
12.8.9	'Thou dost have the form of a warrior,' (he says), to those whose names have the form of 'palvala.'
12.8.10	'Thou standest on the pasture-ground,' (he says,) to those whose names contain the word 'kūpa.'
12.8.11	"The Maruts are the strength of the wind." This is the name of the Niviṣṭyā.
12.8.12	"The Sun is the brilliance." This is the Atidiśyā.
12.8.13	"Sun is the skin." This is the Ātapavati Vārṣyā.
12.8.14	"Slow." This is the Hrādunya.
12.8.15	"Wishes." This is the Prisvā.
12.8.16	"Shakvari." This is the Gorulbyā.
12.8.17	"Holder of the universe." This is the milk.
12.8.18	"Holder (of) the people." This is the curd.
12.8.19	"The lustre of Agni is here," (thus) one offers clarified butter.
12.8.20	"The juice of the waters and plants is here," (thuis) one offers honey.
12.8.21	Then he offers to Sarasvati: "The divine waters, full of honey, have taken up the strength, for the Rajasuya sacrifice, by which Mitra and Varuna were anointed, by which Indra was led beyond the enemies.
12.8.22	"O thou who givest the kingdom, give the kingdom! Svāhā!"
12.8.23	He takes it with a leaf-vessel, saying, "O thou who gavest the kingdom, thou hast given the kingdom to so-and-so, the son of so-and- so, the grandson of so-and so."
12.8.24	Then he pours it into the Vaitas and the Dronakalasa, saying, "The divine waters, flowing with sweetness, flow with sweetness, giving great lustre to the Kshatriya."
12.8.25	Then he places them between the Hotr's and the Brahmaṇācchaṃsin's Dhishṇyas, with the verse, "May they be seated, not to be assailed, bestowing strength, great lustre, and the Ksatriya-hood."
12.8.26	Here those things which are useful are taken to the resting place by the Adhvaryu.
12.8.27	Those things which are useless are thrown away.
12.8.28	The Vasatīvari waters are poured down for the Dashapāyina sacrifice.
12.9.1	Here he stands and asks for a bundle of Darbha grass, a hundred gold coins, four vessels of different kinds of wood, a Tarpya vessel, a turban, a hundred bundles of Darbha grass. He also asks for curd, Udumbara fruit, grass, a bow and arrows.
12.9.2	He ties a hundred-man-weight of gold in a darbha-grass-cord, saying, "Thou art the friend of speech, born of penance."
12.9.3	Then he places it in a bronze vessel or a pot, saying, "You are the giver of Soma."
12.9.4	With gold he purifies. "With the bright, I purify you with the bright. With the bright, with the bright, with immortality, with immortality, svāhā." "For the royal consecration, for the consecrated."
12.9.5	He takes them with the Palasa-leaves, the shining ones, the bestowers of strength, the uninjured, the well-dressed, the wearer of the garments, Varuna has made his abode among the waters, the child among the mothers.
12.9.6	He gives it to the Brāhmaṇa seated in front, taking it with this (formula). Having taken it with this (formule), he gives it to the king seated on the right, with the Udumbara (wood).
12.9.7	Having taken it with this, he gives it to a Vaishya seated behind, with the Ashvattha (wood).
12.9.8	Taking it with this, (he gives it) to a Shudra seated in front, with the Naiyagrodha (wood).
12.9.9	Then having taken the Praraka (the sacrificial post) and having placed it, he places it in a known place.
12.9.10	Then he makes the sacrificer wear the Tarpya garment, saying, "Thou art the womb of the Kshatra."
12.9.11	He puts on the Tarpya garment with the words, "Thou art of the nature of the Kshatras."
12.9.12	He covers the head with the garment, reaching down to the navel.
12.9.13	Then he purifies him with a hundred darbha-grass-blades, with the constant purification.
12.9.14	Then he cleanses him, saying, "Curd, Udumbara, and grass."
12.9.15	Then he brings him forward with the verses, "Agni, the householder, is purified," with seven verses in the Anucchada metre.
12.9.16	Then, standing in the place of sacrifice, he says to him, "This is your king, O sacrificers." Those whose chief he is.
12.9.17	"Soma is our king, O Brahmanas," say the others.
12.9.18	Then he gives him a bow, saying, "You are Indra's thunderbolt, the slayer of Vritra. With you he will slay Vritra." The arrows are for overcoming enemies.
12.9.19	The other one receives it with the words, "Do you torment my enemies." He says, "Protect me from the front, protect me from the sides, protect me from above, protect me from below, protect me from all directions, protect me from evil spirits."
12.9.20	Then he raises his arms with the Tristubh verses, "The golden-colored dawn shines forth."
12.9.21	Then he instructs him with the mind itself, "Proceed along the directions, and raise the mind upwards."
12.9.22	Then he makes him recite:
12.10.1	"Stand by the sacrificial grass, stand by the Ugra, stand by the Viraj, stand by the northern direction, stand by the upward direction."
12.10.2	Then standing here itself, he requests the Marut-offering with twenty-one potsherds and the Amikṣa-offering to the Visve Devī.
12.10.3	The Anuvāka of that (Sāman) which is in the forest, is used for the middle potsherds. The other potsherds are used with the Rajasūya and Gaṇa Sāmans.
12.10.4	He recites with them, "Recite for the Maruts, sacrifice to the Maruts." "Recite for all the gods, sacrifice to all the gods."
12.10.5	Having placed the two oblations for Aniṣṭa and Śviṣṭakṛt, he places them in the known (place).
12.10.6	Then he asks for a tiger skin, gold and silver ornaments, boar-skin shoes, lead and red copper.
12.10.7	The eunuch sits to the right.
12.10.8	Then before the consecration, he offers six oblations to Agni, Svāhā, Soma, Svāhā.
12.10.9	Then on the place for the sacrificer he spreads the skin of a tiger with the neck towards the east and with the hair upwards, saying, "Thou art the lustre of Soma; may my lustre be like thine."
12.10.10	Having seated the sacrificer facing the east, he adorns him with golden and silver ornaments.
12.10.11	"Thou art the immortal, O Death, protect me." He places silver below, saying, "Protect me from lightning." He places gold above, saying, "Protected by a hundred."
12.10.12	Then he strikes the impotent man sitting on the right side with lead, saying, "The serpents are biting."
12.10.13	He throws down the red iron with his left foot, saying, "Namuci's head is thrown down."
12.10.14	Here they take up the consecrations.
12.10.15	He looks at them.
12.11.1	"Soma, the king, Varuna, the gods, and those who are righteous, they have spoken the speech, they have spoken life, they have spoken sight, they have spoken hearing."
12.11.2	Then, taking the Brahma vessel, he consecrates with it.
12.11.3	The Adhvaryu alone mutters the Yajus. The others sprinkle. "He sprinkles thee with the lustre of Soma, with the brilliance of Agni, with the splendour of Surya, with the power of Indra, with the strength of Mitra-Varuna, with the energy of the Maruts, with the power and might of the Kshatriyas, with the power, might and energy of the Kshatriya-lords. Do thou protect the heaven. This is thy heaven."
12.11.4	Then the upper streams, having been removed, flow together from below, flowing along the serpent-like path of the sun, which flows along the back of the bull-like mountain, flowing in their own waters.
12.11.5	Here, at the main vessel of these consecrations, the streams flow together and then he goes to the house of the one who has been consecrated.
12.11.6	Then, when the two are engaged and the wife is appointed, he offers with, "O Prajapati, none other than you."
12.11.7	Here, this appointed one gives a boon.
12.11.8	Then, while giving a vessel to the appointed one, he says, "This is your vessel. It will be yours when I consecrate you. This will be yours."
12.11.9	Then, having returned by the same route by which he went, he offers the Praraka offering on the Āgnīdhra fire, with the formula, "O Rudra, whatever is thy supreme name, to that thou hast been offered, to that thou has been worshipped, svāhā."
12.11.10	Here he gives him the bow, if it has not been given earlier.
12.11.11	When the earth is removed, they cry out, "This is so-and-so's son, so-and- so's grandson, so-and so's great-grandson, the king of the Rajasuya."
12.11.12	Then he releases speech with "Bhūr Bhuvah Suvar."
12.11.13	The mouth is removed with two (verses).
12.11.14	He steps in the Gayatra and Vishnu strides.
12.11.15-18	Then he offers six oblations for the Parthana-s after the consecration, saying, "To Indra svāhā, to Ghoṣa svāhā." He offers twelve oblations for the Bhūta-s, saying, "to Earth svāhā, To Space svāhā." Here he performs the Sviṣṭakṛt rite for these two oblations. Then having covered them, he places them in a known place.
12.12.1	Then she puts on her sandals, saying, "Thou art the anger of cattle," on the right foot, and, "May thy anger be mine," on the left.
12.12.2	Then she touches this (earth), saying, "Salutations to the mother, the earth."
12.12.3	He places the right foot on it with the formula, "May I not injure my mother, the earth." The left foot with the formula, “May not my mother, the Earth, injure me.”
12.12.4	Then he goes out between the Catvāla and the mound towards the north with the formula, "Thou art the step of Visnu, thou art the stride of Visnu, Thou art the leap of Visnu."
12.12.5	The chariots yoked towards the north stand here.
12.12.6	Having seen them, the Adhvaryu stands still.
12.12.7	Then the Adhvaryus, having taken the bow and strung it, stands by the chariot, saying, "May I conquer in the impulse of the Maruts."
12.12.8	He places the bow on the yoke, saying, "The mind is attained."
12.12.9	At that very moment, the Adhvaryu follows him, saying, "O Purandara, may you conquer the enemies."
12.12.10	The Brāhmaṇa says, “He began with the Tristubh metre.”
12.12.11	Then, while giving the bow to the one who has been struck, he says, "This is the king's bow. He has won it in thirty-six contests with arrows. It is worth a thousand. Therefore, let him take the arrow from it and conquer him. Having conquered him, let him lead him away along the southern path."
12.12.12	The king alone is left. The king's son will shoot the arrow. He will miss it. Therefore, having wiped it with the upper part, one should give the arrow.
12.12.13	He does so.
12.13.1	Then he says, "O sacrificer, come forward. I shall take up the Maitravaruna cup."
12.13.2	When the sacrificer has begun, he takes up the cup for Indra, with the formula, "O Indra, thou of great strength." Having taken it up, he places it, with the formula "Thou art taken up with a support; I take thee for Mahendra, agreeable."
12.13.3	Having wiped it, he places it with the formula, “This is thy birth-place; for Mahendra thee.”
12.13.4	Then he asks for these gems: silver, jujube wood, and gold.
12.13.5	They are spread out in the various Sūtras.
12.13.6	Having spread them on the middle bamboo of the northern Havirdhāna, having touched water, having taken the sacrificial grass, having restrained speech, having turned towards the west, he begins the Stotra.
12.13.7	He recites the Mahendra Stotra.
12.13.8	At the present Sāman, he gives the instructions: "Run the race, beat the drums, the sprinklers sprinkle, the Agnidh (priest) should place the grass in the ladle, the Udgātṛ should strike the mortar, the Pratiprasthātṛ should offer the Varuna oblation on one potsherd, and the Soma."
12.13.9	They do as instructed.
12.13.10	The race is run.
12.13.11	The Dundubhi drums are beaten.
12.13.12	The voices are proclaimed.
12.13.13	The voices being proclaimed, he recites the Anumantrana.
12.13.14	The sounds cease for the Sastra.
12.13.15	They say that this is the Hotr's time.
12.13.16	The Adhvaryu turns away from the Hotr'a time.
12.13.17	The Hotr calls him.
12.13.18	The Adhvaryu responds.
12.13.19	He praises.
12.13.20	He accepts (the Soma).
12.13.21	Having accepted the well-known Upavasatha Soma, he goes forward and takes up the Mahadendra cup.
12.13.22	The others take up the other cups.
12.13.23	The Narashansa cups are taken up.
12.13.24	Then he announces: "Let it be heard, let it be heard. Let the Upavasatha-Soma be praised."
12.13.25	He offers twice at the Vasat and Anuvadat calls.
12.13.26	Similarly, they shake the Nārāśaṃsa twice.
12.13.27	The Mahendra is offered twice and then lies down.
12.13.28	The chariots come.
12.13.29	Seeing the chariots coming, he mutters, "I am united with the power of Indra, I am united with the strength of Indra."
12.13.30	Then he goes out towards the north between the Cātvāla and the Utkarā.
12.13.31	The chariots are yoked and stand to the north.
12.13.32	On seeing them, the Pratihit priest stands still.
12.13.33	Then the Pratihit takes up the bow, strings it, and stands on the chariot, saying, "May I conquer in the impulse of the Maruts."
12.13.34	He places the bow on the yoke, saying, "The mind is attained."
12.13.35	Then he immediately stands by him, saying, "Purūhūta, thou art going to conquer thy foes."
12.13.36	"He begins with Tristubh verses," so says the Brahmaṇa.
12.13.37	Then, while giving the bow to the one who is being consecrated, he says, "This is your bow. It will be yours when I consecrate you. It will be your bow."
12.13.38	Then, having returned by the same route, and having gone around between the sacrificial post and the mound, and having entered by the eastern door, and having placed the oblations in the Havirdhāna, and having turned the chariot towards the east, he stands.
12.14.1	He asks for these gems: silver, jujube, and gold.
12.14.2	In the left hand he places the silver (coin), saying, 'This is his life; may it give me life.' In the right hand he places the wood-apple (fruit), saying, 'this is his strength; may it give strength to me.' In the right (hand) he places the gold (coin), saying 'Thou art the yoke; thou art radiance; may radiance be in me.'
12.14.3	Here he takes up the milk-rice.
12.14.4	He puts the right hand of her into it, saying, "Thou art Mitra," and the left, saying, "thou art Varuna."
12.14.5	Then he touches her, saying, "I am united with all the gods."
12.14.6	Then, having covered her, he puts her down in a known place.
12.14.7	He puts these stones into one string, making the middle one of Udumbara wood.
12.14.8	Having fastened them to the necks, he returns by the same route, and having turned the chariot towards the east in front of the Āgnīdhra, he stands.
12.14.9	Then he offers the oblations for the release of the chariot in the Āgnīdhrā fire, with the four spoon-offerings, "To Agni, the lord of the house, svāhā."
12.14.10	Then for him, in front of the Āgnīdhra, there is placed a chariot-carriage, yoked, facing east.
12.14.11	On it, together with the charioteer, he places the chariot.
12.14.12	He thus conceals him from the world of heaven.
12.14.13	He places it with the verse, "The swan, the pure one."
12.14.14	He brings it down with Brahman, he places it with Brahman.
12.14.15	The Brāhmaṇa says, "It is placed in the Atichandas metre."
12.14.16	Now, in front of him, at the rear, they make a platform for the Agnidhra, either four or eight cubits in size.
12.14.17	On it, he places a wooden stool in the middle, saying, "You are the navel of the Kshatriya."
12.14.18	On it, the northernmost seat is spread, saying, "Thou art the womb of the Kshatriyas."
12.14.19	Then he sits down on it.
12.14.20	He addresses the one who is sitting down with the verse, "May you sit down on the soft and pleasant (seat). May it not harm you."
12.14.21	The other replies, "May it not harm me."
12.14.22	He addresses the seated one with the verse, "Varuna, the upholder of firm vows, has sat down for the sake of kingship, the one of good resolve."
12.14.23	Then the priests sit down around him.
12.14.24	The Adhvaryu sits down in front, the Brahman to the right, the Hotṛ and the Udgātṛ behind.
12.14.25	Then they go forward or backward, carrying the gems.
12.14.26	The Adhvaryu addresses the Brahman:
12.15.1	"You are the Brahman."
12.15.2	The Adhvaryu says, "You are the king, you are the Brahman." "You are Savitr, you are Satyasava."
12.15.3	The Brahman addresses the Brahman: "You are the Brahman"
12.15.4	"You are Brahma, O king," he says. "You are Brahma-Indra, O king, of true splendor."
12.15.5	"Brahma-an" he says to the Hotar.
12.15.6	"You are Brahma, of true splendor," he says.
12.15.7	"Brahma" he says to Udgatar.
12.15.8	"You, O king, are Brahma," he says. The Udgatar says, "You are Varuna, of true Dharma."
12.15.9	"You are a good speaker," he says to the steward.
12.15.10	"You are a good king, O King," says the steward.
12.15.11	He says to the treasurer, "You are a lucky one."
12.15.12	"You are lucky, O King," the treasurer says.
12.15.13	He says, "You are the true king" to the distributor of shares.
12.15.14	"You truly are a king, O King" says the distributor of shares.
12.15.15	The seven names of the meritorious one, then he gives the wooden sword to him, saying, "You are Indra's thunderbolt, the slayer of Vrtra, with it I shall prosper."
12.15.16	The other one receives it, saying, "With it may you prosper."
12.15.17	He gives it to the Soma-presser, the Soma-pressers' chief, the kinsman, the kinsmen's chief, the collector, the dice-players, the cattle-keepers, and the door-keepers, at least.
12.15.18	He throws three hundred and fifty golden dice in the middle of the two (dice-boards).
12.15.19	Then, having cut off five dice, he gives them to him, saying, "This king has become the directions."
12.15.20	He immediately throws them into the dice.
12.15.21	Then he announces this rice.
12.15.22	The two who have different shares are the Brahman and the sacrificer, the two who have equal shares are the Sūta and the Grāmaṇi, the two who take equal shares are the Kṣatt and the Saṅgrahītara.
12.15.23	He who is like a gambler, having sat on the king's seat, having won four hundred dice, says, "The king has won."
12.15.24	Having made them all equal in mind, he says, "The Brahman has won."
12.15.25	Then they announce this cooked rice.
12.15.26	The Brahman and the sacrificer have equal shares, the Sūta and the Grāmaṇi have unequal shares, the Kṣattas and the Saṅgrahītaras have unequal shares.
12.15.27	He whose (army) is defeated, for him the Kṣattā cooks it in his house.
12.15.28	As long as this rice is being cooked, the Hotṛ recites the Śaunaka-śepa while seated on a golden stool.
12.15.29	Therefore, the Adhvaryu recites it while seated on a wooden stool.
12.16.1	"O Hotṛ, thus, O Hotṛ, truthfully, O Hotṛ."
12.16.2	If the Hotṛ does not recite it, then someone else who knows the Hotṛ's recitation recites it.
12.16.3	Therefore the Pratiprasthātṛ recites.
12.16.4	It is said to be a hundred.
12.16.5	When this rice is cooked, then having taken it out in one place, he offers it to the Brahman.
12.16.6	Therefore he gives these gems and a hundred-fold field with four sides.
12.16.7	Then he gives to the Hotṛ a hundred-fold golden whip.
12.16.8	Then he gives a hundred to the Udgâtri.
12.16.9	Then he gives a hundred, a chariot, and three hundred and fifty golden dice, and a golden stool, to the Adhvaryu.
12.16.10	Here they give him this Nirjya, having divided it into four parts.
12.16.11	Then they lead him with this evening twilight, or he goes of his own accord.
12.16.12	These cups follow him.
12.16.13	Here he invites the Iḍa of these two oblations.
12.16.14	The Hotr and the Adhvaryu consume the Mahendra oblation after inviting the Iḍa.
12.16.15	With the Nārāśaṃsa oblation, the Nārāsaṃsa oblations.
12.16.16	These three together invite and consume the Hotr's cup.
12.16.17	As the cups, so the cups.
12.16.18	They touch themselves with the words, "Do thou stimulate me."
12.16.19	They do not fill the cups.
12.16.20	All eat together and then cleanse themselves.
12.16.21	Then he proceeds with the three recitations of the Ukthya verses, "For Indra thee, for Indra thee."
12.16.22	The midday pressing comes to an end.
12.16.23	They proceed towards the third pressing.
12.16.24	It is well known that one performs the Āgrayaṇa rite with the Āditya graha.
12.16.25	Then one performs the Ukthya rite.
12.16.26	The rites are similar to those of the Pavamāna rite.
12.16.27	Having performed the Pavamāna, one performs the rite in one's own abode with the animals.
12.16.28	They have different minds, different deities, different perceptions, different Vasahomas, the same Vanaspati, the same Svishtakrit, the same Prishas, the same Nidhas, the same directions.
12.16.29	Some say that the directions are different.
12.16.30	The same rite is performed after the Avabhrtha.
12.16.31	Now they take up the leather shoes and the leather arm-guards at this Avabhrtha.
12.16.32	Having sprinkled with the Vārāhi and the Armāpāksī formulas, he rises.
12.16.33	At the end of the waters, he offers with the formula, "To the grandson of waters, svāhā."
12.16.34	At the equinox, he offers on a darbha-bunch with the formula, “To the grandson of energy, svāhā.”
12.16.35	Having returned, he offers on the Garhapatya with the formula, "To Agni, the householder, svāhā."
12.16.36	The Avabhrtha rite is well-known.
12.16.37	Having performed the Udayanīya Iṣṭi, he offers the Vasa-animal dedicated to Mitra-Varuna.
12.16.38	Having performed the prescribed animal-sacrifice, he does not shave off the beard or hair.
12.16.39	This Ukthya, Abhisecaniya, Catuṣṭoma Pavamāna, with a thousand as Dakṣiṇā, comes to an end.
12.17.1	Now for him, even before this, a hall is built in the seven places where the dice are thrown, in the place where the gods are worshipped.
12.17.2	Here he offers an oblation to Agni on eight potsherds.
12.17.3	He gives gold.
12.17.4	He stays in the second place where the dice are cast.
12.17.5	An oblation to Sarasvati.
12.17.6	He gives a cow with a calf.
12.17.7	He stays at the third place where the dice is cast.
12.17.8-17	The Savitrī oblation is in twelve potsherds. One gives away a garment with a border. In the third month, having performed the Samyānyāsa rite, one dwells with the resolve. The Pūṣan oblation is in rice-gruel. One gives a garment with a dark border. In fourth month, having performed Samyānyāṣa rite, one dwells resolved. The Brhaspati oblation is in potsherds. One gives a garment with black border. In fifth month, having performed Sāmyānyāsa rite one dwells resolved. The Indra oblation is in eleven potsherds.
12.17.18	He gives a bull.
12.17.19	On the sixth day, he performs the Samyāna-rite and stays in the house.
12.17.20	He offers a Varuna-offering on ten potsherds.
12.17.21	He gives a great sacrificial animal.
12.17.22	Then on the seventh day, he enters the house.
12.17.23	This is the day of initiation.
12.17.24	Now it is said:
12.17.25	They initiate immediately, buy Soma immediately, and give a garland of lotus flowers.
12.17.26	Then having brought him from the sacred place, having purified him, having brought the garland of lotuses, he performs the Isti of consecration.
12.17.27	When that is completed, he does not make a fist and does not speak.
12.17.28	He puts down this oblation, the remnant of the vow-offering.
12.17.29	Then he performs the Prayaniya Isti.
12.17.30	The Havir-krit releases speech.
12.17.31	Here they give him the remnant of this oblation, the vessel of the vow.
12.17.32	Then he performs the Pravargya rite.
12.17.33	Having performed the Pravargya, he performs the Pada rite.
12.17.34	Having done the Pada rite, having bought the king with ten young calves, he performs the Atithyasacrifice.
12.17.35	Having performed the Atithya rite, he offers the Soma cake to Soma in front of the Upasads.
12.17.36	He gives a brown (cow).
12.17.37	Then in the middle of the Upasad rites, he offers the cake to Tvashtri on eight potsherds.
12.17.38	He gives an ox.
12.17.39	Then above the Upasads, he offers the Visnu cake on three potsherds. 
12.17.40	He gives a dwarf (cow).
12.17.41	He then carries the Ahavaniya fire.
12.17.42	Having taken the Āhavaniya fire, he mixes it with the Sadas and Havirdhāna fires.
12.17.43	Having mixed the Sadas and the Havirdhāna, he takes the Agni and Soma fires.
12.17.44	Having taken the Agni and Soma, he erects the sacrificial post near the sacrificial post.
12.17.45	Having released the sacrificial post reaching the heaven, he prepares the animal for Agni and Soma.
12.17.46	Having performed the well-known Vaya sacrifice, he takes the Sārasvatī and Vasatavārī offerings.
12.17.47	Then he offers the Pasupurodāsa oblation.
12.17.48	The Pasupurodāsā oblation ends with the Iḍāntas.
12.17.49	The animal sacrifice ends with the Patnisaṃyājas.
12.17.50	Some say it ends with the Heart-pierce.
12.17.51	Then having performed the Vasatavārīs, they observe fasting with special offerings.
12.17.52	Now, then, they become aware of the great night.
12.17.53	Having taken the clarified butter in the morning, having brought it near the king, he performs the morning recitation.
12.17.54	When the morning recitation is completed, he goes to the water.
12.17.55	He goes to the water with water.
12.18.1	He approaches the Agniṣṭoma sacrifice.
12.18.2	The pressing is well-known.
12.18.3	The Grahas are taken well-known.
12.18.4	The rite is similar to that of the Graha of Asvin.
12.18.5	Having taken up the Graha of the Asvins, having taken two Rasanas, he approaches the sacrificial post.
12.18.6	Having released the sacrificial post reaching the heaven, he prepares the animal for Agni.
12.18.7	For it, the animal for Prajapati is the Uparampha.
12.18.8	Having performed the Vapa rites of them, they proceed towards the morning pressing.
12.18.9	At the eastern gate, the Sūta-gramani and his wife stand, at the western gate, the Kṣatt and the Sangrahitāra.
12.18.10	When he is about to go out, they ask him, "Who is your mother? Who is your maternal grandmother?"
12.18.11	Those who succeed in the tenth month, they let go.
12.18.12	Those who do not succeed, they follow with a long lineage.
12.18.13	Those who say, "Our mother Savitri is a Vaishya," they are born by the Vaishyas, saying, "She is the protector of marriages."
12.18.14	They recognize the cup at ten places.
12.18.15	The morning pressing concludes directly.
12.18.16	They proceed to the midday pressing.
12.18.17	The pressing is well-known.
12.18.18	The Grahas are taken well-known.
12.18.19	The same rite is to be performed for the Dakṣiṇas.
12.18.20	Having offered the Dakṣiṇā oblations, he gives a garland to the Adhvaryu, gold to the Udgātṛ, a horse to the Hotṛ, twelve milch-cows to the Prastôtṛ and Pratihartṛ, a cow to the Brahman, a mare to the Maitrāvaruṇa, a couch to the Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin, garments to the Nestr and Prati-neṣṭṛ, barley-meal to the Sthūri, a bullock to the Acchavaka, and a goat to the Agnidhṛt.
12.18.21	Bhārgava is the Hotṛ priest.
12.18.22	The Śrāyanta-sāman is sung at the Brāhmaṇasavana and the Vāravantīya-sāman at the Agnistoma-sāman.
12.18.23	The Madhyāndina Sāman is concluded in a straight manner.
12.18.24	They proceed to the third pressing.
12.18.25	Having performed the Ādityagraha rite, one takes up the Agrayaṇa draught.
12.18.26	The rite is similar to that of Pavamāna.
12.18.27	Having performed the Pavamāna (Stotra), he performs in his own place with the two animals.
12.18.28	They have different minds, different deities, different mutual perceptions, different Vasahomas, the same Vanaspati, the same Svistakrt, the same Prāsa, the same Nidā, the same directions.
12.18.29	Some say that the directions are different.
12.18.30	The same rite is from Avabhrtha onwards.
12.18.31	Avabhrtha is well-known.
12.18.32	Having performed the Udayanīya Iṣṭi, he offers the Vasa-animal to Mitra-Varuna.
12.18.33	Having performed the prescribed animal sacrifice, he shaves the hair on the right side of the head, but not the hair on the head.
12.18.34	This Agniṣṭoma with seventeen Stomas, to be performed with ten Soma-pressings, with a thousand as Dakṣiṇā, comes to an end with the Upavasatha.
12.19.1	Then he performs the sacrifice with five oblations, encompassing the directions.
12.19.2	He offers an oblation to Agni on eight potsherds, to Indra on eleven potsherds, a cooked oblation to the All-gods, a milk-rice oblation to Mitra-Varuna, and a cooked oblation for Brhaspati.
12.19.3	Then indeed it is said:
12.19.4	Having offered the oblations, one should pour over the oblation for Brhspati.
12.19.5	Having offered the oblations, he pours over the Barhaspatya (cake).
12.19.6	Having reached the Anvâhârya (rice), he gives the sacrificial gifts as prescribed.
12.19.7	Then he performs the animal-sacrifice with two animals.
12.19.8	He offers a pregnant heifer to Aditi and a pregnant black-spotted she-goat to Maruts.
12.19.9	Aditi is pregnant, Maruts are not.
12.19.10	He moves forward with the eastern Aditya and the northern Maruts.
12.19.11	He invites the Aditya loudly and the Maruts in a low voice.
12.19.12	It concludes as in the case of the animal sacrifice involving two animals.
12.19.13	Then he performs the sacrifice with the oblations of the Satyadutas.
12.19.14	He offers a cake on twelve potsherds to the Asvins, a cake on twelve potsherds to Pusan, a cooked rice to Sarasvati, the truthful, a cake on twelves potsherds to Savitr, the truthful-progenitor.
12.19.15	Having placed the Anvähäryapāka, he gives a bow with three strings and a dry shield.
12.19.16	He sends it to the kings of the enemy.
12.19.17	He who receives it knows him as Mitra.
12.19.18	Then he who does not accept (the gift) is known to be his enemy.
12.19.19	Then he performs the rites with the former oblations.
12.19.20	He offers an oblation of eight potfuls to Agni, a rice-cake to Soma, a cake on twelve potfuls to Savitr, a rice- cake to Brhaspati, a cake on eight potfuls to Tvashtri, a cake on twelves potfuls to Vaisvânara.
12.19.21	Having obtained the Anvāhārya portion, he gives away the chariot with the right-hand horse.
12.19.22	Then having performed the Full-moon and New-moon sacrifices, he performs the northern Prauga sacrifices with the offerings.
12.19.23	He offers a rice-pap to Sarasvati, a rice-pap for Pusan, a rice- pap for Mitra, a rice-pa for Varuna, a rice-papa for Ksatra-pati, a rice-p for Aditya.
12.19.24	Having placed the Anvāhārya (rice-ball), he gives away the chariot, the vehicle and the horse.
12.20.1	Here he performs the twelve-day vow.
12.20.2	He anoints himself.
12.20.3	He does not run away from a fight.
12.20.4	He anoint himself.
12.20.5	He is not negligent.
12.20.6	He fights when there is a battle.
12.20.7	The sacrificer observes the vow of Agnihotra leftovers.
12.20.8	The wife brings the food.
12.20.9	Now, before this, three halls are built for him in the well-liked place of sacrifice.
12.20.10	Having settled in the southern half of the hall, having churned out the fires and performed the rites, he initiates for the Atiratra with Keshabaraniya and Pratichinastomas.
12.20.11	His initiation is unlimited, and the Upasads are twelve.
12.20.12	He buys the king in such a way that he thinks, "May the Soma-pressing be accomplished on the full-moon day for me."
12.20.13	It is accomplished for him in that way.
12.20.14	He comes to the Upavasatha day with the well-known rite.
12.20.15	Having taken away the Vasatīvari waters, they observe the fast separately.
12.20.16	Then they get up early in the morning.
12.20.17-23	Having taken the clarified butter for the morning (rites), having brought it near the king, he performs the morning recitation. When the morning recitation is over, he goes to the water. He approaches the Atiratra sacrifice. The pressing is well-known. The Grahas are taken well-known. The rites are similar to the Avabhrtha. The Avabhrtha is well-known.
12.20.24	Having performed the Udayanīya Iṣṭi, he offers the Vasa-animal dedicated to Mitra-Varuna.
12.20.25	Having performed the prescribed animal sacrifice, he shaves off all the hair on the right side of the altar.
12.20.26	This Pratichinastoma Keshavapaniya Atiratra with a thousand as Dakshina comes to an end with the Upavasatha.
12.20.27	Then, having decided on a middle-sized hall, having churned out the fires, having performed the Vyuṣṭi rites, he initiates for the two-day rite.
12.20.28	His initiation is unlimited, and the Upasads are twelve.
12.20.29	He buys the king in such a way that he thinks, "When I have the two-day (rite), the previous day will be accomplished on the day of fasting before the new moon, and the subsequent day on the subsequent day."
12.20.30	The Vyuṣṭidvi-rātra comes to an end.
12.20.31	Then, having determined on the northern half of the hall, having churned out the fires, having performed the Udayanīya Agniṣṭoma, he consecrates himself.
12.20.32	He has three consecrations, three Upasads, and the Prasūta on the seventh day.
12.20.33	This Udayanīyagniṣṭoma ends with the Caturṣṭoma, with a thousand as Dakṣiṇā, and the Upavasatha.
12.20.34	Then he performs the Devikā-Havis.
12.20.35	Then he performs the Traidhatavīya sacrifice.
12.20.36	Then he performs the Sautrāmaṇī sacrifice.
12.20.37	The Rājasūya is completed in fifteen and a half months.
12.20.38	The Rājāsura is completed, the Rājāsura has been completed.
13.1.1	Now we shall explain the Iṣṭis.
13.1.2	Their procedure is prescribed only once, namely, that of the Darśa-Pūrṇamāsa.
13.1.3	The procedure of the Darśapūrṇamāasa is prescribed.
13.1.4	All are of the first kind, all are of the middle kind, all are the best kind.
13.1.5	One should offer oblations at the proper time, on the days of the Parva and Tithi, to those who have been designated as having a place.
13.1.6	Now those who have not been designated as having places, and those auspicious days of the bright fortnight, these are the sacred places. Those which are not for the purpose of removing distress.
13.1.7	Now those which are for the purpose of removal of distress, and those which are the times of obtaining the means, they are.
13.1.8	As it is said in the Veda, "What is not born, not produced, not created, not fashioned, not made, not composed, not discomposed, not dead, not alive, not increasing, not decreasing, not this, not that, not both, not one, not many, not the same, not different, not past, not future, not present, not seen, not heard, not known, not attained, not thought, not meditated upon, not perceived, not perceived, this is Brahman."
13.1.9	The Agnihotra has been explained.
13.1.10	The Vrata-offering is always to be offered.
13.1.11	The sacrificer should offer the Yañmānas till the accomplishment of the sacrifice, except for the offerings to the deities.
13.1.12	Those whose names are mentioned should be offered silently.
13.1.13	The others should be offered loudly, as per the instruction.
13.1.14	One should know seventeen Sāmidhenī verses. One should make the two verses of the Manavī hymn the Dhāyyas, the two verses of Uṣṇih and Kakubha the Dhāyyās, and the two verses of Tristubh the Samyājyās.
13.1.15	The two verses of Vartraghna are the Ajyabhāgas in the first half of the month.
13.1.16	The two ending with Vrīdhana are in the second half of the month, says Aupamaṇyava.
13.1.17	If the offerings are exhausted by desire or by the Dakṣiṇā, one should know them to be of different kinds of grass.
13.1.18	By the order (of the priest), the Dakṣiṇa-exhausted (offering) becomes of the same kind of grass as the others. The Neṣṭi (priest) follows the Upāṃśuyāja (priest) as the turning of the directions.
13.1.19	The Yājyā and Anuvākyā are of the same deity as the oblation.
13.1.20	The offerings that are mentioned in the Svishtakrit are to be made before it.
13.1.21	The Iṣṭis for which the gifts are not mentioned are to be given garments as gifts.
13.1.22	The animal sacrifice is to be given cows as gifts.
13.1.23	It is said that the Anvāhārya is a permanent (sacrifice). Thus these Iṣṭis have been explained.
13.2.1	Now, it is said:
13.2.2	"One desiring offspring should offer an Ekādaśakapāla oblation to Indra-Agni."
13.2.3	These are its verses: "O Indra and Agni, I have heard your words."
13.2.4	One should offer an Indra-Agni oblation on eleven potsherds if one is competing in a field or with one's own kinsmen.
13.2.5	These are its verses: Indra and Agni, the bright ones, have loosened Vritra from the sky.
13.2.6	One should offer Indra-Agni on eleven potsherads if one is about to go to war.
13.2.7	These are its verses: "O Indra and Agni, may you be victorious in the ninety-nine battles."
13.2.8	One should offer an Indra-Agni oblation on eleven potsherds to conquer a battle.
13.2.9	These are its verses: "Both of you, O Indra and Agni, are heard."
13.2.10	One should make an Indra-Agna offering on eleven potsherards when going to a gathering.
13.2.11	These are its verses: "Indra and Agni, the bright ones of heaven, have loosened Vritra."
13.2.12	One should offer a cake to Pusan.
13.2.13	These are its verses: We have come to you, O lord of paths, on the path.
13.2.14	One should offer an oblation to the lord of the field when one arrives at a village.
13.2.15	These are the verses: We are the lord of the fields, the lord of the lord of the fie
13.2.16	One should offer a cake on eleven potshards to Indra-Agni.
13.2.17	These are for those who wish to conquer in battle.
13.3.1	One should offer a cake to Agni as the path-maker on eight potshards if one who is a performer of the new and full moon sacrifices misses the new moon or full moon.
13.3.2	For this Iṣṭi, one who is about to perform it procures grass from the path and a bull.
13.3.3	For this, these are the mantras: "O Agni, lead us to the gods."
13.3.4	Having placed the Anvāhārya rice, he gives away the bull.
13.3.5	One who has kindled the sacred fire should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni, the lord of vows, if he behaves as if he is not observing the vow.
13.3.6	These are her (Agni's) vows. You, O Agni, are the guardian of vows. If we transgress the vows, then (you) are the guardian of the vows.
13.3.7	One should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni, the destroyer of Raksas, if the Raksas afflict him.
13.3.8	Now indeed it is said:
13.3.9	One should offer (the cake) when the sun has set, and one should consecrate (the sacrificer) when the sun is rising.
13.3.10	He who has been attacked by a demon at night, should offer to Agni, the destroyer of demons, a cake on eight potshards.
13.3.11	He should offer it when the fire is surrounded by the sacrificial grass.
13.3.12	He should recite the fifteen Sāmidhenī verses of this hymn in the reverse order, beginning with "Do thou, O Indra, make the earth thy friend."
13.3.13	The two verses are: "The destroyer of demons, the illuminator."
13.3.14	Then he offers the oblation of the ladle in front of the Svishtakrit, with the verse, "May the Svasnas be in heaven, may they be in Agni."
13.4.1	One should offer a cake on eight potshards to Agni Rudravat, if one is practising sorcery.
13.4.2	These are the verses for it: "O Agni, you are Rudra, you are the king of the gods."
13.4.3	If one's cows or men are killed, or if one is afraid, one should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni, the fragrant, saying, "This is for you."
13.4.4	These are the verses: "Agni is the Hotar, he has made it good."
13.4.5	If one is engaged in battle, one should offer to Agni, the forgiving, a cake on eight potsheards, saying, "For you."
13.4.6	These are its verses: "Agni has cried out, you are the Vasus."
13.4.7	Now indeed it is said:
13.4.8	"He indeed addresses those whose earlier and later (sacrifices) are performed in succession."
13.4.9	For his offering of a man is his most beloved.
13.4.10	One should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Kshamavata.
13.4.11	These are its verses:
13.4.12	Now indeed it says:
13.4.13	He is indeed invited to the house of him whose house he enters.
13.4.14	One should offer a cake on eight potshards to Agni Kshamavata.
13.4.15	These are its mantras:
13.5.1	It is said:
13.5.2	One should offer to Agni Kama a cake on eight potshards to him whom one desires.
13.5.3-6	These are the verses for her. We seek that Agni, the Angiras, who is the most excellent. One who is competing for a field or with his kinsmen should offer a cake on eight potshards to Agni, the most excellent. These are the verses to be recited: The best, the most excellent, O Bharata, he who is white-toothed. One who has been cursed should offer a cake to Agni, the best. These are the mantras to be recited:
13.5.7	These are its (Agni's) verses.
13.5.8	One who desires to live the whole life should offer a cake on eight potshards to Agni.
13.5.9	These are its verses: "O Agni, giver of life, give me life."
13.5.10	One who desires prosperity should offer a cake to Agni Jātavedas on eight potshers.
13.5.11	These are his verses: "To him, the one who is above heaven,
13.5.12	One desiring lustre should offer a cake on eight potshards to Agni Rukmat.
13.5.13	These are the verses for it: "Thou art pure, thou art shining, thou art bright."
13.5.14	One desiring lustre should offer to Agni Tejasvat a cake on eight potsheds.
13.5.15	These are its verses: "To thee, O lord of wealth, the most lustrous."
13.5.16	If one is studying, one should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Sahantya.
13.5.17	These are its formulas: "O Agni, bring us the power to endure, O Agni, the power to endure in battle."
13.6.1	If one desires, "May I be endowed with food," one should offer a rice-cake on eight potsherdas to Agni Anvata.
13.6.2	These are its verses: "O Agni, lord of food, lord of wealth, be gracious to us, O son."
13.6.3	One desiring to be a lord of food should offer to Agni, the lord of food, a cake on eight potshards.
13.6.4	These are its verses:
13.6.5	One desiring to become a lord of food, should offer to Agni the lord of food a cake on eight potsheds.
13.6.6	These are its (Agni's) forms.
13.6.7	One should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Pavamāna, to Agni Pāvaka, to Agni Śuci, for the removal of disease.
13.6.8	One who is going to perform this Iṣṭi procures gold.
13.6.9	For her these are the verses: "O Agni, thou purifiest the life-breaths; O Agni, do thou purify; O Agni, O Purifier, do thou purify. That Agni, the most pure of the pure, is the purifier. O Agni, thy purities are bright."
13.6.10	Having placed the Anvähärya (rice), he gives gold.
13.6.11	One who desires sight should offer this oblation.
13.6.12	For her these are the mantras:
13.7.1	One desiring offspring should offer a cake on eight potshers to Agni Putravat and a cake on eleven potshers to Indra Putrin.
13.7.2	These are the verses for that: "He who thinks of you with his heart, O Kirin, for whom you were born, O Jatavedas, for him you are a good son, for him you bestow praise and praise. Soma has united with Indra."
13.7.3	One who desires to be endowed with juice should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni, the lord of juice, in milk from a goat.
13.7.4	These are its formulas: "I have followed the waters with Agni's juice."
13.7.5	One who desires to be wealthy should offer a cake to Agni, the wealthy, on eight potsherls.
13.7.6	These are its verses: Vasu, Vasupati, Agni, Vasupati, Vasupati among the Vasus.
13.7.7	One should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni, the giver of strength, when engaged in battle.
13.7.8	These are its verses: You, O Agni, the giver, this Agni of ours.
13.7.9	If someone were to take fire from his fire, one should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Agnivata.
13.7.10	These are the verses for that: "Agni is kindled by Agni. For you are Agni, O Agni."
13.7.11	If the fire is taken out from the house where the Agnihotra has not been offered, one should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Jyotishmat.
13.7.12	They say that one should take it out after lighting it.
13.7.13	It should not be done like that.
13.7.14	If the share is taken out before, should another be taken out?
13.7.15	Having placed those very potsherds, he churns.
13.7.16	He churns those very potsherads.
13.7.17	"From here Agni was born first, from his own womb, the knower of beings. May he carry oblations to the gods with Gāyatrī, Triṣṭubh and Jagatī verses."
13.7.18	By means of the metres he generates him from his own womb. So says the Brahmaṇa.
13.7.19	One should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Jyotishmat.
13.7.20	These are its verses: "O Agni, thy purities, thy lights,
13.8.1	"And again it is said:
13.8.2	One who is being cursed should offer a cake on twelve potsherds to Vaiśvānara Agni, a rice-pap to Varuna and a rice-pap for Dadhikrāvan.
13.8.3	One who is going to perform this Iṣṭi procures gold.
13.8.4	For it these are the verses: "Vaiśvānara, with thy aid, thou Agni, shining with thy radiance, thy heat has been kindled. I have done the highest for Dadhikrāvṇa, for Dadhikrâvṇa."
13.8.5	Having obtained the Anvāhārya portion, he gives gold.
13.8.6	One desiring offspring should offer this oblation.
13.8.7	These are the mantras for that oblation:
13.8.8	"One should offer a cake on twelve potshards to Vaiśvānara Agni when a son is born."
13.8.9	These are the two mantras for that offering: "To the one who is seen as Vaiśvānaran, to the one who is born as Bṛhaspati, to Agni, the one who is the lord of the house, to the one whose name is Agni, to the one called Agni, to the great Agni, to the Agni who is the lord, to the one with the great name, to the one named Agni, to the lord of the great name, I offer this oblation to the one who has the great name, the one who has a great name, the great Agni, the one with a great name, to Agni, to the supreme Agni, to the highest Agni, to the most excellent Agni, to the best Agni, to the greatest Agni, to the superior Agni, to the excellent Agni, to Agni, I offer this great oblation to Agni, to Agni."
13.8.10	He should offer a cake on twelve potsherds to Vaiśvānara Agni on the new moon or full moon day.
13.8.11	The two verses are: "Vaiśvānara, the protector, is in the sky."
13.8.12	One should offer an eight-potsherd cake to Agni and a twelve-potsherd to Vaiśvănara Agni when about to consign Agni to fire.
13.8.13	These are her verses: "Agni is the head of the earth, Vaishvanara, with your help. You, O Agni, shining with radiance."
13.8.14	One should offer a cake on twelve potsherds to Vaishvanara and a cake on seven potsherds to Maruts, if one desires a village.
13.8.15	It is indeed said:
13.8.16	One should place the Vaishvanara offering on the Ahavaniya fire and the Maruts offering on the Garhapatya fire.
13.8.17	One should place them after being told to do so.
13.8.18	At the proper time he offers to Prāñca Vaisvānara.
13.8.19	When the Sāmidhenī verses are being recited, he offers to Maruts.
13.8.20	For him these are the verses: "Vaisvānara, with your help, questioned in heaven, Maruts, whatever is your protection from heaven, whatever is your shield."
13.9.1	One who is about to go to war should offer a cake to Aditya.
13.9.2	May Aditi not be able to reach the great earth, her mother.
13.9.3	One should offer a cake on twelve potsherds to Vaiśvānara Agni when going to one's own house.
13.9.4	The verses for it are: "May Vaiśvānaran Agni, with our help, bestow wealth on us."
13.9.5	One should offer cake on twelve potshers to Vaiśvănara Agni when two enemies have eaten food.
13.9.6	These are its (Vaisvânara) verses: 'Vaisvânar, the protector, has come to us.'
13.9.7	One who is about to attack an enemy should offer a Vaisvânara oblation on twelve potsherds.
13.9.8	These are its verses.
13.9.9	One who has received a cow should offer a Vâisvânara obla- tion on twelve potsherda.
13.9.10	These are its verses: "Vaisvānara, with thy help, O Agni, thou shinest with thy radiance."
13.9.11	One should offer a cake on twelve potsherds to Vaisvānara when one has received a horse or a man from both sides.
13.9.12	These are its verses.
13.9.13	One should offer to Vaisvânara a cake on twelve potsheds when one is about to go to a friend.
13.9.14	These are its two verses: "May I be in the good opinion of Vaisvânara, the all-pervading, who is the giver of wealth."
13.10.1	Now, indeed, it is said:
13.10.2	"He who, having undertaken for a year, does not release (the vow), becomes one who is not established."
13.10.3	"One should offer again to Vaisvânaras, having returned."
13.10.4	He offers again to Vaisvanara, having returned.
13.10.5	He releases him with the share of the sacrifice, saying, "For stability." So says the Brāhmaṇa.
13.10.6	Now indeed it is said:
13.10.7	"One should send the best cow to one's enemy with a rope."
13.10.8	He sends the best cow to his enemy with a rope and places it in his enemy's cattle pen.
13.10.9	He sends him to Nirriti. So says the Brahmaṇa.
13.10.10	These are its mantras:
13.11.1	Now it is said:
13.11.2	One desiring cattle should offer a cake to Indra.
13.11.3	These are the mantras for it: "Indra on all sides, Indra, the man."
13.11.4	One desiring cattle may offer a cake on eleven potsherds to Indra, the bestower of strength.
13.11.5	These are your senses, O Indra, the hundred-armed, you are the giver of wealth to us.
13.11.6	One desiring Brahmic glory should offer a cake on eleven potshards to Indra, the giver of heat.
13.11.7	These are his (Indra's) senses: "In whom are seven Vasus, the cooked food is brought in by the mothers."
13.11.8	One desiring food should offer a cake to Indra, the sun-giver, on eleven potshers.
13.11.9	These are hers. The bards sing to thee, O Indra, in the Brihat and Gāyatrī metres.
13.11.10	One who desires prosperity should offer a cake on eleven potshards to Indra, the possessor of heat, to Indra, the bestower of strength, to Indra, possessing the sun.
13.11.11	These are her (Indrani's) verses: "In whom are seven Vasus, in whom are seven Rudras, in whom are the seven Adityas, in whom are all the gods, in whom are a hundred powers, in whom are ten powers, in whom is the power of Indra, in whom is a thousand powers, in whom the power of Indra is a thousand, in whom is Indra, in whom are Indra's powers, in whom Indra is a thousand. The singers sing to you, O Indra, the great Gāyatrī."
13.12.1	One should offer a cake on eleven potsherds to Indra, the remover of sin, if one is afflicted by sin.
13.12.2	These are its verses: "O Indra, do thou remove the distress of him who says, 'What is mine?'"
13.12.3	One should offer a cake on eleven potshards to Indra Vāma-mṛdha if one is attacked by enemies or if one's kingdom is being attacked.
13.12.4	These are its verses: "O Indra, do you remove the distress, like a fierce deer."
13.12.5	If one is bound or imprisoned, one should offer a cake on eleven potshards to Indra, the protector.
13.12.6	These are the verses for it: "O Indra, the protector, may he not be harmed by this."
13.12.7	If a great sacrifice does not approach one, one should offer an Indra cake on eleven potsherds to Indra, the lord of Arkas and horse sacrifices.
13.12.8	These are its verses: "They are yours, O Indra, the chariot, which is yours."
13.13.1	One should offer a cake on eleven potsherds to Indra, the upright, if one desires a village.
13.13.2	These are its verses: "Day by day, the months follow you, they give to you."
13.13.3	One should make an offering of cooked rice to Indrani if one's army is like a river.
13.13.4	And indeed it is said:
13.13.5	He should tie the Balbaja-grass to the sacrificial post.
13.13.6	He should offer them along with the sacrificial post. So it is said.
13.13.7	He offers them along with the post.
13.13.8	These are the verses for her: "Among the women, I am Indra's wife. I am not Indra's wife."
13.13.9	One should offer a cake on eleven potshards to Indra, the angry one, the intelligent one, in a battle, when engaged in battle.
13.13.10	These are the verses for her: "He who is born, he is great Indra, the fierce one."
13.13.11	One should offer this oblation if one feels as if one has been killed.
13.13.12	These are the verses for it:
13.13.13	One should offer it if one feels as though one has committed a sin oneself.
13.13.14	These are also the verses for it:
13.14.1	He for whom they are performed should offer a cake on eleven potshards to Indra the bestower.
13.14.2	These are the verses for it: "Do not be angry with us, come to us."
13.14.3	He for whom they are being performed should offer a rice-cake on eleven potshers to Indra the bestowing. If one is like one who has given but does not give.
13.14.4	These are the verses addressed to her: "We invoke the giver, the giver with the thunderbolt."
13.14.5	One who is besieged or about to be besieged should offer a cake on eleven potshards to Indra Sutāma.
13.14.6	These are the verses addressed (to him): "Indra Sutāma, we are in the good opinion of the one who is worthy of sacrifice."
13.14.7	He who is worthy of prosperity, should be equal to those who are equal. Therefore, one should offer this Indra-offering on eleven potsherds."
13.14.8	Now, it is said:
13.14.9	"The Revati verse is the introductory verse, for peace and non-injury. The Shakaris verse is the offering verse."
13.14.10	These are the verses: "Revati has come to us, for him the chariot in front."
13.15.1	Now, there is a saying:
13.15.2	One who is practising sorcery should offer oblations to Agni-Vishnu in eleven potsherds.
13.15.3	The oblation to Sarasvati should be of ghee.
13.15.4	The oblations to Brhaspati should be in the form of cooked rice.
13.15.5	It is said:
13.15.6	Those who practise sorcery are attacked by others.
13.15.7	One should recite two Puronuvakya verses for the purpose of excessive use.
13.15.8	He recites the Puronuvakyas twice.
13.15.9	He offers the oblations three times.
13.15.10	These are the verses for that: "Agnavisnu, Agnavisnu, O divine one, come to us. From the sky, O Brihaspati, from the father."
13.15.11	One should offer with this if one is being harmed.
13.15.12	These are indeed the verses for that.
13.15.13	"If a sacrifice does not approach one, one should offer an Ekadashakapa Agnivisnu oblation."
13.15.14	These are its two names: Agnāviṣṇu, Agnāviṣņu.
13.15.15	One should offer a cake on ghee to Agni-Viṣṇu for one who desires sight.
13.15.16	These are its two names.
13.16.1	Now, it is said:
13.16.2	One's own power and strength are taken away by the sacrificer's enemy.
13.16.3	One should make an offering to the enemy of the sacrificer in the form of a sacrifice.
13.16.4	His senses and energy are not diminished.
13.16.5	One should offer before speaking.
13.16.6	Before speaking, he should get up at the end of the night and
13.16.7	offer an eight-pot offering to Agni-Vishnu before the morning pressing.
13.16.8	Sarasvati should be the oblation with ghee.
13.16.9	And the oblation to Brhaspati should be cooked rice.
13.16.10	These are her verses: "O Agni-Vishnu, O Agni-Vishnu! O divine one, lead us! From heaven, O Brihaspati, from the father."
13.16.11	One should offer an Ekadashakapa Agni-Vishnu oblation at the time of the Madhyandina Savana.
13.16.12	Sarasvati should be the oblation with ghee.
13.16.13	The oblation should be dedicated to Brihaspati.
13.16.14	These are her verses:
13.16.15	If the third pressing is not done at the proper time, one should offer a cake on twelve potsherds to Agni-Vishnu.
13.16.16	The oblation to Sarasvati should be of ghee.
13.16.17	The oblations to Brhaspati should be of rice-gruel.
13.16.18	These are the same for her.
13.16.19	If the time for the Vasava pressing is not proper, one should offer an oblation on one potsherd to Mitra-Varuna.
13.16.20	These are for her: "O Mitra-Varuna, come to us for our prosperity."
13.17.1	He who desires Brahmic glory should offer this oblation to Soma-Rudra on the full moon of the month of Tisya.
13.17.2	He who desires Brahmic splendor should offer an oblation to Soma and Rudra on the full-moon day of the month of Tishya.
13.17.3	He performs the rites when the fire is surrounded.
13.17.4	It is said:
13.17.5	The milk churned for the white cow and the white calf becomes ghee. Ghee is the sprinkling.
13.17.6	They smear with ghee.
13.17.7	It makes all that is brahmic splendour.
13.17.8	They say that brahmic splendour is made in excess.
13.17.9	One becomes the lord of bad skin.
13.17.10	One should do the two verses of Manavī.
13.17.11	"The two verses, 'O Soma, O Indra, the chariot of the gods,' and 'O Soma, the two of you, the two of us,' are recited in the light of the two verses.
13.17.12	These two verses are recited in the rite: 'Soma and Rudra have separated the distant one; Soma and Rudra, you two, these two.'
13.18.1	If one fears, 'I will become a bad skin,' one should offer a cake to Soma and Pūṣan.
13.18.2	These two are recited in the ritual: 'Soma and Pūṣa, these two gods.'
13.18.3	One desiring offspring should offer a cake to Soma-Rudra.
13.18.4	These are the mantras for that: "Soma-Rudra, you two, have torn apart the distant one. Soma-Rudra, both of you, have these."
13.18.5	One who is practicing sorcery should offer a cake on Soma-Rudra to Soma-Rudра.
13.18.6	These are indeed the mantras for it.
13.18.7	One who is suffering from a chronic illness should offer a cake for Soma-Rudra.
13.18.8	The Hotṛ priest prepares the horse for the sacrifice which is to be performed.
13.18.9	These are the same as before.
13.18.10	Having placed the Anvāhārya rice, the Hotṛ priest gives the horse.
13.18.11	One should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Soma-Rudra for one who desires, "May my enemy be born in his own abode."
13.18.12	Having determined the boundary of the other field, he performs the Agnihotra rites and offers the Soma-Rudra oblation.
13.18.13	Now it is said:
13.18.14	One should take half of the altar and leave the other half.
13.18.15	One should spread half of the sacrificial grass and leave the other.
13.18.16	One should place half of the wood and leave the other.
13.18.17	His own enemy is born in his own house. Thus says the Brāhmaṇa.
13.18.18	These are its forms.
13.19.1	Now indeed it is said:
13.19.2	One desiring a village should offer a cake on eleven potshards to Indra and a cake on seven potshards to Maruts.
13.19.3	Now indeed is said:
13.19.4	He places the cake to Indra on the Āhavanīya and the cake to Maruts on the Garhapatya.
13.19.5	He takes it up when it is not being recited.
13.19.6	At the proper time he offers the Indra-Prāyanca.
13.19.7	At the reciting of the Sāmidhenī verses, he offers to Maruts.
13.19.8	These are the verses for it: "O Indra, we have come from all sides; O Indra, men, Maruts, whatever is your protection from heaven, that is your protection from earth."
13.19.9	One who desires should offer this (cake) with the verse, "May I establish concord between the nobility and the people."
13.19.10	While offering the cake to Indra, one should say, "Recite to Indra."
13.19.11	Having gone around Indra from all sides, he recites.
13.19.12	Having transgressed, he announces, "Let us sacrifice to the Maruts."
13.19.13	He sacrifices with "Your protection."
13.19.14	If he were to recite the Marut hymn, he should say, "Recite to the Maruts for me."
13.19.15	He recites, "What the Maruts have done for you in heaven."
13.19.16	Having transgressed and announced, he says, "Let us offer to Indra."
13.19.17	He sacrifices, saying, "To Indra, the men."
13.19.18	He makes them have a common share in their own oblations. "The destroyers stand." So says the Brahmaṇa.
13.19.19	One who desires should offer this oblation, "May they be united."
13.19.20	Having offered according to the deity, one should offer according to the deity.
13.19.21	He unites them according to their own oblations, as they are.
13.19.22	They are united. So says the Brahmaṇā.
13.19.23	These are her offerings, which are the same as those of the previous one.
13.20.1	One desiring a village should offer a cake on eleven potshards to Indra and a cake on twelve potshards to the All-gods.
13.20.2	One who is going to perform this Iṣṭi should prepare and keep aside a garment which has not been worn before.
13.20.3	Now it is said:
13.20.4	One should cut off from the Indra cake and then cut off from the All-gods cake.
13.20.5	Then one should cut off from above the Indra cake.
13.20.6	Having cut off from the cake to Indra, he cuts off twice from the cake to the All-Gods.
13.20.7	Then on the top of Indra's (altar).
13.20.8	"The Brāhmaṇa says, "He encloses his own people on both sides with his own power."
13.20.9	These are the verses to be recited: "Indra, in the midst of the Bharas, may I be intoxicated."
13.20.10	Having placed the Anvāhārya portion, he gives the garment to the one who is not the eldest.
13.20.11	"One desiring a village should offer a cake on eleven potsherds to Agni and a cake on eight potsherds to Indra, and having milked for Pṛśni, offer a cake to Priyavrata to the Maruts."
13.20.12	Now indeed it is said:
13.20.13	"The Yajya and Anuvakya verses are related to Priyavati."
13.20.14	These are the verses: "I invoke your love, O Turan, for the sake of prosperity. With your rays."
13.20.15	"If one is at odds with someone else, one should offer this sacrifice to him as a means of reconciliation."
13.20.16	When he desires to know them, having brought them together, he offers a cake on eight potsherds to Agni, the lord of wealth.
13.20.17	A cooked rice to Soma, the lord of Rudras, a cake on eleven potsherds to Indra, the lord of Maruts, and a cooked rice to Varuna, the lord of Adityas.
13.20.18	These are her verses: "May Agni, the first, protect us with the Vasus; may the god protect us with the vasus."
13.21.1	One should offer a cake to the shining Adityas for prosperity.
13.21.2	These are her verses: "Sacrifice is the pure of the gods; the waters are the pure of the earth."
13.21.3	One should offer rice to the supporting Adityas when one is obstructed or about to be obstructed.
13.21.4	Then, when he is not prevented, he takes the foot-dust of the Adityas, saying, "Do you consent."
13.21.5	Then, having taken them, he carries them, saying, "O Maruts, come hither, you who are givers of good gifts, with the lord of the people, this king."
13.21.6	Then he pours them into the palms of the sacrificer, saying, "With true blessings."
13.21.7	"Here is the mind," he says, and holds it back.
13.21.8	Here he scatters these ashes of the feet.
13.21.9	Here he mentally thinks of the person whom the sacrificer hates.
13.21.10	These are his (verses): 'The Adityas, the upholders, uphold the three worlds.'
13.21.11	If there is a village-dweller beyond this, one should bring rice from his house.
13.21.12	One should separate the white and black ones.
13.21.13	Now indeed it is said:
13.21.14	"If they are white, one should offer a cake to Aditya."
13.21.15	It is said about this: "One should not give these to the Kshatriyas."
13.21.16	"Aditya is indeed the deity. One attains the clan." So it is said in the Brahmana.
13.21.17	Now indeed it is said
13.21.18	"His clan has been attained, but the kingdom has not been attained," so they say.
13.21.19	If they are black, one should offer a Varuna oblation.
13.21.20	This is said about it: "This is for me, O Varuna. I come to you."
13.21.21	The kingdom is indeed Varuna.
13.21.22	One reaches both the clan and the kingdom. This is the Brahmanical statement.
13.22.1	Now, it is said:
13.22.2	If he does not know, he should offer it with the formula, "I am offering this share to the Ādityas from the Avagantā village of such and such a clan."
13.22.3	He stops after the offering.
13.22.4	If he knows, he mixes it.
13.22.5	For her these two are recited: "The sacrifice of the gods, the Ādityās, is renewed."
13.22.6	The Adityas, desiring to obtain their share, make him enter the community. So says the Brahmana.
13.22.7	Now indeed it is said:
13.22.8	If he does not enter, one should strike seven Mayuka twigs on the middle finger.
13.22.9	Having placed the horse in the east, he strikes seven Mayuka twigs in the middle finger.
13.22.10	Having struck the middle one, he extends three towards the east and three towards the west, saying, "I bind these Adityas for the sake of such and such a village."
13.22.11	The Adityas indeed lead him to the village of the bound heroes. So says the Brahmana.
13.22.12	Now indeed it is said:
13.22.13	If he does not reach, he should offer a cake to the Adityas.
13.22.14	He should also place the rays on the fire-wood.
13.22.15	He should place them together with the fire-wood."
13.22.16	He places them together with the wood.
13.22.17	He understands that there is no obstruction. This is the Brahmanical text.
13.22.18	Now, indeed, it is said:
13.22.19	They are ashvattha (Ficus religiosa).
13.22.20	The ashvattha is indeed the strength of the Maruts.
13.22.21	By strength alone he understands the clan.
13.22.22	There are seven.
13.22.23	The Maruts are seven groups.
13.22.24	One understands the group by group. This is the Brahmanical statement.
13.22.25	These are the same for it.
13.23.1	Now, indeed, it is said:
13.23.2	"One who fears death should offer this hundred-black-antelopes to Prajapati."
13.23.3	For this Iṣṭi, one who is about to perform it prepares a hundred gold coins, a new vessel, and plenty of ghee.
13.23.4	Then, having taken the first step with the words "For you, O god Savitar, by the impulse of..." and "I pour out what is pleasing to Prajapati," he pours out four handfuls of gold coins.
13.23.5	Having released speech with the Havishkrit formula, having placed a new vessel on the Garhapatya fire, having brought clarified butter through the strainer, he pours the black beans through the strainer.
13.23.6	Then he pours clarified butter.
13.23.7	Having placed the clarified butter, having encircled both with fire, he places it within the altar.
13.23.8	Then indeed it is said:
13.23.9-12	Four (grains) are offered to the deity, four to the Svishtakrit, eight to the Idâ, four to the Avântara-Idâ, one to the Prasitra, and one to the sacrificer. Those who offer clarified butter offer it. Those who partake of clarified butter partake of it.
13.23.13	Then having taken them together, he offers them to Brahman.
13.23.14	These are the verses: "Hiranyagarbha, Prajapati."
13.24.1	"If one desires Brahmic glory, one should offer this oblation to Surya."
13.24.2	One who is going to perform this sacrifice prepares five golden coins, two golden and silver ornaments.
13.24.3	Having cooked this rice-gruel, having poured over it, having taken it up, having placed it in a vessel made of gold and silver, he places it within the altar.
13.24.4	The rite is similar to that of the Prayāja offerings.
13.24.5	Now indeed it is said:
13.24.6	"At each Prayāja offering one should offer a Kṛṣṇala."
13.24.7	He offers the Kṛṣṇalā at each Prayāja offering.
13.24.8	These are its verses: "Udu tyam citram" (RV 1.114.1).
13.24.9	Having placed the Anvāhārya rice, he gives gold and silver ornaments.
13.24.10	One who desires, "May I obtain gold, may gold be mine," should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni, a cake on twelve potsherds to Savitr, and cooked rice to the earth.
13.24.11	One who is about to perform this sacrifice prepares gold.
13.24.12	For her these are recited: "The ancient one, the new one, the golden-handed one for protection, the good one today, O Savitar, is here among the mountains. The Stoma-s are your investigators."
13.24.13	Having reached the Anvähärya, he gives gold.
13.24.14	One should offer this oblation if one has lost gold.
13.24.15	For her these are recited.
13.24.16	One should offer this oblation if one's gold is lost.
13.24.17	These are the same for her.
13.25.1	If one is a Soma-vami, one should offer this obltion to Soma-Indra, a cake on eight potsherds, and Soma-Indra made of Shyamaka grains.
13.25.2	These are for him: "With the belly of Soma, with the belly of Soma."
13.25.3	One becomes a Soma-vamin, another becomes a Soma-purifier.
13.25.4	If one is very pure, then one should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni the bestower and a cake on eleven potsherds to Indra the bestower for the sake of cattle.
13.25.5	These are its formulas: "He who has well-poured, the one with the Sabādha."
13.25.6	If one desires cattle, one should offer a rice-cake on eight potsherards to Agni the bestowers and a rice-cake to Indra the bestowers on eleven potsherads.
13.25.7	For this sacrifice, one prepares curds, honey, ghee, water and barley.
13.25.8	Having recited the verse "Obeisance to thee, O Agni, the giver, I offer this oblation agreeable to thee", one offers four handfuls of rice.
13.25.9	Having recited this verse, "Obeisance unto thee, O Indra, the bestower, I offer this agreeable oblation", one offers four more handfuls of rice.
13.25.10	Having made this the rule, he offers the oblation to Prajapati, saying, "I offer the oblation to be enjoyed by Prajapati." Four barley grains.
13.25.11	Among them, the barley grains are offered as oblation.
13.25.12	They take up the barley grains.
13.25.13	He releases speech with the oblation.
13.25.14	The rite is common up to the sowing.
13.25.15	Having poured (the water), he places eight potsherds in the southern half of the Garhapatya and eleven in the northern half.
13.25.16	Then, having pounded these barley grains in a mortar, and having placed the Garhapatyaka potsherd on the Garhapatys, they roast the barley grains.
13.25.17	When he pours these oblations, then he adds these roasted barley grains to the four - curd, honey, ghee and water.
13.25.18	For her these are the verses: "O Agni, give to the giver, give us wealth. O Agni, the giver, we invoke thee. The giver, the wielder of the thunderbolt, pure ghee, both the well-shining and the clarified butter."
13.26.1	If one has fallen from the sacrifice, one should offer this sacrifice: an offering to Agni on eight potsherds, to Indra on eleven potsherds, and a rice-gruel to Soma.
13.26.2	Now indeed it is said:
13.26.3	"One should unite the Agniya and the Saumya in the Candra."
13.26.4	He unites the Agniya and Saumya in Candra.
13.26.5	He places the brilliance and the brahmic lustre in it. This is the Brahmanical statement.
13.26.6	Her verses are: "O Indra, you are the protector of the ancient, O Indra, you are surrounded by all. O Soma, you are the man for us. Your abode is the sky."
13.26.7	If one desires that a particular person should not approach him, he should offer a cake on eleven potshards to Agni and Soma.
13.26.8	These are its verses: "O Agni and Soma, you two, with your knowledge, have come to these (sacrifices).
13.26.9	If one desires Brahmic glory, he should offer an eight-potshered cake to Agni and Soma.
13.26.10	One who desires Brahmic glory should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni-Soma made of Shyamaka grains.
13.26.11	These are the mantras used in this offering: "O Agni-Soma, accept this oblation offered by me."
13.26.12	One who fears impotence should offer a Shyamaka rice-cake to Soma Vaji.
13.26.13	These are its verses: "O Apāyasa, may you increase.
13.26.14	One who desires a village should offer oblations to Brahmanaspatya in eleven potsherds."
13.26.15	It is said:
13.26.16	"The verses of invocation and praise should contain the word 'group'."
13.26.17	These are its verses: We invoke you, O lord of groups, with the group.
13.26.18	One who desires to destroy the Brahman-class should offer this oblation.
13.26.19	One should perform the Yajya and Anuvakya mantras related to Maruts.
13.26.20	The following are the mantras for this: "O Maruts, whatever is your protection from heaven..."
13.27.1	One who desires heaven should offer a cake to Aryaman.
13.27.2	The following mantras are used for this: "Aryaman, whatever is yours..."
13.27.3-7	One who desires that his progeny should be generous should offer a cake to Aryaman. These are the mantras for it. One who desires to go to a prosperous community should offer a cake on eleven potsherds to Aryaman. These are the mantras. If a king is younger than his brother, he should offer this Indra cake on eleven potshers to the younger brother.
13.27.8	Now, indeed, it is said:
13.27.9	"The Yajya and Anuvakya verses are related to the Budhna and the Agara."
13.27.10	These are the verses: "Singing with the Angiras, from the Budhna, the foremost, examining with the Manas, from the Budhni, the foremost."
13.27.11	"If a Brahmin is younger than his brother, he should offer this oblation to Brhaspati."
13.27.12	Now indeed it is said:
13.27.13	The Yajya and Anuvakya verses are related to the Budhna and the Agara.
13.27.14	These are the verses for that: "The great earth has spread out from the Budhna, the one who has taken the foremost for strength."
13.28.1	Now indeed it is said
13.28.2	One who is afflicted by a sinful disease should offer this oblation of cooked rice to the sun on the new moon day.
13.28.3	These are its nine (verses). The new one is born, the one that the Adityas nourish with rays.
13.28.4	If one desires that he should be a king, one should offer this oblation of three kinds: a cake on eleven potshards to Indra the King, to Indra the Overlord, to Indra the Self-King.
13.28.5	Then having made the formula "For thee, O god Savitr, for the impulse of Savitr", he offers four handfuls of rice with the formula, "I offer what is dear to Indra, the king".
13.28.6	Having made the same formula, he offers four handful of rice to each of the deities Indra, the overlord, Indra, the self-sovereign.
13.28.7	Having made the oblations, he releases speech.
13.28.8	The reason for this is that the oblations are equal.
13.28.9	Having placed the Garhapatya fire, he places eleven upside-down potsherds.
13.28.10	It is said:
13.28.11	One should place the potsherds upside down for the sake of non-exhaustion.
13.28.12	There are three sacrificial cakes.
13.28.13	These are the three worlds.
13.28.14	For the attainment of these worlds.
13.28.15	The latter is greater than the former.
13.28.16	He makes the latter and the latter more and more superior.
13.28.17	He makes all of them go to him and then pronounces the Avadya.
13.28.18	Pronouncing the Avadya, he says, "Do you recite for Indra, the king."
13.28.19	"You are Indra, the king in the eastern direction," having recited this, he offers with the verse, "Indra conquers and does not get conquered."
13.28.20	Pronouncing the avadya, he (the Adhvaryu) says, "Do thou recite for Indra, overlord."
13.28.21	"Indra conquers, not conquered by others." Having recited this, he should recite, "May I conquer." He offers with the verse, "May I be victorious."
13.28.22	While offering, he says, "O Indra, the self-sovereign, recite after me."
13.28.23	Having recited, "May I conqueror," he offers in the eastern direction with the verse, "You are Indra, the king."
13.28.24	The recitation is in reverse order. This is said in the Brahmanas.
13.29.1	One who desires the senses and strength should be sacrificed with this entire-back (sacrifice).
13.29.2	One who is about to perform this sacrifice prepares a horse, a bull, a male goat, and a ram.
13.29.3	Then, having made the initial step, "For you, by the impulse of the divine Savitar," he pours four handfuls of rice, saying, "I pour out what is pleasing to Indra Ratha-ntara."
13.29.4	Having made this the rule, he offers four handfuls to each deity, namely, to Indra of the Bṛhat-sāman, to Indra of Vaivāvata-sāman; to Indra of the Vaivāvata, to Indra of Śākvara-sāman.
13.29.5	Having made the oblation, he releases speech.
13.29.6	The rite is common up to the pouring down of the oblation.
13.29.7	Having poured down, he places twelve upside-down potsherds on the Garhapatya.
13.29.8	Now indeed it is said:
13.29.9	He places the potsherds upside down for the sake of not being exhausted.
13.29.10	The cake on twelve potsherds is for the sake of being for all gods.
13.29.11	He cuts around completely.
13.29.12	While cutting he says, "Do you recite for Indra Rathantara."
13.29.13	"We praise you, O hero," he recites. "We invoke you, for you are the one who grants." He offers.
13.29.14	He recites, "Do you recite for Indra, the son of Bharata."
13.29.15	Having recited, "We indeed call you," he offers, "O Indra, that is in heaven."
13.29.16	He recites, "Recite for Indra, the one with variegated (cows)."
13.29.17	Having recited, "That is in heaven, O Indra," he offers, "O Indra, may the Soma be drunk for you."
13.29.18	He recites, "Do you recite for Indra Vairāja."
13.29.19	Having recited, "Do drink Soma, O Indra, may it strengthen you," he offers, "You are never a stranger."
13.29.20	He recites, "Recite for Indra Śākvara."
13.29.21	Having recited "You are never an outsider," he offers, "May we enjoy the abundance of Indra."
13.29.22	He recites, "Do you recite for Indra, the son of Rivat."
13.29.23	Having recited, "May the Revatis be our highest joy," he offers, "O hero, we praise you."
13.29.24	The Brahman says, "Recite in turn."
13.30.1	Having placed the Anvahaarya, he gives a horse, a bull, a male goat, and a ram.
13.30.2	One who is being cursed should offer with this.
13.30.3	The same is the former.
13.30.4	If one desires sight, one should offer this Isti: to Agni Bhrasvat, a cake on eight potsherds; to Surya, a rice-pap; to Agni Bhraswat, a cake on seven potsherds.
13.30.5	These are hers: "O Agni, thy pure lights, thy bright lights, thy pure lights."
13.30.6	When the Ida has been invoked, it is not deposited for the Agnidhra.
13.30.7	Then he gives three balls of dough to the sacrificer.
13.30.8	He offers the balls, saying, "We offer to the shining one, the knower of beings, thee, the seven tawny horses on the chariot. The bright array of the gods has gone up." He offers the balls.
13.30.9	He offers the eye to him.
13.30.10	This is the Brahmanical explanation of it.
13.30.11	One who desires a village should offer the Vaiśvadevī and Saṅgrahaṇī oblations.
13.30.12	They cook the Vaiśvadeva oblation as if they were taking it in.
13.30.13	Then he lays down the enclosing sticks with the formula, "Thou art Dhruva, I am Dhruva, may I be among my kinsmen."
13.30.14	These are the formulas for it: "All gods, all gods."
13.30.15	Then he offers three oblations with the ladle in front of the Svishtakrit with the formulas, "Obeisance to him, obeisance to him, the gods."
13.31.1	Then indeed it is said:
13.31.2	Agni takes his body, Soma his sap.
13.31.3	Varuna seizes him with Varuna's noose, Sarasvati his speech, Agni-Vishnu his soul, whose life is cut short.
13.31.4	One who has a life-threatening disease, or one who desires to live out his full life, should offer this sacrifice.
13.31.5	He who is about to perform this Iṣṭi prepares a new wooden vessel of Khadira wood, fresh ghee and a new garment. The size of the vessel should be as much as he thinks.
13.31.6	Then having made the first step as "O god Savitr, by your impulse", he offers an oblation of eight potfuls to Agni, a rice-pap to Soma, an oblation of ten potfuls to Varuna, a rice-pulp to Sarasvati, and an oblation of eleven potfuls to Agni-Visnu.
13.31.7	The rite is common upto the pouring of clarified butter.
13.31.8	He follows the pouring of clarified butters with the verse, "What was new became ghee.
13.31.9	The act of placing the ladles is common.
13.31.10	Having placed the ladles, he places the Pravarta ladle in a new wooden vessel spread with grass and sprinkled with water, along with the oblations, inside the altar.
13.31.11	The act of placing is common to the Prayāja offerings.
13.31.12	Having performed the Prayāja offerings, he performs the offerings with the oblations.
13.31.13	These are her (Agni's) verses: "O Agni, thou art the giver of life, thou art the life-giver; thou art the life, thou art Agni. Thou art the life, O Agni, thou art Agni, the life-giver. Thou art the giver of wealth, thou art the wealth-giver. Thou givest wealth, thou art Agni." "Thou art the giver of strength, thou art the strength-giver. Thou dost give strength, thou art Agni," "Thou art the highest, thou art the highest, O Agni. Thou art Agni, the highest, thou dost give the highest. Thou art the highest, the highest, O most excellent one. Thou art the most excellent, the highest, the most excellent, O Agni." "Thou dost give the highest, thou givest the highest, thou dos give the highest, O highest one. Thou art Agni." "O Agni, the highest one, thou dost give Agni, the highest. Thou dost give Agni, O Agni, the highest." "O Agni-Vishnu, O Agni-Vishnu."
13.31.14	Then he offers the oblations with the ladle in front of the Svishtakrit.
13.32.1	"Thou art the breath of the Asvins, of him give thee the breath of whom thou art the breath, svāhā. Thou art the breath of Indra, of him give thou the breath of whom thee art the breath, svaha. Thou art thebreath of Mitra-Varuna, of him give ye the breath of whom ye are the breath, svāhà. Thou art the breaṭh of all the gods, of them give ye the breath, of whom ye are breath, svāha."
13.32.2	Having offered the oblations, he pours down the melted butter with the offerings. He says, "You are the king, you are the Viraj, you are the Samraj, you are the Svaraj."
13.32.3	Having taken this melted butter in front of the Ahavaniya fire, he places it on the right side.
13.32.4	Then he makes the sacrificer gaze at the clarified butter, saying, "The stream of ghee, the path of immortality, given by Indra, well-given by the Maruts, that you Vishnu saw, that you Ida Gaivy brought."
13.32.5	Then the priests, beginning with the hand of Brahman, recite the Pavamāna Stoma, saying, "May the god Savitr release thee for life, for life, by the Stoma of the Gayatri, by the strength of the Upamshus. May the god Savitr, by the Stotra of the Brihadratha and Ratha-tara, by the strength, of the Sukra, release thee for life for life, by thee. May the god savitr release thee for the life, for life by the Stoma, of the Brihad-ratha and Rathatara, by the strength by the Sukra, by the Stotr of the Agni, by the strength the strength of the Agrayana, by the Jagati, by the strength. May the god Svitr release thee for life. For life, by the measure of Agni, by the Jagat
13.32.6	Then he drinks ghee from the golden vessel.
13.32.7	He recites the following verse while drinking: "O Agni, make this (ghee) dear to life and lustre. O Varuna, O Soma, O King, grant protection to this one as a mother does to her son. May all the gods grant him long life as it was before."
13.32.8	Then, having washed this (ghee-vessel) with water, he should tie it to the right ear with the verse: "May it bestow life on you from all sides."
13.32.9	Then he turns him around, saying, "You are life, you are all life, you are the whole life, you are everything."
13.32.10	Then the Brahman takes his hand, saying, "May Agni be long-lived." From the end of the section.
13.33.1	As many horses as one would receive, one should offer Varuṇa oblations in four pots, one more than that.
13.33.2	These are its verses: "This is mine, O Varuna, I come to you."
13.33.3	If there is another recipient, one should offer a one-pottered offering to Surya. This is said.
13.33.4	These are its verses: "He rises up, the bright one..."
13.33.5	Then one goes to the water for the Avabhrtha bath.
13.33.6	Then it is said:
13.33.7	One should offer a cake to Apamnaptrya on returning."
13.33.8	These are the two kinds of oblations to be offered to the waters.
13.33.9	One who is afflicted by sin should offer this oblation to Indra and Varuna.
13.33.10	One who intends to perform this sacrifice prepares curds, milk and cooked rice.
13.33.11	Then having made the first step as "O god Savitar, by your impulse", he pours down four handfuls of rice, saying, "I pour down what is dear to Indra and Varuna."
13.33.12	He releases speech after having made it fit for offering.
13.33.13	The rite is common upto the pouring down.
13.33.14	Having poured down, he places eleven potsherds on the southern half of the Garhapatya.
13.33.15	When he puts the cake on the fire, then he cooks the milk-rice on the Garhapatya.
13.33.16	Then having taken out the cake, spread and sprinkled, and having covered it with the milk-rice, he places it within the altar.
13.34.1	Now indeed it is said:
13.34.2	One puts the cake on milk-rice.
13.34.3	He makes it self-existent.
13.34.4	And also having a place.
13.34.5	He arranges it in four parts.
13.34.6	It stands in the directions.
13.34.7	Again he arranges it.
13.34.8	Having divided the cake into four parts, he arranges it, saying, "O Indra and Varuna, with that body of yours which is to be protected, do you release this one from sin. With that body of yours, O Indra and Varuna which is to be enjoyed, to be guarded, to be shining, do you release him from sin."
13.34.9	Again he gathers (the oblations) and offers them together.
13.34.10	These are for her: "O Indra and Varuna, I am yours, O Indra and Varuna. For the sacrifice I offer."
13.34.11	Then from in front of the Svishtakrit he offers the oblations with the ladle: "Whatever sin of yours, O Indra-Varuna, is in the fire, I offer it to you with this." Eight.
13.35.1	Then indeed it is said:
13.35.2	One who has an enemy should offer this sacrifice to Agni Pravata, Agni Vibadhavata and Agni Pratikavata.
13.35.3	These are her verses: "Agni, the most excellent, may he bestow on thee; may he bestow on me. Thou art the most excellent of all, the most excellent of lights. Thou art the best of all, the best of lights. Thou, O Agni, with thy best form, the well-formed, the well-seeing, the well-moving."
13.35.4	One who has an enemy should offer this sacrifice to Indra, the remover of enemies. He should offer a cake on eleven potshards to Indra, the destroyer of enemies, to Indra, the giver of strength.
13.35.5	Now it is said:
13.35.6	One should offer a cake of thirty-three potshers.
13.35.7	These are the same as the three cakes of eleven potshers mentioned earlier.
13.35.8	These are her verses: "O Indra, the destroyer of foes, I have entered. O Indra, may thy kingdom and thy powers be mine. O hundred-powered one, may I be thy benefactor."
13.35.9	If one is in rivalry with an enemy, he should offer this sacrifice. He should offer a cake on eight potshards to Agni Samvarga.
13.35.10	When it is cooked and near, he should touch it with this formula.
13.35.11	He touches the heated (oblation) with this formula, "Thou art strength, thou art power, thou art force, thou art splendour, thou art the abode of gods, thou art all, thou art all-life, thou art all; I shall conquer this enemy with this oblation."
13.35.12	"O Indra, yoke the divine messengers!" This is the name of a hymn. One should recite the seventeen Sāmidhenī verses in the reverse order.
13.35.13	The following are the verses for it: "O friends, may you be united, may you be joined together. O bull, may you be well-united."
13.36.1	"If one desires offspring, one should offer this oblation to Prajapati, the goat, for him."
13.36.2	The following are its verses: "O Prajapati, may you know."
13.36.3	If one desires cattle, one should offer this oblation of Soma and Pūṣan, a cake on eight potsherds, to Soma and Pūshan.
13.36.4	These are its mantras: "Soma and Pūṣhan, these two gods..."
13.36.5	One should offer to Citrā if one desires cattle."
13.36.6	One observes fast with the mantra, "To Citrā, the dog..."
13.36.7	Then in the morning he offers an oblation to Agni on eight potsherds, a rice-pap to Soma, an oblation to Tvashtri on eight potsherads, a rice-papto Sarasvati, a rice- pap to Sarasvata, a rice-p to Sinivali, an oblation of eleven potsherds to Indra.
13.36.8	These are hers: "With Agni, may we win wealth, with Agni, O Agni, may we prosper. May Tvashtri, the foremost, increase us. May the four-footed one, the divine, grant us prosperity. May the giver of wealth, the giver of food, the giver of strength, the giver of happiness, the giver of life, the giver of light, the giver of radiance, the giver of brilliance, the giver of splendor, the giver of glory, the giver of fame, the giver of renown, the giver of prosperity, the giver of wealth come to us. The one who drinks from the sky, from Sarasvati, the one who is praised by the gods, the one who gives food, the one who grants prosperity, the one who bestows wealth, the one who brings happiness, the one who makes us happy, the one who delights us, the one who pleases us, the one whose praise is sung by the gods, Sarasvati, the goddess, the one who has the golden hue, the one who shines, the one who illuminates, the one who illumines, the one who lights up, the one who brightens, the one who causes to shine, the one who radiates, the one who glows, the one who blazes, the one who burns, the one who sparkles, the one who glitters, the one who dazzles, the one who enlivens, the one who cheers, the one who gladdens, the one whose radiance is sung by
13.36.9	Then he offers the oblations of the ladle in front of the Svishtakrit, with the five verses and two formulas, "O Agni, come with cows..."
13.37.1	One who is going to perform the Kārīrī sacrifice.
13.37.2	He prepares a black garment, a black pot, a black horse, a black chariot, a black antelope skin, black honey, black barley grains, a black pot with raw and cooked (food), a black skin, a black sheep, a black cow, a black goat, a black calf, a black cow-pen, a black cowherd, a black cowherdsman, a black cowhouse, a black cowstall, a black cowpen, a black bull, a black cowman, a black bullock, a black cowdung, a black cow's urine, a black cow’s milk, a black cow
13.37.3	Then he places a black garment and a black pot in the place of the sacrificer.
13.37.4	Then, having placed a black horse in front of the Āhavanīya fire, having bound it with a black rope, having placed it on a black antelope skin within the altar, he pours black honey and black barley grains.
13.37.5	He places a pot on the heap.
13.37.6	Then, having placed a wooden post in front of the heap, facing east, he binds a black cow in front of it.
13.37.7	To the north of the Ahavaniya fire he places the black twig of the Varsahavu tree, the grass and the kindling wood.
13.37.8	Then the sacrificer puts on a black garment and a black turban.
13.38.1	"He says, "Thou art Marut, the strength of Maruts, thou breakest the stream of waters."
13.38.2	"O Maruts, delight the hawk that is coming." He turns towards the wind from the west.
13.38.3	It generates wind in front of itself, for the purpose of preventing rain. So says the Brāhmaṇa.
13.38.4	Then, having released the horse from the yoke, he scatters it with the Uttaravargīya verse, "Cry out, thunder, and deposit the embryo."
13.38.5	If it shakes, if it urinates, or if it defecates, he knows that it will rain.
13.38.6	Then he offers the oblations named after the winds: "May the wind from the east bring rain, may the wind from the west bring rain, may all the winds bring rain, svāhā." Eight times.
13.38.7	Then on the inner side of the altar, on a black antelope skin, he mixes the barley grains with honey: "The sweet ones, the pure ones, the shining ones, the dark ones, the flowing ones, the well-foaming ones, the ones borne by Mitra, the ones borne in the kingdom, the ones from Surastra, may they protect here."
13.38.8	Having made three balls, having mixed them together, he binds the ends of the black antelope skin with a thread, saying, "Thou art the thread of the horse of Vṛṣṇi; I bind thee for rain."
13.38.9	Then he binds it on the first knot of the neck.
13.39.1	"O Agni, O Soma, O Sun, the Vasus, the gods, have bound thee."
13.39.2	The day and night are bound together.
13.39.3	On the second (he binds) with the verse, "The gods, Mitra-Varuna-Aryaman, have bound the heaven and earth with a firm bond."
13.39.4	He stops at the day and night.
13.39.5	On the third (he binds) the verse, "Gods, drinkers of Soma, have bound the feet of the waters, the swift-moving."
13.39.6	He stops again at the day and the night.
13.39.7	Now indeed it is said:
13.39.8	"If it rains, one should offer only that much."
13.39.9	If it rains, or if it does not rain, he offers the oblations on the ground, sprinkled with the ladle. They make darkness even in the day, O Maruts, as you come from the ocean.
13.39.10	Then he looks at the smoke of these oblations, saying, "The smoke is of a dark color, tawny, like the Suparna."
13.39.11	If it does not rain,
13.39.12	He should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Dhāmacchāda, a cake on seven potsherds to Maruts, and a cake on one potsherd to Surya.
13.39.13	These are the verses for it: "You are the one who is not shaken, O Agni, O Jātavedas, O Maruts, send down rain for us from heaven. The Maruts swell the waters, the well-giving ones. The Maruts, the well-givers, swell the waters. The Maruts send down rain, the well-giver, the well-knowing ones. The Marut host, the well-knowers, send down rain. The Maruts are the well-givers. The Maruts have sent down rain. The well-givers have sent down rain."
13.39.14	Then he offers three oblations with the ladle in front of the Svishtakrit: "May I obtain the pure, the new, the invoked."
13.39.15	Then he fills this pot with water: "Produce rain from heaven, fill the ocean with water."
13.39.16	If it bursts or breaks, he knows that it will rain.
13.39.17	Then he offers on the Avīsa-grass, with the formula, "Thou art the Avīsa, the first-born, thou art the strength belonging to the ocean."
13.39.18	If it shakes, if it rains, if it discharges excreta, he knows that it will rain.
13.39.19	Then he offers on the Varsahauta-grass, with
13.40.1	the formula, "Stretch out the earth, break this heavenly sky, let the heaven be raised up, give us the heaven, let the lord release the covering."
13.40.2	Then he strikes him on the Āhavanīya with the verse, "The golden-haired one, the spreading of dust."
13.40.3	Then he looks at his smoke with the verse, “The Suparnas have come to you with the rays.”
13.40.4	Then standing within the altar, he shakes the black antelope skin with the verse, "The gods who have shares in heaven."
13.40.5	The Kariri rite is concluded.
13.40.6	Now about the Anjasavakariri.
13.40.7	He offers the Agniya cake on eight potsherds. Having cooked it, he places it.
13.40.8	It has fifteen kindling verses, five Prayāja offerings, and two Ajyabhāga offerings in the Vartrāghna rite.
13.40.9	Then the Agniya offering: "Agni is the head of the oblations."
13.40.10	The Samyājyā verses are in the Tristubh metre.
13.40.11	Those with which he binds the balls, those with which he offers, and those with which he looks at the smoke, they are accomplished.
13.40.12	The Anjasavakariri is concluded.
13.41.1	Now indeed it is said,
13.41.2	One who is performing a sacrifice or being sacrificed to, or one who is about to perform a sacrifice or being performed to, or one for whom a sacrifice is being performed, should perform the sacrifice with the Tridaśavīya rite.
13.41.3	One who is about to offer this sacrifice prepares a thousand gold coins, a cow for the oblation, and a cow for the sacrifice.
13.41.4	Then having made the formula "For thee, O god Savitr, for the impulse", he offers four handfuls of rice with the formula "I offer what is dear to Indra and Vishnu".
13.41.5	Having made the same formula, he offers four handful of barley with the formula "What is dear to Indra-Vishnu".
13.41.6-11	Having made this the rule, he offers the oblation to Indra-Vishnu, saying, "I offer the oblation to the one loved by Indra-Vishnu." There are four oblations of rice. He places the oblation on the rice itself. They take up barley. He releases speech with the oblation. The rite is the same up to the placing of the oblation. Having placed it, he places twelve potsherds on the Garhapatya.
13.41.12	Now indeed it is said:
13.41.13	There is a cake on twelve potsherds.
13.41.14	Of them three are on four potsherds. (Each)
13.41.15	For the attainment of the three.
13.41.16	There are three cakes.
13.41.17	These are the three worlds.
13.41.18	For the attainment (of these) worlds.
13.41.19	The later and later (cakes) are larger.
13.41.20	He makes the later and later (cake) larger. The one in the middle is made of barley.
13.41.21	Now indeed it is said:
13.42.1	All the metres are recited in this Iṣṭi, they say.
13.42.2	The Kakubha is indeed the strength of the Tristubh.
13.42.3	The Uṣṇīṣa is the Jagatī.
13.42.4	By reciting the Uṣṇīsa and Kakubha, he obtains all the metres.
13.42.5	He places two Dhāyyās in the light: "O Agni, with your powerful rays..."
13.42.6	Then (he says) "O Agni, three are thy powers, three thy places of rest." He places it with three (verses) for the sake of similarity. So says the Brahmaṇa.
13.42.7	"He makes all approach and pronounces the benediction."
13.42.8	These are recited at that (rite): "You both have won together in your work."
13.42.9	Having placed the Anvāhārya (rice-ball), he gives a thousand gold coins, a cow for Tarpaṇa.
13.42.10	If one desires, "May he be born as a king, unconquered, and may he slay Vritra," one should offer this oblation to Indra and Brihaspati.
13.42.11	One who is about to perform this sacrifice prepares a golden yoke.
13.42.12	These are its verses: "May Indra and Brihas pati protect us, may Brihaspati protect us from the rear."
13.42.13	Having obtained the Anvāhārya portion, he gives a golden garland.
13.43.1	One should offer a cake on twelve potsherds to Vaiśvānara Agni, having eaten new grain without offering the Āgrayana oblation, or one who offers in the fires of another or whose fires are offered in by another.
13.43.2	Having set up the fires in the Āraṇis, having performed the Upavasatha rite, having churned out the fires, having performed the Viharana rite, he offers a cake on twelve potsherds to Vaisvānara.
13.43.3	These are its verses: "Vaisvānara with his own impulse, praised in heaven."
13.43.4	If one whose Agnihotra has been interrupted desires, "May the thread of my progeny not be cut off," he should offer a cake on eight potshards to Agni Tantumaat.
13.43.5	Having ascended the fires on the kindling woods, having churned out the fires, having separated them, he should offer a rice-cake on eight potshers to Agni Tantumaata.
13.43.6	These are yours. You are our thread and bridge, O Agni, you are the path that leads to the gods. We ascend your back, O Agni, and then we shall rejoice with the gods in the same place. Making himself the way, the sharp-horned bull shines, looking at the ancient abode. Agni has spread the divine thread.
13.43.7	We invoke Agni, the well-offered, the bearer of oblations, the conqueror of foes, the destroyer of fiends, the conqueror in battles, the luminous, the shining, the Purandara, the well-performed. O Agni, do thou swell that which is well-offered. O Agni, thou art the god who conquers all foes. Thou extendest our path far and wide. Make it luminous. Give us the imperishable life. Life.
13.43.8	If one who has established the sacred fires weeps, one should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni, the upholder of vows.
13.43.9	These are the verses for that: "O Agni, you are the upholder of the vow, pure, approaching the gods. O Agni, for the carrying of offerings.
13.43.10	O Agni, the immortal, the giver of gifts, the protector of vows, the worshipper, the giver of good heroes, the bestower of treasures, the knower of all, protect us for life, O Jātavedas.
13.43.11	Now if the fires of one person were to be mixed with the fires of another person, or if the fires of another were to be mixed, then having set up the fires on the kindling woods, having churned out the fires, having gone away, he should offer a cake on eight potshards to Agni Viśvakarman, and to Agni Vratapati.
13.43.12	These are her verses: "The winds, blown from all sides, Agni, thee! Agni, the human beings praise thee. O Agni, thou art the guardian of vows. If we have transgressed the vows, O Agni, thou knowest."
13.43.13	The sacrifices are concluded, the sacrifices are concluded.
14.1.1	Now indeed it is said:
14.1.2	Prajapati desired, 'Let me create progeny.'
14.1.3	He performed austerities.
14.1.4	He created the serpents.
14.1.5	He desired, 'Let me create offspring.'
14.1.6	He performed austerities for a second time.
14.1.7	He created the birds.
14.1.8	He desired 'Let me create offsprings.'
14.1.9	He performed austerity for a third time.
14.1.10	He saw this instruction for consecration.
14.1.11	He said, 'From that he created offspring.'
14.1.12-17	They ask, "What is that austerity by which one, having performed austerities, speaks the words of consecration?" Now, indeed, it is said: The Angirasas, going to the heavenly world, introduced the consecration and austerity in the waters. One bathes in the waters. One directly obtains the consecration and austerity. This is what one should say." Now, indeed it is said:
14.1.18	If a consecrated person sees something impure, the consecration leaves him.
14.1.19	"His blue (eye) and his black (eye) go away."
14.1.20	Seeing something impure, he mutters, "The mind is untied, the eye is poor, the sun is the best of lights, may the consecration not leave me."
14.1.21	It does not leave him.
14.1.22	"It does not go away from him, neither the blue nor the black." This is the Brahmanical text.
14.1.23	Now, indeed, it is said:
14.1.24	"When the consecrated one is rained upon, the divine waters are not appeased, they destroy his strength, power, consecration and austerity."
14.1.25	He, being rained upon, mutters: "You give strength, you give power, you give strength, do not destroy my consecration, do not destroy the austerity." He says this.
14.1.26	He takes all this into himself.
14.1.27	His energy, strength, consecration, and austerities are not destroyed. This is the Brahmanical text.
14.1.28	Now, indeed, it is said:
14.1.29	Agni is the deity of the consecrated one.
14.1.30	He goes away from here as if he were far away when he goes.
14.1.31	He becomes far away from here as he ascends.
14.1.32	Having ascended the fire on the sacrificial grass, he proceeds with the verse addressed to Brihaspati:
14.1.33	Go from the good to the better. May Brihaspati be your leader." He says this.
14.1.34	Brihaspati is indeed the Brahman of the gods.
14.1.35	He follows him.
14.1.36	He indeed leads him across. So says the Brahmana.
14.1.37	The course of the waters is known.
14.1.38	The conclusion is stated.
14.1.39	Now indeed it is said,
14.1.40	He who, having sent Soma, the king, to the world of sovereignty, buys it, goes to the sovereignty of his own people.
14.1.41	The world of sovereignty of Soma, the king is indeed the metres.
14.1.42	One should recite this mantra before buying Soma."
14.1.43	He recites this mantra before buying the Soma.
14.2.1	"This is your share of the Gayatri verse." Let him say to Soma, "This is your portion of the Tristubh verse." Let him tell Soma, "This your share of the Jagat verse." Let him speak to Soma, "May you attain the sovereignty of the Chandomas." Let him tell him.
14.2.2	Having sent him to the world of sovereignty, he buys him.
14.2.3	"He goes to the sovereignty of his own people." So says the Brahmana.
14.2.4	Now indeed it is said:
14.2.5	He who knows the foundation of Tānūnaptrā indeed stands firm.
14.2.6	Brahmin scholars say: "They do not offer, they do not sacrifice, then where does Tānūnaptrs stand firm?"
14.2.7	One should say: "In Prajapati's mind."
14.2.8	One should sniff three times."
14.2.9	He sniffs three times, saying: "I offer you in Prajapati' s mind."
14.2.10	This is indeed the firm foundation of Tānūnaptr.
14.2.11	He who knows this stands firm. Thus says the Brāhmaṇa.
14.2.12	Now, indeed, it is said:
14.2.13	He who knows the firm foundation of the Adhvaryu stands firm.
14.2.14	When one thinks, "I shall perform the Homa without advancing," then standing, one should call out.
14.2.15	When one has thought, "I shall offer the Homa without moving forward," then standing, he calls out.
14.2.16	This is the foundation of the Adhvaryu.
14.2.17	He who knows this stands firm. So says the Brahmana.
14.2.18	Now indeed it is said:
14.2.19	If one were to offer after advancing, one would go away from the foundation.
14.2.20	Therefore one should offer while standing in the same place for the sake of foundation.
14.2.21	This is done elsewhere than at the oblations.
14.2.22	One offers after advancing at the oblations.
14.2.23	Now, indeed, it is said:
14.2.24	"He who knows the own of the Adhvaryu becomes his own."
14.2.25	The ladle is his own, the Vāyavya is his own, and the cup is his own.
14.2.26	If one were to call out without taking the Vāyavy or the cup, one would go away from one's own.
14.2.27	He calls out after taking both the Vāyव्य and the cup.
14.2.28	So that one does not go away from one’s own. This is the Brahmanical explanation.
14.2.29-31	Now indeed it is said: "He who performs the Stotra without establishing the Soma, the Soma becomes unextinguished, the Stoma becomes unextinguished. The Uktas become unextinguished, and the sacrificer becomes unextinguished." The Adhvaryu becomes unextinguished.
14.2.32-36	Having taken the cup, he should offer the Stotra after pouring out the Soma. For the pouring out of the Soma is the taking of the cup. Having taken the cup, one offers the Stotra after having poured out the Soma. He places the Soma back, the Stoma, the Uktas. The sacrificer stands back, the Adhvaryu. This is the Brahmanical text.
14.3.1	Now indeed it is said:
14.3.2	"When they collect the Soma-purchasing cow, they collect the sacrifice."
14.3.3	The Havirdhāna is the mouth of the sacrifice.
14.3.4	"When they would lead the Havirdhāna towards the east, then one should anoint the axle with that."
14.3.5	When he leads the Havirdhana towards the east, he anoints the axle with the third step from the Havirdhānā.
14.3.6	The Brahmanical text says that the sacrifice is continued at the very mouth of the sacrifice.
14.3.7	Now, it is said:
14.3.8	They carry the fire towards the east, bring in the wife, and set up the Anvähäryä fires. Then this his Dhishnya fire is lost. He thinks about it. Then Rudra, having become powerful, destroys the offspring and cattle of the sacrificer.
14.3.9	When they lead the animal to be sacrificed towards the east, then one should take the animal-sacrificial portion.
14.3.10	When they lead the animal towards the east, he takes the animal-sacrifices.
14.3.11	He makes him a sharer with that alone. So says the Brahmana.
14.3.12	Now indeed it is said:
14.3.13	The sacrificer is the Ahavaniya.
14.3.14	They indeed drag the sacrificer away when they take the animal to be offered from the Āhavanīya.
14.3.15	One should do it in this way or one should make a fire-stirring stick.
14.3.16	If he is going to do it, he does not follow it.
14.3.17	It indeed lies burning continuously.
14.3.18	If he follows him, then at the time of the animal sacrifice, taking a torch and approaching the fire, he goes before the animal, carrying the torch.
14.3.19	Here they cook the animal with the churning stick.
14.3.20	They bring the torch along with the oblation for the purpose of the sacrificer's well-being, says the Brahmana.
14.3.21	Now indeed it is said:
14.3.22	If the offering of the animal is lost, one should offer the clarified butter as an expiation.
14.3.23	One should offer the clarified-butter as an expiation as many times as the offerings of the animal are lost.
14.3.24	This is the expiation. This is the Brahmanical text.
14.3.25	Now, it is said:
14.3.26	If they were to kill an animal, if one were to desire, "May they be afflicted with distress," one should offer at the Agnihotra with the verse, "O Anga, you are indeed wise."
14.3.27	He offers at the Agnihotra the verse, "You are indeed wise, O Anga."
14.3.28	He afflicts them with distress.
14.3.29	This is the Brahmana.
14.3.30	If one performs the one-man sacrifice, one offers this oblation in the fire.
14.3.31	The consecration is known.
14.3.32	The procedure for the Apāyas has been stated.
14.3.33	The Brāhmaṇa is concluded.
14.4.1	Now, indeed, it is said:
14.4.2	"He who performs the sacrifice contrary to the deities is cut off from the deities and becomes worse.
14.4.3	He who performs the rite according to the deities is not cut off from the gods and becomes better.
14.4.4	He touches the Āgnidhra with the Āgneya (verse), the Havirdhāna with the Vaishvadeva (verse), the ladles with the Āgneye (verse), the Vāyavyā (verse) the Vāyavya (vessel), and the Sadas with the Indra (verse).
14.4.5	He touches the Āgnīdhra with the Āgneyi (verse), the Hāvirdhāna with the Vaiśvadevā (verse), the Sruks with the Āgneyā (verse), the vāyavyā (vāyavyā) the Vāyu (vessel), and Sadas with the Indrā (verse).
14.4.6	Thus he serves the sacrifice according to the deities.
14.4.7-13	One does not become more powerful by turning away from the deities. Thus says the Brāhmaṇa. The wearing of the great outer garments of Udumbara wood has been mentioned. The placing of the ladles has been mentioned.  The touching of the vessels has been mentioned. Now indeed it is said: The Adhvaryu is the protector of the sacrificer. Indeed, the protector is destroyed before the protected.
14.4.14	"Protect me from the curse of any one, O Asanī." One should offer this before the morning recitation.
14.4.15	Before the morning recitation, having risen at midnight, the Agnidhra offers to Asanī, saying, "Protect me from any curse, O Asannī, svāhā."
14.4.16	The Adhvaryu himself prepares the protection in front of him, saying, "For non-injury." This is the Brahmaṇa.
14.4.17	Now indeed it is said:
14.4.18	"He who conquers by means of the metres, conquers the two who are pressing."
14.4.19	He who is performing the Soma-sacrifice, rising from the Agnidhra-chamber, offers three oblations for lying down and sitting up, with the formula, "For lying down thee, for sitting up thee, with the Gayatri-verse for overpowering, svāhā." "For lying down, for sitting up, with Triṣṭubh-verse for overpowering svāhā." For lying down, for siting up, with Jagatī-verse for overpowering. Svāhā.
14.4.20	Then he offers two oblations to Prāṇa and Apāna, with the formulas, "May Prāṇa and Āpāna not fall into death; may Prāṇa and Apaṇa not abandon me."
14.4.21	Now indeed it is said:
14.4.22	"Those whose Soma is obtained, they strive for Prāṇa and Aprāṇa among the deities."
14.4.23	He says, "For lying down thee, for sitting thee."
14.4.24	Lying down and sitting are the metres.
14.4.25	The Brahmanical text says that he wins the metres by means of the metres.
14.4.26	Now it is said,
14.4.27	"He who has more sacrificial rites, they say, wins the deities."
14.4.28	If the Soma sacrifice is to be performed after the Agniṣṭoma, one should perform the Ukthya.
14.4.29	One approaches the Ukthya rite.
14.4.30	If it is Ukthya, one should perform the Atiratra.
14.4.31	One approaches the Atiratra sacrifice.
14.4.32	One wins over his deities through the sacrificial rites. One becomes more prosperous. So says the Brahmana.
14.4.33	Thus indeed is it for the Adhvaryu.
14.4.34	Now for the Chandogas.
14.4.35	The Ajya offerings are with the words "Preti" and "Ceti" for victory.
14.4.36	The Marutvati verses are to be recited for victory.
14.4.37	Both the Brihat and Rathantara are to be recited.
14.4.38	Thus it is according to the Chhandogas.
14.4.39	Now according to the Hotri.
14.4.40	The Sajaneya, the Shashi, the Vihavy, the Agasthya, and the Kayashubhi are to be recited according to the Ekahyayajin.
14.4.41	Now for the Sattrins, the rising at midnight is the same, with five Abhibhuti, two Pranahuti,
14.4.42	They proceed as prescribed.
14.4.43	They perform the rites on the days as prescribed.
14.4.44	The recitation of the Nigrābha rites has been mentioned.
14.4.45	Now, it is said:
14.4.46	"Oṣadhayaḥ (plants) are the classes of Soma."
14.4.47	The classes are indeed the lords of the king who gives away.
14.4.48	Soma belongs to Indra.
14.4.49	While pressing Soma, he requests the king for the sake of the plants.
14.4.50-52	May your good birth, born of truth, grow in our minds. May we be blessed by you. The goddesses, the plants, in accord with Indra, may they consent to the Soma pressing. He says this. He consecrates him for his own clan, for his own deity, for the Oṣadhis. So says the Brāhmaṇa. Now indeed it is said,
14.4.53	The first drop of Soma that is being pressed, if it falls down, it takes away the power, strength, progeny and cattle of the sacrificer.
14.4.54	One should recite this mantra over it.
14.4.55	If the first drop of Soma being pressed falls down, one should recite this mantra: "Do not fall down along with progeny, along with the growth of wealth, my power and strength."
14.4.56	He prays for this blessing, for the strength of Indra, for progeny, for cattle, for non-destruction. So says the Brāhmaṇa.
14.4.57	Here is the mantra for the drops.
14.4.58	We shall describe it along with the others.
14.4.59	Now indeed it is said:
14.5.1	He who dedicates the gods to the fame of the gods and men to the fame of men, becomes famous among the gods as among men.
14.5.2	One should take the Grahas before the Āgrayaṇa silently.
14.5.3	Those above it, loudly."
14.5.4	The Grahas which he takes before the Āgrayaṇa, he takes silently.
14.5.5	The Grahas which he afterwards, he takes aloud.
14.5.6	He thus makes the gods enter into the company of the gods, and men into the company of men.
14.5.7	He becomes famous among the gods, and among men. So says the Brāhmaṇa.
14.5.8	When they are about to perform the Bahispavamāna, while they are engaged in it, he offers a spoonful of clarified butter on the Ahavaniya with the verse, "May Agni at the morning pressing protect us, Vaisvānara, the great, the all-pervading, may he, the purifier, bestow wealth on us. May we be long-lived and have food together, svāhā."
14.5.9	At the Madhyandina Pavamāna, when the Ahāvanīya is being taken up, he offers a spoonful of clarified butter with the verse, "May all the gods, the Maruts, and Indra not forsake us at this second pressing. May we be in the good opinion of the gods, speaking the life-giving and agreeable words."
14.5.10	At the Ārbhava Pavamāna, and at the Ahāvanīya, he offers the Sruva-oblation, saying, "This is the third pressing of the sages, who have brought the cup with truth. They, the good-natured, seeking heaven, may they lead us to prosperity. Svāhā!"
14.5.11	Now indeed it is said,
14.5.12	Or, the offerings that are made with the Ayatanas are different from those that are made without the Ayatanas.
14.5.13	Those that are made with Aghara are different from those made without Aghara.
14.5.14	One should offer the Aindravayava with the Aghara, says the Sutra.
14.5.15	Having taken up the Indra-Vayu cup, he offers the libation with the formula, "This is the sacrifice, the rite. May the gods be for the plants, for the cattle, for all people. You are the rite. Do thou swell with ghee, O divine Soma. Svāhā."
14.5.16	He thus makes the offerings to Soma have a fixed abode.
14.5.17	He who knows thus becomes one having a fixed abode.
14.5.18	Then indeed he anoints the heaven and earth with ghee.
14.5.19	When anointed, they become fit to be used.
14.5.20	He who knows thus becomes fit to be used.
14.5.21	Then the Pratiprasthātṛ offers the flowing Soma from the churning of the Ahavanīya with the verse, "This is your share, O Rudra, which you have begged for. Accept it. May you be the protector of the cattle, the prosperity of wealth, and the good progeny of the years. Svāhā."
14.5.22	Then indeed it is said:
14.5.23	Manu divided the inheritance among his sons.
14.5.24	He did not give the Brahmacarya of Nabha-Neḍiṣṭha.
14.5.25	He came.
14.5.26	He said, "Do not be without a share."
14.5.27	He said, "I am not without a share."
14.5.28	These Angirasas are performing a sacrifice.
14.5.29	They do not know about the world of heaven.
14.5.30	Tell them this Brahman.
14.5.31	They will go to the world of heaven, and those who have cattle will give them to them."
14.5.32	He said this to them.
14.5.33	They ask, "What did he say to them?" "The Apāyas, the Sāntanīs, the Drapas, the Anumantrīyas, the Acchavākyas, the Stotrīyas, and the Sastrīyas, speak the truth, may your faith not fail." This is what he said to them.
14.5.34	This is a description of the rite mentioned in the statement, "Rudra approached him while he was performing the sacrifice with animals."
14.5.35	Then he offers two oblations in the course of the rite.
14.5.36	"May I be acceptable to speech," "May I accomplish the Stoma with the Rk," these are the third oblations offered above.
14.5.37	We shall describe them there.
14.5.38	Then he recites the Dṛpas verses: "The Dṛpas has risen, that Dṛpas of thine, which Dṛpas, which Dṛpa of thine."
14.5.39	Then indeed it is said:
14.5.40	"The Adhvaryu is the first among the priests to be yoked. The Stoma should be yoked with him."
14.5.41	When they move out for the Bahispavamāna, the Adhvaryu moves forward, holding the two sacrificial grass-blades, bending down.
14.5.42	"She (the voice) goes in front, she goes straight, she places the fame among the gods in me, the life in the animals, the offspring in me and the sacrificer."
14.5.43	He thus yokes the voice at the mouth of the sacrifice. So says the Brahmana.
14.5.44	Now indeed it is said,
14.5.45-51	This is the real foundation of the sacrifice, when having taken up the Grahas, they move out for the Bahispavamāna. They move out towards the east. They praise with verses directed towards the east. Having returned with a verse addressed to Vishnu, they stand up. He stands up having returned with a verse directed to Vishnu. Vishnu is the sacrifice. He makes the sacrifice.
14.5.52	"O Vishnu, thou art our last protector, grant us protection. The streams of thy bounty flow together, and the milk-cows yield the inexhaustible (Soma). Thus he says.
14.5.53	What dries up while he is lying down, that he makes to grow by this (Soma-drinking). Such is the Brahmaṇa text.
14.6.1	Now indeed it is said:
14.6.2	He who, knowing the ascending order of the Pavamāna hymns, offers sacrifice, ascends the Pavamāna (hymns).
14.6.3	It is not cut off from the Pavamānas.
14.6.4	When the fifth verse is recited in the Bahispavamāna, he recites, "You are the hawk, the Gayatra metre, I am following you, may you protect me with welfare."
14.6.5	When the eighth verse is recited in Madhyandina Pavamāna, he recitess, "You are Suparna, the Tristubh metre, I amfollowing you, may you protet me with welfare."
14.6.6	When the ninth Pavamāna is recited in the Ārbhava Sāman, he recites with the Jagatī metre, "May I be with food, may I be with food." He says, "May I cross over safely."
14.6.7	These are the ascending stages of the Pavamāna Sāmans.
14.6.8	He who knows this and performs the sacrifice ascends the Pavamāna stages.
14.6.9	He is not cut off from the Pavamāna stage. This is the Brāhmaṇa.
14.6.10	Now, indeed, it is said:
14.6.11	He who knows the continuity of Pavamāna, attains the whole of life.
14.6.12	He does not die before his time.
14.6.13	He becomes possessed of cattle.
14.6.14	He obtains progeny.
14.6.15	The cups of Pavamāna are taken up. But these are not taken up by him.
14.6.16	If one were to take them up without taking them up, one would cut off Pavamāna.
14.6.17	When it is cut off, the Adhvaryu's breath would follow it.
14.6.18	One should touch the Dronakalaśa with the formula, "Thou art taken with a purpose; for Prajapati thee."
14.6.19	He touches the Dronakalaša with the formula, “For Prajapati thee.”
14.6.20	With the formula, “for Indra thee” he touches the Ādhavanīya.
14.6.21	With the formula “for all the gods thee” he touches Pūtabhṛt.
14.6.22	He thus prolongs the Pavamāna (chant).
14.6.23	He attains the whole span of life.
14.6.24	He does not die before his time.
14.6.25	He becomes possessed of cattle.
14.6.26	He obtains progeny. So says the Brahmaṇa.
14.6.27	Now indeed it is said,
14.6.28	"There are indeed three pressing-rounds.
14.6.29	Then they omit the third pressing-round and make it without a verse,
14.6.30	Having offered the Upāṃśu oblation, he should pour the Upāṃshu oblation into the Upāṃshupātra and then pour it into the third pressing.
14.6.31	He pours the Upāṃšu oblation into the Rījiṣa of the Madhyandina pressing.
14.6.32	By pouring it, it becomes endowed with Upāṃshu.
14.6.33	By that he becomes prosperous.
14.6.34	He makes all the pressing-rounds bright, shining, and of equal strength. So says the Brāhmaṇa.
14.7.1	Now, the discussion on the pressing-rounds that have been pressed.
14.7.2	When the Drona-vessel is broken or when the water has flowed out of it, taking four spoonfuls, he offers on the Ahavaniya fire when the sacrificer has begun. "The moon, having become grey, has gone away from the midst of many young ones. See the divine deed of the god. He who was equal to himself, he died. Svāhā!"
14.7.3	Then having sprinkled water from the Vasatīvari vessels into the Hotr's goblet, he collects the essence of it with the verse, "May prosperity increase with Soma. May I obtain the wealth of that which is offered and consumed."
14.7.4	He recites the verse, "To the lord of the earth svāhā, to the lord of the world svāhā, svāhā to the lord of beings."
14.7.5	If it has been spilled, he smears it back.
14.7.6	If, however, he has already started, having removed the sacrificial grass, he should bring it back to its place. Having removed the sacrificial grass and having poured out the Āgrayana, he should pour it into the Āgrayana.
14.7.7	When the Ādhavaniya vessel is filled or when it is being filled, taking four spoonfuls in the Ādhavaniye vessel, he offers with the verse, "When the sacrificer has begun, the two oceans, vast and imperishable, flow around like feet in the belly. Seeing one, they cross over; not seeing the other, they cross over by a bridge. Svāhā!"
14.7.8	Then having sprinkled water from the Vasatīvari vessels into the Hotr's goblet, he collects it in the same way with the verse, "May prosperity increase with Soma. May I obtain the wealth of that which is offered and consumed."
14.7.9	He recites the verse, "To the Lord of the Earth, svāhā! To the Lord of the World, svāhā!"
14.7.10	If it is spilled, he smears it.
14.7.11	If it has been spilled, having taken it up, having covered it with the sacrificial grass, having brought it to the place of offering, having removed the sacrificial grass, he makes it flow into the Āgrayaṇa vessel.
14.7.12	When the Pūtabhṛtī is poured out or is being poured out, or when the vessel is being filled, taking four spoonfuls, he offers on the Āhavanīya fire when the sacrificer has begun. The two sisters, the continuous, the one with hair, knowing all the worlds, having come to cover, wearing the dark (colour), he takes up the bright (colour) with the formula, "To the daughter of the wind, svāhā."
14.7.13	Then having poured out water from the Vasatīvari vessels into the Hotr's goblet, he collects the Svadha in the same way, saying, "May prosperity increase with Soma. May I obtain the wealth of that which is offered and consumed."
14.7.14	He recites the following verse for the spilled (Soma): "To the Lord of the Earth, svāhā! To the Lord of the World, svāhā!"
14.7.15	If it is spilled, he smears it.
14.7.16	If it has been spilled, having taken it up, having covered it with the sacrificial grass, having brought it to the place of offering, having removed the sacrificial grass, he makes it flow into the Āgrayaṇa vessel.
14.7.17	When the Āgrayaṇa has been poured out or is being poured out, having offered to it with the Puroruc, having raised it, having covered it with the sacrificial grass, having brought it near, having removed the sacrificial grass, he makes it flow from the Dronakalaśa.
14.7.18	Then, when another planet has risen or is rising, having offered to the same deity with the Puroruc, having raised it, having covered it with the sacrificial grass, having brought it to the altar, having removed the sacrificial grass, he makes it flow into the Āgrayaṇa vessel.
14.8.1	Now indeed it is said:
14.8.2	"The gods did what the Asuras did at the sacrifice."
14.8.3	The gods saw this great sacrifice.
14.8.4	They performed that.
14.8.5	They performed the Agnihotra vow.
14.8.6	Therefore one should be of two vows.
14.8.7	For they offer the Agnihotra twice.
14.8.8	They performed a full-moon sacrifice, an Agniṣomīya animal sacrifice.
14.8.9	They performed an animal sacrifice to Agni, a Dārśa sacrifice.
14.8.10	They perform the morning pressing of the Visvedevā deities.
14.8.11	They performed the Varunapraghasa, the Madhyandinasavana, the Sakamedhas, the Pitryajna, and the Tryambaka, the third Savana.
14.8.12	They ask, "Which is that great sacrifice?"
14.8.13	It is said to be this very Caturmasya Soma.
14.8.14	And indeed, whatever Soma sacrifice there is, that is the great sacrifice.
14.8.15	The Asuras followed that sacrifice of theirs.
14.8.16	They did not follow it.
14.8.17	They said, "These gods have become worthy of sacrifice."
14.8.18	That is why Adhvara is called Adhvara.
14.8.19	Then the gods became victorious, the Asuras were defeated.
14.8.20	He who, knowing this, offers a Soma sacrifice, becomes victorious, his enemy is defeated." So says the Brahmana.
14.8.21	Then he approaches the king of all (the gods) with the formula, "Agni is the overlord, Indra is the overlord. The overlord of all gods is the overlord of me along with Brahmic glory." "Do thou purify us for the cow, for the people, for the horse. O king, for the plants. We may be the givers of thy uninterrupted wealth, of thy prosperity, of thy nourishment, O lord of wealth. Do thou give me that. Do thou enjoy that. Do thou wipe this off."
14.8.22	The four Brahmanas are the means of attaining the four objects of desire. He directs his desire to the object he desires and then proceeds.
14.8.23	He then moves about in the space between the fires.
14.8.24	He looks at the Upamsupa vessel with the verse, "O breath, give me radiance, flow for radiance."
14.8.25	He looks at Antaryama vessel with the verse "For out-breath."
14.8.26	He looks into the Upamshu-savan vessel with the verse "For through-breath."
14.8.27	"He looks at the Indra-Vayu vessel with the verse," "For speech."
14.8.28	To Daksha and Kratu, thus the Maitravaruna.
14.8.29	To hearing, thus the Asvin.
14.8.30	To the eyes, thus the Sukra and Manthin.
14.8.31	To the self, thus the Aggrayan.
14.8.32	To the limbs, thus the Ukthy.
14.8.33	To life, thus the Dhruva.
14.8.34	To stability, thus the Ritupatra at the midday pressing.
14.8.35	Not at the morning pressing.
14.8.36-39	"He looks at the sixteen-fold (Soma) with the words, 'For energy.' He looks at the Drona-pot with the words, "Thou art the belly of Vishnu." He looks at Ādhavanīya with the words, "Thou art the belly (of Indra)." He looks at Pūtabhṛt with the words, “Thou art the belly of all the gods.”
14.8.40	Then he addresses the king as a whole: "Who are you? What is your name? For whom are you? For whose sake are you? Whom have you satisfied with Soma? Whom have you delighted with Soma? May I be very prosperous with offspring, very heroic with heroes, very radiant with radiance, very nourished with nourishment. May you flow for me, giving radiance to all my forms, for the sake of radiance. May you give me that. May I partake of that. May I wipe this away."
14.8.41	The four kinds of Brahmins are the ones who are accomplished. He says, "May I remove the life of the one who desires this, may I remove prosperity, may I remove brahminical splendour, may I remove the life from that one, may I remove this."
14.8.42	He satisfies the one who desires.
14.8.43-47	He enters him through the Prāṇa and Apāna, through speech, through Dakṣa and Kratu, through the eyes, through the ears, through the limbs of the body, and through life. This is the Brahmanical text on the one who is the best archer. The arrangement of the Sphyas has been explained. The spreading out has been explained. The recitation of the oblations has been explained.
14.9.1	The taking of the fresh butter which is not mixed with anything else has been mentioned.
14.9.2	The mixture of curds and ghee has been mentioned. Now it is said:
14.9.3	It is said:
14.9.4	If a crow pecks at the fresh butter, the Śūdra-s of him would die prematurely.
14.9.5	If a dog pecks at it, the four-footed animals of him would die prematurly.
14.9.6	If it spills, the sacrificer would die prematurely.
14.9.7	Now indeed it is said:
14.9.8	The fresh butter is indeed the animals.
14.9.9	The animals indeed fall away from him for whom the fresh butter falls away.
14.9.10	When one takes the fresh butter again, one takes the animals back to him again. So says the Brahmana.
14.9.11	Now indeed it is said
14.9.12	The fresh butter indeed is the breath.
14.9.13	The vital breath of him whose clarified butter has been spilled, is spilled.
14.9.14	When he takes back the clarified butter that has been spilled, he takes back the vital breath.
14.9.15	He takes it back having placed gold in it.
14.9.16	When the clarified butter has been spilt, he asks for a pot or a bowl.
14.9.17	Having placed it within the altar, he collects its own share with the verse, "May prosperity increase with curds and ghee. May I obtain wealth from that well-sacrificed and well-offered one."
14.9.18	He recites the verse, "To the lord of the earth, svāhā! To the lord of the world, svāhā!"
14.9.19	Then he places a hundred-mānas gold in this ladle.
14.9.20	At the eternal grasping, he recites the verse to Visnu, "O Visnu, be our last refuge."
14.9.21	Having removed the gold, he makes the horse smell it and places it.
14.9.22	Now, as for the impure substance, which has been smelt by a dog, pecked by a crow, or eaten by an insect, or whatever else one considers impure,
14.9.23	Having put the ladle into water, he puts it into another ladle. The gold is of a hundred manas.
14.9.24	At the constant offering, he recites the verse to Vishnu, "O Vishnu, you are our last refuge."
14.9.25	Having taken out the gold, he makes the horse smell it and then puts it down.
14.9.26	Now indeed it is said,
14.9.27	If the melted butter spills, then his sacrifice is cut off.
14.9.28	One should take it back with a verse to Vishnu.
14.9.29	He takes it back with a Vishnu verse.
14.9.30	Vishnu is indeed the sacrifice.
14.9.31	One makes the sacrifice continuous with the sacrifice. This is the Brahmanical statement.
14.9.32	When they are about to enter the inner chamber, he says, "Brahman, we shall enter. Hotar, praise the Gharma."
14.9.33	May Brahma, the god Savitar, bestow it. This he tells you. Do thou bestow it, and do thou sacrifice. Brihaspati is the Brahma. Do thou protect the sacrifice. Do thou protect him who is the lord of the sacrifice. Do protect me. O Prachara, do thou establish. Herein one becomes established in the sacrifice of oblations.
14.9.34	Where he says, "O Brahman, we shall praise you, O teacher," that Brahman is pleased. The god Savitar has told you this. May you prosper and may you sacrifice. Brihaspati is the Brahman. May the verses of the long-lived one not be lost. May the true blessings of the Samaveda be true. May the true intentions be true. Speak the truth and the truth. Praised at the rising of the god Savitar, may there be Indra-possessed praise at the morning Savana.
14.9.35	"O Indra, may we be prosperous." At the midday pressing.
14.9.36	"O Indra, may you be prosperous." At third pressing.
14.9.37	He recites the milking of the praised at the praised, the praised of the praised, the strength of the praised, may the praised milk for me, may I go to the praised of the praise."
14.9.38	He recites the verse, "May the weapon yield to the weapon, may the weapon yield to me. May the weapon yield to my weapon, may the two weapons come together."
14.9.39	He recites the verse for both of them, "We invoke the Indra-like ones, may we yield milk, may we yield offspring. May my true blessing be among the gods, may I attain brahmic glory."
14.9.40	Then he recites the re-establishment of the sacrifice: "The sacrifice became, it became, it became known, it increased, it became the lord of the gods. May it make us lords, may we be the lords of wealth."
14.9.41	Then indeed it is said:
14.9.42	"The sacrifice indeed milks the lord of sacrifice, the lord of sacrifice milks the sacrifice."
14.9.43	He who, not knowing the milking of the two, the praise and the hymn, performs sacrifice, the sacrifice milks him.
14.9.44	Having performed sacrifice, he becomes worse.
14.9.45	He who, knowing the milking of these two, the praise, and the hymn, offers sacrifice, the sacrifice is milked by him.
14.9.46	Having offered sacrifice, he becomes better.
14.9.47-49	The praise of the praised, the strength of the praised, may the praised yield to me. May I go to the praise of the praised. The instrument of the instrument, the strength of instruments, may the instruments yield to me. May I go to the instrument of the instruments. Thus he says. This indeed is the milking of the praise and the instrument. He who, knowing this, performs sacrifice, indeed milks the sacrifice.
14.10.2	He says, "The Utkhasas (are the priests)." He says this in reference to the morning pressing.
14.10.3	He says, "The Ukthasas (are the ones who) have sung the Ukthas." He says this in regard to the pressing.
14.10.4	He recites, "The Uktha is the speech." He says this after having sung the midday pressing.
14.10.5	He sings, "The Ukth is Indra." He says this having sung the third pressing.
14.10.6	These are the seven syllables.
14.10.7	The Sakvari has seven feet.
14.10.8	The Shakra is the thunderbolt.
14.10.9	With the thunderbolt alone, at the third pressing, he conceals the thunderbolt. Thus says the Brāhmaṇa.
14.10.10	Now indeed it is said:
14.10.11	Brahmin scholars say: "That Adhvaryu would be who would arrange the metres according to the pressing."
14.10.12	The brilliance is in the morning pressing, the strength in the midday pressing, the cattle in the third pressing.
14.10.13	Having taken the Prātaḥsavana libation, he says, "Utkhasha."
14.10.14	Having taken the Madhyāndinasavana libation, he (the Adhvaryu) says, "Uktham vaachi."
14.10.15	Having taken (the libation) at the Tṛtīyasavana, he says, “Uktham vaachii Indrāya."
14.10.16	These are seven syllables.
14.10.17	The Sakvari metre has seven feet.
14.10.18	Animals are Sakvaras.
14.10.19	The Tṛtīya-savana is Jagat.
14.10.20	At the third pressing, he makes the metres complete.
14.10.21	The Jagati metre is indeed cattle.
14.10.22	The third pressing is cattle.
14.10.23	He thus places cattle in himself at the third pressing, so says the Brahmana.
14.10.24	Now, it is said:
14.10.25	When the Hotri calls out to the Adhvaryu, he places the Avya (the oblation) in him.
14.10.26	If he does not take it away before a year, he should bring it to his house.
14.10.27	He responds, "Shonsa, like a joy."
14.10.28	He responds, “Shonsa, like joy.”
14.10.29	It is indeed taken away by that. This is the Brahmanical explanation.
14.10.30	Now, indeed, it is said:
14.10.31	Just as one waits for a straight line, so the Adhvaryu waits for the Prati-gar.
14.10.32	Whatever one may accept, one gets just as much as one deserves.
14.10.33	Whatever is lost from half a verse, one loses just as much as is lost from those who are running.
14.10.34	They say that one should not accept a gift with the hope of getting something in return.
14.10.35	One accepts a gift with the expectation of getting something inreturn or loses something from half a verse.
14.10.36	One should breathe out only saying "prānau" and breathe in only saying "apānau".
14.10.37	One who knows this and recites it thus becomes a consumer of food.
14.10.38	This is the Brahmanical text: "The horse is born in the mouth of the offspring."
14.10.39	Now, indeed, it is said:
14.10.40	This one is the Hotṛ, that one is the Adhvaryu.
14.10.41	When he recites while seated, he does not go to the mouth of this one, the Hotṛ.
14.10.42	This one is like a seat.
14.10.43	Then indeed the Sacrificer milks her with that.
14.10.44	When standing, he recites, then the Adhvaryu does not go to the other world.
14.10.45	For he is standing, as it were.
14.10.46	Then indeed the Sacrificer also milks him with that.
14.10.47	Because he recites while seated, therefore the gods live on the gifts from here.
14.10.48	Whatever he accepts while standing, therefore men live on gifts from the other side.
14.10.49	Whatever he recites while sitting facing east,
14.10.50	he accepts while standing facing west. Therefore semen is deposited facing east and offspring are born facing west. This is the Brahmanical explanation.
14.10.51	Now indeed it is said:
14.10.52	When the Hotṛ calls out to the Adhvaryu, he hurls the thunderbolt at him.
14.10.53-59	He turns away from it. When he is called, he turns away from it, He throws the thunderbolt at it. This is the Brahmanical (rite). The taking of the Prati-ni-grahyas has been described. The covering of the Sansa-rava has been described. The Upa-amsa and Antarya-ma rites have been described. (The rites) of the two-deity deities have been described.
14.11.1	Now, then, the taking of the Atigrahya grahas.
14.11.2	If he is alone or if there are many, having taken the Agrayana grahas, he takes them.
14.11.3	The offerings of the Maheendra graha are offered in succession.
14.11.4	He takes up the Agniya cup with the formula, "O Agni, do thou purify the life-breaths." Having followed it, he places it with the formula, “Thou art taken with a support; for thee, O Agni, for the lustrous one, I take up what is agreeable."
14.11.5	Having wiped it around, he places it, with the formula, "This is thy birth-place; for thee, for the lustrous Agni.
14.11.6	Then, about to offer it, he looks at it, saying, "O Agni, you are luminous. May you be luminous among the gods. Make me luminous, long-lived, and shining among men."
14.11.7	He offers it, saying, "I offer you to consecration, austerity, and brilliance."
14.11.8	Having offered, he recites: "You are the knower of brilliance, do not let me lose brilliance, may I not lose brilliance, may brilliance not lose me."
14.11.9	He eats, saying: "May Agni bestow brilliance upon me, may brilliance be in me, may brilliance not leave me."
14.11.10	Then, while rising, he takes up the Indra-cup with the verse, "Rising with strength, I take up the Indra-Cup." Having recited this, he anoints it and places it with the verse, “This is your abode. For Indra, for you, the strong one, I take up what is agreeable."
14.11.11	Having anointed it, he places it with the words, "This is your abode for Indra, for you the strong one."
14.11.12	Then, about to offer it, he looks at it, saying, "O Indra, thou art powerful; may thou be powerful among the gods. Make me powerful, long-lived, and shining among men."
14.11.13	He offers it, saying, “I offer thee for the power of Brahman and of the Kshatra.
14.11.14	Having offered, he recites: "May he who knows strength not deprive me of strength, may I not deprive him of strength, may he not deprive me of his strength."
14.11.15	He eats, saying: "May Indra bestow on me wisdom, may he bestow on me progeny, may he bestow strength on me."
14.11.16	Then he takes up the Sūrya cup with the Sūrya verse, "O Sūrya, the illuminator of all," and then with "Thou art taken with a support; for Sūrya thee, for the shining one, I take thee that is agreeable."
14.11.17	Having wiped it around, he places it (in the cart), saying, "This is thy birth-place; for Sūriya thee, for the shinning one."
14.11.18	Then, about to offer it, he looks at it, saying, "May the sun shine, may you shine. May you be shining among the gods. Make me shining, long-lived, and lustrous among men."
14.11.19	He offers, saying, "I offer to you who shine, to Vayu and to the waters.
14.11.20	Having offered, he recites: "You are the knower of gold, do not let me lose gold, do not lose gold for me, do not let gold be lost for me."
14.11.21	He eats, saying: "May the sun bestow brilliance upon me, upon me may be the brilliance."
14.11.22	These are taken in the latter days of the six-day Prsthya sacrifice - on the twenty-first, twenty-ninth, and thirtieth days.
14.11.23	The Vishvajit should be taken at the end of all sacrifices for the sake of the strength of the sacrifice.
14.11.24	It should be taken at an Agnistoma for the sake of increasing the sacrifice. This is the Brāhmaṇa.
14.11.25	Then he murmurs the Upākaraṇa (mantra) "Vayu makes a hissing sound."
14.11.26	One who is going to perform the priestly duties or is going to take up the weapon, recites this mantra: "Ida Devahu."
14.11.27	He becomes dear to the officiating priests.
14.11.28	Approaching the assembly, he recites this Yajus while explaining the question.
14.11.29	He indeed wins the question.
14.12.1	Now, the taking of the Grahas of Aśvamedha and Ādābhya.
14.12.2	When he is about to take up the Anśu and the Adābhya, he prepares two new dishes of Udumbara wood. The Anśu-dish has four corners and is smooth. The Adābhya-dish is rough. They are surrounded by two golden and silver plates. There is also a hundred-māṇas of gold.
14.12.3	Then he makes three strands of the king of the sacrificial grass. "The Vasus make thee grow with the Gayatri metre, go to the path dear to Agni. The Rudras make thee grow with Trishtup metre, go to Indra's path dear to Indra. The Adityas make thee grow with Jagati metre, go to path dear to all the gods."
14.12.4	Then having poured out water from the Vasatīvarī pitchers into the Hotr's goblet, he shakes it twelve times with the formula, "I shake thee, O bright one, for the bright ones, O bright one." Having taken up the formula, "For the bright ones, I shake thee, O Bright one, for the Bright ones," he shakes it.
14.12.5	Then, having taken the rays in the invincible vessel, he takes them, saying, "I take the bright with the bright, in the form of the day, with the rays of the sun, they have settled in this fierce one, the streams of heaven, the flowing one."
14.12.6	Then, having taken it, he rises up, saying, "The form of the bull shines brightly, the great one."
14.12.7	"Soma comes, the leader of Soma; the bright one comes, the leader (of the bright ones).
14.12.8	Having come, he offers on the Ahavaniya fire when the sacrificer has begun, saying, 'To that name of thine, O Soma, which is bright, to that of thine, O bright one, Svāhā!'
14.12.9	Then, having circumambulated clockwise, he releases the rays of the king, saying, "O divine Soma, with the Gayatri metre, do thou approach the path dear to Agni. Thou art the lord. O divine Soma, with Triṣṭubh metre, do thou come to the path dear to Indra. Thou art the friend. O divine Soma with Jagatī metre, do thou go to the path dear of all the gods."
14.12.10	Then he says to the Pratiprasthātṛ, "Do you hold the ladle of water or the ladle of Soma juice at the rear of the Ahavaniya."
14.12.11	He does so.
14.12.12	Then he cleans the gold with water and ties it to the middle finger or fastens it to the nose.
14.12.13	Then he takes up the Anus, with the verse, "O Vamadeva," and sings mentally. He takes it with the verse, “To Prajapati thee,” and offers it with the verse “To Prajapata thee.”
14.12.14	Then he takes up the gold with the verse, "May our breath come from afar, from the atmosphere, from heaven, from the earth, thou art immortality. To Prāṇa thee."
14.12.15	Then he anoints himself with water within the altar: "May Indra and Agni bestow splendour on me, may Soma and Brihaspati bestow splendour on me; may all the gods bestow splendour on me. May the Asvins bestow splendour on me."
14.12.16	"He who has given, or he who has not given, follows you. All the divine hymns have been recited. It has become like a wheel."
14.12.17	This is the golden (coin) of the Adhvaryu.
14.12.18	The Brāhmaṇa is the answer.
14.13.1	Now, indeed, the taking of the Pṛṣṇis.
14.13.2	Having arranged the king in ten ways, he touches him with the ten formulas, "You are Vayu, named Prāṇa."
14.13.3	They are indeed taken in the Aksīya days of the year.
14.13.4	Wherever one may take them, this is another.
14.13.5	Now, then, the taking of the Parāsaṃnas.
14.13.6	These Parāsaṃna-grahas are taken in succession from the day before the equinoctial day for three days.
14.13.7	On the equinoctiai day, the Parāsaṅnas are taken both in the reverse and in the forward order.
14.13.8	And thereafter for three days, he takes them in the reverse order.
14.13.9	The Brāhmaṇa says, "Prajapati created the gods and the demons."
14.13.10	Now, it is said:
14.13.11	"The sacrificer is indeed cut off by the two fires when he performs the Śṛta ritual here and then goes to another place for the Avabhrtha."
14.13.12	"O Agni, giver of life, accepting the oblation," one should offer the Avabhrtham.
14.13.13	He who is about to perform the Avabhrtha sacrifice offers the tenth oblation to Agni, saying, "O Agni, accepting the oblation, come with a receptacle of ghee, with a source of ghee, having drunk ghee, and the sweet milk of the cow, protect this (oblation) like a father protects his son, svāhā."
14.13.14	He appeases them with the oblation, so that the sacrificer does not suffer any harm. This is the Brahmanical text.
14.13.15-18	The feeding of the sacrificial grass has been mentioned. The offering of flour has been mentioned. Now it is said: "If one were to perform a mixed rite, one should offer flour into the fire with the palms joined."
14.13.19	The Snātaka, having taken up the ladle, offers the parched barley-grains, which have been spread over and sprinkled upon the ground, to the fire burning in the forest, with the formula, "I offer to the all-consuming, the all-devouring, the all-consuming fire, Svāhā."
14.13.20	One (is destroyed) by fire, one by water, one by wind. May they make us a remedy, the assembly, the excellent strength.
14.13.21	Then he purifies him with three darbha-grass-tufts, with this eight-verse hymn: "Purifying, bestowing gold."
14.13.22	He becomes pure, clean, purified, and fit for sacrifice.
14.13.23	Now indeed it is said:
14.13.24	On the Ekastaka day of the bright fortnight, one should cook a cake on four potsherds and observe a fast with it in the morning.
14.13.25-26	Desiring to know the equality, having risen at midnight, on the day of the Ekastaka, having cooked a cake on four potsherds, in the morning when the sun has risen, having taken this cake sprinkled with water, having surrounded it with leaves and grass, having placed it on the ground, having covered it with grass, having placed it on the grass, having placed the potsherds on the grass, having covered it with grass and leaves, having placed it in the house, having placed the grass and leaves on the ground, having placed the potsherded on the grass, and having covered it with the grass and leaves, and having placed it in a house, having placed grass and leaves on a ground, having placed the pots on the grass, then the grass and leaves become pure. The end of the house, the lamp, and the water pot.
14.13.27	Having taken this, they go to that direction where his (the sacrificer's) house is clearly visible.
14.13.28	Having taken this single torch, he lights it with a twig and a leaf, holding it.
14.13.29	Then it becomes pure grass.
14.13.30	With that he fasts in the house.
14.13.31	Then he takes it up.
14.13.32	Here he attains knowledge.
14.13.33	If it burns, it becomes equal to merit. If it does not burn, it becomes equal in sin.
14.13.34	By this very knowledge, the sages of old performed the long sacrifice. Thus says the Brahmana.
14.13.35	Having eaten this cake here, having touched water, one returns home.
14.13.36	The bull ages among the cows. By that one becomes ready to perform the sacrifice.
14.13.37	That is his arrangement when he is about to sacrifice with an animal.
14.13.38	If he is about to release it, he mutters twice near its right ear: "May Tvashtri be auspicious, the reddish-colored one."
14.13.39	Then he releases it among the cows.
14.14.1	"I give you this young one."
14.14.2	He addresses the animal being led forward with the verse, "The cows have chosen thee for kingship; the Maruts, the dwellers in heaven, have called thee. Thou art shining in the eastern direction of the firmament of the kingdom. Then the fierce one shall distribute the riches."
14.14.3	Then he offers an animal to Tvashtri, Indra or Prajapati.
14.14.4	These are the deities of the Sandhi animal.
14.14.5	He recites the two verses beginning with "To his greatness and to his sight" in the manner of the Upakrama.
14.14.6	Then he offers the Vapa, saying, "This was the covering of the gods."
14.14.7	Then he offers his Havi, saying, "The father of the young ones, the lord of the harmless ones."
14.14.8	The subsequent animal rites are common.
14.14.9	When one is about to perform the Vasya sacrifice, he says, "Look at the embryo."
14.14.10	If they see the embryo, they run away, covering it with a piece of cloth.
14.14.11	Then he offers a piece of cloth to her, saying, "May Surya, the god, the disposer for those in heaven, Vayu for the nobility, Brihaspati for the offspring, offer you to Prajapati, the luminous one, svāhā."
14.14.12	He recites the verse, "The womb of yours is tawny, the womb is golden, the limbs are not tawny, that one I have united with the gods."
14.14.13	Then he asks for eight pieces of gold, a sheath, an inner sheath, a garment and a turban.
14.14.14	Then having washed this gold with water, having put on a garment and shoes, having tied it with a turban, having placed it in a small box, he places it in a big box.
14.14.15	He says, "The embryo is turned back within the bones."
14.14.16	When he is being turned back, he recites the verse, "Turn back, turn back, turn back again, O Indra, the four directions of the earth, with them turn back again."
14.14.17	He recites the formula, "I break your shell, I break your womb, I break your vagina, I break your mother and son, I break the embryo and the placenta. Let it be outside you."
14.14.18	Then, having taken this embryo with tongs, having sprinkled it with water, he bakes it on hot ashes.
14.14.19	He offers the Vasahomas at half of it.
14.14.20	Then having brought that embryo between the Catvāla and the mound, between the sacrificial post and the Havaniya fire, and having stretched it towards the south, he places it with five Hotr-priests.
14.14.21	Then he performs the Vasaya offering.
14.14.22	Then, while pouring out the oblation of the embryo in front of the Svishtakrit, he says, "Recite for Vishnu Shipi-vishta."
14.14.23	Then indeed it is said:
14.14.24	"One should pour out the oblation in front of the navel and above it."
14.14.25	He pours out the oblation from in front of the belly and above it.
14.14.26	He pours twice.
14.14.27	Having called out, he says, "Recite for Vishnu, Shipi-vishto."
14.14.28	When the Vasat-call is made, he offers with the verse, "The Urudrpas, the Indu, the Pavamana, the wise one, has placed the embryo. One-footed, two-footed, three-footed, four-footed, five-footed, six-footed, seven-footed, eight-footed, may it spread through the worlds, svāhā."
14.14.29	Then he performs the Svishtakrit offering.
14.14.30	Then, having brought back the embryo as it was taken out, he brings it to the northern half of the Ahavaniya fire, facing east, and covers it with ashes, saying, "May the earth and heaven, having mixed and nourished this sacrifice, protect us with their burdens."
14.14.31	This is the treasury-mixture of the Adhvaryu.
14.14.32	The Brahmanical text is the next one.
14.15.1	One who is about to perform the sacrifice of a goat.
14.15.2	Those days which he thinks are not rainy, on those days he offers a cake on eight potsherds to Agni.
14.15.3	Those deities which are mentioned in the Brāhmaṇa texts, he dedicates it to one of them.
14.15.4	He recites the two verses beginning with "O Vayu, do thou be adorned" and ending with "O Varuṇa, do thou be purified".
14.15.5	In the employment, he directs it to the will, to desire, to prosperity.
14.15.6	When the fire is being carried around, he offers five oblations in the form of a Kikkatā. "Kikkatā is your mind to Prajapati, svāhā. Kikkatā is your breath to Vāyu, svāhā." "Kikkatā are your eyes to Surya, svāhā." "Kikkatā is the ear to heaven and earth, svāhā." "Kikkatā your speech to Sarasvati, svāhā.”
14.15.7	Then, as she is being led away towards the north between the Catvāla and the Utkara, he recites (the verse), "Thou art the fourth, the most powerful, thou art powerful. Once when thou didst conceive in thy mind, thou didst become powerful. Thou art powerful, thou art the most powerful. Go to the gods. May the desires of the sacrificer be fulfilled."
14.15.8	"He makes it follow in the worship, 'The most prosperous of the goats, the most prosperous of the sheep, the most prosperous on earth, the most prosperous in heaven, the most prosperous among the gods, the most prosperous for us, the most prosperous, the most prosperous.'
14.15.9	Then he offers the thread to it, 'Weaving the thread, follow the radiance of the rays.'
14.15.10	Then he makes an offering of the oblation to it, 'You are the oblation of the mind, the colour of Prajapati.'
14.15.11	Then he eats the portions of the oblations, saying, "May we be sharers of your limbs."
14.15.12	Now indeed it is said:
14.15.13	Of her, indeed, the only divine worship is when there is a cloud on the day of her attainment.
14.15.14	If there is a cloud when she has attained, one should either immerse it in water or eat it all.
14.15.15	The immersion of this (cloud) in water is a failure.
14.15.16	Baudhayana says that one should offer the oblations of Avadāna with this very mantra and then offer the remaining oblations in the fire.
14.15.17	One should offer it after placing it on the fire, says Aṅgiras.
14.15.18	Now, it is indeed said:
14.15.19	This is indeed the oblation of those who perform a thousand sacrifices and are householders.
14.15.20	They should offer it with this very mantra.
14.15.21	These are the same as those of the Apti.
14.15.22	One of them alone performs this sacrifice.
14.16.1	Now, the offering for victory.
14.16.2	One who is going to offer for victory procures a ladle, a spoon, enclosing sticks, grass-blades, a sacrificial grass, and a bundle of twigs.
14.16.3	Then having kindled the sacrificial fire in vain, having spread a grass-made sacrificial grass, having placed the enclosing sticks, having anointed the sacrificial wood of Vibhītaka, having offered it with the utterance of "svāhā", having offered the oblation with the ladle called "Bādhaka", he offers thirteen oblations with the ladle, uttering "Svāhā to Citta and Svāhā to Citti".
14.16.4	Or else, taking four spoonfuls with the obstructing spoon, he offers, reciting all the mantras, with the words, "Mind and mental activity, intention and intentionality, knowledge and consciousness, the mind and the Śakvarī verses, the New Moon and Full Moon sacrifices, the Brihat and Rathantara (Sāman), Prajapati gave the victories to Indra Vṛṣṇi in the fierce battles. All the clans bowed to him. He is fierce, for he became the oblation. Svāhā!"
14.16.5	Now indeed it is said:
14.16.6	The gods and the Asuras were engaged in battle.
14.16.7	Indra approached Prajapati.
14.16.8	He gave him these victories.
14.16.9	He offered them.
14.16.10	Then indeed the gods conquered the Asuras.
14.16.11	What they conquered, that is the victory of the victories.
14.16.12	They should be offered by one who is competing.
14.16.13	"One conquers that army." This is the Brahmana.
14.16.14	Now indeed it is said:
14.16.15	"One should offer at the place where one desires to perform a rite."
14.16.16	"If one desires to perform such and such a rite, one should offer the Abhyanana offerings at that place, thinking, 'May this be accomplished for me.'
14.16.17	" One who is about to offer the Abhyana offerings prepares a leaf-made ladle and a leaf-made pot, leaf-made enclosing sticks, Kusha grass-made sacrificial grass, a leaf-made fire wood.
14.16.18	Then having kindled the sacrificial fire in vain, having spread a couch of Kuśa grass, having placed the enclosing sticks of leaves, having besmeared the wood of leaves, having offered with the Svāhā-utterance, having offered the Upasad-oblation with the ladle of leaves, saying, "May Agni, the lord of beings, protect me." Seventeen oblations are offered with the ladle.
14.16.19	Having offered, he recites the verse, "The fathers, the grandfathers..."
14.16.20	Or, having taken four spoonfuls in a leaf-made spoon and leaf-made ladle, having recited all the mantras, and having offered, he recitates at the end, "The fathers..."
14.16.21	Now, the offering of all together.
14.16.22	First he should offer the Abhyatana oblations, then the Jaya oblations, then those to the Rāṣṭrabhṛt deities.
14.16.23	The Brāhmaṇa is the last.
14.17.1	Now indeed it is said:
14.17.2	"They should be offered to one who desires a kingdom."
14.17.3	One who desires a kingdom should prepare the Samyāparidhi oblations.
14.17.4	Then having kindled the sacrificial fire in vain, having placed the sacrificial grass and sacrificial grass-holders, at night, he offers twice with the formula "Svāhā" to the National-bearers in the sacrificial grass and holders. "The one who knows the truth, the one who is the abode of truth."
14.17.5	The National-bearers are the kingdom.
14.17.6	He indeed wins the kingdom for him.
14.17.7	One becomes the kingdom itself. This is the Brahmanical statement.
14.17.8	Then indeed it is said:
14.17.9	"For oneself."
14.17.10	One who is going to offer for oneself, having kindled the sacrificial fire, offers twice with the Svāhā-utterance to the National-bearers in the evening on the boundary of the village.
14.17.11	The National-bearers are the nation.
14.17.12	The nation is the people.
14.17.13	The nation are the cattle.
14.17.14	When one becomes the best by means of the nation, one conquers the nation by means of the national.
14.17.15	Vasishtha is the Brahman of those who are equal.
14.17.16	Now, it is said:
14.17.17	"One should offer for one who desires a village."
14.17.18	One who desires a village should offer after having kindled the sacrificial fire in the sacrificial place at night, and offer twice with the Svāhā sound to the Rāṣṭrabhṛtas while standing on the boundary line of the village.
14.17.19	The Rāṣṭrabhṛtas are the kingdom.
14.17.20	The kingdom is the kinsmen.
14.17.21	He wins his own people by means of the country.
14.17.22	It is indeed said, "One becomes a village-dweller."
14.17.23	It is indeed stated,
14.17.24	"One offers at the Adhidevana."
14.17.25	He wins his own people through the Adhidevana.
14.17.26	They stand by him, having been won over." So it is said.
14.17.27	It is said,
14.17.28	"The Rāthāmukha should be offered to one desiring strength."
14.17.29	When one is about to perform the Ojas-sacrifice, one should take up the Rathamukha (a wooden ladle) above the fire, and offer it twice with the Svāhā-utterance in the evening, on the ground marked with a line.
14.17.30	The Rathamukha is indeed Ojas.
14.17.31	The Ratha is Ojas.
14.17.32	One thus obtains Ojas with Ojas.
14.17.33	He becomes endowed with Ojas. This is the Brahmanical statement.
14.17.34	Now, there is also this:
14.17.35	He for whom the country has been destroyed should be offered to.
14.17.36	As many chariots as he has, he should say, "Yoke them."
14.17.37	He yokes the country for him. So says the Brahmana.
14.17.38	Now indeed it is said:
14.17.39	The oblations of him whose country is not prosperous are incomplete.
14.17.40	Having taken out the axle of his own chariot, he should offer it on the fire.
14.17.41	Having taken out the axle, he takes it up on the fire at night, holding it in the axle-hole of the chariot, and offers it twice with the Svāhā-form to the National Providers.
14.17.42	He arranges the oblations.
14.17.43	Those who are being measured by him, they are measured by the kingdom. Thus says the Brāhmaṇa.
14.18.1	Now indeed it is said:
14.18.2	"When a battle is engaged, one should offer."
14.18.3	When a battle is being engaged, one who is going to offer prepares a bundle of Mantha grass.
14.18.4	Then having placed the fire in front of the enemy, having rubbed the Manthuka wood, having offered it with the Svāhā-utterance, having offered it twice with the Svāha-utterance in the night on the boundary of the village, the National-rulers offer.
14.18.5	The embers are turning around, turning around the army of the enemies. This is the Brahmanical text.
14.18.6	Then indeed it is said,
14.18.7	To whomsoever is mad, he should be offered.
14.18.8	One who is going to offer to a mad person prepares the following: a fig tree, an udumbara tree, an ashvattha tree, and a plaksha tree.
14.18.9	Then, having kindled a sacrificial fire, having anointed the wood with ghee, and having offered it with the Svāhā sound, in the night, having placed the wood on the ground, the National Holder offers twice with the Svāha sound.
14.18.10	These are the houses of Gandharvas and Apsarases.
14.18.11	He pacifies them in their own abode. Thus says the Brāhmaṇa.
14.18.12	Now it is said:
14.18.13	One should offer in the reverse order when attacking.
14.18.14	One who is going to attack, having built a fire-place in a pit or a ravine, facing east or west, and having set up a fire-place, offers twice with the Svāhā-utterance to the National-bearers in the night, having surrounded it with clods of earth.
14.18.15	Or, he makes the Vasat-call with the harsh words.
14.18.16	He cuts off the speech with the harsh words itself.
14.18.17	He is afflicted by the affliction. Thus it is said in the Brahmana.
14.18.18	Now, it is said:
14.18.19	If one desires that he should take food, then he should lie down on the ground in the assembly hall and collect the grass, saying, "O Lord of the universe."
14.18.20	If he wishes to take the food of someone, he lies down in the assembly hall with the words, "O Lord of the World, I am taking the food of so-and-so, son of so-and so." He collects grass.
14.18.21	Then, having taken them, he carries them.
14.18.22	He says, "I am taking the food belonging to so-and- so, son of so and so."
14.18.23	He takes the food of that person.
14.18.24	It is said in the Brahmana that one should take it with six (verses).
14.18.25	Then he gives them to his own assembly or to his own ministers.
14.18.26	"The seasons give him food and drink, taking it from Prajapati." So says the Brahmaṇa.
14.18.27	Now indeed it is said:
14.18.28	"If a kinsman who is senior has become destitute, having settled him in a place, having cooked a Brahma-rice in a four-cornered pot, it should be offered to him."
14.18.29	If the eldest kinsman has died, then having settled him in a place, having cooked a Brahma-rice in four pots, and having offered twice with the Svāhā-utterance on the line of the dice, the National-givers offer.
14.18.30	The National-givers are the shield.
14.18.31	The shield is the place.
14.18.32	He makes him go to the shield of his equals, says the Brāhmaṇa.
14.18.33	Now indeed it is said:
14.18.34	It becomes four-cornered.
14.18.35	It stands in the directions.
14.18.36	It becomes of milk.
14.18.37	It places radiance in it.
14.18.38	It is taken up for being boiled.
14.18.39	It becomes with ghee for being purified.
14.18.40	Four Brahmins eat.
14.18.41	It is indeed said:
14.19.1	It is indeed stated:
14.19.2	Devaki should be offered by one who desires offspring.
14.19.3	First, for one who desires offspring, he makes the first one for Dhatri.
14.19.4	First, one who desires cattle.
14.19.5	In the middle, for one who wants a village.
14.19.6	In the center, for one who is afflicted by disease.
14.19.7	First, of one who is about to sacrifice.
14.19.8	The best, of one who has sacrificed.
14.19.9	First, the one who desires wisdom.
14.19.10	In the midst, the one who wants radiance.
14.19.11	They are cooked in milk.
14.19.12	If one were to offer all of them together, they would burn him down, being independent.
14.19.13	One should offer two in the first, and then the third.
14.19.14	One should then offer the others in the same way.
14.19.15	Then they do not burn him down.
14.19.16	And also, one attains the desire for which one offers them. This is the Brahmanical statement.
14.19.17	Now, indeed, it is said:
14.19.18	The oblations which he offers in the evening and morning are the bricks which the sacrificer lays down.
14.19.19	The bricks of one who has laid down the fire are the days and nights.
14.19.20	When he offers in the morning and evening, he obtains the days and nights and lays down the bricks.
14.19.21	He offers ten times in one place.
14.19.22	The Viraj has ten syllables.
14.19.23	Having obtained the brick of Viraj, he places it.
14.19.24	Thus indeed, he obtains the sacrifice of Viraj.
14.19.25	It becomes his sacrificial post.
14.19.26	Therefore, having gone beyond ten (places), that is the place of sacrifice.
14.19.27	That which is beyond that is indeed without a place.
14.19.28	When he is about to depart after having stayed there for ten days, they make him lie down on the Agniṣṭha fire-altar, whatever is to be made to lie down for him.
14.19.29	Whatever is below that is indeed the abode.
14.19.30	Indeed, Rudra is the lord of the abode.
14.19.31	If one were to go without offering to Agni, Rudra, having become Agni, would rise up and strike him.
14.19.32	One offers to Agni.
14.19.33	One appeases him with a share.
14.19.34	The sacrificer does not suffer any harm. So says the Brahmana.
14.19.35	Now indeed it is said,
14.19.36-39	If he offers when yoked, it is as if he offers a sacrifice when the horse has gone. It is just like that. If he offers when not yoked, it would be as if he offers when the horse is safe. It is just as that. If one offers when not yoking, it would be like offering a sacrifice when the Vastosthiya is not yoked. The right one is yoked, the left one is not yoked.
14.19.40	When the right hand is joined and the left hand is not joined, then taking four spoonfuls in a leaf-made ladle, he offers on the Āhavanīya fire with the verse addressed to Vastaṣpati.
14.19.41	Having recited the verse "O Vastaṣpati, do you accept us", he offers with the verse "O Vastospati, with your auspicious company".
14.19.42	Having placed this ladle here, having tied it to the left, one proceeds.
14.19.43	One does both.
14.19.44	One pacifies him without any (further) division. So says the Brahmana.
14.19.45	Now indeed it is said:
14.19.46	If one were to offer with one (ladle), one would perform the offering with a ladle.
14.19.47	Having recited the Puronuvākyā, one offers with the Yājyā for attaining the divine world. So says the Brāhmaṇa.
14.19.48	Now indeed, it is said:
14.19.49	If one were to place the fire-wood and then ascend the house, one would be doing something wrong.
14.19.50	If one were to go without sprinkling the ashes, it would be as if one were to burn the sacrificial garments or the sacrificial fire.
14.19.51	"He places it on the kindling woods with the verse, "This is your natural abode."
14.19.52	This is indeed the natural abode of Agni.
14.19.53	He places it in its own natural abode.
14.19.54	Now they say, if one who has ascended the fire-wood perishes, the fire should be placed again on it.
14.19.55	"Come here with that body of thine, O Agni, which is fit for sacrifice." He makes him ascend, saying, "May he be self-possessed."
14.19.56	He mounts the Self. "Come hither, O Agni, with that form of thine which is fit for sacrifice. Mount the Self, the Self, making the wealth of men abundant. Having become the sacrifice, he sits down on the sacrifice, on his own birthplace. The knower of beings, born in the house, come hither."
14.19.57	Then they make him descend, saying, "Descend, O Jātavedas, again carry the oblation to the gods for us, knowing, bestow on us life, offspring, and wealth, be imperishable, shine for us from afar."
14.19.58	The sacrificer is the womb of Agni.
14.19.59	They make him ascend on his own womb. So says the Brahmana.
14.20.1	The Anvarambha has been explained.
14.20.2-6	Now indeed it is said: The sages did not see Indra face to face. Vasishtha saw him face to face. He said, "I will tell you the Brahman, how your subjects will be born. But do not tell this to the other sages." He told him these Stomabhāgas.
14.20.7	Then the subjects were born from Vasīshtha, the family priest.
14.20.8	Therefore they say that Vasīshtha is Brahman.
14.20.9	When he says, "Brahman, we will praise you, O teacher," the Brahman responds, "O Savitar, the divine one," taking this as the initial verse, and then responds, taking each verse of this hymn, saying, "You are the ray, I invoke you for destruction."
14.20.10	Thus he performs the Agniṣṭoma with twelve (verses), the Ati-Agniṣṭoma with thirteen, the Ukthya with fifteen, the Ṣoḍaśī with sixteen, the Vājapeya with seventeen, the Ati-Rātra with twenty-nine, and the Apto-ryāma with all (verses).
14.20.11	When they proceed to the Rathantara Sāman, he says, "Thou art Vasu, thou art Vesa-Sri, thou art Vasasthi."
14.20.12	He proceeds thus, having reached the Apto-ryama.
14.20.13	Now, then, about the exceeding steps.
14.20.14	One who is practising sorcery against his enemy, who is competing with him, should go to the arts of sorcery and should proceed for a year by these steps.
14.20.15	I conquer the enemy with Agni, the god, with the Gayatri metre, with the Trivrt stoma, with the Rathantara Sāman, with the Vasatkara, with the thunderbolt. I bring down my elder brothers, the enemies, to the lower world. I drive them away. I push them back. I push them down in this world of the earth. He who hates us and whom we hate, I step over them with Vishnu's step.
14.20.16	I conquer the battle with Indra, the god, with the Tristubh metre, with the fifteen-fold Stoma, with the Brihat Sāman, with the Vasat-utterance, with the thunderbolt. I strike down my enemies, my co-born brothers, to the lower world. I drive them away, I push them back. In this destruction, in this world of the earth, him who hates us and whom we hate, I step over them with Vishnu's step.
14.20.17	I conquer the battle with the All-gods, with the Jagatī metre, with the Stoma of seventeen, with the Vāmadevya Sāman, with the Vasat-call, with the thunderbolt. I strike down the enemies, the adversaries, the foes, the foes of the gods, the foes of men, the foes of cattle, the foes of wealth, the foes of food, the foes of water, the foes of fire, the foes of wind, the foes of space, the foes of heaven, the foes of earth, the foes of light, the foes of darkness, the foes of day, the foes of night, the foes of dawn, the foes of evening, the foes of morning, the foes of noon, the foes of afternoon, the foes of sunset, the foes of twilight, the foes of sleep, the foes of waking, the foes of death, the foes of life, the foes of birth, the foes of growth, the foes of old age, the foes of youth, the foes of strength, the foes of weakness, the foes of good, the foes of evil, the foes of truth, the foes of falsehood, the foes of happiness, the foes of unhappiness, the foes of joy, the foes of sorrow, the foes of pleasure, the foes of pain, the foes of peace, the foes of strife, the foes of prosperity, the foes of adversity, the foes of success, the foes of failure, the foes of gain, the foes of loss, the foes of victory, the foes of defeat, the foes of fame, the foes of infamy, the foes of praise, the foes of blame, the foes of honour, the foes of dishonour, the foes of love, the foes of hatred, the foes of friendship, the foes of enmity, the foes of affection, the foes of aversion, the foes of union, the foes of separation, the foes of unity, the foes of diversity, the foes of harmony, the foes of discord, the foes of concord, the foes of dissension, the foes of agreement, the
14.20.18	Or he may follow the rites of the Abhicharaṇīya sacrifices.
14.20.19	Or, having excluded the other months, he may go through the months in order for a year.
14.20.20	The sucking of the Soma and the Amānu has been mentioned.
14.20.21	Now, then, of the Atimāsa sacrifices.
14.20.22	Having offered to Vaiśvānara, having melted the clarified butter in the Garhapatya fire, having purified it, having taken four spoonfuls in the ladle, he offers on the Garhapaty fire, while the sacrificer has begun.
14.21.1	"Those gods who are the destroyers of sacrifice, who dwell on the earth, may Agni protect me from them. May we go to the well-doers. Svāhā."
14.21.2	Taking another four spoonfuls, he offers on the Garhapatya itself with the verse, "The gods who have come to the sacrifice on the earth, may Agni protect me from them. May we go to the well-doers. Svāhā!"
14.21.3	Then, having approached the Agnidhra, we have come to Mitra-Varuna, the most excellent, the share of you two among the nights, grasping the heaven, in the world of the well-done, on the third back, in the shining sky.
14.21.4	Then, having run to the Āgnīdhra (fire), having taken four spoonfuls in the spoon, he offers at the Āgnīdhrā fire when the sacrificer has begun, "Those gods who are the destroyers of sacrifice, who dwell in the atmosphere, may Vayu protect me from them. May we go to the well-doers. Svāhā."
14.21.5	Then taking another four spoonfuls, he offers on the Āgnīdhra fire with the verse, "Those gods who dwell in the sky, may Vayu protect us from them. May we go to the well-doers. Svāhā."
14.21.6	Then he goes to the Ahavanīya (fire) with the verse, "O Savitr, those nights of yours which pass between heaven and earth, may I go with all my houses and progeny, ascending the heaven and crossing the paths."
14.21.7	Then having gone to the Ahavaniya fire, having taken four spoonfuls in the ladle, he offers on the Ahavaniya while the sacrificer is engaged. "The gods who are the destroyers of sacrifice, who dwell in heaven, may Surya protect us from them. May we go to the well-doers. Svāhā."
14.21.8	Taking another four handfuls, he offers on the Āhavanīya fire with the verse, "Those gods who are in heaven, who are in the sacrifice, may Surya protect us from them. May we go to the well-doers. Svāhā!"
14.21.9	Then he attends on the Ahavaniya (fire) with the verse, "With that which thou hast brought to Indra, O Jātavedas, with the best oblation, do thou, O Agni, increase him. Do thou place him in the foremost position among his kinsmen."
14.21.10	The gods who are the destroyers of sacrifice are present in the sacrificial session.
14.21.11	They are present in these worlds, taking and churning, of him who gives and sacrifices.
14.21.12	Those gods who are the destroyers of sacrifice, who dwell on earth, who dwell in the sky, who dwell in heaven, he says.
14.21.13	Having crossed these worlds, with his house and cattle, he goes to the heavenly world, says the Brahmana.
14.21.14	Or one offers three oblations in the Garhapatya, three in the Agnidhra, and three in the Ahavaniya.
14.21.15	Or, reciting, he may run from the Garhapatya to the Ahavaniya.
14.21.16	The Utkrit-Iști has been described.
14.21.17	Here he offers this third Pravarta-oblation: "May the sun, the god, protect me from the gods; may the wind from the atmosphere; may the sacrificer; may Agni protect my eyes. Svāhā."
14.21.18	Then, when practising sorcery, he offers milk with a twig of the Kārṣmarya tree in a vessel, saying, "O Savitar, with these names of Soma, we invoke thee. With those names of Soma, O Savitar, we invoke thee! Svāhā!"
14.21.19	He should cut out his heart and intestines.
14.21.20	He certainly destroys his enemy.
14.21.21	Then he says to him with whom he would have a rivalry, "Come near my cup, I shall touch it."
14.21.22	He should offer the cup with this very mantra.
14.21.23	The king flows upwards or downwards.
14.21.24	The offering of the Pātnīvata cup has been mentioned.
14.21.25	The offering to Aditya has been mentioned.
14.22.6	He takes up the Soma-graha after having covered the two Barhis-grahas.
14.22.7	"One should take up the Soma-graham for one who desires Brahmic glory."
14.22.8	Having collected the strands, he takes up the Soma graham.
14.22.9	Then on the Mahavrata day he takes up the Prajapati-graha, saying, "You all are praising the sacrifice." Having recited this, he says, "You are taken with the call, for Prajapati I take you, agreeable."
14.22.10	Having wiped it, he places it, saying, "This is your birthplace, for Prajapata."
14.22.11	Now then, the taking of the Pranagrahas.
14.22.12	Having satisfied the king, he draws out the new threads towards the east. This is the eastern quarter. Its life is Bhauva. Spring is the life of Bhauva. The Gāyatrī is the spring. The Gāyatra is the Gāyatrī. The Upāṃśu is from the Gāyatra. The Trivṛt is from the Upāṃśa. The Rathantara is from the Trivṛt. The sage Vasīshtha is from the Rathantara. "With you taken by Prajapati, I take life for the subjects."
14.22.13	This is the southern (direction) called Viśvakarman. He lays down nine (bricks) towards the south.
14.22.14	This is the western (direction) called Visvavyaca. He lays down (nine) towards the west.
14.22.15	This is (the direction) called Suvar (gold) towards the north. He lays down towards the north.
14.22.16	This is above called Mati. He lays down above.
14.22.17	He lays them down in a clockwise direction.
14.22.18	He (the Adhvaryu) repels them with the breath-holders, the eastern quarter, the spring season, Agni as the deity, Brahman as the wealth, the three-fold Stoma, and the fifteen-fold Vartani. The age is three-fold, the wind is the wind in front, the wind with the ocean, the Rishi.
14.22.19	He recites, "The fathers, the grandfathers, the distant ones, the near ones, those who are in front."
14.22.20	The southern directions are those which are to the south.
14.22.21	The western directions are those which lie to the west.
14.22.22	The northern directions are those which occur to the north.
14.22.23	The upward directions are those which exist above.
14.22.24	They go around in a clockwise direction.
14.22.25	They are employed in the Pravargya and Udaygya rites on the tenth day.
14.22.26	One who is suffering from a disease or one who has been attacked by an enemy should offer the Agniṣṭoma sacrifice at the night-long sacrifices.
14.22.27	One becomes free from disease.
14.23.1	It is said:
14.23.2	Both of them are created by Prajapati. This is the Brahmanical text.
14.23.3	"O Surama, O Asvins!" This is said at the Sautrāmaṇī.
14.23.4	It is also said:
14.23.5	This is the Agnihotra.
14.23.6	This (cow) indeed sits down for him for whom the Agnihotra-cow sits down.
14.23.7	One should make her rise up.
14.23.8	He makes rise up the cow for whom the Agnihotri-cow sits down, saying, "The divine Aditi has risen up in all forms, she has placed life in the lord of sacrifice, making a share for Indra, Mitra and Varuna."
14.23.9	Now indeed it is said,
14.23.10	When the Agnihotra cow approaches him, he sits down, turning away from the fire.
14.23.11	Having milked her, he should give her to a brahmin, saying, "He who does not eat your food."
14.23.12	When the Agnihotra cow comes near him, he milks her and gives her to a brahmana, saying, "The one who does not eat."
14.23.13	And he does not eat any food after that.
14.23.14	Now, indeed, it is said:
14.23.15	"If the Agnihotra milk spills while being milked, it enters the earth.
14.23.16	One should recite this (verse) over it."
14.23.17	He recites this over the Agnihotra milk that spills while being milched.
14.23.18	Whatever milk has been given to the earth, whatever to the plants, whatever to the waters, whatever milk is in the houses, whatever milk is with the cattle, may that milk be mine. He says so.
14.23.19	He places milk in his own house and in the cattle.
14.23.20	He sprinkles water.
14.23.21	He obtains it through water. So says the Brahmana.
14.23.22	Now indeed it is said,
14.23.23	He who joins the two, the one who is in distress and the one who is not in distress, at the time of the sacrifice, both of them are distressed.
14.23.24	Indeed, the Agnihotra is distressed when it is milked and spills. If one were to milk it again,
14.23.25	one should not milk the Agnihotra that has been spilled.
14.23.26	One should do it as it is and as it was.
14.23.27	If it spills, one should again offer after milking another (cow).
14.23.28	The Brāhmaṇa says, "One makes the sacrifice without distress by means of that which is without distress."
14.23.29	Now indeed it is said:
14.23.30	If the Uddhṛta spills and one offers again without having offered from that, one would interrupt the sacrifice.
14.23.31	One should sit down where it spills and again take it up.
14.23.32	Wherever he spills, he should place the pot there, bring the remaining (rice), sprinkle it again, and offer it as it is.
14.23.33	If it is spilled again, one should offer it again.
14.23.34	One makes the sacrifice with what is not afflicted, with what is afflicted. This is the Brahmanical text.
14.23.35	Now, indeed, it is said:
14.23.36	If a dog runs between the Agnihotra and the fire-place, then his sacrifice is cut off.
14.23.37	For Agni is indeed Rudra.
14.23.38	If one were to turn back following the cow, one would offer the animals to Rudra.
14.23.39	The sacrificer would be without animals.
14.23.40	If one were to sprinkle water on the fire, one should sprinkle water from the fire that has not been used. One should place the fire that has been used in the water.
14.23.41	One should take ash from the Garhapatya fire and recite the verse, "Vishnu strode forth." One should recite the verse, "May it be destroyed by the fire of Vishnu." One should recite this verse while moving towards the fire of Vishnu.
14.23.42	He moves towards the fire of Vishņu reciting the verse, "May it be destroyed."
14.23.43	The sacrifice is Vishnu. By the sacrifice itself he makes the sacrifice continuous. So says the Brahmana.
14.23.44	Then he sprinkles the place of the dog with ashes for peace. So says the Brahmaṇa.
14.24.1	Then it is said:
14.24.2	The Ahavaniya fire desires the Garhapatya fire, and the Garhapaty desires the Ahavaniya fire, when the sun rises without the fire being carried out.
14.24.3	Having bound a darbha-blade with gold in front, one should hold the fire and the Agnihotra.
14.24.4	When the sun rises before the fire has been taken out, having bound a darbha blade with gold in front and having performed the rites, the Brahmana-student follows the fire with the kindling wood and the Agnihotra.
14.24.5	Then having placed the gold in the place of the Āhavanīya fire, and having taken it away, he establishes the wood, having gone round it clockwise.
14.24.6	Now indeed it is said:
14.24.7	Having approached the Agnihotra, one should sit down here.
14.24.8	One follows the vow that has been broken.
14.24.9	One goes to the end of one's self, who becomes weak.
14.24.10	The sacrifice of him who has not taken up the fire before the sun rises, comes to an end.
14.24.11	One offers again.
14.24.12	One makes the end of the sacrifice end with the end. So says the Brahmaṇa.
14.24.13	Now indeed it is said:
14.24.14	Varuṇa seizes the sacrifice of him whose fire has not been taken up before the sun rises.
14.24.15	One should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Varuṇa.
14.24.16	The sacrifice is redeemed by that alone. Thus says the Brāhmaṇa.
14.24.17	Now indeed it is said:
14.24.18	The Āhavanīya fire desires the Garhapatya fire, and the Garhapaty desires the Āhavanīya when the sun rises without the fire being taken out.
14.24.19	One should keep the ghee taken in four mouthfuls in front, then the fire, then the Agnihotra.
14.24.20	If the sun rises while the fire is still not taken out, the officiating priest takes it out with four spoonfuls of clarified butter and the Brahmanical student follows him with the fire-wood and the Agnihotra-oblation.
14.24.21	Having placed the clarified butter in the place of the Āhavanīya fire, and having taken out the fire, he establishes the fire-wood.
14.24.22	It is indeed said:
14.24.23	The sun rises before the fire has been taken out for her, and she is deprived of her share.
14.24.24	One should offer with ghee, sitting towards the west, with the verse, "O Dawn, may you enjoy the sacrifice with the leader, accompanied by the gods, most sweet to the gods, svāhā." One should say, "One makes her face towards the west." This is the Brahmana text.
14.24.25	Now indeed it is said,
14.24.26	Having placed the Agnihotra, one should sit down here.
14.24.27	One dies after the vow has been broken.
14.24.28	One goes to the end of one's self when one becomes emaciated.
14.24.29	One goes beyond the end of the sacrifice when the sun rises without having taken up the Agnihotra.
14.24.30	One offers again.
14.24.31	One makes the end of the sacrificial rite with the end, so says the Brahmana.
14.24.32	Now, indeed, it is said:
14.24.33	"The sun rises before the fire has been taken out, then a friend seizes his sacrifice."
14.24.34	One should offer a cake to Mitra.
14.24.35	"One should redeem the sacrifice with that." So says the Brahmana.
14.24.36	Now, indeed, it says:
14.24.37	If the Garhapatya were to be extinguished while the Ahavaniya is not, then if one were to churn the Garhapaty without extinguishing the Ahavaniya, one would sever (the connection).
14.24.38	One would generate enmity for him.
14.24.39	Whatever is done as the foundation of the sacrifice, Rudra follows that.
14.24.40	If one were to attend the Agni of the foundation before (the proper time),
14.24.41	Rudra would be the slayer of his cattle.
14.24.42	Having taken down the Āhavaniya, one should churn out the Garhapatya."
14.24.43	Having taken down Āhavaniya he churns out Garhapatya.
14.24.44	"Here first Agni was born from his own womb, the knower of beings. May he carry oblations to the gods with Gāyatrī, Triṣṭubh and Jagat verses, knowing."
14.24.45	By means of the metres he generates him from his own womb. So says the Brahmaṇa.
14.24.46	Now indeed it is said:
14.24.47	One performs the churning of the Garhapatya.
14.24.48	The animals stand near the Garhapaty of one who has set up the fire.
14.24.49	When he moves away, the animals go away following him.
14.24.50	Then he addresses him, saying, "Be pleased with the food, with wealth, with strength, with splendour, with the sacrifice, with the lord."
14.24.51	Then he kindles him, saying, "May the two Sarasvatis kindle thee. Thou art the sovereign, thou art the overlord."
14.25.1	Now indeed it is said:
14.25.2	The wheel is indeed the thunderbolt.
14.25.3	He whose chariot or cart goes between the fires, his sacrifice is broken by the thunderbolt.
14.25.4	Having taken out the Āhavaniya fire, one should take out the kindling wood from the Garhapatya fire.
14.25.5	Having taken out the Āhavanīya fire, he takes out kindling wood from Garhapatya, "Whatever is the first place of Agni, you have stretched out the rays of the sun there, bring together the most prosperous one, unite us with good will and prosperity."
14.25.6	By means of this very sacrifice, he continues the sacrifice. Thus says the Brāhmaṇa.
14.25.7	Then he addresses him: "You, O Agni, are the most brilliant, the most agreeable, the most excellent Hotṛ. With you, the one who spreads the sacrifice."
14.25.8	Agni is all the deities. By means of the deities, he continues the sacrificial rite. Thus says the Brahmana.
14.25.9	Then he offers a cake on eight potsherds to Agni, the path-maker.
14.25.10	Having placed the Anvāhārya portion, he gives away a bullock.
14.25.11	The Iṣṭi comes to an end in the prescribed manner.
14.25.12	Now indeed it is said:
14.25.13	"If Soma is spilled at the morning pressing, one desiring the midday pressing, spills it."
14.25.14	When the Soma is in excess at the morning pressing, he goes forward and says, "Do you carry the Hotr's goblet forward. The Uddhatr should carry the king completely. Do not let it be in excess."
14.25.15	They carry forward the Hotr' goblet first, and the others as they are available.
14.25.16	Having carried the king completely, they place him on the northern altar.
14.25.17	Then having sprinkled himself, having taken the two sacrificial grass-blades, having restrained speech, having turned towards the west, he begins the Stotra.
14.25.18	He praises.
14.25.19	This is the Gāyatrī Sāman, consisting of fifteen syllables, "The cow drinks for the Maruts" - they make it in the form of "drinking".
14.25.20	They say that this is the Hotr's highest (Sāman).
14.25.21	From here onwards it is common.
14.25.22	Now indeed it is said,
14.25.23	When the Soma-juice was in excess at the Madhyandina pressing, he desired the third pressing to be the Sun.
14.25.24	When the Soma-juice had been in excess at the midday pressing, he went forward and said, "Do you carry the Hotr's goblet forward. The Uddhatr should carry the king forward completely. Do not let it be in excess."
14.25.25	They first take up the Hotr's goblet, and the others in due order.
14.25.26	Having taken up all the cups, they place them on the northern altar.
14.25.27	Having sprinkled water, and taking the two sacrificial grass-blades, he runs towards the west, keeping silence, and begins the praise.
14.25.28	He praises.
14.25.29	This is the Gaurīvita Saman, the seventeenfold, the great Bhan, in the sun. They perform this on these (days).
14.25.30	They say that this is the Hotr's last (Saman).
14.25.31	From here onwards it is the same.
14.25.32	Now indeed it is said:
14.25.33	If Soma overflows at the third pressing, one should perform the Ukthya.
14.25.34	If it overflows at the Ukthya, one should perform an Atiratra.
14.25.35	The Atiratra which is in excess, that is called the Dushprajna.
14.25.36	When the Atiratra is in excess, they go forward, saying, "Carry the Hotr's goblet forward; the Udbahita should carry the king completely forward, lest it should be in excess."
14.25.37	They carry forward the Hotr' goblet first, and the others as they are ready.
14.25.38-42	Having thus taken up the sacrificial grass, he approaches the Uttaravedi, restraining speech, and performs the Stotra. He recites the Stotra. This is the Brhat Sama, consisting of twenty-one verses, performed in the Shivivistavati verses dedicated to Vishnu. This is the Hotr's highest (Sama), they say.
14.25.43	The rest is the same as before.
14.26.1	Thus in the case of the Chāndogas who desire (to perform the rite).
14.26.2	If they do not desire, then at the morning pressing, in the extra (rice-gruel) he puts the Āgrayana on top of the pot which is sufficient for the king and what is left over, and takes it below.
14.26.3	He pours it three times.
14.26.4	When he is about to pour it down, the entire Āgrayaṇa becomes settled.
14.26.5	Having sprinkled it three times, he places it.
14.26.6	At the midday pressing, if there is an excess, then he takes the Āgrayaṇa from above the pot which he thinks is sufficient for the king and places it below.
14.26.7	He pours it down three times.
14.26.8	When it is poured out, it becomes the entire Aghamarana.
14.26.9	Having sprinkled it three times, he places it.
14.26.10	At the third pressing, if there is excess, one should pour out the Hariyajana here.
14.26.11	Because there is no taking again.
14.26.12	Now, the discussion about the Dhruva that has been lost.
14.26.13	He should offer him with the two verses addressed to Indra and Agni.
14.26.14	Indra and Agni are the gods who repeatedly offer protection. This is one verse.
14.26.15	He should offer him with two verses addressed to the Ashvins.
14.26.16	The Ashvins are the physicians of the gods. He does this for him as a remedy. This is one view.
14.26.17	One should offer him, having surrounded him with two verses addressed to Vishnu.
14.26.18	What exceeds the sacrifice, that exceeds Vishnu, the shipper. This is one opinion.
14.26.19	One should lead him away with the Avabhrtha.
14.26.20	"Just as my other Soma-smeared vessels are, so shall this be." This is one.
14.26.21	One should perform the Upasads with the Barhis.
14.26.22	This indeed is Agni Vaisvānara, the one who is kindled.
14.26.23	This Agni Vaisvânara is taken up.
14.26.24	"It will certainly be offered in Agni Vaisvânarend." This is another.
14.26.25	Then again he consecrates.
14.26.26	Sacrifice is indeed the atonement for sacrifice.
14.26.27	Thus indeed it is for those who sacrifice for one day.
14.26.28	Now for those who perform a Sattra.
14.26.29	Having made a stream of water flow into the Marjalyi (pond), they lead him there.
14.26.30	The next day they are to perform the Soma-sacrifice.
14.27.1	The Sāmans have been mentioned.
14.27.2	Now indeed it is said,
14.27.3	Those who are initiated and die, they are indeed afflicted.
14.27.4	If they were to reject him, the world would be like that of the cruel-doers.
14.27.5	One should say, "Bring and burn."
14.27.6	If one finds a person who has been initiated and is suffering, he becomes the bed of the Agnidhra.
14.27.7	They bring food for him, as much as he thinks is enough for a meal.
14.27.8	If he is not dead, he returns.
14.27.9	If he does go, they should take the embers from all the fires, place them on the forest fires, and carry him out between the Cātvāla and the Utkara, facing north, and cremate him with that.
14.27.10	After cooling him for three nights, they should collect him.
14.27.11	They who have done this, may desire the six-day-long (rite).
14.27.12	Then when the six days have passed, he asks for a pot of bones.
14.27.13	Having deposited the collected (bones) to the right of the sacrificial post, they should praise with the verses of the Serpent Queen.
14.27.14	This indeed is the Serpent Queen.  
14.27.15	She alone gives him (the bones).
14.27.16	They say that it is defective if praised without being censured.
14.27.17	The Hotṛ first goes around facing east, reciting the Mārjālīya hymn, reciting the Yāmis, and proclaiming the Serpent-Queen hymns.
14.27.18	Among them, the Adhvaryu goes around last.
14.27.19	Then, having put on the sacrificial thread, they go back three times as they came.
14.27.20	Having thus surrounded them, the Adhvaryu goes around first.
14.27.21	Having taken it, he places it between the Cātvāla and the mound, and the stone and the pot of bones, and sprinkles it with water, reciting, "May the water cleanse our sin."
14.27.22	In it they take the Maitrāvaruṇa cups.
14.27.23	Then they perform the remaining part of the Sattra.
14.27.24	At the time of the Avabhrtha, he places the pot of bones and sprinkles it with water.
14.27.25	This Avabhrtha indeed becomes for him, even if his own nearest relative is not there, he should initiate him in his place.
14.27.26	In the year, they perform the sacrifice for bones.
14.27.27	And indeed it is said,
14.28.1-3	When the sacrificial post of one (who is performing) a Sattra grows, they should offer a goat to Tvashtri, having many forms. If the sacrificial post of the Sattra-performers grows, they should cut off the cup of the Savaniya (oblation) and offer a goat to Tvashtr.
14.28.4	Or, having cooked the oblation of Brahma for Tvashtra, they may cause these branches to grow or they may cut them.
14.28.5	Or, having offered the oblations of Tvashtri, they may cause those branches to grow or may cut them. Or, they may say, "For Tvashtri."
14.28.6	Or, it is said:
14.28.7	Now, it is said:
14.28.8	Those who are initiated, whose fire has gone out, they are distressed.
14.28.9	If the Ahavanīya fire goes out, if one were to extinguish it, one would sever it.
14.28.10	One would generate enmity for him.
14.28.11	If the Āhavaniya fire goes out one should take it from the Agnidhra fire.
14.28.12	If the Agnidhra (fire) goes out, one should take it (from the Garhapatya fire).
14.28.13	If the Garhapatya fire goes out, one should rekindle it from the same place.
14.28.14	It is here that it is rekindled.
14.28.15	Where they see the best fire hidden, they desire it.
14.28.16	If the fire goes out from the embers, one should make an arani.
14.28.17	One should also make a krumuka."
14.28.18	He who is born from the womb, having made a bundle of grass, having placed it on the fire, and having placed the sacrificial grass near it, should churn it.
14.28.19	Having placed those very potsherds, he churns. Agni was born first from his own womb, the knower of beings. May he carry oblation to the gods with the Gayatri, Triṣṭubh and Jagat metres, knowing.
14.28.20	He generates him from his own womb with the metres, says the Brahmana.
14.29.1	If the Āhavaniya and Gārhapatya fires were to be extinguished, one should churn out the Gārhapaty and take the Āhavaniye from the Agnidhriya fire.
14.29.2	If the Agnidhriya and Gārhaptya fires were to become extinguished, one should take the Agnidhriya from the Gārhaptīya.
14.29.3	Now if the Āgnīdhra and the Āhavanīya fires were to be carried away, one should carry the Āgnīdhrīya fire from the Garhapatya and then carry the Āhavanīyīya fire.
14.29.4	If all of them were to be carried, one should churn out the Garhapaty, carry the Āgnidhrīya fire and then carry the Ahāvanīya fire. So it is said.
14.29.5	Now indeed it is said:
14.29.6	One churns out the Garhapathya.
14.29.7	The Garhapatya is the womb of Agni.
14.29.8	He generates him from his own womb.
14.29.9	He does not generate a rival for him. So says the Brāhmaṇa.
14.29.10	Now indeed it is said:
14.29.11	If Soma is to be offered to him, one should cut off gold, silver, into two parts and offer one part and pour down the other.
14.29.12	When Soma is pressed, he cuts it in two and pours one part into the ladle and pours the other part into the principal cup and offers.
14.29.13	He presses Soma and offers Soma. So says the Brahmana.
14.29.14	Now indeed it is said:
14.29.15	When Soma is being pressed, his dear body has gone out.
14.29.16	That became gold, the yellow metal.
14.29.17	When they make gold, the yellow (metal), they make it with its own dear body. So says the Brahmana.
14.29.18	Now indeed it is said:
14.29.19	If one's Soma is stolen, one should buy it back.
14.29.20	That itself is the atonement. So says the Brahmaṇa.
14.29.21	Now indeed is said:
14.29.22	If someone steals what has been bought, or if one plucks the grass of the month of Phālguna, it is said.
14.29.23	Grass is small grass.
14.29.24	Phālguna is the month of Haimavata.
14.29.25	If they are not available, white ones are the substitute.
14.29.26	It is known.
14.29.27	Soma was on the third heaven from here.
14.29.28	Gāyatrī brought it.
14.29.29	Its leaf was cut off.
14.29.30	That became a leaf.
14.29.31	That is why it is called a leaf.
14.29.32	Therefore, the sprinkling should be done only with the juice of leaves.
14.29.33	One should sprinkle with boiled (rice) at the morning pressing.
14.29.34	This becomes boiled.
14.29.35	With curd at midday.
14.29.36	This becomes curd.
14.29.37	With buttermilk at the third pressing.
14.29.38	The churned out butter, with the cream, is taken out, and is called 'new butter'.
14.29.39	The Agniṣṭoma should be performed with the Rathantara Sāman.
14.29.40	Those who are appointed as priests should perform the sacrifice.
14.29.41	They alone perform the sacrifice. Here is the text:
14.29.42	One should give a cow as Dakṣiṇā.
14.29.43	Here one gives a cow as Dakșiṇā.
14.29.44	What one gives here, one gives there.
14.29.45	One should again buy Soma.
14.29.46	He desires that sacrifice with sacrifice.
14.29.47	That itself is the atonement. So says the Brāhmaṇa.
14.29.48	Now indeed it is said:
14.29.49-51	He who performs the Sattra sacrifices himself to all the deities, to all the desires, to all the Stotras, to all the metres, to all the Prsthas. He who performs the Sattras sacrifices himself to all this. One should perform the Sattra with all the Vedas. They perform the Atiratra and the Visvajit.
14.29.52	Now here he gives the entire Veda.
14.29.53	His Soma-pressing should be with all the (verses) of the entire (Veda).
14.29.54	He redeems himself from all the deities, from all the desires, from all the Stotras, from all the metres, from all the Prsthas. This is the Brahmanical text.
14.30.1	"Pavamānaḥ suvarjanaḥ" (RV. 10.10.1) is recited at the Sautrāmaṇī.
14.30.2	The Brāhmaṇa is the answer.
14.30.3	Now indeed it is said:
14.30.4	Therefore, one who performs the Vaishvadev sacrifice should seek the welfare of the year.
14.30.5	Therefore, one should seek the welfare for the year by performing the Varunapraghasa sacrifice.
14.30.6	Therefore, the sacrificer should desire the welfare of the present year by means of the Sākaṃmedha sacrifices.
14.30.7	Therefore, the sacrificer desires the welfare of the coming year by means of Śunāsīrīya.
14.30.8	Now, indeed, it is said:
14.30.9	The Krittikā stars of Agni, the bright light beyond them, the light below them. They say that one should alternate with bricks of the stars.
14.30.10	Now indeed it is said:
14.30.11	"One should do the auspicious star on the day after tomorrow."
14.30.12	One should do it in the morning.
14.30.13	One should do in the evening.
14.30.14	One should perform at midday.
14.30.15	One should perforin in the afternoon.
14.30.16	One should perfom in the evening.
14.30.17	As far as the sun goes there, where one sees the lowest, one should do so much.
14.30.18	If one does something, one should do it on a auspicious day.
14.30.19	The Brahman is superior to the Brahman.
15.1.1	When a king who has conquered his enemies and is the lord of the entire earth is about to perform an Asvamedha sacrifice,
15.1.2	He makes this sacrifice to the gods. The Aśvinis are in front, the Aśvinis in the south, the Aśvins in the west, the Aśvīnis in the north.
15.1.3	They cut down trees, break up the high grounds, fill up the low grounds, and remove the reeds.
15.1.4	They make the fords of the rivers, the springs, and the marshes.
15.1.5	Then they make these two lakes in the middle of the sacrificial ground, flowing together, without a dam, with auspicious names, if they find them so.
15.1.6	If they do not find them so, they dig them and fill them with water from a well or a river, with auspicious names.
15.1.7	So that they become flowing together, without dam, with auspicious namess.
15.1.8	They erect the sacrificial enclosure for the gods on the other side of the two, twice the size of the fire-altar as prescribed in the Vidhā.
15.1.9	They build a shed with its ridge facing east, with openings towards the directions, and with the lowest part towards the south.
15.1.10	They build the horse-shed towards the south of it.
15.1.11	They make the horse-pen with the ends of the horse-troughs facing downwards.
15.1.12	Now these are his equipments: a horse, a good one, the best of his good horses, and others, unlimited, without blemish, without blemish, and a black one with four white feet; two slaves, a son for his younger sister, and a son for his daughter-in-law; an old cow, a bull, a stone-pestle, and a plough; four hundred ploughmen, a hundred of the king's sons, a hundred of his own sons, a hundred chieftains of the Sutas, a hundred chief collectors of the Ksattas; four great priests.
15.1.13	Those who follow them.
15.1.14	They bring them to the time of the Suparna sacrifice.
15.2.1	To the time of the Subrahmaṇya sacrifice.
15.2.2-3	The four kinds of water, the four thousand gold coins, the two golden and silver coins, the two other golden coins, the two vīṇā and gāthī, the two Brahmins and Kṣatriyas, the two ropes made of muñja and kuśa grass, the two thirteen-arched gems - with these offerings, he enjoys the beautiful and long-lasting heaven.
15.2.4	Then having placed the fires on the kindling woods, he goes to the hall, reciting, "O Savitar, those paths of yours which are ancient, free from dust, spread out in the sky, by those paths today, by the good paths, do thou protect us and do thou tell us what is above."
15.2.5	Having gone round the shed on the north and having entered the shed by the eastern door, having churned out the fires in the place of Garhapatya and having moved them, he stands by the Garhapatya with the formula, "Salutations to Agni, the lord of earth, the touch of the world, do thou give the world to this sacrificer."
15.2.6	To Anvähäryapacani he says, "Salutations, to Vayu, the lord of atmosphere, the touch of world, do thou bestow the world to this Sacrificer."
15.2.7	Obeisance to the Sun, to the one who shines in heaven, to the one that touches the world, to the one for whom the sacrificer offers. He says this to the Ahavaniya fire.
15.2.8	Now, in front of him, at the rear, a stable for horses is made with a single drain and measured.
15.2.9	Having placed the Vritha fire there, he offers ninety oblations with the formula, "To death svāhā, to death svāhā" and eleven with the formula, “To effort svāhā.”
15.2.10	The man has a life of a hundred years, and a hundredfold energy. He is as big as the man himself. He has overcome death. This is the Brahmanical text.
15.2.11	Having shaved the hair and beard, having removed the body hair, having cut the nails, having cleaned the teeth, having bathed, they put on fresh clothes.
15.2.12	Both of them are adorned with human ornaments, wearing fresh clothes.
15.2.13	Then he cooks the food for the Vrata-ceremony.
15.2.14	There are two kinds of food, one mixed with ghee and the other with milk.
15.2.15	In the afternoon, gold is placed on the faces of the couple.
15.3.1	The sacrificer wears gold and the wife wears silver, or if there are many wives, they wear silver.
15.3.2	In the evening, the sacrificer offers Agnihotra while remaining silent.
15.3.3	The Sutas, the Gramaniyas, the Ksattas, the Sangrahitars, and the Karus of Rajagriha approach him.
15.3.4	He gives them a post-horse.
15.3.5	They spend the night cooking and enjoying it, and keeping awake.
15.3.6	Then, in the morning, they wash their mouths and find gold spread out.
15.3.7	The Pauchaleyas take it.
15.3.8	Then they stand facing the rising sun, saying, "Salutations to the seer, salutations to the sub-seer, salutations to anu-seer, salutlations to the hearer, salutations to sub-hearer, salutations anu-hearer, salutaions to the existent, salutations to non-existent, salutations to what is born, salutations to that which will be born, salutations the past, salutations to future."
15.3.9	Then he offers the Vaiśvadevī oblation along with the Saṅgrahaṇī.
15.3.10	The Iṣṭi comes to an end as prescribed.
15.3.11	While the Adhvaryu is engaged here, the Pratiprasthātṛ, having cooked the Brahmaudana in the four kinds of water, pours clarified butter over it and places it in a vessel.
15.3.12	Then having washed this vessel and spread it out, he places in it the washed silver and gold.
15.3.13	Having taken it out without touching it, having poured clarified butter over it, and having brought a lot of ghee,
15.3.14	he then places the washed gold above it.
15.3.15	Then having seated those great priests on the northern side, having made them perform the Ācamana rite in order, he makes him touch the ground, as if cutting it off.
15.4.1	He says, "May the Brahmanas and the kings go safely with this sacrificial horse, for the sake of the Brahmanical fee."
15.4.2	The others reply to him, "We shall accomplish you with this horse, which is fit for sacrifice, for the sake of the Brahman-fee."
15.4.3	Then they know the Brahman-fee for him.
15.4.4	Then he instructs them, "Eat each one separately, without tasting again, and go on the path."
15.4.5	Then, having sprinkled clarified butter on the rope, he gives it to the attendant.
15.4.6	Having eaten twice more, they praise, saying, "Your Brahmaudana is accomplished."
15.4.7	And he gives them four thousand gold coins and two golden and silver ornaments.
15.4.8	Here those who consecrate the king sprinkle the Adhvaryu.
15.4.9	He said, "The Brahmanas and the kings, the Adhvaryu, these two years, the king will be. Listen to him. Whoever does not listen to him, all his wealth will be taken away."
15.4.10	Then the Adhvaryus become the king for these two years.
15.4.11	The other is called the sacrificer.
15.4.12	He said, "Brahman, I shall sacrifice a horse to the gods and Prajapati. By that may you be satisfied."
15.4.13	The other replied, "To the gods and Prajapatī, by that may you be satiated."
15.5.1	Then he takes the halter, saying, "For you, by the impulse of the divine Savitar, with the arms of the Ashvins, with the hands of Pusan, I take."
15.5.2	Having taken it, he recites the formula, "Having taken this rope of truth, he has grasped it."
15.5.3	With that he attaches the horse, "You are the one who directs, you are the one who holds, you are the controller, you are the holder, you are the protector, you are the guardian, you are the lord, you are the ruler, you are the binder, you are the upholder, you are the firm one."
15.5.4	In the same way, he takes the second rope.
15.5.5	In the same way he makes the horse enter.
15.5.6	He sprinkles the horse's back.
15.5.7	At this time the son of Anu and Anvādheya, and the dogs of Shvan and Shvantha, make the dog enter.
15.5.8	Then this male dog, having bound his left knee with a piece of leather, stands near the dog with a mallet.
15.5.9	Then the Adhvaryu goes forward with a hundred princes of the Tarpya clan.
15.5.10	The Brahman sits on the right with a hundred fierce kings.
15.5.11	The Hotṛ sits behind with a hundred Sūta leaders.
15.5.12	The Udgātṛ sits in front with a hundred Kṣattas and Sangrahitṛs.
15.5.13	In the middle are the horse and the dog.
15.5.14	Then they proceed to the southern lake.
15.5.15	The sky has become your back, the horse has stepped over with his steps. The horse has stepped over, the horse has gone over, the horse is going over. With three recitations they run towards the horse from the lap.
15.5.16	The Adhvaryu, standing in front facing towards the west, sprinkles it with the formula, "May this king slay Vritra with this sacrificial horse."
15.5.17	After that, the princes of the royal lineage sprinkle a hundred times.
15.5.18	Brahma stands facing north and sprinkles with the verse, "May this king be invincible after performing the sacrifice with this pure horse."
15.5.19	After that, the non-royal Ugras sprinkle a hundred times.
15.5.20	The Hotṛ, standing behind (the sacrificer) facing the east, sprinkles (the sacrificial ground) with this horse, fit for sacrifice, saying, "May this king be the lord of this people, of many horses, of many goats and sheep, of many barley and corn, of many beans and sesamum, of many gold, of many elephants, of many men-slaves, of much wealth, of much prosperity, of much cattle and food, of much of all wealth. May he be a king."
15.5.21	Then the Sūta-gramagṇīs sprinkle a hundred times.
15.5.22	The Udgātṛ stands facing south, sprinkling with the formula, "May this king live for the entire life by means of this horse which is fit for sacrifice."
15.5.23	Then the Kṣattasangrahitāras sprinkle a hundred times in succession.
15.5.24	The Brāhmaṇa says, "They sprinkle the horse from all directions."
15.5.25	Then this is the rite for him when he has been left out. When he says, "When I shall have compared (the dog), then strike it,"
15.5.26	he compares it with the dog and strikes it with a stone-pestle.
15.5.27	He recites this formula over it.
15.6.1	"He who seeks to kill the horse, Varuna approaches him."
15.6.2	Having placed himself behind the horse's hind-leg, he sprinkles water on it with the verse, "The man is far, the horse is far."
15.6.3	Then the Brahman takes his hand with the verse, “O Brahman, I and you have become the slayer of Vritra. O Indra, the destroyer of enemies, do you look at us who are united. The good wishes of Indra are auspicious.
15.6.4	Here he places the rope of muñja grass at the two ends, with the two ropes of muñja grass.
15.6.5	It is attached to the branch of the Vetasa tree.
15.6.6	Here the sons of the king are separated by this hundred palas.
15.6.7	They are separated according to them.
15.6.8	Two others take the other end of the hundred.
15.6.9	Then he instructs them with this verse: "They are running towards the horse, as if they were pushing it forward with a pole."
15.6.10	When the Adhvaryu is running, he makes the sacrificer recite (the verse), "O Indra, do thou come to the sacrifice, to the earth and the sky. Thy greatness is not diminished by the rays. For thou didst slay Vritra with thy own power. The enemy did not know the end in battle."
15.6.11	Having bound him, he sprinkles him with water flowing towards the south.
15.6.12	Then, having turned the horse to the right, he brings it to the hall, saying, "The wind has gone to the waters, the beloved form of Indra. O praise-singer, you are turning the horse back along this path again."
15.6.13	The Adhvaryu follows him with the Stokyiya verses beginning with "Agnaye svāhā, Somāya svāhā." With this Anuvāka, he offers again and again until the Stokas cease.
15.6.14	Having placed the horse facing east in front of the Sāla, he offers the Savitrī oblations to Agni and Vayu with the formula, "Agnaye Svāhā, Vāyave Svāhā." Seven times.
15.6.15	Then he offers the Savitrī oblation on eight potsherds in the morning.
15.6.16	Having approached, he offers the portions in front, saying, "To Agni svāhā, svāhā to Indra and Agni." Five.
15.6.17	In front of the Svishtakṛt, he offers eighty oblations for the horse-riding, saying, "For Iṅkāra svāhā, for Kṛta svāhā."
15.6.18	When the fire is not kindled, he offers thirteen oblations to the wind, saying, "To the going forth, svāhā! To the going away, svāhā!"
15.6.19	That Iṣṭi comes to an end.
15.6.20	Then, having turned the horse to the right and led it into the shed through the eastern door, and having placed it facing east within the altar, he says,
15.7.1	Or, as they say, the Adhvaryu offers at every step of the sacrificial horse, and we shall offer here so that it may be offered at every step.
15.7.2	He offers to his wives, with the formulas, "Here is firmness, here is the firm one, here is the one who is firm, here is the lover, here is the beloved."
15.7.3	Then, having made him come out towards the east, he sprinkles him with the formula, "For Prajapati thee" towards the east, "For Indra-Agni thee" towards the south, "For Vayu thee" towards the west, "For all the gods thee" towards the north, "For the gods thee" below, "For all gods thee" above.
15.7.4	Then he sprinkles it with the Atiprokṣa formula, "For the earth thee, for the sky thee, for the heaven thee, for the existent thee, for the non-existent thee, for the waters thee, for the plants thee, for all beings thee."
15.7.5	Then he offers to his forms, with the formulas, "To the black one svāhā, to the white one svāhā." With these two formulas.
15.7.6	Then, having risen up, he murmurs the names of the horse at his right ear: "Thou art a horse, thou art a steed, thou art a swift one, thou art a man, thou art a chariot, thou art a winner, thou art a bull, thou art a human being. The name is Yayu."
15.7.7	Then he stands near him, saying, "Having reached the world of the Adityas."
15.7.8	Then he releases him with the two thongs, saying, "Thou art the earth; for the earth thee; for the prosperous thee; for the future thee; for all beings thee."
15.7.9	Then he hands him over to the deities, saying, "The gods, the protectors of the vow, protect this horse consecrated to the gods for the Soma sacrifice."
15.7.10	Here they let loose these unlimited, unfettered, unharnessed horses.
15.7.11	Here these four hundred guardsmen pursue him, armed with shields and lances, as if for battle.
15.7.12	To them he gives cooked food.
15.8.1	He said, “Brahmins and kings, whoever will take this cooked food, I will not allow him to be censured.”
15.8.2	He said, “Brahmin and kings, outside the temple, you should drive away the vehicle. Whoever is connected with this bull, all his wealth will be lost.”
15.8.3	They drove away the vehicle outside the temple.
15.8.4	And they wander with horses, mules, and donkeys.
15.8.5	Not with mares or she-donkeys.
15.8.6	Then these two Vena-singers take hold of the Vena.
15.8.7	Then this Brahman sings the Vena-song: "He gave, he sacrificed, he cooked, he cooked." Thus the three songs are mixed.
15.8.8	The horse has free rein.
15.8.9	And they protect him from bathing and riding.
15.8.10	Now if a horse is afflicted, they obtain (the horse) by means of the Agniyaष्टाकपाल, the Saumayaष्टाकपल, the Savitraष्टाकपाल and the Paushnaष्टाकपाल.
15.8.11	Now if one does not find (the horse), then there is the Agnimaraष्टाकपाल for Agni Vaisvānara and the Mrigakaraष्टाकपला.
15.8.12	If there is a windstorm, then for Agni, the remover of distress, there is an oblation of eight potfuls of cooked rice; milk for Surya; and ghee for Vayu.
15.8.13	If it blows from the south, then for Rudra.
15.8.14	If there is a leak, then for Pusha.
15.8.15	If it is in water, then for Varuna.
15.8.16	If it has one eye, then for Surya.
15.8.17	These are the remedies for various kinds of distress.
15.8.18	The expiation is to be performed only once.
15.8.19	He releases the best of his horses.
15.8.20	Then he proceeds with the two straps.
15.8.21	The rite is similar upto the offering.
15.9.1	Having released the horse, they offer the animals for Visve Devā.
15.9.2	The animal-offerings and the oblations for Visve Devās follow.
15.9.3	The animal-sacrifices are the Vaiśvadeva-offerings.
15.9.4	The Savitri-verse follows them.
15.9.5	The animals are well-known. They are concluded.
15.9.6	Then in the afternoon, he offers a cake on twelve potsherds to Savitr and Asavitri.
15.9.7	The well-known Iṣṭi is concluded.
15.9.8	Then, having performed the Full-moon and New-moon sacrifices, he returns as prescribed.
15.9.9	Then these two Vena-singers take up their instruments.
15.9.10	Then this royal Vena-singer sings: "I am a warrior, I fought, I conquered that battle." Thus three mixed verses.
15.9.11	When the Agnihotra oblation is offered in the morning, the Brāhmaṇa sings with the Vīṇā. When the Agnihotra is offered in the evening, the Kṣatriya sings.
15.9.12	They sing like this for a year.
15.9.13	Then he offers the Savitrī oblation on eight potsherds in the morning.
15.9.14	Having approached, he offers the shares in front.
15.9.15	When the sun has not risen, he offers the Dhṛti and Pradrāva oblations.
15.9.16	The Iṣṭi comes to an end in the prescribed manner.
15.9.17	At midday, he offers a cake on eleven potshards to Savitr, the giver of life.
15.9.18	The Iṣṭi ends in the prescribed manner
15.9.19	In the afternoon, he offers a twelve-potshered cake to Asavitra, the giver of food.
15.9.20	The Iști comes to an end as prescribed.
15.9.21	Next day, he commences with the Savitrī verses.
15.9.22	Thus, day after day, the sacrificer goes to the Savitrī-offerings, to the Iṣṭi, to the animal-sacrifice, to the Yavāgāra-offering.
15.9.23	When the four months are over, having performed the Savitrī Iṣṭi they offer animals to Varuna.
15.10.1	The animal-sacrifices follow the animal-offerings of these (animals). The oblations to Varuna follow.
15.10.2	The animal-sacrifices are offered to Varuna.
15.10.3	The Savitri-verse is recited in the middle.
15.10.4	The animals are offered in the prescribed manner.
15.10.5	In the afternoon, he offers a cake on twelve potshards to Savitri and Asavitri.
15.10.6	The prescribed Iști comes to an end.
15.10.7	Then, having performed the Full-Moon and New-Moon sacrifices, he returns as prescribed.
15.10.8	Then, on the next day, he begins with the Savitri verses.
15.10.9	Thus, the Sacrificer, day after day, goes through the remaining four months with the Savitri-verses, as he pleases with the Iṣṭi, as he pleases by the Animal-Sacrifice, as he pleases through the Śyāmākāgrāyana.
15.10.10	Then, when four months have passed, on the full-moon day, he offers the animal dedicated to Aniyavata.
15.10.11	His Pasupurodāsa follows the offering of Aniyavata
15.10.12	The Pasupurodāsā of Aniyavāta is offered.
15.10.13	The first Savitrī follows it.
15.10.14	The animal sacrifice is concluded as prescribed.
15.10.15	Then at midday he offers the animal to Sāntapana.
15.10.16	The animal cake follows it, the offering to Sāntapan.
15.10.17	The animal offering to Sānta-pana is indeed his.
15.10.18	The Savitri follows it, the middle one.
15.10.19	The animal sacrifice ends with the well-known (rites).
15.10.20	Then in the afternoon he offers a cake on twelve potsherds to Savitr and Asavitra.
15.10.21	That well-known Iṣṭi comes to an end.
15.10.22	Then in the evening he performs the Gṛhamedha rite.
15.10.23	Then in late night he performs the Pūrṇadava rite.
15.10.24	Then at dawn he offers a sacrificial animal for sport.
15.10.25	The Pasupuroḍāśa rite follows it, the offering for sport.
15.10.26	His Pasupuroḍaśa rite is for sport.
15.10.27	It is followed by the first Savitrī verse.
15.11.5	Then in the afternoon he performs the Pitryajña.
15.11.6	Having performed the Pitryajna, he performs the Traiyambaka.
15.11.7	Having performed Traiyambaka, he offers a sacrificial animal to Aditya.
15.11.8	The Pasupurodāsa follows it, and the offering to Aditya.
15.11.9	Aditya is his Pasupurodasa.
15.11.10	The Savitri follows it.
15.11.11	The animal sacrifice is well-known.
15.11.12	Having performed the Full-moon and New-moon sacrifices, one returns to the well-known (ritual).
15.11.13	On the next day, one commences with the Savitri verses.
15.11.14	Thus the sacrificer goes on for half four months with the Savitri-verses, as he pleases with the Iṣṭi, as he pleases by the animal sacrifice, as he pleases through the Vrihyāgrayaṇa.
15.11.15	Then, on the Upavasatha day of the New Moon, having performed the Savitrī Iṣṭi and offered the Savitrī oblations to Agni, having collected the omenta and the heads of the animals, he offers the animal to Vāyu.
15.11.16	The animal to Prajāpati is the concluding offering.
15.11.17	Having performed the Vapa rites of these two animals, he offers two Pasupuroḍāśa oblations.
15.11.18-22	The Savitri of the middle kind follows them. The Pasusati is concluded. Then in the afternoon he offers a cake on twelve potshards to Savitr and Asavitra. The Istisati is concluded. Then on the next day he commences with the Savitri.
15.11.23	Thus the sacrificer, day after day, goes through this half-month with Savitrī-offerings, with Iṣṭi and with Pasubandha.
15.11.24	When four months have passed, he performs the Savitrī-Iṣṭi.
15.12.1	He offers animals to Sunaśirī.
15.12.2	The Pasupuroḍāśa offerings follow them. The offerings to Sunaśiri are offered.
15.12.3	The animal-sacrifices of these are the Shunashīrīya oblations.
15.12.4	The Savitrī of the middle one follows them.
15.12.5	The animals are well-known. They are concluded.
15.12.6	Then in the afternoon, he offers a cake on twelve potsherds to Savitr and Asavitr.
15.12.7	This is the well-known Iṣṭi. It is concluded.
15.12.8-9	Then, having performed the Full-moon and New-moon sacrifices, having sat down in the sacrificial hall, he shaves the head of the sacrificer with a razor of red iron and a three-edged knife, first from the front, then from the right, then from the back, then from the left, then from above.
15.13.1	Then they tether the horse in the stable.
15.13.2	Then having brought it from the ford and purified it, he performs the Isti of Agni-Diksaniya with three oblations.
15.13.3	The offerings are as many as in the Diksaniya Isti.
15.13.4	Then the Adhvaryu, having turned by the right, having hastened towards the west, having offered the Patnīsaṁyājya offerings, having approached towards the east, having swollen the Dhruva vessel, offers three preceding Vaiśvadev offerings with the formulas, "To the one who has been offered to, svāhā."
15.13.5	Then he offers seven Prāṇāhuti offerings with the formulas "To Prāṇa, svāhā; to Vyāna, svāhā".
15.13.6	He offers the Ekavimśini consecration with the formulas "to Pṛthivī, svāhā, to Antarikṣa, svāhā"
15.13.7	He offers five oblations in the consecration of the five paths, six in the consecration of Agni, one in the consecration of Rtu, for the work of the gods of Bhuva.
15.13.8	He performs the sacrifice for seven days.
15.13.9	He offers three oblations in the east, three in the west, and one in the north, for the consecration of Rtus.
15.13.10	He offers two oblations at the end of the season, saying, "The great earth, the great heaven, the great ocean."
15.13.11	This is the day on which one takes the consecration.
15.13.12	He carries the fire for a year.
15.13.13	There are twelve Upasads.
15.13.14	Here the classes of people gather around him as described.
15.13.15	These are the crafts that are not inferior to the others: the carpenter, the chariot-maker, the potter, the smith, the goldsmith, the jeweller, and the tailor.
15.13.16	Now he teaches the carpenter.
15.14.1	Cut one hundred stakes of Butea monosperma, and make them into pegs. Make twenty-one stakes, twenty-one ropes, and a rope-halter. Make the Agniṣṭha post of Butea monosperna, the Pautrīdrava posts of Butea monos perma, the Upasthāvana posts of Butea monosp erma, six posts of Butea frondosa, six posts of Khadira, six posts of Palāśa, the Palāśa post for the Pātnīvata, the Palāsa post for the Viśāla post, make vessels of wood in one shape, thirty-six ladles with long handles, thirty-six strainers with long handles, four or eight Indraṇas, four-wheeled chariots, and large-wheeled chariots so that they are equal to the tops of the stakes. Make unlimited posts for the ascending (of the chariot). Make one wooden platform for the horse to lie on.
15.14.2	Then he instructs them in the making of chariots, saying, "Make your own chariots; make unlimited chariots."
15.14.3	Then he instructs them in making armour, saying, "make unlimited armour."
15.14.4	Then he instructs the potters: "Make bricks in twenty-one different ways, make three big pots, make them like a horse trough, a cow trough, and a deer trough. They should burn these with their parts. Make an unlimited number of pots."
15.15.1	Then he makes the following articles of iron: a spear, a razor, a vessel for sprinkling, a black vessel, a golden vessel, a golden razor, four iron vessels, four silver vessels, four silver razors, thirty-six gold vessels, thirty-six silver vessels, thirty-seven silver razors, three hundred and thirty needles of gold, three hundred and sixty needles of silver, three hundred and forty needles of lead, and one iron pot for boiling the Aśvattha leaves.
15.15.2	Then he instructs them to make these things of gold: a hundred coins of a hundred palas, make golden and silver vessels for the two kinds of wealth, make golden vessels in one form, make golden pillows as many as there are wives, make golden or silver pins with silver or golden knots, make golden or copper pots as many as there is wives, make golden pins with silver or gold, make golden water pots as many as wives, make golden towels with silver or gold handles, make one golden broom, make three golden brooms with silver or gold handle, make a thousand golden pieces of glass, a thousand silver pieces of glass, and a thousand sea glass, a golden whip, a golden six-piece, a golden ladle.
15.16.1	Then he instructs them in the nails, saying, "Make them unlimited, eight."
15.16.2	Then these other things are added to it: a hundred skins of ghee, a hundred skins of honey, a hundred skins filled with rice, a hundred skins with cakes, a hundred skins full of fried grains, a hundred skins containing curds, a hundred skins having barley-meal, a hundred skins consisting of barley-meal, and a hundred skins of fried beans, and a hundred of skins of rice mixed with Priyangu.
15.16.3	Now, of these, twenty-one priests are left over, and he himself is the twenty-second.
15.16.4	They collect animals from different countries, some of a certain kind and others of a different kind, and they know them.
15.16.5	In villages, the village-dwellers; in forests, the forest-dwellers; on mountains, the mountain-dwellers; by rivers, the river-dwellers; birds in cages, reptiles in jars.
15.17.1	The settlement is well-known.
15.17.2	Then one performs the Pravargya rite.
15.17.3	Having performed the Pravargya, one performs the Pada rite.
15.17.4	Having performed the rite with the foot-step, having bought the king with a thousand (coins), he performs the Atithyahomas.
15.17.5	Having performed the rite with Atithyahomas, he performs the rite with Pravargya and Upasads every day.
15.17.6	It is indeed twelve days.
15.17.7	The Agni is installed in twenty-one ways.
15.17.8	His Sadas has twenty-one layers.
15.17.9	Then he places the Ahavaniya.
15.17.10	Having taken the Ahavaniya fire, he mixes it with the Sadas and the Havirdhana fires.
15.17.11	Having mixed the Sadas and Havirdhana fires, he takes the Agni and Soma fires.
15.17.12	Having taken the Agni and Soma, he erects the sacrificial post within the enclosure.
15.17.13	Having released the rope attached to the post, he offers the animal to Agni and Soma.
15.17.14	Having performed the well-known Vaya sacrifice, he takes up the Vasatīvari waters.
15.17.15	Then he offers the Pasupurodāsa oblation.
15.17.16	The eight Devasuva oblations follow it, beginning with "To Agni, the householder" and ending with "To Agni Gayatra." This is the Dasahāviṣṭi sacrifice.
15.17.17	The Yajya and Anuvakya verses of that (Agni) are: "May the fire of the directions, knowing the good, be our protector."
15.17.18	The Pasupurodhas end with the Idantad (verse).
15.17.19	The animal sacrifice ends with the Patnisamyajas.
15.17.20	Some say it ends with the Hridayasula (verse).
15.17.21	Then, having performed the Vasatavari ceremony, they observe the fast with special care.
15.17.22	Now, then, they wake up at midnight.
15.17.23	The rites are the same as those of the Paridhis, except that the Paridhis are not worn.
15.17.24	He recites the verse, "Who yokes thee? May he yoke thee!" six times in the middle, six times in the right half, and five times in the left half.
15.17.25	Then, having brought the king down, he performs the morning recitation.
15.17.26	Having worn the Paridhis and performed the morning recitation, he goes to the water.
15.17.27	He goes to the water with water.
15.17.28	He approaches the Agniṣṭoma sacrifice.
15.17.29	The sprinkling is well-known.
15.17.30	The Grahas are taken in the well-known manner.
15.17.31	The Pavamāna is similar to the Soma-pressing.
15.17.32	One who is going to press the Pavamāna asks for the sacrificial grass and a hundred Palas.
15.17.33	Then he says, "O Udgātṛ, may the horse sing for you the sacrificial grass and the hundred Palas."
15.17.34	They join the horse with the garland, saying, "O Agni, O horse, I join you. Do thou protect me safely. O Vayu, O horse, O Aditya, O horse, do thou protect me safely."
15.17.35	Then they move towards the Pavamāna (cup) in an upward direction.
15.17.36	The Vāḍava herd is on the north, and is surrounded by a fence.
15.17.37	They open it up.
15.17.38	The mares neigh.
15.17.39	The horse neighs.
15.17.40	That is the horse's song.
15.17.41	The auspicious words are spoken.
15.18.1	The horse has gone up, the life has gone up, good existence has gone up, brahmic glory has gone up, this has gone up, that has gone up, such are the auspicious words that are spoken.
15.18.2	The mares are let loose.
15.18.3	They tether the horse in the horse-stall.
15.18.4	Here they spread the food of such and such a person.
15.18.5	Then he says, "O Udgātṛ, do sing for me a hundred cows and a hundred palas."
15.18.6	His Bahispavamāna is in four (verses).
15.18.7	The Ajyas are in eight each.
15.18.8	The Madhyandina Pavamāna is in twelve.
15.18.9	The Prsthas are in sixteen.
15.18.10	The Arbhava Pavamāna is twenty.
15.18.11	The Agniṣṭoma Sāman is twenty-four.
15.18.12	It is called the Caturstoma.
15.18.13	The rite is similar to that of the Graha of Asvin.
15.18.14	Having taken up the Graha of the Asvins and having taken eleven thongs, he approaches the sacrificial post.
15.18.15	Having released the rope with a knot at the end, which is placed near the fire, he prepares eleven animals.
15.18.16	Having performed the Vapa rites for them, they proceed to the morning pressing.
15.18.17	It concludes in a straight line.
15.18.18	They proceed to the midday pressing.
15.18.19	The pressing is well-known.
15.18.20	The Grahas are taken up as prescribed.
15.18.21	The rites are common for the Dakṣiṇās.
15.18.22	Having offered the oblations to Dakṣiṇā, he offers eight oblations for the union of the sacrifice, saying, "May the sacrifice proceed forward."
15.18.23	He gives the third portion of the Dakṣiṇās.
15.18.24	Having offered the oblations for Viśvakarman, he offers nine oblations for sufficiency, saying, "The past, the future, and the present."
15.18.25	Here there is no consecration with fire.
15.18.26	He performs the uninterrupted continuity.
15.18.27	The Madhyandina Savana concludes in a straight line.
15.18.28	They move towards the third pressing.
15.18.29	Having performed the Āditya-graha, one takes up the Āgrayana.
15.18.30	The rite is similar to that of Pavamāna.
15.18.31	Having performed with Pavamāna, one moves towards one's own abode with the animals.
15.18.32	They have different mental offerings, different deities, different touches, different Vasahomas, the same Vanaspati, the same Svishtakrit, the same Prishas, the same Nidhas, and the same directions.
15.18.33	Some say that the directions are different.
15.18.34	The same rite is performed at the Patnisamyajas.
15.18.35	The Agniṣṭoma with four Stotras is concluded with the Patnisamyājas.
15.19.1	Then for him are spread out these hundred ox-hides, reaching up to the upper hip and up to the junction of the wings.
15.19.2	Then having taken out twenty or twenty-four of these ghee-hides, they mix the food with the remaining ones.
15.19.3	Then, having built twenty or twenty-four layers of wood in the middle of the fire, and having cut off the remaining ones, they scatter them.
15.19.4	He thus extends the divine city of four corners within himself.
15.19.5	Or else he makes the ends of the wings of the altar, as in the case of the Samāvatī post. Then having raised it, they cover it.
15.19.6	They make the northern door of it.
15.19.7	They place these Indrāṇasānas in the four directions and the others in the intermediate directions, if there are eight.
15.19.8	And four each of them mount one by one, and ten others who work at night.
15.19.9	Then they bring the oblations in the pots with the eight oblations.
15.19.10	Then the Adhvaryu takes up the spoon with a long handle and the kindling wood with a long handle.
15.19.11	The Pratiprasthātars take up twenty-one (materials), and ten others who are working at night.
15.19.12	Then the Adhvaryu, having besprinkled ghee with the spoon, offers three oblations to the Visve Devas.
15.19.13	"They offer with the spoon, saying, "Svāhā to the one who has been besprinkled, svāhā." They offer with the ladle, saying, ".
15.19.14	" This is the same sequence.
15.19.15	When they reach the end of this section, then he recites this section.
15.20.1	The eastern Stokiyas, then this section, the western Stokiyas.
15.20.2	Then this section, the northern Stokiyas, and this section, the twenty-one-day consecration. Then this section, the seasonal consecration. Then this chapter, the Savitri of the horse. Then this section,
15.20.3	Thus they go through these sections with this very section.
15.20.4	When they reach the end of these sections, they then proceed to these sections. The two sections on the horse-shaped plants and the horse-parts of the Visve Devas, the two sections on the plants and trees, the two sections of the waters and the sections on the joining and naming of the waters, and the section on the Samplava.
15.20.5	The Khari-homa has been described.
15.20.6	They offer these Anuvākas in the same way, with the same Anuvāka.
15.20.7	When they reach the end of these Anuvāka, they then return to these Anuvāaka.
15.21.1	"Svāhā to one, svāhā to two."
15.21.2	They offer these anuvākas again and again in the same way with the same anuvāka.
15.21.3	Then, when the Vasatīvarī verses are being taken up, they proceed to the Adhvaras.
15.21.4	When the Vasatīvari verses have been taken up, and the Subrahmanya verses have been recited, they again proceed to the Adhvāras.
15.21.5	They offer these Anuvākas again and again with this Anuvāka, and they conclude with the offering of the Abhiupakarana.
15.21.6	These are said to be the life-long rites of the horse.
15.22.1	Some say that they are the concluding rites.
15.22.2	For they offer throughout the night.
15.22.3	When the Adhvaryu and the Pratiprasthātṛ are about to perform the morning recitation, two others, the performers of the night rites, run towards them.
15.22.4	Then having brought the king (of Soma) near, he performs the Prātaranuvāka.
15.22.5	When the Prātaranuvaaka is over, he goes to the water.
15.22.6	He goes to the water with water.
15.22.7	He approaches the Ukthya sacrifice.
15.22.8	The rite is common for Upāṁshu.
15.22.9	When he is about to offer the Upāṁshu-libation, having approached the Indrāṇasa-vessel, he offers four spoon-offerings: "To Uṣas svāhā, to Vyūṣṭi svāhā, To Udeṣyate svāhā, and to Udyate svāhā."
15.22.10	The sprinkling is well known.
15.22.11	The rite is similar to that of Antaryāma.
15.22.12	When performing the Antaryama sacrifice, having approached the Indra-Agni (fire), one offers four oblations with the ladle, saying, "To the rising one, svāhā! To heaven, svāhā!" "To the world, svāhā!” “To all, svāhā.”
15.22.13	Here the rising sun stops, the performers of night rites.
15.22.14	They cut off the coverings.
15.22.15	They turn back the Indra-Agna (fire).
15.22.16	The Grahas are well-known to be taken with gold.
15.22.17	The Grahas are similar to the Aggrayan graha.
15.22.18	Having taken the Aggrayan, he takes two Grahas of the form of gold and silver, saying, "He who is the life-giver, he who is the giver of the self."
15.22.19	Then he takes the Ukthya.
15.22.20	The Graha is similar to the Asvin graha.
15.23.2	Three of the Butea frondosa tree to the south, three of the Khadira tree to the north, three of the Palasa tree to the south and three of the Palala tree to the north.
15.23.3	Here he places the Palala wood silently to the south.
15.23.4	Having thrown away the sacrificial posts with the ends turned upwards, the Adhvaryu places the three animals belonging to Prajapati, namely, the horse, the goat and the deer, near the Agni-sthala.
15.23.5	Then he puts on the yoke-halter, the black-necked one for Agni-Indra, the black-tailed one for Indra-Pūṣan, the black-throated one for Pūṣan, for Tvashtri the two with black necks and with hairy tails, the two with sharp backs, the two for Brhaspati, the black-spotted one for the nurse, the one with a hump for the sun, the one with strength for the one with strength, the one with fat for the one with fat.
15.23.6	Then the Adhvaryu offers the animal to Agni, the leader, with the formula, "To Agni, the leader," etc.
15.23.7	Then the Adhvaryū offers the animals to Soma, the lord, with the formula "To Soma, the lord," etc.
15.23.8	Then the Adhvaryu places the animals on the fire-altar, one by one, beginning with the king Indra, and ending with the king Indra.
15.23.9	Thus there are sixty animals on the fire altar.
15.23.10	Then there are ten chapters beginning with the red and ending with the smoke-red.
15.23.11	Of these, the first nine are placed on the southern posts, and the last nine on the northern posts.
15.23.12-15	The Agni-Indra posts are the chief ones in the southern ones, and the Indra-Pusha posts in the northern ones. Now the ten chapters of the "Mayu" (section) are the Prajapati (section). Of these, the first five are placed in the southern posts, and the last five in the northern ones.
15.23.16	Then, in this sacrifice, he makes an offering to the one whom he hates with his mind.
15.23.17	If he does not hate anyone, he says, "The rat is your animal."
15.23.18	At this time, he offers a spoonful of oblation into the Ahavaniya fire, saying, "To the one who has been made an offering to, svāhā."
15.24.1	Then he yokes the horse in front of the sacrificial post to the chariot with the verse, "They yoke the moving reddish-brown Brhaspati, they stand around him."
15.24.2	Then its back is wiped with the verse, “The shining ones shine in heaven.”
15.24.3	In the same way he yokes the northern yoke.
15.24.4	In the same manner he yokes the yoke on the northern side.
15.24.5	The two are wiped on his back. The desirable horses are yoked to his chariot, the red ones, the strong, for the man to drive.
15.24.6	Then, making a banner, he releases it towards the flag, saying, "Make a banner, O bannerless one."
15.24.7	Then he equips the sacrificer with armor and weapons, saying, "It becomes like the emblem of the cloud," with fourteen (verses), according to the form.
15.24.8	Then he addresses the chariot with three verses in anuṣṭubh metre: "O tree-lord, be the protector of the forest."
15.24.9	Then he blows the drum with three verses in anuşṭubh metre, saying: "Blow the earth and the sky."
15.24.10	Then he proceeds to the southern lake. The sky is your back. The horse has stepped over with his steps. The horse has conquered. With three recitations.
15.24.11	They run the horses towards the knees.
15.24.12	Then, having turned the chariot round to the right, he brings it to the hall, saying, "The wind has gone to the waters, the dear body of Indra. O praise-singer, you are turning the horse back by this path again."
15.24.13	The Adhvaryu follows them with the Stokyiya verses beginning with "to Agni svāhā, to Soma svāhā." With this Anuvāka he again and again follows them until the Stokas cease.
15.24.14	Then, having released the horse in front of the sacrificial post from the chariot, they make it go twice around the Adhvaryu's resting place, having tied it with a golden tie.
15.24.15	Then the queen, with the wind, comes with the perfumes, the groups, and the gems, bringing the horse.
15.24.16	She anoints him with the oil from the head, saying, "May the Vasus anoint thee with the Gayatri metre." With the Pautrâdriva oil, together with the wives of the sacrificers who have been anointed.
15.24.17	Then he anoints the part below the navel and above the navel with the formula, "May Rudras anoint thee with the Tristubh metre."
15.25.1	With the formula, "With the formula, 'May the king be anointed with the formula, 'With the formula, 
15.25.2	Then, what is behind the navel and in front of the tail, he anoints with the verse, "May the Adityas anoint you with the Jāgata metre." With this verse, the wives of the chief of the Sutas and the chief of the Kshatras and the Sangrahitrs (collectors) join together.
15.25.3-4	The golden coins which are attached to the hair on the eastern side of the head, are given to the wife of the king. The silver coins which are attached on the western side of the head are given to the wives of the nobles.
15.25.5	Then the wives of the chief of the Sutas and the collectors of the Ksattas, along with their wives, offer a thousand sea-shells in the holes, saying, "May there be gold."
15.25.6	The wives go as they came.
15.25.7	Then the queen, the wives of the king, and the slave-girls offer him rice mixed with honey, saying, "This is the great queen, this is the slave-girl."
15.26.1	The Lājī, the Śācī, the Yaśo, the Māmā, the Yavyā, the Gavyā, the gods have eaten this food, may they eat this food. O Prajāpati, this is your food.
15.26.2	It is known that the offspring of the one whose food is eaten becomes prosperous.
15.26.3	Then, having released the horse from the yoke, he proceeds with the Nirmanthyas, covering it with the Nirmanthya, with the Prahṛti and Abhihuți.
15.26.4	Then the Adhvaryu yokes the horse with the head of a sheep to the southernmost (post).
15.26.5	Then he yokes the animals for the Parjanya sacrifice to it, namely the black-necked one for Agni-Indra, the black-necked for Indra-Pūṣan, and the black-necked (one) for Pūṣan. These three are yoked to the forehead.
15.26.6	The two black-necked ones for Agni are yoked to its neck.
15.26.7	The two tawny-necked ones for Tvashtri are yoked to his thighs.
15.26.8	The two Barhaspatya (animals) with white backs are to be placed on the back.
15.26.9	The one with a black belly to Dhatri.
15.26.10	The one having strength in the belly to Surya, the one having the tail to Pitvi.
15.26.11	Then the Adhvaryu places the animal to Agni on the Agni-sthala, the red bull to Agni with the army, to Agni with the banner, the red bull with white horns to Agni with the head, the red bull having a black belly to Agni with the belly, the red bull of the Surya-clan to Surya, the red bull, the one having strength in its belly to Pitvi, the red bull which has a tail to Pitvi.
15.26.12	Then the Adhvaryu yokes the animals at the Agnișthāna fire, saying, "To Soma, the self-sovereign, the bull and the cow."
15.26.13	Then the Adhvaryū yokes the animals to the Agniṣṭhāna fire, saying "To Indra, the king, the boar."
15.26.14	He yokes all the animals, both wild and domestic, by means of the yoking rite. He yokes those animals which he is going to release among the wild ones.
15.26.15	Then the priests who are to the south (of the altar) appoint (the priests).
15.26.16	Then those who are to the north.
15.26.17	Then he sprinkles the horse with the sprinkling of the constant (rite), and with the sprinkling of excess, with the formula, "Thou art the seed of the born."
15.26.18	The other animals with the constant (rite) only.
15.26.19	Then the priests who are on the south sprinkle (the animals).
15.26.20	Then those on the north.
15.26.21	Then he makes the horse smell the sprinkling water in front of the sacrificial post.
15.27.1	"Agni was the animal, they worshipped with it, it conquered that world in which Agni is, that is your world, you will conquer it." "Then smell (the sprinkling water), Vayu was the animal, Aditi was the animal, it was the animal."
15.27.2	If he does not smell, then he should make him smell again. Agni was a beast; they worshipped with it. It conquered that world in which Agni is. That is your world. Therefore I will enter you if you do not smell. Vayu was a beast; Aditya was a beast;
15.27.3	If he does not smell, then he should make him smell again. Agni was the animal, they worshipped with it. He conquered that world in which Agni is. That is your world. You will conquer it if you smell. Vayu was the animal, Aditya was the animal.
15.27.4	At this time he offers a spoonful of clarified butter on the Āhavanīya fire, with the formula, "To the Agni who has been obtained, svāhā."
15.28.1	Then, while taking up the kindling wood from the fire, he says, "Recite to Agni who is kindling."
15.28.2	He places the kindling wood.
15.28.3	He arranges the kindling wood around.
15.28.4	He sweeps with a Veda.
15.28.5	While the Sāmidhenī verses are being recited, he pours the libation with the spoon.
15.28.6	The two ladles are wiped with the formula, "Thou art the ladle."
15.28.7	Then, without touching the ladles, he steps forward towards the north and anoints the horse, the goat and the deer with the formula, “Thou art the horse, the sheep and the deer.”
15.28.8	Then the animals belonging to the Parjanya.
15.28.9	Then the other animals.
15.28.10	Then the animals on the right.
15.28.11	Then the ones on the left.
15.28.12	Then having placed the ladles in their places, he chooses the Pravargya.
15.28.13	The priests are well-known.
15.28.14	The Hotṛ falls down.
15.28.15	He desires the impulse.
15.28.16	Having taken the two ladles after being impelled, having approached, having announced, he says, "Do thou send forth to the kindling woods."
15.28.17	"The kindled one, the one who is born, the one who has the mind, the one who knows the mind," these are the names of the horse.
15.28.18	When the Vasat-call is made, he offers. At the fourth and eighth (offerings) he makes the offerings equal. At the eighth (offering) he makes all equal.
15.28.19	He pours down the remnants of the offerings with the Parı-Svāhā-call.
15.28.20	Having offered ten Prayāja-offerings, he steps forward towards the north and asks for gold and a dart.
15.28.21	Having anointed them with clarified butter, he anoints the horse, the goat and the deer with them.
15.28.22	The southern ones are of gold, the northern ones of silver.
15.28.23	Then having placed the ladles in their respective places, he says, "Recite the Anuvakya for the fire being kindled."
15.28.24	The sheep, the red-necked goat, and the Salmali tree protect thee with the cooking-pots.
15.28.25-27	These animals, having been sprinkled with fire, are let loose. Two cows for Agni, two cows for Vayu, two cows for Yama, two cows for Varuna, two cows for Soma, two cows for Indra, two cows for the earth, two cows for Kubera, two cows for Sarasvati, two cows for Savitar, two cows for Mitra, two cows for Aryaman, two cows for Bhaga, two cows for Pusan, two cows for Vishnu, two cows for Rudra, two cows for Nirriti, two cows for Nikumbha, two cows for Suniri, two cows for Parjanya, two cows for Vasava, two cows for Dhruva, two cows for Prajapati, two cows for Brahman, two cows for Brahma, two cows for Ishvara, two cows for Sadhyas, two cows for Maruts, two cows for Viashvas, two cows for Vishvas, two cows to the quarters, two cows for wind, two cows for heaven, two cows for earth, two cows to heaven and earth, two cows each for the directions, two cows for Agni, one cow for Vayu, one cow for Yama, one cow for Varuna, one cow for Soma, one cow for Indra, one cow for the earth, one cow for Kubera, one cow for Sarasvati, one cow for Savitar, one cow for Mitra, one cow for Aryaman, one cow for Bhaga, one cow for Pusan, one cow for Vishnu, one cow for Rudra, one cow for Nirriti, one cow for Nikumbha Suniri, one cow for Parjanya, one cow for Vasava, one cow for Dhruva Prajapati, one cow for Brahman, one cow for Brahma, one cow for Ishvara, one cow for Sadhyas Maruts, one cow
15.28.28	The horse is treated as the principal animal.
15.28.29	The Adhvaryu takes up the horse with the two ladles.
15.28.30	The other performers take the other animals separately, leading them towards the north in a row without mixing them.
15.28.31	Then he asks for the sacrificial grass, a hundred Palas of gold, a hide, a staff, a rope and a wooden sword.
15.28.32	This is spread out in plenty towards the north.
15.28.33	He offers to the horse being slain, with the five-fold formula, "The grass, the hundred-pal, the hide, the halter and the whip."
15.28.34	The horse being bound with the Tarpya-formula, the Prastotar stands up with the Sama-formula.
15.28.35	The others are separate from them.
15.28.36	Then they slay the others, either facing east or north.
15.28.37	Having said, "Do not make the Māyū rites," and having returned by the same route by which he had gone, they sit down at the place of the Pṛṣadājya.
15.28.38	Then the Brahman and the Hotṛ, speaking the Brahmanic speech, are between the sacrificial post and the Āhavanīya fire.
15.28.39	The Brahman is on the right side.
15.28.40	The Hotṛ is on the left side.
15.28.41	The Hotr asks the Brahman:
15.29.1	What was the former mind? What was the great age? What was the tawny one? What was the Pilpilila?
15.29.2	The other replied: The sky was the former mind. The horse was the great age. The night was the tawny one. The sheep was the Pilpililla.
15.29.3	The other asks: Who is the only one who moves? Who is born again? What is the remedy for cold? What is the great covering?
15.29.4	The other replies: The sun is the only one that moves. The moon is born again. Fire is the remedy for the cold. The earth is the great covering.
15.29.5	He asks him (the other) who is the supreme end of the earth, he asks him the navel of the world, he asks him for the seed of the horse of the sun, he asks for the supreme space of speech.
15.29.6	The other replies: They call the Veda the highest limit of the earth, they call the sacrifice the navel of the universe, they call Soma the seed of the horse of the sun, and Brahman is the highest space of speech.
15.29.7	They call the Vedas the highest limit of speech.
15.29.8	He offers the Veda as the highest oblation, and the animals as the highest oblations.
15.29.9	Then he offers seven oblations to the vital airs, saying, "To the vital air svāhā, to the spreading vital air svāha."
15.29.10	He offers thirty-six oblations to the horse-sacrifices, saying, "When the horse neighed for the first time, being born, may Mitra, Varuna, and Aryaman, those who see the horse, the cooked one, run to it."
15.29.11	Then the Samitāras approach, saying, "Come."
15.29.12	He releases the animals from the noose and recites the formula, "Aditi has released these nooses."
15.29.13	They release this direction with separate uninjured (animals) and recite, "I make the enemy go down. I release the nooses on him whom I hate."
15.29.14	Then the wives, with golden water-vessels, go forward.
15.29.15	They go forward, filling the vital airs of the horse, one after the other, of the other animals.
15.29.16	Then the queen, having let down her hair and put on a garment, and having covered herself with a golden veil, having gone around the horse three times in the counter-clockwise direction, having come to Avantin, having come to Stavanti, having come to Priyam, having come to the most beloved of the beloved, having come to Apina, having come to Nidhi, having come to you, the lord of Nidhi, we invoke you, O Vasu, O mine.
15.29.17	Having gone around three times, she stands to the north, together with the wives of the obstructed ones.
15.29.18	Thus the king of the Vātsyas with his wives.
15.29.19	Thus the king of the Parivṛktas with the leaders of the Sūtas and the collectors of the Kṣattas with their wives.
15.29.20	As the wives go along.
15.29.21	Then having adorned that horse with all ornaments, they cover it.
15.29.22	They make the northern door.
15.29.23	Then the Adhvaryu, having adorned the buffalo with all ornaments, and having made her cry and lament, leads her away, saying, "O mother, O daughter of the mother, O mother, no one leads me away. The horse is being led away."
15.29.24	Having sat down to the north of the horse, he puts on the head the garment.
15.29.25	The Adhvaryu mixes them with the Tarpya-mixture, saying, "O ye two, ye who dwell in the golden world, mix ye together."
15.29.26	Then the cow lies down near the she-goat, and places the foetus on her back, saying, "I knew the foetus, thou knewest the foetus. We shall both carry the four feet together."
15.29.27	The Adhvaryu recites over her, "The bull, the bearer of seed, may it deposit seed." Having responded, he says, "He who has killed the enemy in the dark sign." From here on.
15.29.28	Then the wife censures (the Adhvaryu).
15.30.1	"O Amba, O Ambali, O Ambika, may no one harm me. The horse is the best."
15.30.2-7	The sacrificer strikes her with the words, "Raise her up, the upright one." She curses him in the same way. He strikes her with the verse, "She who eats barley, the one who is hungry." She curses in the same way.
15.30.8	All the Gaṇas (attendants) of Śiva are running after her. Your mother and father are also there.
15.30.9	There is no censure here.
15.30.10	Having rested for a while, having mounted the horse, having risen, having put on the garment, having washed with water, reciting the three verses "Water is the foundation, the source of nourishment..." and the fourth verse "I have performed the sacrifice for Dadhīci."
15.30.11	All of them recite the verse "Surobhimatī" (at the time of the sacrifice). Those who speak impurely
15.30.12	They lead the wife (to the altar).
15.30.13	They cut off the covering.
15.30.14	The Adhvaryu takes away the horse's ornaments and the dwelling place.
15.30.15	Then, having mixed the ash and chaff from the Salmali tree, they smear the horse in the direction of its hair.
15.30.16	Then the queen, with the wind blowing, comes with the groups of needles, taking the horse.
15.30.17	Where the horse is before the belly, there the queen makes the paths of the sword with golden needles. "It goes, 'The Gāyatrī, the Tristubh, the two-footed, and the four-footed,' with two verses, with the wives of the ones who are struck down.
15.30.18	Now that which is behind the navel and in front of the anus, that belongs to the kings, with the two northern ones, to the wives of the non-kings.
15.30.19	Now that which is behind (the navel) and in front of (the anus), that belongs to the Parivṛktis, with the two southern ones, to the leaders of the Sūtas and the Ksattas and the wives of the collectors.
15.30.20	As the wives go in this way.
15.30.21	The Adhvaryu takes the needles to the house.
15.30.22	Then he asks for a golden needle and a needle of reed.
15.30.23	With these he sews the horse's belly. Thus the horse is protected.
15.30.24	He makes the sacrificer recite the six verses: "Who protects you? Who protects you?"
15.30.25	When he reaches the end of this Sūkta, then the Adhvaryu should take out the flesh from the shoulder of the horse and say, "Thus the horse is purified."
15.30.26	There is no Vapa of the horse.
15.30.27	The fat is spread like the moon. This is the Vapa of the Horse.
15.30.28	The Vapa of the sheep and the goat is like this.
15.30.29	The southern ones are made of gold, the northern ones of silver.
15.31.1	The Adhvaryu first takes up the oblation of the horse with the first ladle.
15.31.2	The others take up the oblations with the subsequent ladles.
15.31.3	He places the tip of the sacrificial grass for the horse whose oblation is being heated.
15.31.4	They place the other oblations.
15.31.5	The omentum of the horse is roasted towards the north, of the goat and the deer towards the south, and of the other animals towards the south.
15.31.6	The omentum of horse is offered with a spoonful of ghee.
15.31.7	They offer it with the formula, "Thou art taken with a vow."
15.31.8	Having performed the offering with the formula, Svāhā, and having poured the omentum of ghee, he pours the omentum over the horse.
15.31.9	Those who have come near offer.
15.31.10	Then having offered a spoonful of oblation in the form of "Svaha" in front, one offers the greatness with gold, saying, "May the sky be your greatness."
15.31.11	Then, having spread out, he takes up the omentum of the horse with the spoon twice, and says "To Prajapati" in a low voice. "Recite the omentum, fat of the goat and sheep being cut off" loudly, as much as the spoon can hold.
15.31.12	Then they take up the other vessels with the ladle and the spoon.
15.31.13	He pours over it twice.
15.31.14	Having gone beyond the place of hearing, he says, "To Prajapati" in a low voice. "The fat of the horse, goat, and calf is ready. Let it be offered." He says this loudly.
15.31.15	He offers the fat when the Vasat call is made.
15.31.16	Then he offers the greatness with silver above. "That is your greatness on earth."
15.31.17	Then he performs with the fat of the Parangyas, then with the fat of others.
15.31.18	Then the priests of the southern side offer the omentum-offerings, then those of the northern side.
15.31.19	He offers the omentum offerings of those animals which he has killed from the village and the forest.
15.31.20	These are the animals whose species are offered in the Upāṃśu sacrifice to Prajāpati, Savitr, Sarasvati, Pūshan, Yama, the Pitṛs, Heaven and Earth, Vāyu, Surya, and Viśvakarman.
15.31.21	Then having offered a ladleful of oblation in the form of Svāhā above, having sprinkled the omentum and the ladle, having gone out, they cleanse themselves in the Cātvāla.
15.31.22	Then he (the Adhvaryu) distributes the animals. He says, "O Shamitra, do thou distribute." "Do thou distribute the hair of the horse, the bones of the horse, as they are, having cut them into pieces, in the two pots of Shamitra. Thus the upper part, thus the goat-deer, then the right side, the horse-skin, the neck of the goat-deer." Having cooked them in the Shamitra, having cooked the horse-tail in the iron pot, having cooked the goat-tail.
15.31.23	Then having offered to Savitr, they proceed to the morning pressing.
15.31.24	It concludes in a straight line.
15.32.1	Then having offered to SavitR, they proceed to midday pressing.
15.32.2	The pressing is well-known.
15.32.3	The Grahas are taken in the well-known manner.
15.32.4	The rites are common to the Dakshina-grahas.
15.32.5	Having offered the oblations to Dakṣiṇā, he offers eight oblations for the union of the universe, saying, "May the sacrifice pass to the front."
15.32.6	He gives Dakṣiṇās according to his desire.
15.32.7	Having offered the oblations for Viśvakarman, he offers nine oblations for sufficiency, saying, "The past, the future, and the present."
15.32.8	The consecration of fire is well-known.
15.32.9	He performs the uninterrupted succession.
15.32.10	The Madhyamdina Savana comes to an end in the straight line.
15.32.11	Having offered to Savitr, they proceed to the third Savana.
15.32.12	Having performed the rite with the Aditya-graha, he takes up the Agrayaṇa.
15.32.13	Then he takes up the Ukthya.
15.32.14	The rite is similar to that of the Pavamana.
15.32.15	Having performed the Pavamāna Stotras, he requests for these animals, "A horse, a goat, a deer."
15.32.16	Then the animals belonging to the Parjanya, then the others, then the southern ones, then the northern ones.
15.32.17	They place the oblations to the north of the horse, the goat, and the deer, and to the south of the other animals.
15.33.3	The southern ones are made of gold and the northern ones of silver.
15.33.4	He offers the oblation for the Svishtakrit with the formula, "To the horse, to the goat, to the deer."
15.33.5	The oblations for the other animals are offered without any formula.
15.33.6	He offers oblation for the Ida with the formula, “To the horse, the goat, the deer.”
15.33.7	The oblations of the other animals are without any formula.
15.33.8	Then he puts the horse on the Vaitasa plank, as per the limbs.
15.33.9	He extends it towards the east, with the head facing towards the east.
15.33.10	Towards the west, with the head towards the east, the goat.
15.33.11	Then, taking up the Juhu and the Upamant, he says "To Prajapati" in a low voice, and "Recite the AnubrUhi of the oblation of the horse, goat and sheep" loudly.
15.33.12	Having gone beyond the Āśrāvyā (hymn), he says, "To Prajapati" in a low voice. "The oblation of horse, goat and calf is being offered. Let it be offered" in a loud voice.
15.33.13	When the Vasat is uttered, he strikes them together with the ladle into the fire.
15.34.1	"The sky is your back. The horse has gone beyond with steps. The horse has been conquered by the horse" with three recitations.
15.34.2	Then the priests of the southern (side) offer the oblations of the Parjanya-sacrifices, then those of the northern (side).
15.34.3	Then the priests of the northern (sidel offer the oblations, then those of southern (side).
15.34.4	He offers the oblations of those animals which he has brought from the forest and those which he has brought in from the village.
15.34.5	It has been said that the offerings of these animals are made in the Upavasatha rite.
15.34.6	Then he offers in the eastern direction, in front of the Vanaspati tree.
15.34.7	Then he performs the Vanaspati rite.
15.34.8	Then in front of the Svistakrt, he offers the first Asvatini oblation with the throat of a cow and a deer.
15.34.9	Then he makes the Svistakṛt offering.
15.34.10	At this time he offers a spoonful of clarified butter on the Āhavanīya fire, with the formula, "To the offered, svāhā."
15.35.1	Then he places this Prasaka on the fire, either to the south or to the west, facing east.
15.35.2	Its eastern half is like a ladle.
15.35.3	Similarly, the middle part.
15.35.4	The bottom is like a bowl.
15.35.5	And when he has spread the four (kinds of) grass, he says, 'The careful one brings them continuously. I shall recite the Stegas.'
15.35.6	He recites the Stegas when he reaches the flowing fire: 'With his teeth he seizes the frogs, with his jaws he swallows them.' The fourteen verses end with 'For effort svāhā.'
15.35.7	Then he offers two oblations, saying, "To the bull of the sacrifice svāhā; to the bull of the offering svāhā." There are thirty-six verses for the horse sacrifice, three verses with two feet each: "Which of these worlds have they established? The waters have stood firm, the bountiful ones."
15.35.8	Here he offers this Prasaka in the fire.
15.35.9	Then he offers this with the Saṃsrava.
15.35.10	The rite is similar to that of the Anuyājas.
15.35.11	Then before the last Anuyāja, he offers the Asvattejanī on the skin of a horse.
15.35.12	The rite is similar to the Patnī-Samyājās.
15.35.13	Then before his last Patnī-Samyāja, he offers the Aśvattejanī with an iron pot.
15.35.14	The Ukthya sacrifice with twenty-one Stotras comes to an end with the Patnī-samyājās.
15.35.15	Then, having performed the Vasatīvari rites, they observe the special fast.
15.36.1	Then, at midnight, they become aware.
15.36.2	Having taken the clarified butter in the morning, having brought the king (Soma) near, he performs the morning Pravargya rite.
15.36.3	When the morning Pravargva rite is over, he goes to the water.
15.36.4	He goes to the water with water.
15.36.5	He approaches the Atiratra sacrifice.
15.36.6	The Abhiṣava is well known.
15.36.7	The Grahas are well known.
15.36.8	It is similar to the Aśvinī Graha.
15.36.9	Having taken the Aśvin graha, he takes eleven ropes and approaches the sacrificial post.
15.36.10	Having released the rope with the knot at the top, the rope with the loop, and the rope near the fire, he offers eleven Prātaḥsavaniya animals, the Prajapatya animals.
15.36.11	Having performed the Vapa rites for them, they proceed to the morning pressing.
15.36.12	It concludes in a straight line.
15.36.13	They proceed to the midday pressing.
15.36.14	The pressing is well-known.
15.36.15	The Grahas are taken up as prescribed.
15.36.16	The rites are common for the Dakṣiṇās.
15.36.17	Having offered the oblations to Dakṣiṇā, he offers eight oblations for the union of the sacrifice, saying, "May the sacrifice proceed forward."
15.36.18	He gives the remaining Dakṣiṇās.
15.36.19	Having offered the oblations for Viśvakarman, he offers nine oblations for sufficiency, saying, "The past, the future, and the present."
15.36.20	The consecration of fire is lost.
15.36.21	Here one does not perform the rite of continuity.
15.36.22	The Madhyamdina Savana comes to an end in the straight line.
15.36.23	They move forward for the third Savana.
15.36.24	Having performed the Adityagraha, he takes up the Agrayaṇa.
15.36.25	Then he takes up the Ukthya.
15.36.26	The rites are similar to those of the Pavamana.
15.36.27	Having gone through the Pavamana, he moves in his own abode with the animals.
15.36.28	Their minds are the same, their deities are the same, the mutual recognition is the same, the offering of the Vasahomas is the same, their trees are the same, they have the same Svishtakrit, the same Ida, the same directions.
15.36.29	The same rite is performed at the Patnisamyajas.
15.36.30	Having offered the oblations to the wives, having come forward, having gratified the Dhruva, he offers the oblations to Bhuti and Anubhuti with the verses, "May my houses be with Agni, may the heat follow me." With these two Anuvakas.
15.36.31	Then he offers the oblation to Bhūta and Bhavyā with the verses, “Svāhā to Bhūta, Svāhā to Bhavyā.”
15.36.32	Then having offered the Samitsya-yajus in the Adhvara, he offers ten Agni-offerings.
15.36.33	The rite is similar to that of Avabhrtha.
15.36.34	Then having offered the second Avabhrtha-offering in this Avabhrtha, he offers ten Varuna-offerings with the formula, "Salutations to the king, salutations to Varuna."
15.36.35	Then he offers ninety oblations with the formula, "To Death svāhā, to Death svāhā." He offers eleven oblations with the formulas, "To Effort svāhā, To Energy svāhā."
15.36.36	Man has a life span of a hundred years, a hundred powers, and a hundred selves. He has overcome death from what is equal to the man.
15.37.1	Then this Atreya, who is white, who is deformed, who has a mole, who has red eyes, who is crooked, who is rough, who has deformed nails, who is humpbacked, who is impotent, who is naked, bathes.
15.37.2	He offers on his head, saying, "Svāhā to Jumbaka."
15.37.3	Here he gives him a hundred ways to go astray.
15.37.4	Then they make him pay tribute to the one who has won by arrows, saying, "Do not let there be cattle-thieves in my country."
15.37.5	The Avabhrtha is well known.
15.37.6	Having performed the Udayaniya-Iṣṭi, he prepares the Vasa-animal dedicated to Mitra-Varuna.
15.37.7	For it, there are nine white Vasa-animals dedicated to Surya, which are used for reproach.
15.37.8	Having performed the Vapa rites of those (cows), having placed the Patnivata cake in front of the Garhapatya, having placed the black, spotted, kiki-divi and vi-digai animals of Tvashtri, he offers them.
15.37.9	Having released them after having encircled them with fire, he makes the offering of ghee.
15.37.10	Then he offers the Pasupurodāśa oblations. The Pasupurodāsas are offered first.
15.37.11	Then before the Pasupurodasa and Svishtakrit oblations, he offers ten barley grains with the formula, "Salutations to the king, salutations to Varuna."
15.37.12	Then before the animal and Svishtakṛt oblations, he makes ten cow-dung offerings with the formula, "Mayobhū, Vāta, Abhivāta, Sras."
15.37.13	The animals are concluded in the prescribed manner.
15.37.14	Then having performed the Upavasatha-Iṣṭi, having erected a big sacrificial post in front of the Āhavanīya fire, he offers these animals on it, namely, the Agniya, the Indra-Agniya and the Asvinya.
15.37.15	Having performed the Vapa-offerings of them in the prescribed manner, he offers the Pasupurodāśa oblations.
15.37.16	The eight oblations to the gods are followed by the eight oblations to Agni, the remover of sins, in eight potsherds. This is the ten-oblation sacrifice.
15.37.17	These are the verses of invocation and praise for that sacrifice:
15.38.1	"I think of Agni, the first, the wise one."
15.38.2	Then before the Pasupurodāśa and the Svishtakṛt, he offers ten oblations for Brahmic glory, saying, "May the Brahman become one who has Brahmic glory."
15.38.3	Then before the Pasu-Svishtakṛt he offers ten oblatioins to Samnati, saying, "Agni has bowed to Samnati, the earth has bowed to Sammati."
15.38.4	The animals are concluded in the prescribed manner.
15.38.5	Here he performs for twelve days with the twelve Brahmoḍanas.
15.38.6	The performance of these has been described as elsewhere in the case of one with the two girdles.
15.38.7	Here he gives these to them, a hundred coins of one hundred palas each.
15.38.8	He gives them in a vessel of gold and silver, the two being of equal value.
15.38.9	He gives one golden vessel, a golden whip, a golden staff, and a golden vessel.
15.38.10	Then he gives a hundred to the Vīṇā and Gāthī, in the path of the hundred.
15.38.11	Then he offers the animals of the seasons, in the places of Agni, the seasons, the three tawny ones are the spring ones, the three with stripes are the summer ones, the three spotted ones are the rainy ones, the three speckled ones are the autumn ones, the three striped and speckled ones are the winter ones, the three covered ones are the ones of the cold season, for the year to be completed.
15.38.12	Then he performs the Devikā-offerings.
15.38.13	Then he performs the Traidhātavīya sacrifice.
15.38.14	Then he offers the Sautrāmaṇī sacrifice.
15.38.15	The horse sacrifice is concluded in three years.
15.38.16	The horse-sacrifice is concluded, the horse-sacrifice is completed.
16.1.1	One who is going to perform the twelve-day sacrifice becomes one or many.
16.1.2	For one who has performed with Dakṣiṇās,
16.1.3	If they are one or many, they initiate on the sixth day after the new moon.
16.1.4	They know the fire-sticks of the householder separately.
16.1.5	If they know the fire-stick of the householder, they churn out the Garhapatya and take up the Ahavaniya.
16.1.6	They bring the Vrata-wood from the village.
16.1.7	If they know separately, the householder alone first churns.
16.1.8	Those others sit around and churn, and then pour the Garhapatya.
16.1.9	Therefore, from that which has become one, they take up the Ahavaniya.
16.1.10	Having brought the Vrata-sticks from the village, they pour them down.
16.1.11	If later on another person comes, then having churned, he should pour half into the Garhapatya and half into the Ahavaniya. Having brought the Vrata-wood from the village, he should offer it.
16.1.12	The former rites summon him.
16.1.13	Now, the examination of the Pavamāna (Stotra).
16.1.14	The Adhvaryu first consecrates the householder, then the Hotṛ, then the Brahman, then the Udgātṛ, the Pratiprasthātṛ consecrates the Adhvaryu, the Prastôtṛ, the Praśâstṛ, the Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin, the Agnidhra consecrates the Pratiprasthatṛ, the Acchavaka, the Neṣṭṛ, the Potṛ, the Sadasya, the Unnetr consecrates the Agnidhra, the Gravastut, the Subrahmaṇya, the Pratihartṛ, himself last.
16.1.15	If they say, "The Adhvaryu alone is the purifier of all, he alone will purify us all," then he alone purifies them all.
16.1.16	Or one purifies another if they are studying.
16.2.1	For them the well-known Diksaniyesti is performed.
16.2.2	When the householder is addressed once, he first chooses the Rṣis of the householder, then the Hotṛ, then the Ātman, then the Brahman, then the Udgātṛ, then the Pratiprasthātṛ, then Prastôtṛ, then Praśāstṛ, then Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin, then Acchāvāka, then Sadasy, then Agnīdh, then Potṛ, then Neṣṭṛ, then Gravastut, then Unnetr, then Subrahmaṇya, then Pratihartṛ, then at the end.
16.2.3	The rest is the same as in the case of the Brahmana.
16.2.4	All of them are present at the oblations offered during the initiation ceremony.
16.2.5	The Adhvaryu makes the householder recite the text loudly on a black antelope skin.
16.2.6	The others follow him.
16.2.7	If they are studying, they may recite the text among themselves.
16.2.8	They perform the Vrata-rite according to their capacity, either one by one or many together.
16.2.9	Just as they perform the rites in the order of their seniority, so also in the rites of Ucchiṣṭa, Atigrahya, and Ṣoḍaśinī.
16.2.10	On the sixth day, they place the Uttaravedi if the fire is not already kindled.
16.2.11	Now if he has already built the fire, they place the Uttaravedi on the first day.
16.3.1	They have twelve days of consecration, twelve days of Upasads, and twelve days of Prāsuta.
16.3.2	Some say, "One should not build the fire for twelve days."
16.3.3	Others build it.
16.3.4	They proceed to the Upavasatha day with the well-known rite.
16.3.5	The Jyotiṣṭoma, Vaiśvānara and Atiratra are the Prāyaṇīya (rites).
16.3.6	When he takes the Vasatīvari waters to the third pressing at the midday pressing, he takes them from the Vasatīvarī pitchers. Having run to the Agnidhriya pitcher, he takes them at the junction of the shadow and the sun with the formulas, "These waters are full of oblations, the god is full of oblations; the sacrifice is full of oblation; may the sun be full of oblation."
16.3.7	Those who say that this is the unbroken continuity and that we shall again and again urge this.
16.3.8	He recites the Yajus of the Yajus-Yajusya or the Samyuvake Stotra.
16.3.9	Among them, the Jyotishoma Vaisvamaner is the Pratiraatra.
16.3.10	When it is completed, they turn around the enclosing sticks.
16.3.11	They strike the Prastara.
16.3.12	(The offerings) end with the Patnīsaṃyājas.
16.3.13	At the Ati-praisa, the Brahman restrains speech.
16.3.14	When the Vasatīvarī waters have been taken away, when the Subrahmaṇyā has been called, the Brahman releases speech.
16.3.15	The Adhvaryu offers the Upāṁshu-oblation, saying, "The form of the night."
16.3.16	The Agniṣṭoma sacrifice with Trivṛt (Stoma) and Rathantara (Sāman) is stretched out.
16.3.17	At the Mahendra Stotra, a chariot runs away.
16.3.18	By the word "chariot" he indicates the Mahendra Stotram.
16.3.19	This much is the craft done on this day.
16.3.20	He makes the continuity unbroken.
16.3.21	On the next day, the Ukthya with fifteen Stotras and Brihat-sāman is performed.
16.3.22	On this day, the Adhvaryu prepares the Mahendra stotra.
16.3.23	This much is the craft performed on this day. 
16.3.24	He makes the continuation unbroken.
16.3.25	Then on the next day, the Upavasatha rite is performed. The seventeenth day is Utkhya and Vairupa-sama.
16.3.26	On this day, the Adhvaryu prepares the Stotra for the Mahadendra (sacrifice).
16.3.27	This much is the work done on this day.
16.3.28	He performs the Ahina-santiti.
16.3.29	Then on the next day, the Ekavimsa (Stoma) is performed with the Ukthya and Viraj-saman, the Agnishtoma with Sodashin and Atigrahya.
16.3.30	Some say that the Sodashin is not to be performed with Atigrahya. The Ekavimsa is the twenty-first day.
16.3.31	It is the day of the New Moon.
16.3.32	They perform the Viraj in the Pratipat (day) and the Atigrahya in the Shashtra (day). This is one.
16.3.33	Then at the morning Pravargya, they churn for the Mahendra-cup, when both (the Adhvaryu and the Udgâtri) have set out.
16.3.34	They do not churn after that.
16.3.35	On this day the Adhvaryu prepares the Mahendra-stotra with the churning-sticks in his hand.
16.3.36	The Udgâtri churns on his right shoulder.
16.3.37	All of them make a hissing sound when he is born.
16.4.1	There is an inquiry about this.
16.4.2	One should offer on the Garhapatya for those who desire stability.
16.4.3	On the Agnidhra for those who desire offspring.
16.4.4	On the Shamitra for those who desire cattle.
16.4.5	On the Ahavaniya for those who seek heaven.
16.4.6	Ignoring that, he offers on the Ahavaniya alone, saying, "May we be of the same mind."
16.4.7	Having struck, he offers with the verse, "Agni moves in Agni, having entered."
16.4.8	This much is the craft done on this day.
16.4.9	He makes the continuity of the sacrifice uninterrupted.
16.4.10	On the next day, the Ukthya with Trinava Stotras, Shakra-sāman and Atigrahya Sāman is performed.
16.4.11	The Adhvaryu performs the Mahendra stotra with water mixed with the Avakira grass.
16.4.12	There is a discussion on this.
16.4.13	One should take the Prokṣaṇī water to the Cātvāla, one should take the Āsrava water to the Āsrava, one should mix the flour for the Puronuvākyā, one should mix together the flour for the Pūrṇāhuti.
16.4.14	Ignoring this, one should do as the Udgātṛs say.
16.4.15	The Udgātṛ priests, while singing the songs in the forest, think that they are pacifying the impurity with the Sāman chants.
16.4.16	If they were to tell the Adhvaryu, he should say, "Go and bathe."
16.4.17	This much is the craft done on this day.
16.4.18	He performs the uninterrupted continuity.
16.4.19	Then on the next day, the Trayastrimsa Stotra, the Raivata Saman, and the Saura Atigraha.
16.4.20	On this day the Adhvaryu performs the stotra of the Mahadendra with grass mixed with water.
16.5.1	The discussion about them has been stated.
16.5.2	This day is the self-sacrifice.
16.5.3	They do not offer the seasonal sacrifice to each other on this day.
16.5.4	When he says, "O Adhvaryus, do you offer," then the Adhvaryus sit down behind the sacrificial post, and offer the self-sacrifice. "We invoke the Adhvaryu-Asvins, the two Adhvaryus. May they drink the Soma with the Ritu, the approaching, the horse-drawing chariot. May they yoke it here for your release. May they pour the oblations with honey. Where have you gone? Now drink the Soma, O ye possessing strength. May they drink Soma with the Rtu, with the Vaushat."
16.5.5	When he says, "O householder, perform the sacrifice," then the householder, sitting with his back towards the Garhapatya, himself performs the Rtuyaja sacrifice. "We worship Agni, the householder, the Garhapaty. May these sacrificers who offer to you be well-housed. May you be well-householder with these sacrificers who are offering. May Agni, the householder and the Garhapatys, drink Soma with the Rtu."
16.5.6	O Agni, be patient with the kindling wood, be patient with oblation, be patient with Brahma, be patient with praise. With all the gods, with the season, with wealth, with the great, with the shining, with the shining gods, do thou pour the oblation.
16.5.7	With the season, do ye drink Soma.
16.5.8	This is the day of the Saṃvāśin.
16.5.9	They keep the calves on the north side and the mothers on the south side.
16.5.10	At the end of the Mahendra hymn, they mix the calves with their mothers between the Sadas and the Havirdhāna.
16.5.11	They tie the calves.
16.5.12	They release the mothers.
16.5.13	He performs the Mahendra hymn.
16.5.14	Then in the afternoon, the crafts are performed in the Uthyaparaya rites.
16.5.15	The Hotṛ praises the Paruṣa.
16.5.16	The Valakhilyas (sages) are the Maitrāvaruṇa priests.
16.5.17	The Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin priest recites the Vṛṣākapi hymn and the Acchāvāka recites the Eyamamaruta hymn.
16.5.18	The sixth day of the Prsthya Sāman comes to an end.
16.5.19	He performs the Ahīna Santati rite.
16.5.20	Then, having performed the Vasatīvari ceremony, they observe the Upasads with special rites.
16.6.1	Then on the next day they perform the Chandomas of twenty-four verses, with the Brihat-saman.
16.6.2	Then on the next day, they perform the Chendomas of forty-four verses,with the Rathantara-saman. Then on the next
16.6.3	day, they perform the Chandomas of sixty-four verses, again with the Brihatsamana.
16.6.4	Then on the next day they perform the twenty-fourth Agniṣṭoma sacrifice with Rathantara Sāman.
16.6.5	This day is without any speech.
16.6.6	On this day no one speaks to another.
16.6.7	One should speak either in a verse or in a Nārāśamsa verse.
16.6.8	They say, "If one does not speak, the sacrifice does not proceed."
16.6.9	The Brahman says, "Let us recite."
16.6.10	One should not pay attention to this.
16.6.11	"One should not pay" is the rule.
16.6.12	This day is not in the Anushtubh meter.
16.6.13	One does not recite in the Anushtubh meter.
16.6.14	If they were to recite in the Anushthubh meter, the Adhvaryu should recite in the Anushutabh meter.
16.6.15	"Those who are above the sun, or with whom the sun is together, may they impel our sacrifice." With this Gayatri addressed to the sun, one should take the Vasatavari waters.
16.6.16	"In your heart, in your mind." Having taken it out with this, one should bring the king with another Gayatri addressed to Soma.
16.6.17	Having recited the verse, "O Vishnu, thou art our last refuge," he should stand by the king with another Gāyatrī verse addressed to Vishnu.
16.6.18	If the ignorant one recites the Anushtubh verse, he should tell the Hotṛ, "I have transgressed."
16.6.19	The Hotṛ is the one who makes the king attain.
16.6.20	The Hotṛ makes him attain with those syllables.
16.6.21	If he thinks, "I am not desirous of the Veda, but of the Rgveda alone," then he should make them complete the two Vedas, the Rg and the Yajus.
16.6.22	One should not be concerned with this.
16.6.23	"One should not be" is the rule.
16.6.24	This Agniṣṭoma with twenty-four stomas and Rathantara Sāman is completed.
16.7.1	When it is completed, the kindlers go.
16.7.2	Having brought the kindling woods, they deposit them in the Āgnīdhra chamber.
16.7.3	When they have begun, he offers a spoonful of oblation on the Āhavanīya with the formula, "To Prajapati Svāhā" mentally.
16.7.4	Then they proceed to the assembly hall silently for the Stoma.
16.7.5	Having known that they have been poured together, the Adhvaryu, having mentally hastened towards the east, having mentally made this vessel, and mentally another vessel, takes up the Graha for Prajapati, saying, "Thou art taken with a formula; I take thee dear to Prajapati."
16.7.6	Having rubbed and settled it with the mind, saying, "This is what it is," he says, "This is your birthplace, for Prajapati you."
16.7.7	Then having touched water, taking the sacrificial grass, restraining speech, having run towards the west, he prepares the praise mentally.
16.7.8	He praises mentally.
16.7.9	He recites mentally.
16.7.10	He sings mentally.
16.7.11	He responds mentally.
16.7.12	The Hotṛ calls out with the mind, "This is the supreme one."
16.7.13	The Hotṛ calls out mentally.
16.7.14	The Adhvaryu responds mentally.
16.7.15	The Hotṛ praises mentally.
16.7.16	The Udgātṛ responds mentally.
16.7.17	When one reaches the end of this mental rite, the Hotṛ then loudly proclaims the four Hotṛs.
16.7.18	Therefore the Adhvaryu replies.
16.8.1	"O Hotar, thus, O Hotar, truly, O Hotar. O Hotar, I remember."
16.8.2	If the Hotar does not recite, then the one who is desirous of reciting the Hotar's part recites.
16.8.3	Therefore the Pratiprasthātṛ responds.
16.8.4	When they reach the other side, then the Adhvaryu, having hastened mentally towards the east, mentally takes up that cup.
16.8.5	He invites mentally.
16.8.6	He responds mentally.
16.8.7	Having offered with the mind, having uttered the Vasat and Anuvṣat, he takes the oblation.
16.8.8	Having invited with the mind, they consume.
16.8.9	Having cleansed the vessel with the mind, he gives it.
16.8.10	This Stoma is concluded in silence.
16.8.11	The Adhvaryu asks the priests, "Will you release speech at the tree or the sun or the stars?"
16.8.12	The Brahmana text says, "The sun is above the tree."
16.8.13	They release speech only when the sun is above the trees.
16.8.14	They sit here only.
16.8.15	They sit in the wife's hall.
16.8.16	Then the Adhvaryu and Pratiprasthātā, not moving too far, join the Dhiṣṇyas with the two sacrificial grass-blades. They say, "Here is Dhriti, here is Vidhriti, here is Ranti, here is Ramati."
16.8.17	They let loose the speech as it has been uttered.
16.9.1	Now, the discussion about the moving (of the Adhvaryus).
16.9.2	The Adhvaryu should move towards the southern Havirdhāna-shed, moving towards the axle.
16.9.3	By this the serpents became free from disease.
16.9.4	Then they cast off their old bodies.
16.9.5	They say that one who goes by an untrodden path, or strikes a tree or falls into a pit, or goes astray,
16.9.6	should go by the path of the Vasat-call.
16.9.7	This is indeed the path to heaven, namely the path of the vasat-call.
16.9.8	They say, "The path of the Vasat-call is indeed a path that leads away from here."
16.9.9	"The path of the Adhvaryu is indeed the path that leads to heaven. The path of the Advaryu is indeed a path leading to heaven."
16.9.10	They move along the path of the Adhvaryu.
16.9.11	When they are thus connected, he offers a spoonful of oblation into the Ahavaniya fire, saying, "May the calf, drinking its mother's milk, drinking the nourishment of wealth, drinking the nourishment, may it bestow on us prosperity, food, and energy, svāhā!"
16.9.12	Having gone out of the Ātala region, they recite: "May speech come, may speech approach, may speech approach. Whatever I did not do, whatever I did not do not, whatever I did wrong, whatever I did right, whatever I did wrongly, whatever I did rightly, in Prajapati, in Prajapata, in the father, may it be."
16.9.13	They stand at the end of speech.
16.9.14	Of these, the Prāyaniya Atiratra is the same as the Udayaniya.
16.9.15	Having concluded the Sattra, one should perform the Jyotistoma, the Agnistoma, the Catuṣṭoma, the Prsthashāmaniya, with a thousand as the Dakṣiṇā.
16.10.1	Now, the discussion of the Grahakalpa.
16.10.2	The first day begins with the Indra-Vayu Graha.
16.10.3	The second day begins with the Sukra Graha.
16.10.4-10	The third and fourth days are headed by the Aggrayan. The fifth day is headed by the Indra-Vayu. The sixth and seventh days are headed by Shukra. The eighth day is headed by Aggrayan. The ninth and tenth days are headed by Indra-Vayu.
16.10.11	The first Trirātra is Gāyatrī, the second is Jagatī, and the third is Trisṭubh.
16.10.12	The second Trirātra is Jagatī in the morning, Gāyatrī in the midday, and Trisṭubh in the evening.
16.10.13	The third Trirātra is Trisṭubha in the morning, Jagatī in midday, and Gāyatrī at evening.
16.10.14	Therefore, they offer with the right kind of verses.
16.11.1	Now, here is the discussion on the sacrifice of animals.
16.11.2	Some say that the animals should be dedicated to Indra and Agni.
16.11.3	This world belongs to Agni, the intermediate space to Vayu, and the sky to Indra.
16.11.4	When the animal is dedicated to Indra-Agni and the Vasat-offering is dedicated to Vayu, then they please these worlds and go to them, having been established in these worlds.
16.11.5	But those who undertake the rites not dedicated to Indra-Agnis, they do so as if they were taking away the evil without taking away the good.
16.11.6	Therefore, the animals should be dedicated to Indra- Agni. This is one view.
16.11.7-12	The animals of the Atiratra are on both sides, and in the middle the Indra-Agni ones. The Ekadasin animals are on both sides and in the middle Indra-Agni. All should be Agniya, this is one. All should belong to Indra, this is one All should belong Prajapati, this is one.
16.11.13	It is well known that on the first day they offer the first Ekadashini.
16.11.14	They perform the Varuna-upalambha rite for the Agni-offering.
16.11.15	Thus his animals do not exceed the ten middle days.
16.11.16	It is well known that on the best day they offer the best Ekadashi.
16.11.17	They perform the Vaishvadev rite either for Agni or Varuna.
16.12.1	They say, "If the consecration lasts for twelve days, the Upasads for twelve days, and the Prasuta for twelve days, how do these days become pleasing and endowed with animals?"
16.12.2	The three Ekadashin days, the Agniṣṭoma, the Vaisvadev and the Anubandhya.
16.12.3	These are the thirty-six animals and these are the thirty- six days.
16.12.4	Thus these days of his become pleasing and endowed with animals.
16.12.5	They say, "How is the year attained by the twelve-day rite?"
16.12.6	There are twelve full moons, twelve eights, and twelve new moons.
16.12.7	These are indeed the most fruitful days of the year.
16.12.8	By following these, the year is attained.
16.12.9	The twelve-day rite is completed.
16.12.10	The year is completed.
16.12.11	Thus the year is obtained in twelve days.
16.13.1	Those who are going to be initiated for the year come together.
16.13.2	They used to come together for the year, seeking to know each other's human and divine (matters).
16.13.3	And one becomes the maker of the Soma-drink.
16.13.4	They initiate themselves four days before the full moon of Magha.
16.13.5	Their purchase takes place on the Ekastaka day.
16.13.6	If they initiate themselves without knowing the exact date,
16.13.7	or if they know the exact date on the Ekastakā day, they initiate themselves four days prior to the full moon of Phalguna or Chaitra.
16.13.8	The buying of the animals takes place on the eighth day of the dark fortnight.
16.13.9	They do not perform the Ekastaka sacrifice.
16.13.10	The Sutiya sacrifice takes place in the bright fortnight.
16.13.11	The months are completed in the bright fortnight,
16.13.12	the birth, the equinoctial point, and the rising of the sun take place in the bright fortnights.
16.13.13	The twelve-day rite is common.
16.13.14	Similarly, on the sixth day, they place the Uttaravedi. If there is no fire-kindling, then on the first day, they place it.
16.13.15	If there is fire-kindling then on the first itself, they place the Uttara-vedi.
16.14.1	They have twelve days of consecration, twelve days of Upasad, and a year of prosperity.
16.14.2	Some say, "One should not kindle the fire in a year."
16.14.3	Some do so.
16.14.4	They proceed to the Upavasatha day with the well-known rite.
16.14.5	For them the well-known Jyotiṣṭoma, Vaisvānara and Prāyaṇīya Atiratra are completed.
16.14.6	When that is completed, they undertake the twenty-four-fold Ukthya, the Ārambhaṇīya, with both Sāmans.
16.14.7	Then they undertake the Abhipavamāna Sāman.
16.14.8	The Jyotiṣṭoma Agniṣṭoma, the Ukthya Gauḥ, the Ukthyo Āyuḥ, the Ukthyā Gauḥ, the Jyotiṣṭomam Agniṣṭoma.
16.14.9	They perform it with four (sacrifices).
16.14.10	The Rathantara and the Bṛhat are performed in reverse order.
16.14.11	The Pañcadaśa is the sixth day.
16.14.12	That is the month.
16.14.13	Having thus completed it, they proceed for five months.
16.14.14	Then they prepare for the sixth month.
16.14.15	There are three Abhiplvas (extra days) in the six days, making eighteen days.
16.14.16	The Prayaniya and the Armbhaniya.
16.14.17	Those are twenty days.
16.14.18	The Prishthya is the six-day Abhijit, the Parah-sama.
16.14.19	That is a month.
16.14.20	Now, the Vaiśvadevam.
16.14.21	Now, on the day of the equinoctial point, they perform the Ekavimśa Agniṣṭoma with the Brhat-sāman.
16.14.22	Its Atigrahya is solar, and the animal sacrifice is solar.
16.14.23	Some perform this on the day itself, saying that the day of the Diwakīrti is when the sun has risen.
16.14.24	Maudgalya says that the procedure of other days should be followed.
16.14.25	The Hotr of the Mahadivakirtti Stoma recites the Vikarna Brahmasama and the Agnistoma.
16.14.26	After the Visuvat, they perform the three inverted Svaras.
16.14.27	Then they perform the Visvajit.
16.14.28	Then they perform the Prastara-less six-day Prastara-rite.
16.14.29	This day is the last one of the Grahayaga rites beginning with the Trayastrimsa.
16.14.30	Then they perform the Abhipavamana six-day rite.
16.15.1	The Jyotiragniṣṭoma, the Ayusuktha, the Gauṣuktha, the Ayus uktha, the Gaușuktha, the Jyotiragnișṭoma.
16.15.2	They offer it in the same way.
16.15.3	The Brihat and Rathantara are reversed in the Prishtha.
16.15.4	The six-day Prsthya is at the beginning.
16.15.5	That is the month.
16.15.6	Having thus completed it, they proceed for five months.
16.15.7	Then they prepare the sixth month, which is to be prepared.
16.15.8	The two Abhijit sacrifices are of six days each, making twelve days.
16.15.9	The Goayushi sacrifice is of fourteen days.
16.15.10	Four days beyond the winter solstice, making eighteen days.
16.15.11	The Dasaraatra, the Mahaavrata and the Atiraatra.
16.15.12	That is a month.
16.15.13	This is the Goayushi sacrifice with a month as the base.
16.16.1	The Brihat and Rathantara Sāmans are not to be omitted. In the last month, the Prstha Sāmans are to be chanted once.
16.16.2	This is the second Gavāmayana.
16.16.3	The third is the Dashamasya.
16.16.4	The Abhiplvas and Akshiyas are the Angirasa-s' Gavāmayana;
16.16.5	The Prsthya and Akshiyas, the Adityas' Gavāmayanas;
16.16.6-9	The Agniṣṭomas are performed in the middle, and the Prāyaṇīya and Udayanīya on either side of it. This is the second course of Prajapati. All the Agniṣṭomas should be performed. This is the third course of Prajapatı. Now we shall discuss the proper order of the Grahas.
16.16.10	Now some take up the two Grahas, Sarasvatī and Viṣṇu, before the Prāyaṇīya and Udayanīya (sacrifices), saying, "Sarasvatī is speech, Viṣṇu is sacrifice; having surrounded speech and sacrifice in the middle, we shall go to the heaven without distress."
16.16.11	They say that the sacrifice is performed by speech, and therefore Sarasvati is trustworthy. And whatever is the sacrifice, that is Vishnu.
16.16.12	It does not become our Brahman.
16.16.13	One should not take the two Grahas of Sarasvati and Vishnu. This should not be done.
16.16.14	This should not be done is the rule.
16.17.1	Now, then, the taking of the two Grahas, namely, of Asvins and Dabhi.
16.17.2	One should take the Adabhya cup at the Prayaniya (Satra), the Anshu at the Visuvat, the Adabhya at the Mahavrata. Both the Prayaniya and the Visuvat are taken together, both the Mahavrata are taken together.
16.17.3	Wherever one may take them, this is another way.
16.17.4	Now the taking of the Parahsana cups.
16.17.5	These are the Parahsamans. They are taken from the day before the Visuva (equinox) onwards for three days. They are taken in the reverse order. "He takes it with the formula, "Thou art taken with a support. I take thee dear to the waters and plants." "He takes it with, "Thou are taken with a support, I take thee dear unto the plants and creatures." "He then takes it with, “Thou art taken with support. I take Thee dear to Prajapati."
16.17.6	Then on the day of the vernal equinox, the planets are taken up with Mercury at the head.
16.17.7	The rite is the same as in the case of the Graha taken up at the Aggrayanasaftra.
16.17.8	Having taken the Āgrayana, he takes three from the Parāsaṃnā. "He says, "Thou art taken with the Upayāmasaṃnā. I take thee agreeable to the waters. Thou art taken with the Upāyasamānā. I take you agreeable to the plants. Thou art taken, I take thee agreeable for the plants. Thou are taken, I take you agreeable for the offspring. Thou art taken. I take thee acceptable to Prajapati."
16.17.9	Then he takes up the Sūrya-cup with the Sūrya verse.
16.18.1	"Having recited the verse, "O Tāraṇi, thou seest all," he says, "Thou art taken up with a view to being offered; I take thee agreeable to Surya, the shining one."
16.18.2	Having wiped it around, he places it, saying, "This is thy birth-place; for thee unto Surya, the shining."
16.18.3	Then he takes the turned-up ones, saying, "Thou art taken with a support. I take thee agreeable to the offspring, to Prajapati. Thou art taken with a suppoṛt. I take thee agreable to the plants, to the offspring. Thou art taken, with a support.I take thee agreeable to water, to the plants."
16.18.4	This is the Brāhmaṇa text regarding the seven days of the Atigrahya Soma being taken.
16.18.5	Thereafter, from the day of the equinoctial point onwards, he takes the Soma for three days in reverse order, alternating between the Vaisvānara and Aditya rites.
16.18.6	"You are taken with the Upāṁsu formula for the sake of offspring. I take you agreeable to Prajāpati."
16.18.7	Then the Vaisvânara rite.
16.18.8	"May Visvakarman be satisfied with the oblation." Having recited this, he takes up the Soma with the formula, "Thou art taken with a view to being offered; I take thee agreeable to plants and progeny."
16.18.9	Then he takes up the Aditya Soma.
16.18.10	"May Aditi be satisfied." Having recited this he takes up the soma with the formula, “Thou art taken with the view to being offered, I take thee agreeable for water and plants."
16.18.11	Then he (the Adhvaryu) takes up the Visvakarman Soma.
16.18.12	Now the Aditya.
16.18.13	Now, after three days, having gone back to the Aditya and Vaiskarma deities, he performs the Mahavrata rite.
16.18.14	Both are performed together on the Mahavrata day.
16.18.15	Now, on the Mahavratai day, he takes the Prajapati-related Atigraha.
16.18.16	They offer thee the sacrifice, all ye gods. Thou art taken with a vow; I take thee for Prajapati.
16.18.17	Having wiped it, he places it, saying, "This is thy place; for thee to Prajapati."
16.19.1	Now then the discussion of the animal sacrifice.
16.19.2	The praise of the Indra-Agni (sacrifice) has been stated.
16.19.3	The animals of the Atiratra are on both sides of the middle, and the Indra-Agni ones in the middle.
16.19.4	The Ekadasin animals are on both sides, and the Indra Agni ones in the middle
16.19.5	All should be Agniya. This is one view.
16.19.6	All should be Indra-Agni. This is one opinion.
16.19.7	All should belong to Prajapati. This is one option.
16.19.8	All of them should be of eleven days. This is another view.
16.19.9	It is well known that the eleven-day Soma sacrifices are performed in the third day of the excellent ten-day Soma sacrifice. The Ekādaśin is performed on the eleventh day.
16.19.10	Nine days are left over after the completion of the Apasūna.
16.19.11	Among them, they offer these nine Brahmanas and animals to the Vaisnava Vamanas.
16.19.12	Among them, the one who follows this path offers the Barhaspatya animal at the Visuva sacrifice.
16.19.13	They perform the Sauri Upaalambha for him.
16.19.14	If they do not obtain these nine Brahmavats, then they make the middle days of the year, the nine Iindra-Agni animals.
16.19.15	Thus they proceed. The Savaniya animal of the Visuvat falls on Indra-Agni.
16.19.16	They make the Sauri animal at the Upalambha.
16.19.17	The Savitra animal at the Mahavrata.
16.19.18	The Prajapati and the Indra are the two sacrificial posts.
16.20.1	The next day he prepares for the Mahavrata sacrifice an unlimited number of chariots, an unlimited number of drums, as many cows as there are chariots, clarified butter, a skin of a cow with its tail, a skin of an ox, a drum made of earth, a skin of bull with its tail, and a Brahman and a Shudra, both wet, and a skin-maker.
16.20.2	The Hotr prepares the wooden stool, the Adhvaryu the two wooden supports, the Hotrakas the wooden seat, the Udgata the wooden seat of Udumbara wood, and the Sanda the wooden seat.
16.20.3	The bow, the hundred-stringed bow, the leather bag, the woollen cloth, the leather bag with a handle, these are the things for the wives.
16.20.4	The wooden seat with a wooden frame, the pair, and the unlimited number of female slaves, and as many water-pots.
16.20.5	Then on the twenty-fifth day of the Mahāvrata they perform the Agniṣṭoma with Rathantara Sāman.
16.20.6	The rite is similar to the Graha of Indra.
16.20.7	Having taken up the Graha of Mahendra, he arranges the following materials:
16.20.8	Having dug a pit behind the Agnidhra, they cover it with the skin of a bull with the hair turned upwards.
16.20.9	Having raised his tail, he stands on the bank.
16.20.10	Here he places the drums in the directions.
16.20.11	They stand on the bank, striking them without striking.
16.20.12	Then the chariots, having gone around the Devayajana, stand in the north.
16.20.13	Of them, the one with three bows is the chief, the prince.
16.21.1	Therefore, he places the skin of the animal to be offered to Agni and Soma on the north of the sacrificial post.
16.21.2	At the right time, he cuts it with a sharp knife.
16.21.3	Then the Brahman and the Śūdra stand between the Sadas and the Havirdhāna, holding the wet skin of the animal.
16.21.4	The Hotr places the spleen.
16.21.5	The Adhvaryu spreads the two mats, the Hotr's assistants spread the mats.
16.21.6	The Udgātṛ goes up the Sanda-ladder of Udumbara wood.
16.21.7	He takes up the arrow with a hundred strings.
16.21.8	The wives of the Udgātṛ sit around him with their garments, shawls and aprons.
16.21.9	Then at the southern end of the altar, in the enclosure of the Kṛṣṇala wood, the two (priests) play together.
16.21.10	Then having placed the water-pots of the female slaves, they sit around the Marjālīya.
16.21.11	Then the Adhvaryu, seated on the Kūrcas, begins the Mahendra Stotra.
16.21.12	He recites the Mahendra Stotram.
16.21.13	At the present Sāman, he gives the instructions: "The racers run, the Dundubhi drums are beaten, the sprinklers sprinkle, the Agnīdhra places the ladle in the fire, the Upabarhas are placed, the mortar is raised, the Pratiprasthātṛ places the Soma for the Somas."
16.21.14	They do as instructed.
16.21.15	The racers run.
16.21.16	The Dundubhi drums beat.
16.21.17	The voices speak.
16.21.18	The wives of the Udgātṛ sing to him with their garments, with their shawls, with their bells.
16.22.1	There is a Sama called Bhadra.
16.22.2	It is sung to that (Sama).
16.22.3	Then this prince, having three bows, puts on the skin.
16.22.4	The Brāhmaṇa stands near him, saying, "Do not go beyond, do not go too far."
16.22.5	It is then again hidden by the three (parts of the body).
16.22.6	Then these two, the Brāhmaṇa and the Śūdra, are engaged in making wet leather. The Brāhmaṇa says, "These are the good ones, these have done good."
16.22.7	The Śūdra says, "These have gone out, these have done bad."
16.22.8	The Brāhmaṇa conquers.
16.22.9	The Śūtra is destroyed.
16.22.10	The two (priests) are united.
16.22.11	Then, having placed the water-pots of the maids, they dance around the Marjālīya, having struck the supports, and striking the right foot, they sing this Madhu.
16.22.12	When they have been covered once, he recites the first (verse).
16.23.1	The cows are fragrant, the cows are fragrant like guggula, the cows are the mothers of ghee, may they be abundant here. This is the honey of Hemahu.
16.23.2	Having placed the feet on the ground, they step on the right foot.
16.23.3	The second (verse) is recited by those who have not yet performed the first (verse). "The cows drank the water of the Ganges at the mouth of the river, they drank the water of Sarasvati, they plunged into the eastern waters, this is the honey of the golden mountain."
16.23.4	Having struck the feet of the standing ones, they strike the right feet.
16.23.5	He recites the third verse, or the first verse, of those who are excluded. When the two Rākhāndyas speak, when the two Māṅkīradāśakas are anxious to have peace in the village, when the village is afflicted by a bull, when the bull is afflicted by the village, when it is afflicted by the bull, when it is suffering from the bull, when the village suffers from the bull, then it is afflicted by Haima. This is honey.
16.23.6	Then, standing to the north of the Marjālīya (fire), he makes them recite this verse: "This is the honey, the sweet nectar, this Soma, the great, pressed, Indra has drunk it, the giver of wealth. This is honey."
16.23.7	From here onwards they recite only "This is honey, this is honey, this honey."
16.23.8	Of these, the Prāyaniya Atiratra is the same as the Udayaniya.
16.23.9	Having performed the Sattra, one should perform the Jyotiṣṭoma, the Agnistoma, the Catuṣṭoma, and the Pañcaśaḍahoma, with a thousand Dakṣiṇās.
16.24.1	One desiring heaven should be initiated for the Dvādaśāha.
16.24.2	Its initiation is unlimited, and the Upasads are twelve.
16.24.3	He buys the king in such a way as he thinks: "When I have two nights left, the former day will be fulfilled on the day of fasting before the new moon and the latter on the latter."
16.24.4	It is fulfilled for him in that way.
16.24.5	The Abhijit is the former day, the Gati is the latter.
16.24.6	The Jyotistoma Agnistoma is the former day.
16.24.7	He attains brilliance by that.
16.24.8-16	The Atiratra with all Stoma is the next one. For the attainment of all, for the securing of all. The Gayatra is the eastern (hymn). The Trishtup is the western. The Rathantara is the eastern (verse). The Brihat is the western. The Vaikhanasa is the eastern (chant). The Sodasi is the western. (The hymn) Havishman is the eastern (day).
16.24.17	The Havishkrit is the final (Sutra).
16.24.18	The two fortnights are not different, they are different in strength, so says the Brahmana.
16.24.19	The two-night rite is concluded.
16.24.20	One who is going to perform the three-night rite
16.24.21	procures a thousand (cows).
16.24.22	In that (rite) there are (verses) like 'The elevated one, the low one, the dwarf'.
16.24.23	Then this is his thousandth, the other one is scratched and anointed.
16.24.24	He consecrates.
16.24.25	He buys Soma with Rohini, Pingala and Ekahanya.
16.24.26	There are twelve Upasads.
16.25.1	The first day is the Agniṣṭoma.
16.25.2	It has a three-fold morning pressing, a fifteen-fold midday pressing and a seventeen-fold third pressing.
16.25.3	Having offered the oblations pertaining to Dakṣiṇā in the Āgnīdhra (fire), he offers the Sruva-oblation with the verse, "Thou bringest a thousand. The skin of the elevated and the low is on both sides. May the thousand be shared by me along with progeny and cattle. May wealth again enter me."
16.25.4	The first of these three sets of thirty is taken.
16.25.5	He makes the continuity of the Ahīna sacrifice.
16.25.6	On the second day, the Upavasatha.
16.25.7	Its Pratsutra Sâman has fifteen verses, the Madhyandina Sâman seventeen, and the Tṛtīyasutra Sâman twenty-one.
16.25.8	Having offered the oblations pertaining to Dakṣiṇā in the Āgnidhra (fire), he offers the Sruva-oblation with the verse, "O Agni, the Angiras, the bestower of food, the bestower, may you bestow food on me. Protect me. Do not harm me. May you share with me a thousandfold, along with progeny and cattle. May prosperity return to me."
16.25.9	The first of these three sets of thirty is being taken.
16.25.10	He makes the continuity of the sacrifice unbroken.
16.25.11	On the third day there is an Atiratra.
16.25.12	Its morning pressing has seventeen stomas, the midday pressing twenty-one, the evening pressing twenty-nine, the Agniṣṭoma Sāman thirty-three, the Udgīthas sixteen.
16.25.13	The first night is of sixteen verses, the others of fifteen. The Rathantara is the Sāman of three verses.
16.25.14	Having offered the Dakṣiṇā oblations in the Agnidhra chamber, he offers the Sruva-oblation with the verse, "Thou art the support of a thousand, thou art the Vāmana of Viṣṇu. Do thou share with me the thousand along with progeny and cattle. May prosperity again enter me."
16.25.15	Vāmana is the first of these forty.
16.25.16	Here, one does not make a continuous series of faults.
16.26.1	Then, having gone around the Agni-dhrā with the right, he should make the sacrificer smell the Dronakalaśa at the end of the Ahavanīya fire. "He should say, "Smell the pot, O Urudhārā, O Payasvatī, may the drops enter you like the rivers into the ocean. May you share with me a thousand, along with offspring and cattle. May prosperity again enter me."
16.26.2	He makes him prosper with cattle and wealth. He who knows this becomes prosperous with cattle and wealth." So says the Brahmaṇa.
16.26.3	Now, indeed, it is said:
16.26.4	"Having approached the Agnidhra with her, one should offer while standing in front of her, facing west."
16.26.5	He offers to her, standing in front of her, facing the west, with the verse, "You both strove, you did not conquer, you did not lose. Neither of you conquered the other. O Indra and Vishnu, when you strove, you divided the thousand into three parts."
16.26.6	The thousand is divided into three parts in the three-day sacrifice.
16.26.7	He makes it a thousand.
16.26.8	He makes it of the size of a thousand. This is the Brahmanical text.
16.26.9	Then he offers oblations to her forms: "To the dark one, svāhā! To the white one, svāha!"
16.26.10	Then, having risen from her, he mutters in her right ear, "O Agniye, O Ranti, O Aditi, O Sarasvati, O beloved, O most beloved, O great, O famous, these are your names. May you tell the gods of my good deeds."
16.26.11	He informs the gods of him. The gods recognize him. This is the Brahmanical text.
16.27.1	Then he recites over the thousandth (brick) which is being carried towards the north between the two mounds, "May it lead me to the world of heaven, may it lead me to a world of light, may it lead to all the worlds of merit, may it lead us to the firm abode, may wealth return to me with offspring and cattle."
16.27.2	He establishes him in progeny, cattle and wealth.
16.27.3	He who knows this becomes one who has progeny, cattle and is wealthy.
16.27.4	Now, indeed, it is said:
16.27.5	One should give it to the Agnidhra, the Brahma, the Hotri, the Udgâtri or the Adhvaryu.
16.27.6	It is given to him as a thousand, and accepted by him as a thousand. So says the Brahmana.
16.27.7	Now, indeed, it is said:
16.27.8	"He who, not knowing this, accepts her, should accept her thus: 'You are one, not a thousand; I accept you as one, not a hundred.'
16.27.9	He who knows this accepts her as one, not as a thousand." So says the Brahmana.
16.27.10	Now, indeed, it says:
16.27.11	"Thou art the good, the prosperous, the well-loved. Enter me, the good, the prospering, the well-beloved." So he says.
16.27.12	"He enters him as the good, the prosperity, the well-loving. He does not injure him." So says the Brahmaṇa.
16.27.13	Now indeed it is said:
16.27.14	"Brahmin scholars say: 'One goes to the thousandth, the thousandth, and the thousandth.'
16.27.15-21	If one were to release it towards the east, one would go to a thousand and a thousand. That thousand is not known. One would not know the world of heaven. One releases it towards the west. It revolves around that thousand. Knowing that, one goes to the world of heaven.
16.27.22	He releases the sacrificer towards the east, towards the west.
16.27.23	"Quickly, a thousand is born, the last one is taken away, the first one goes to the gods." This is the Brahmanical statement.
16.27.24	By this very (rite) Rauhineya Krotuni, Kaulaśva, Yāska, Rtuमुख, and Viharita performed (sacrifices).
16.27.25	Then the Garga Mśaka, a student of Āruṇi, came.
16.27.26	He, not seeing the arrangement, said, "Is it not said to be one day?"
16.27.27	He replied, "No."
16.27.28	He went to him.
16.27.29	He said to him, "That."
16.27.30	He indeed performs the entire sacrifice.
16.27.31	This is called the Garga three-day sacrifice.
16.28.1	One who is about to ascend four heroes consecrates for the four-day sacrifice.
16.28.2	Its initiation is unlimited. There are twelve Upasads.
16.28.3	Its days are indeed the Agniṣṭoma alone, but with twenty-four Pavamāna hymns, and the Udyat Stoma. This is one thing.
16.28.4	One Agniṣṭoma, two Ukthas, and then the Atiratra.
16.28.5	The Chandogas may ask about the option of the Sāman. This is another thing.
16.28.6	Here, the sacrificer Atri, the son of faith, did not bow down before the four kinds of energy - brilliance, sense-control, brahminical splendour, and food.
16.28.7	Desiring to attain these desires, one initiates for the Caturātra.
16.28.8	Its initiation is unlimited, and the Upasads are twelve.
16.28.9	Its days are indeed the Agniṣṭoma alone. These four Agniṣṭomas should be performed. This is one view.
16.28.10	One Agniṣṭoma, two Ukthyas, and then an Atiratra.
16.28.11	The Chandogas may ask about the option of the Sama. This is another.
16.28.12	One desiring prosperity consecrates himself for the Catuṣṭoma.
16.28.13	His consecration is unlimited, and the Upasads are twelve.
16.28.14	Now it is said:
16.28.15	The Upasads should be Purorāśin.
16.28.16	In the first four-day period, he offers the Agniya oblation of clarified butter and the Agniya oblations of eight potfuls of cooked rice in the evening and morning.
16.28.17	In the second four-day period he offers the Soma oblation of clarified butte and the Soma oblations of four potfuls of cooked in the evening and the morning.
16.28.18	In third four-day period offers the Viṣṇu oblation of clarified buuter and the Viṣṇo oblations of three potfuls of cooked
16.28.19	His Stoma is Trivrit and Saptadasa.
16.28.20	Breath is Trivrit, food is Saptadasa. Prajapati is Saptadasa;
16.28.21	Prajapati was born from breath and food.
16.28.22	From breath and food, indeed, Prajapati was born.
16.28.23	From breath, and food, indeed the Sacrificer is born.
16.28.24	The Agniṣṭoma days should have the Caturvimśa and Pañcadaśa Pavamānas. This is one view.
16.28.25	One Agniṣṭoma, two Ukthas, and then the Atiratra.
16.28.26	They should ask about the option of the Chandoma and the Sāman. This is another view.
16.29.1	One who desires offspring, one who desires to be free from enemies, one who desires cattle, one who desires the end of speech, should perform the consecration for five nights.
16.29.2	His consecration is unlimited, with twelve Upasads.
16.29.3	The days of this sacrifice are three-fold, five-fold, seven-fold, twenty-five-fold, the Agniṣṭoma, the Ukthya, the Ukthhya, the Agniṣtoma, the Mahāvrata, the Viśvajit, the Sarvapṛṣṭha and the Atiratra.
16.29.4	Those who are going to perform the sacrifice with the Sarasvata rite, prepare two kinds of cattle, one with eleven bulls and the other with one hundred bulls.
16.29.5	Their sacrificial post is made of ashvattha wood, and their fire-altar of the same wood.
16.29.6	For that is the way to heaven.
16.29.7	They have a wheel-shaped altar.
16.29.8	Their sacrificial post is made in the shape of a pestle.
16.29.9	They are initiated at the river Sarasvati.
16.29.10	For them this Trivrt Agniṣṭoma alone is completed.
16.29.11	When that (Soma) is placed, they carry the sacrificial post, they carry the Dhishnya-bricks, they make the Agni-bricks equal in size, as they have to be made equal in size.
16.29.12	They proceed with the same six-day Pañcadaśa-stoma.
16.29.13	Every day, the sacrificers, while putting on and taking off their robes, crying out, desiring to win the cattle, when they make ten hundred, then one rising.
16.29.14	When they make a hundred thousand, then one rising
16.29.15	When they are defeated or when they are conquered, then one rising at Plaksha or Prasravana.
16.30.1	Now, they say, this is the Munyayanam.
16.30.2	The ascetic Kharivivadhi offers a cake on eight potsherds to Agni, the lord of vows, in the water of the Sarasvati.
16.30.3	This well-known offering is concluded.
16.30.4	Then he offers this Savaniṣṭoma sacrifice: an offering to Agni on eight potsherds, to Indra on eleven potsherds, and to the All-gods on twelve potsherds.
16.30.5	One who has performed the entire sacrifice or one who has performed it in a different order, resumes it.
16.30.6	Every day, while the sacrificer is engaged in the laying down of the Samit-sticks, he recites the verse, "May I desire the unassailable." When they obstruct him, or when they cut off his Khari-stick, then he rises up once and goes to the Plaksha tree or to the Prasravana.
16.31.1	One who desires cattle initiates for seven nights.
16.31.2	His initiation is unlimited, and the Upasads are twelve.
16.31.3	The days of this sacrifice are the Agniṣṭoma with three stomas, the Ukthya with fifteen stomas, the Uthyas with seventeen and twenty-one stomas, the Trinava Ukthya, the Pañcaviṃśa Agniṣṭoma, the Mahāvrata, the Viśvajit, the Sarvapṛṣṭha and the Atiratra.
16.31.4	The Brhadrathaṃtara is the first of the days. The Viśvajit is directly performed in the last days. The Pṛṣṭhas are performed in the last.
16.31.5	One who desires Brahmic glory performs the consecration for eight nights.
16.31.6	His consecration is unlimited, with twelve Upasads.
16.31.7	The days of this are the Trivṛt Agniṣṭoma, the Pañcadaśa Ukthya, the Saptadaśa Ukthyas, the Ekavimśa Ukthhya, the Trinava Ukthya, and the Trayastrimsa Ukthya, then the Pañcaviṃśa Agniṣṭoma with the Mahāvrata and Viśvajit, and the Sarvapṛṣṭha Atiratra.
16.31.8	When the creatures are afflicted by hunger, or when there is a disease of cattle, one performs the Navarātra consecration.
16.31.9	Its consecration is unlimited, and it has twelve Upasads.
16.31.10	They perform this three-day rite three times, namely Jyotiḥ, Gauḥ, and Āyuḥ.
16.31.11	The Atiratra is the last day of these.
16.31.12	One who desires offspring, one who desires to be free from enemies, one who is practising witchcraft, one who is being practised against, one who is about to consecrate himself for the Dasara-rite, having offered the Dashahotar oblation, consecrates himself for the Dasahara-rite.
16.31.13	His consecration is unlimited, and the Upasads are twelve.
16.31.14	Its days are the Trivrt Agniṣṭoma, the Agniṣṭoma with Agniṣṭut, and the Agnīṣomīya Sāmans.
16.31.15	The Pañcadaśa Ukthya, the Indra Sāmans.
16.31.16	The Trivṛt Agniṣṭoma is performed in the Visvedevī-sūktas.
16.31.17	The Saptadaśa Agniṣṭoma in the Prajāpati-sūktas, with intense Soma.
16.31.18	The Ekavimśa Ukthya in the Sūryasūktas.
16.31.19	Saptadaśa Agniștoma in the Prajāpater sūktas, with Upāhvaya.
16.31.20	The Trinava Agniṣṭomas are performed in the Aindrī-sūktas on both sides.
16.31.21	The Trayastrimsa Ukthya in Visvedevī-sutras.
16.31.22	The Vishvajit, the Sarvaprstha and the Atiratra are the concluding sacrifices.
16.32.1	Those who desire offspring perform the Ekadasa-day sacrifice.
16.32.2	Its initiation is unlimited and the Upasads are twelve.
16.32.3	Its days are the Jyoti and the Atiratras.
16.32.4	The six-day Prsthya sacrifice.
16.32.5	Three Chandomas.
16.32.6	Then the Atiratra.
16.32.7	Then the Aheenavidhi, the six-day Pṛṣṭhya sacrifice.
16.32.8	Three chandomas.
16.32.9	The tenth day.
16.32.10	Now the Atiratra.
16.32.11	Now this Paundarika, a twelve-day sacrifice, with a thousand horses as Dakshina.
16.32.12	Its consecration is unlimited, with twelve Upasads.
16.32.13	Its days are connected, a six-day period.
16.32.14	Three Chandomas.
16.32.15	The tenth day.
16.32.16	The Atiratra now.
16.32.17	He gives a thousand every day.
16.32.18	On the last day, he gives a thousand horses.
16.32.19	Now they say that this is the Jyotirayaṇa.
16.32.20	Some say that it is the Bharata Dvādaśāha.
16.32.21	He consecrates himself.
16.32.22	His consecration is unlimited, with twelve Upasads.
16.32.23	Its days are the Jyotiratītrātra.
16.32.24	The Jyotiragniṣṭoma.
16.33.4-14	The Prātyangira six-day ritual. Now the Atiratra. Now the northern fourteen-day ritual.  Atiratra. The three days called Jyotiḥ, Gauḥ and Āyuḥ. The Prātyangirā six-day ritual The Prātyaṅgira three-day ritual. Now the Atiratra Now the eastern fifteen-day ritual. Atiratra. The three days called Jyotir, Gauḥ and Ayus.
16.33.15	Ten nights.
16.33.16	Now the Atiratra.
16.33.17	He arranges the tenth day and the Atiratra and the Mahāvrata.
16.33.18	It is indeed a sixteen-night sacrifice for one who is not a brahmin.
16.33.19	Now the northern fifteen-night sacrifice.
16.33.20	Atiratra.
16.33.21	Three-fold Agniṣṭoma.
16.33.22	The three days are Jyotiḥ, Gauḥ, and Āyuḥ.
16.33.23	The six-day Prsthya.
16.33.24	The three days are the Prātyangira.
16.33.25	Then the Atiratra.
16.33.26	Then the seventeen-day (rite).
16.33.27	Atiratra.
16.33.28	One five-day (rite),
16.33.29	Ten days,
16.33.30	Then the Atira-tra.
16.33.31	He arranges the tenth day and the Atiratra and the Mahāvrata.
16.33.32	It is indeed the Brahmanical eighteen-day (rite) alone.
16.33.33	Then the twenty-day (rite):
16.33.34	Atiratra,
16.33.35	The three days beginning with Jyotiḥ, Gauḥ and Āyuḥ.
16.33.36	The six days of the Prsthya Sāman.
16.33.37	The three days of the Prati-Sāman.
16.33.38	Then the Atiratra.
16.33.39	Then the Ekavimśatirātra.
16.33.40	Atiratra.
16.33.41	The six-day Prsthya Saman.
16.33.42	These seven days are the middle ones of the year.
16.33.43	The six Prati-Saman days.
16.33.44	Then the Atirātra.
16.34.1	Now the twenty-four-day (rite) beginning with the past.
16.34.2	Four days, namely Atiratra, Jyotiṣṭoma, Gauriṣṭoma, and Ayus, then ten days, then Atiratra.
16.34.3	He places the tenth day and Atiratra together with the Mahāvrata.
16.34.4	It is indeed the twenty-five-day rite for the non-Brahmana.
16.34.5	Now the twenty-four day rite beginning with the future.
16.34.6	Jyotiṣṭoma Atiratra.
16.34.7	The Prsthya (Satra) is of six days.
16.34.8	They perform the Trayastrimsa (Satra) after the Trayastrimsas (Satra).
16.34.9	Then they perform the Prsthya Satra which is not prescribed.
16.34.10	They perform a Trayastrimsa Upakrama in the Trivrtti (Stoma) with Rathantara Saman.
16.34.11	Its Pavamana Stotras are of twenty-four stomas.
16.34.12	In the fifteenth Ayana they perform the Trinava Uktha with the Brihat Sama.
16.34.13	In it there are twenty-eight Pavamana verses.
16.34.14	In the seventeenth Ayana they perform Ekavimsa Uktha with the Vaivavasa Sama.
16.34.15	In that there are thirty-two Pavamana verses
16.34.16	In the twenty-first Ayana they perform their own Ekavimsa with the Vaivava Sama.
16.34.17	His Pavamānas are thirty-six in number.
16.34.18	They perform the Ukthya at their own place, with the Sakvara Sāman.
16.34.19	His Pavamānas become forty in number.
16.34.20	At their own place they perform the Ukthhya, with the Raivata Sāman. The Ukthya is performed at the place of the Raivata.
16.34.21	His Pavamanas become forty-four in number.
16.34.22	They perform the Trayastrimsa (Stoma) after the Trayastrimsas.
16.34.23	There are eight forty-four Pavamana verses.
16.34.24	Then they perform the turning back of the six-day Pañcadaśa (Stoma).
16.35.1	They perform the Trivrt (Stoma) on the Trivrt.
16.35.2	For the fulfilment of the Stotras and for prosperity.
16.35.3	They perform the Jyotiragniṣṭoma.
16.35.4	Then the Atiratra.
16.35.5	Now the thirty-night (rite).
16.35.6	The Jyotiṣṭoma Atiratra.
16.35.7	The six-day Prājāpatya.
16.35.8	They perform the Trayastrimsa (rite) from the Trayastrimsat.
16.35.9	They perform (the rite) with thirty-nine (sāmans).
16.35.10	They perform (with the rite) with twenty-one (sāmans)
16.35.11	They perform the Agniṣṭoma with three layers.
16.35.12	They perform Indrastoma with fifteen (sāmans),
16.35.13	They perform (rite) with seventeen (sāmans)
16.35.14-21	They perform the Ekavimsa (Stoma). They perform the Catu-vimsa (Stoma) They perform the Prishthas (Stoma) from the Catu-vishas. They perform the Trayastrimsa (Stoma) in the Trayastrimsha (Stoma). They perform the Trinava (Stoma). Two Ekavimsa Stomas are performed. They perform four Catushtoma Stomas. Now the Atiratra (Stoma).
16.35.22	Now the thirty-two-night (rite).
16.35.23	An Atiratra (rite).
16.35.24	Nine nights with Jyoti, Gau, and Ayus.
16.35.25	The three nights are reversed.
16.35.26	Now the Atiratra.
16.35.27	Now the thirty-three-night (rite)
16.35.28	An Atirattra (rite).
16.35.29	Three five-night (rites).
16.35.30	The Vishvajiti, Sarvaprstha, and Atiratra. The Vishvajiti is the first.
16.35.31	One five-night (rite),
16.35.32	The ten-night (rite)
16.36.6	And the tenth day, and the Atiratra, and the Mahavrata, he arranges.
16.36.7	This is indeed the thirty-seven nights of the Brahman.
16.36.8	Then the fifty-one nights of the Ekasa.
16.36.9	Atiratra.
16.36.10	Three Agniṣṭomas with three stomas.
16.36.11	Then the three nights.
16.36.12	Ten Pañcadaśas with Ukthas.
16.36.13	Then the Atiratra.
16.36.14-23	Their tenth day is sixteenfold. Twelve days are the Ukthyas. Then comes the Atiratra. The six days of the Prsthya. Then comes Atiratra.  Twelve days are Ukthyas. Then comes Atiratra.
16.36.24	The three Abhijit sacrifices are the six-day sacrifices.
16.36.25	They are eighteen days.
16.36.26	The Prāyaniya and Ārambhaniya are the first two.
16.36.27	They are twenty days.
16.36.28	The Abhijit is the twenty-first.
16.36.29	The three Parā-sāman sacrifices are the next three.
16.36.30	Then comes the Visuva sacrifice.
16.36.31	The three Arvā-sāman are the next three sacrifices.
16.36.32	Then comes Viśvajit.
16.36.33	The Abhijat sacrifice is repeated.
16.36.34	The Goāyushi sacrifice.
16.36.35	Ten nights.
16.36.36	The Mahāvrata.
16.36.37	And the Atiratra.
16.36.38	Now the sixty-first night.
16.36.39	From this same (night) he adds two six-day periods of the Prsthya (fortnight) to the nine nights on either side.
16.36.40	The latter of these two is repeated.
16.36.41	Now the hundredth night.
16.36.42	The three days of Atiratra, Jyotiṣṭoma, Gauriṣṭoma and Ayusṭoma, the fourteen days of Abhiplva, the six days, the ten days, the Mahāvrata and the Atiratra.
16.36.43	Now the thousand-day sacrifice.
16.36.44	The Atiratra (sacrifice) is the first, then follow ninety-nine Trivṛt Agniṣṭomas, then a hundred Pañcadaśa Ukthas, then a hundred Saptadaśa Ukthas; then a hundred Ekavimśa Ukthas ; then a hundred Trinava Ukthas; then one hundred Trayastrimsa Ukthas; then ninety-nine Trivrta Agnistomas.
17.1.1	One who is going to perform the Atiratra sacrifice procures four animals for the Atiratra, a horse of reddish-brown colour, a sixteen-spoked vessel of Udumbara wood, and four arrows of superior quality, and one arrow of inferior quality.
17.1.2	He initiates himself.
17.1.3	He buys Soma with a reddish-brown horse having one year.
17.1.4	There are twelve Upasads.
17.1.5	The sacrifice is well known. One goes to the Upavasatha from that.
17.1.6	Then, having performed the Vasatīvari rites, they observe the Upavastha with special rites.
17.1.7	Then, they wake up at the great night itself.
17.1.8	Having taken the royal oblations, having brought the king, he performs the Prātaranuvāka.
17.1.9	When the Prātaranuvaaka is performed, he goes to the water.
17.1.10	He goes to the water with water.
17.1.11	He approaches the Atiratra sacrifice.
17.1.12	The pressing is well-known.
17.1.13	The Grahas are taken in the prescribed manner.
17.1.14	The rite is similar to that of the Agrayan cup.
17.1.15	Having taken the Agrayan cup, he takes the Sodashin cup with the verse, "O Indra, slayer of Vrtra, mount the chariot." Having recited this verse, he takes the cup with the formula, "Thou art taken with the Upayastika formula. I take thee for Indra, the Sodashin, the agreeable one.
17.1.16	Having wiped it, he places it down with the formula, "This is your place; for Indra thee, the sixteen-fold."
17.1.17	Then he takes up the Ukthya cup.
17.1.18	The rite is similar to that of taking up the Asvin cup.
17.1.19	Having taken up the Asvin graha, and taking four girdles, he approaches the sacrificial post.
17.1.20	Having released the sacrificial post with the Svāhā-utterance, he prepares four animals for the Atiratra sacrifice, namely, a ram for Agni, a ram for Indra-Agni, a ram for Indrāṇī and a ram for Sarasvatī.
17.1.21	Having performed the prescribed animal-sacrifices, they proceed towards the morning pressing.
17.1.22	It concludes in the straight path.
17.1.23	They proceed towards the midday pressing.
17.1.24	The Abhiṣava is well known.
17.1.25	The Grahas are well known.
17.1.26	It is similar to the Āgrayana Graha.
17.1.27	Having taken the Āgrayana, he takes the Ṣoḍaśin with the verse, "Indra, the bearer, carries." Having followed it, he says, "You are taken with the offering. For Indra, for you, the Ṣoḷaśin, I take the agreeable."
17.1.28	Having wiped it, he places it, saying, "This is your place; for Indra thee, the sixteenfold."
17.1.29	Then he takes the Ukthya cup.
17.1.30	The midday pressing comes to an end in a straight line.
17.1.31	They move forward for the third pressing.
17.1.32	Having performed the Āditya Graha rite, he takes the Āgrayana cup.
17.1.33	Then he takes up the Sodashin (cup) with the formula, "Thou art Soma, O Indra, thou art the Sodashin." Having followed it, he places it with the formula, “Thou art taken with a support; I take thee for Indra, for the Sodashin, for the agreeable."
17.1.34	Having wiped it around, he places it, with the formula, "This is thy birth-place; for Indra, for thee, for the Sodashim."
17.1.35	Then he takes up the Ukthya cup.
17.2.1	The procedure is similar to that of the Pavamana cups.
17.2.2	Having performed with Pavamāna, he moves in his own abode with the animals.
17.2.3	They have different Manotā, different deities, different touch, different Vasahomas, the same Vanaspati, the same Svistakṛt, the same Ida, the same directions.
17.2.4	Some say that the directions are different.
17.2.5	The same rite is performed with the Dhruva and the cups.
17.2.6	Having performed the three Upavasatha rites with the Dhruva and other cups, he performs the rites of Indra-Varuna, Indra-Brhaspati and Indra-Visnu.
17.2.7	Then, while proceeding towards the east, he says to the Hotṛ, "Do you lift up the Soma cup." The Uddhatṛ says, "Do you cause the Soma to flow."
17.2.8	They first take up the Hotr's goblet.
17.2.9	The others in due order.
17.2.10	Having taken them up, they place them on the northern altar.
17.2.11	They place the sixteen-fold one together with them.
17.2.12	Then he stands near it.
17.3.1	Because no other one is born, who has entered all the worlds, the Prajapati, who is united with offspring, he moves in the three luminaries, he is the sixteenth.
17.3.2	This is Brahma, who is the seasonal one, Indra is known by name in the group.
17.3.3	I praise your great assembly, O Hari, who is seasonal, I seek your favor, O Hari, the one who is praised.
17.3.4	Indra, the name, is the ghee which the tawny ones pour out beautifully. May the heard group enter you, O Indra, the giver of tawny horses.
17.3.5	Then having touched water, taking the sacrificial grass, restraining speech, having run towards the west, when the sun has set, he performs the Stotra of the Sixteen Verses with gold.
17.3.6	In front, they hold a horse, reddish-brown or dark.
17.3.7	Having given away the gold, he praises.
17.4.1	They say that this is the Hotr's highest (duty).
17.4.2	After the Hotr'sthe Adhvaryu turns back.
17.4.3	The Hotr calls him.
17.4.4	The Adhvaryu responds.
17.4.5	He praises.
17.4.6	He responds.
17.4.7	Then when the Hotṛ recites, "May the tawny ones bring thee," then he recites the Udbhid-verse in both directions: "Otha, indeed, is like a Madhuparka, Madhuparka is like Otha."
17.4.8	Then when the Hotṛrecites, "We have come to thee with the Tristubh," then having recited the well-known eulogy, he approaches the east and takes up this Sodashin cup.
17.4.9	They take up the cups, having been mentioned.
17.4.10	Then he announces: "Let it be heard! Let it be heard! The praise-worthy one is the leader of the Soma offerings."
17.4.11	At the Vasat-call, he offers the Sodashin (oblation), saying, "O Indra, the lord, you are the lord of the gods. Make me the lord, the long-lived, the radiant, among humans."
17.4.12	He offers twice at the Vasat and Anuvṣat calls.
17.4.13	Similarly they offer twice at each of the cups.
17.4.14	Then they run towards each other with the portions of food.
17.4.15	"The portion of food is offered with the verse, "Indra has drunk the Sodasi Soma juice."
17.4.16	His portion of food is finished.
17.4.17	For the sacrificer's portion of food is under the control of the sacrificer and the Hotṛ's portion offood is under the control ofthe Hotṛ.
17.4.18	If they were to tell the Adhvaryu, "The Vasat-utterer should partake," he should say, "So be it."
17.4.19	Thus he does not exclude himself from the partaking.
17.4.20	His share is this.
17.5.1	Indra and Samrāṭ Varuna, the king, have taken this first portion of the oblation. I partake of the portion after them. May the voice, pleased with Soma, be satisfied. I partake of that portion of the Soma which has been drunk by Indra, the sixteen-fold, the sweet, the invited, as invited."
17.5.2	Having wiped the vessel, he gives it.
17.5.3	Here he gives a horse of reddish-brown or black colour.
17.5.4	These three together, having invoked, consume the Hotr's goblet.
17.5.5	As the goblets, so the goblets.
17.5.6	They touch themselves, saying, "Do you fill me."
17.5.7	They do not fill the goblets again.
17.5.8	All consume together and sprinkle themselves.
17.5.9	Then he says to the Pratiprasthātṛ, "O Pratiprasthātr, the third portion of the Āgrayana, the third portions of the kidneys, the thigh-pieces, the clarified butter, the Gopa, the Agni, the Asvin, the cooked Soma, the two-handled pot, and the Soma for the evening pressing. Let it be ready by the evening."
17.5.10	They do as they are told.
17.5.11	Then, having gone out, they proceed to the evening pressing.
17.5.12	Having known that they have moved forward, the Adhvaryu, moving forward, says (to the Udgātṛ), "Do you chant the Sāman."
17.6.1	"Do you carry the Hotr's goblet forward. The Udgātṛ should make the Soma flow."
17.6.2	They carry forward the Hotr' goblet first, the others as they are available.
17.6.3	Having carried forward, they place them on the northern altar.
17.6.4	Then having sprinkled himself, having taken the two sacrificial grass-blades, and having restrained speech, he turns towards the west and begins the Stotra.
17.6.5	He recites the Stotra. The Hotṛ recites the Uttara-sāman.
17.6.6	The Hotṛ recites.
17.6.7	After the Hotṛ's time, the Adhvaryu turns away.
17.6.8	The Hotri calls him.
17.6.9	The Adhvaryu responds.
17.6.10	The Hotृ recites.
17.6.11	The Advaryu responds.
17.6.12	Having recited the well-known Upavasanī verses, he goes forward and takes up the Hotr's goblet.
17.6.13	The other goblets are taken up.
17.6.14	Then he announces: "Let it be heard, let it be heard. Let the Upavasanî verses be recited. Let the Soma be offered."
17.6.15	He offers twice at the Vasat and Anuvṣat calls.
17.6.16	In the same way, they offer twice to all the goblets.
17.6.17	Then they run towards the food.
17.6.18	"The food is drunk after the libation, by Indra."
17.6.19	The three of them together take the food, as the Hotr does.
17.6.20	As the cup is filled, so are the cups.
17.6.21	They touch themselves, saying, "Do thou fill me."
17.6.22	They do not fill the cups.
17.6.23	All the eaters cleanse themselves.
17.6.24	Then, going forward, he says,
17.7.1	"Carry the Maitrāvaruṇa goblet forward. The Soma-pourer should recite the Pravâya-verse."
17.7.2	They carry forward the Maitrāvaruṇ goblet first.
17.7.3	The others in due order.
17.7.4	Having carried them forward, they place them on the northern altar.
17.7.5	Having sprinkled water, and taking the two sacrificial grass-blades, he runs towards the west, restraining speech, and begins the Stotra.
17.7.6	He praises.
17.7.7	This is said to be for Maitrāvaruṇa.
17.7.8	The Adhvaryu turns away from the time of Maitrāvaruṇa,
17.7.9	Maitrāvaruṇa calls him.
17.7.10	The Adhvayu responds.
17.7.11	He praises.
17.7.12	He responds.
17.7.13	Having responded to the well-known eulogy, having approached the east, he takes up this Maitrāvaruṇa goblet.
17.7.14	They take up the cups, having been requested.
17.7.15	Then he announces, "Let it be heard! Let it be heard! The eulogy is uttered! Let the Soma be offered!"
17.7.16	He offers twice at the Vasat and Anuvṣat calls.
17.7.17	In the same way they offer twice to all the cups.
17.7.18	Then they run towards each other with the portions.
17.7.19	"The portion after the libation, drunk by Indra."
17.7.20	These three consume the Maitrāvaruṇa cup after having invoked it together.
17.7.21	As the cups, so the cups.
17.7.22	They touch themselves, saying, "Do you stimulate me."
17.7.23	They do not stimulate the cups.
17.7.24	All consume together and then sprinkle themselves.
17.7.25	Then he says to the Pratiprasthātṛ, "The groups of cups should be taken up."
17.7.26	Hearing this, the Pratiprasthatṛ, going forward, says,
17.8.1	The Brahmanaschamsins should take up the cup and say, "The Soma is being pressed."
17.8.2	They take up the cup of the Brahmanaschamsin first.
17.8.3	The others follow in order.
17.8.4	Having taken them up, they place them on the northern altar.
17.8.5	Having touched water, taking the sacrificial grass, remaining silent, having run towards the west, he begins the Stotra.
17.8.6	He praises.
17.8.7	The Brahmanaschanasin says, "This is the best."
17.8.8	The Pratiprasthata turns away from the Brahmanaschanasin at the proper time.
17.8.9	The Brahmana-schanasin calls him.
17.8.10	The Prati-prasthata responds.
17.8.11	He praises.
17.8.12	He responds.
17.8.13	Having recited the well-known Upavasanī verses, having gone forward, he takes up the cup of the Brahman-priest.
17.8.14	The other cups are taken up.
17.8.15	Then he announces: "Let it be heard, let it be heard. Let the Udgātṛs chant the Upavasanīs."
17.8.16	At the Vasat and Anuvṣat calls, he offers twice.
17.8.17	In the same way, they offer twice each to all the cups.
17.8.18	Then they run towards the food.
17.8.19	"The food at the end of the libation is drunk by Indra."
17.8.20	These three together call out and consume the cup of the Brahman-priest.
17.8.21	As the cups, so the cups.
17.8.22	They touch themselves, saying, "Bless me."
17.8.23	They do not replenish the cups.
17.8.24	All consume the food and sprinkle themselves.
17.8.25	Then, having gone forward, he says:
17.9.1	"Carry the cup of the Acchavaka and make the Soma flow."
17.9.2	They carry the cup of the acchavaka first.
17.9.3	The others as they are available.
17.9.4	Having carried them, they place them on the northern altar.
17.9.5	Then having sprinkled himself, having taken the two sacrificial grass-blades, having restrained speech, having turned towards the west, he begins the Stotra.
17.9.6	He praises.
17.9.7	They say that this is the last (verse) for the Acchavaka.
17.9.8	After the Acchavaka's time, the Pratiprasthātṛ turns away.
17.9.9	The Acchavaka calls him.
17.9.10	The Pratiprasthātr responds.
17.9.11	He praises (the Acchavaka).
17.9.12	He responds.
17.9.13	Having recited the well-known Upavasanī verses, he goes forward and takes up the cup for the Acchāvāka.
17.9.14	The other cups are taken up.
17.9.15	Then he announces: "Let it be heard, let it be heard. Let the Upavasanīs be recited. Let the Soma-cups be offered."
17.9.16	He offers twice at each Vasat and Anuvṣat.
17.9.17	In the same way they offer twice to each of the cups.
17.9.18	Then they run towards the food.
17.9.19	"The food is drunk by Indra."
17.9.20	These three together call out for the cup of the Acchāvāka and consume it.
17.9.21	As the cups, so the cups.
17.9.22	They touch themselves, saying, "Do you nourish me."
17.9.23	They do not nourish the cups.
17.9.24	All the eaters cleanse themselves.
17.9.25	The Hotr praises first, then the Maitrāvaruṇa, then the Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin, then the Acchāvāka.
17.9.26	The Adhvaryu proceeds with the two sets of cups in the east, the Pratiprasthātṛ with those in the west.
17.9.27	All the cups are dedicated to Indra.
17.9.28	Thus this first set of four rites is concluded.
17.9.29	In the same way the second one is completed.
17.9.30	In the same way the third one is completed. 
17.9.31	They move like craftsmen in the middle turn.
17.9.32	Then, having withdrawn, they move towards the Rathantara Sandhi.
17.10.1	Having ascertained that they have moved forward, the Adhvaryu, moving forward, says (to the Hotṛ), "Do you raise the cup of the Hotṛ. The Uṇnetr should raise the king completely. Do not go beyond."
17.10.2	They raise the cup of Hotṛ first.
17.10.3	The others as per their turn.
17.10.4	Having raised the king completely, they place him on the northern altar.
17.10.5	Then they put together the two portions of the Āsvina oblation, which have been spread out and sprinkled.
17.10.6	Then having touched water, taking the two sacrificial grass-blades, and restraining speech, he runs towards the west and begins the Stotra.
17.10.7	He praises.
17.10.8	The Hotṛ recites the Uttara-sūkta.
17.10.9	After the Hotṛ's time, the Adhvaryu turns away.
17.10.10	The Hotri calls him.
17.10.11	The Adhvaryu calls out.
17.10.12	He praises.
17.10.13	He responds.
17.10.14	It is praised till the great morning.
17.10.15	The Asvin Soma is performed for a thousand cows. This is the Brāhmaṇa.
17.10.16	Having praised the well-known Uktha, having gone forward, he says, "Recite the Somas of the Asvins and the Tirahina."
17.10.17	Having gone forward, he takes up the Hotr's goblet.
17.10.18	Having been requested, they take up the Āśvina cup.
17.10.19	They take up the cups.
17.10.20	Then he announces, "Let it be heard! Let there be hearing! The Āśvins have been requested to send the Soma that has been set aside for the next day."
17.10.21	He offers at the Vaṣaṭ-call.
17.10.22	They offer together the Āśvina Soma that has been spread and sprinkled.
17.10.23	At the Vasat and Anuvṣat calls he offers twice.
17.10.24	In the same way they offer twice each of all the cups.
17.10.25	Then they run towards each other with the offerings.
17.10.26	The offering of the Soma-juice is drunk by the Asvins.
17.10.27	The draught of all the groups of gods is the draught of the Soma that has been drunk by all the groups of the gods, that has been hidden, that has been pressed, that is sweet, that has been invoked, I partake of the draught that has been invoked."
17.10.28	These three partake of the Hotr's goblet, having invoked it together.
17.10.29	As the goblets, so the goblets.
17.10.30	They touch themselves, saying, "Do you press me."
17.10.31	They do not nourish the goblets.
17.10.32	All the eaters of oblations are purified.
17.10.33	Then he says (to the Hotṛ), "O Agnidh, bring the sacrificial grass, O Upasthātṛ, sit down, O Brahman, we shall proceed. Having placed the kindling wood, O Agnidh, do thou touch the fires each time."
17.10.34	They bring the sacrificial grass from the Agnidhra.
17.10.35	He scatters them in front of the Hotṛ.
17.10.36	The Upavasatha-priest approaches (the fire) with the three-eleventh (verses).
17.10.37	Here he offers the three-elevenths in eleven ways.
17.10.38	From here onwards it is similar.
17.10.39	The Atiratra comes to an end.
17.11.1	One who is going to perform the Ekadasini, having offered the Yupahutis, then goes to that direction where he thinks he will find thirteen sacrificial posts.
17.11.2	Having cut them into twelve pieces, he carries them or causes them to be carried.
17.11.3	He stands at the end of the carrying.
17.11.4	He makes the forms of the Avakṣaṇas.
17.11.5	Now on the previous day, this Vedi is measured into eleven parts by the axle of a chariot.
17.11.6-9	When he marks out the pit for the sacrificial post at the place where the fire is, he asks for this axle of a chariot. He marks out the pit of the sacrificial post to the south, measuring the distance from the axle. He marks it out to the north, measuring the same distance from the axle.
17.11.10	Now, they erect these sacrificial posts on the day of fasting itself, saying that the sacrificer is the Agniṣṭha post and the others are the forms of the limbs.
17.11.11	If someone were to say to him while he is erecting it, "The sacrificer will indeed be without limbs," it would be so.
17.11.12	They say, "If these sacrificial posts were to stand as animals with horns, it would be like the form of the sacrificial ground, like the sacrificial garments."
17.11.13	"One should erect these sacrificial posts on the next day."
17.11.14	They erect them on the next day.
17.11.15	The Agniṣṭha (priest) makes the eleven-fold oblations and distributes them.
17.12.1	The rite is similar to that of the Graha of Asvin.
17.12.2	Having taken up the Graha of the Asvins and having taken eleven thongs, he approaches the sacrificial post.
17.12.3	The posts are washed, placed, and the cups are prepared. They are placed near the eastern posts.
17.12.4	Having released the post which is the most distant from the fire, he erects the southern one first, then the northern one.
17.12.5	He thus erects eight sacrificial posts, one in the east, one in the west, one in the north, and one in the south.
17.12.6	Now indeed it is said:
17.12.7	One should measure out the distance of the upper (posts) for one who desires the world of the fathers. The posts are equal in the upper (posts).
17.12.8	One should measure the distance of the girdle (posts) for him who desires the world (of men). The posts are equal at the girdle (posts).
17.12.9	(One should measure) the distance of the cup (posts) for the one who desires power. The posts are (equal) at the cup (posts).
17.12.10	All the same for one desiring stability.
17.12.11	He makes all the same for one who desires stability.
17.12.12	He separates the other three.
17.12.13	He separates eight sacrificial posts in this way, the southern from the northern.
17.13.1	Now indeed it is said,
17.13.2	If one desires, "May he be a deceiver," one should dig a pit for him, the northern half being the largest, and the southern half being smaller.
17.13.3	Herein he digs the northern half to be the largest, and digs the southern half to be smaller.
17.13.4	This is the pit-making (rite). If one digs thus, he becomes a deceiver. So says the Brahmana.
17.13.5	He should place the larger one on the right side for one desiring heaven, and the smaller one for one desiring prosperity.
17.13.6	Here he places the larger one on his right side, and the smaller on his left side.
17.13.7	The sacrificer makes a bridge for crossing, for the attainment of the heavenly world. This is the Brahmaṇa.
17.13.8	Now indeed it is said,
17.13.9	If one were to use two ropes on one post, then one would obtain two wives.
17.13.10	If one were to use a single rope on two posts, then one would not obtain two husbands. This is the Brahmanical explanation.
17.13.11	Now, indeed, it is said:
17.13.12	"If one desires that his wife should be a woman, one should place it at the end."
17.13.13	He places it at the end.
17.13.14	The woman alone is born to him. So says the Brāhmaṇa.
17.13.15	Now, indeed, it is said:
17.13.16	"If one desires that a man should be born to him, one should insert the semen into the vagina."
17.13.17	He inserts the semen into the woman's vagina.
17.13.18	A man alone is born to her. So says the Brahmana.
17.13.19	Here he places this semen on the right side silently.
17.13.20	Having thrown away the sacrificial posts with the ends towards heaven, he places the Agniṣṭha post towards the east.
17.14.1	The Sārasvata post towards the north, the Saumya post towards the south, the Pauṣṇī post towards the north and the Brhaspatya post towards the north. The Vaiśvadeva post towards the north; the Indra post towards the south; the Māruta post towards the north ; the Indra-Agni post towards the south ; the Savitra post towards the north , the Vāruṇa post towards the south.
17.14.2	Now indeed it is said,
17.14.3	If one wishes, "May he who is free from obstruction be obstructed, and he who is obstructed be free from obstruction," one should offer a Varuna animal to Indra, and an Indra animal to Varuna.
17.14.4	He who is free from obstructions is obstructed, and he obstructed is free from obstructions. So says the Brahmana.
17.14.5	Now it is said:
17.14.6	If one desires, 'May offspring be confused,' one should offer animals.
17.14.7	One offers animals here.
17.14.8	One confuses offspring. So says the Brahmana.
17.14.9	Now indeed it is said:
17.14.10	If one were to offer the Varuna animal after the Abhivâha ceremony, Varuna would seize the offspring.
17.14.11	He offers it to the south, facing north, saying, "For the removal of the waters, for the release of the creatures from the grip of the waters." This is the Brahmanical explanation.
17.14.12	Now, in this sacrifice, he makes an offering to the one whom he hates, mentally.
17.14.13	If he does not hate anyone, he says, "The rat is your animal."
17.14.14	The rite is the same up to the offering to fire.
17.14.15	Having placed the animals which have been sprinkled with water, in the southern half of the sacrificial place, he places two animals in the northern half and then separates the others.
17.14.16	Then they proceed towards the north with the animals which have undergone sprinkling.
17.14.17	Of them, the one belonging to Varuna is in the northern half.
17.14.18	The one belonging to Agni is in the southern half.
17.14.19	The Adhvaryu, with the two ladles, begins with the Agniya (oblation). The other priests, separately, carry them towards the east, one after another, without mixing them.
17.14.20	Having performed the Vapa rites, they proceed towards the morning pressing.
17.14.21	It concludes in a straight line.
17.15.1	Now indeed it is said,
17.15.2	The Iṣṭi is performed with Vayu as the deity, and the Anīṣṭi with Vāyu as the deity. One performs the Pātnīvata rite.
17.15.3	When the Ekādaśina is performed in connection with the Anubandhya rite, the Iṣṭi rite is performed with Vāyu, and the Anīsṭi rite with Vāyu. One carries the Stambayajus to the Gārhapatya fire on the southern side of the Upasad altar.
17.15.4	This is well known as the Pāuroḍāśika rite.
17.15.5	Three times with the Yajus, and once silently.
17.15.6	He first takes up the enclosing sticks.
17.15.7	He murmurs the Karana-mantra.
17.15.8	He throws it down.
17.15.9	The Agnidhra thrice carries it from the thrown down (sticks).
17.15.10	After the Agnidhra has thrice carried (the sticks), he draws a line around the hole for the Paatnivata stake in front of the Garhapatya.
17.15.11	The procedure is similar upto the placing of the ladles.
17.15.12	Having placed the ladles in front of the Garhapatya, having raised the Patnivata, he offers a sheep to Tvashtri, having placed it on the fire.
17.15.13	Having released it after having encircled it with fire, he makes it stand in clarified butter.
17.15.14	Then, taking four spoonfuls of clarified butter, he says, "To Tvashtri" softly, and "Recite loudly" loudly.
17.16.2	He offers at the Vasat-utterance.
17.16.3	Thus he performs the Pasupurodāsa.
17.16.4	Taking four spoonfuls of clarified butter, he says "Agni" in a low voice and "Upamśu" loudly.
17.16.5	Having stepped across and having called out, he says "Agnim" in a low tone and "Upamsu" loudly.
17.16.6	He offers the oblations in the northern half of the eastern half, leaving aside the earlier oblations at the Vasat utterance.
17.16.7	Thus one performs the Svishtakrit of the Pasupurodasi.
17.16.8	Taking four spoonfuls of clarified butter, he says "To Tvashtra" in a low voice and "Recite" loudly.
17.16.9	Having stepped across and having been invoked, he says "Tvashtra" in low voice and "Sacrifice" loudly.
17.16.10	He offers at the Vaṣaṭ-call.
17.16.11	Thus one performs the offering of the oblation.
17.16.12	He offers to the directions with clarified butter.
17.16.13	With fresh butter, the Vanaspati.
17.16.14	The Svishtakrit of butter.
17.16.15	He offers the butter-cake.
17.16.16	He offers after-offerings with fresh butter.
17.16.17	Here he offers the Patnīvat offerings, here the Samishtayajus offerings.
17.16.18	The Patnīvat comes to an end.
17.17.1	Now indeed it is said,
17.17.2	One who does not prosper by the Agni-installation rite, performs it again. One who does not succeed by the Agni-building rite, performs it once more.
17.17.3	One who has built the Agni and is not prosperous, prepares twelve bricks, eight of them are of the Yajus type and four are Lokampra bricks.
17.17.4	When the Hotr has spread out the grass on the Uttaravedi and placed the materials, he takes Agni into himself with two verses: "I take Agni first into myself, Agni who is our Agni."
17.17.5	He mutters the Svayambhuva verse: "Those are thy kindling woods, O Agni, those thy abodes."
17.17.6	Having touched the white horse, he places eight Yajus-verses, with the verse, "By which the sages perform the sacrifice through penance."
17.17.7	Four Lokamprana verses, with the verses, "Satisfy the world, satisfy the void."
17.17.8	Then he touches the Citti-klpti with the verse, "The one who knows the Citti and the Acitti, he who knows the Cittis, he who knows all Cittis, he is the knower of all Cittis."
17.17.9	Having touched the Agniya Citi with the Gayatri verse, he runs with two verses, "May speech be near me, may breath be near me."
17.17.10	The animal sacrifice is extended. Agniṣṭoma is speech.
17.17.11	It concludes with a known (verse).
17.18.1	Jarvara was the householder, Dhritarastra the Adhvaryu, Airavata the Brahman, Datta the Hotri, Prsthushrava and Dureshrava the Udgata and Prastotar, Glavash and Ajagavash the Prastotar and Pratihartar, Shiti-pashtha the Maitravaruna, Takshaka the Brhaspati, Upashti the Sadasy, Tarkshya the Neshta, Shikhatishhikha the Apota, Ahva the Agnidhra, Ajira the Maheya, Subrahmanya the Arbuda, Sand the Unneta, Pashukra the Dhruvagopa, Kauta and Tasha the Adhvaryus, Arimejaya and Janamejaya.
17.18.2	These are the kings and princes of the serpents, who are desirous of poison, and who have performed a sacrifice in the form of men at Khandava-forest.
17.18.3	They had ten Stotras on some days, and twelve Stotras on others. They also had days of rest.
17.18.4	Because they had ten Stotras, therefore the serpents are venomous and have the power of biting.
17.18.5	This is the worldly, the ancestral, the animal, and the sacrificial Sattra.
17.18.6	Those who perform this, the serpents do not harm them.
17.19.1	Tapas is the householder, Ira is the wife, Brahma is the Brahman, Satya is the Hotri, Amrita is the Udgata, the past and future are the Prastotar and Pratihartar, Rta is the Maitravaruna, the seasons are the Sadasyas, the seasons are also the Upagatas, Tejas is the Brahmanasci, Yasas is the Acchavika, Tvixi and Apaciti are the Nestain and Apota, Agni is the Agnidhra, Vak is the Subrahmanya, Bhaga is the Gravastut, Urga is the Unneta, Bala is the Dhruvagop, Manas is the Adhvaryu, Chaksus is the Pratiprasthata, Sedis and Asana are the Idhmavahas, Dhiti is the Visastha, Maruta is the Samita.
17.19.2	These are the first creators of the universe, who performed the Sattra.
17.19.3	Their consecration lasted for a hundred years, the Upasads for a hundred years and the Prasutis for a thousand years.
17.19.4	This is what is said about them: The first creators of the world performed the Sattra for a thousand years, then they went away. Then there was a quarrel, then the protector of the world was born.
17.19.5	They have attained it by means of the Agniṣṭoma sacrifices.
17.19.6	This is the prosperous path of propagation, namely the Agniṣṭomas.
17.20.1	Those who are going to proceed by the path of Kuṇḍapāyin undertake the consecration.
17.20.2	There are five universal yokes.
17.20.3	Of these, this one alone is known as the consecration for a year.
17.20.4	The beginning of the rites is the same as in the Ārambhaṇīya.
17.20.5	Having performed the Iṣṭi of the Ārambhaṇīya kind, he milks the Indra-cow. The Saṁnāyya is performed silently.
17.20.6	Then having taken the Vasatīvari-milk, they spend the night without any special activity.
17.20.7	Next day they perform the sacrifice with the Amāvāsyā (New-Moon) oblations.
17.20.8	They proceed for twenty-eight days.
17.20.9	The Prayaṇīya and Ārambhaṇa are the two.
17.20.10	That is a month.
17.20.11	They go to the full-moon sacrifice with the full-moon oblations.
17.20.12	They go to the Visvedeva sacrifice with the Visvedeva oblations.
17.20.13	 They go to the Varuna-prastha sacrifice with the Varuna- prastha oblations.
17.20.14	 Translation: They go to the Soma-sacrifice with the Soma-oblations.
17.20.15	They proceed to the Saunasiri-sacrifice with the Saunasiriyoblations for twenty-six days.
17.20.16	The Abhijit-sacrifice is the last one.
17.20.17	That is the month.
17.20.18	Visuvatam (the equinoctial sacrifice).
17.20.19	Three Samadevas (Somas) are performed before this.
17.20.20	Now about the Visvajit.
17.20.21	They proceed with the Trayastrimsa stoma for a month.
17.20.22	They proceed for a month with the Trinava stoma.
17.20.23	They proceed to a month with the Ekavimsa stoma.
17.20.24	For a month they proceed with the Saptadaśa stoma.
17.20.25	Proceed for a month with Pañcadaśa stoma
17.20.26	They proceed with Trivṛt stoma for twelve days.
17.20.27	Goayushi (the Soma-pressing)
17.20.28	And those are fourteen.
17.20.29	Four above the equinoctial point.
17.20.30	And those are eighteen.
17.20.31	The ten nights, the Mahāvrata and the Atiratra.
17.20.32	That is a month.
17.21.1	Now these are their sacrificial pits.
17.21.2	That they all become Trivedas, that is their sacrificial pit.
17.21.3	And that they perform the sacrifice in succession, that is their sacrifice pit.
17.21.4	Now, when they partake with the Atasaruka cups, that is their Kundam.
17.21.5	Of them, he who is the Brahman is the same as the Brahmanachchhamsin, and he is the Potar.
17.21.6	Now, he who is Hotri is the same as Maitravaruna, and he is Acchhavacaka.
17.21.7	Now, the Udgata is the same as Prastotar, and he is Pratihartar.
17.21.8	Now he who is Adhvaryu is the same as Pratiprasthatar, and he is Neshtar.
17.21.9	Then the Agnidhra himself is the Gravastut, the Subrahmanya, and the Unnetr.
17.21.10	Now the Upanishads.
17.21.11	Agni is the four-hotr, Vayu is the five-hotr, the Moon is the six-hotr, Prajapati is the seven-hotr, that Aditya is the nine-hotr.
17.21.12	These are the deities who have come by this path.
17.21.13	From there they succeeded.
17.21.14	they go to the heavenly world.
17.21.15	Those who know this, going by this path, prosper and go to the heavenly worlds.
17.22.1	Those who are going by the path of the Utsarga sacrifice take initiation.
17.22.2	For them this is the well-known initiation for a year.
17.22.3	The rites are the same as in the Pañcadaśa and Ṣaḍaha sacrifices.
17.22.4	Having performed the six-day Prsthya sacrifice, he milks the Indra-cow. The Saṁnāyya is performed silently.
17.22.5	Then, having taken the Vasatīvari-milk, they spend the night without any special activity.
17.22.6	Then in the morning, having released the animals, they offer the animal dedicated to Prajapati in the Jyotisha shed.
17.22.7	The Pasupurodāsa follows it. The cake to Agni Vasumat is offered on eight potsherds.
17.22.8	At midday, they offer the cake to Indra Marutvat on eleven potsherds and the cake to Indra on twelve potsherds. The Saṁnāyya is dedicated to Indra.
17.22.9	This Iṣṭi with two oblations is concluded.
17.22.10	Here, having invoked the Saṁnāyyam dedicated to Indra, they consume it.
17.22.11	Then in the afternoon they offer the Vaiśvadeva oblation on twelve potsherds and the Vaiśvadevā oblation on rice.
17.22.12	They perform the Iḍā rites with the deities beginning with the Iḍā rite and ending with the Iḍa rite.
17.22.13	Then he performs the animal sacrifice with the Manotā rite beginning and ending with the Neḍa rite.
17.22.14	Having performed the Anuyājas, having turned by the right, having hastened towards the west, having offered the Samyājas to the wives, having approached towards the east, having filled up the Dhruva vessel, having taken away the Vasatīvari waters, they observe the fast with special care.
17.22.15	On the next day they proceed towards the cows.
17.22.16	Thus, they go on thus, releasing the five lights in each month.
17.22.17	Then, they release the four and thirty Stoma-s and one light, having turned back from there.
17.22.18	Then, on the next day, they begin with the life-span.
17.23.1	They undertake the consecration, intending to go by the path of Tapas.
17.23.2	This is the well-known Agnihotra initiation for them.
17.23.3	The rite is the same because of the commonality of the rite.
17.23.4	The commonality of the rites is well-known.
17.23.5	Then one performs the Prāyaniya rite.
17.23.6	Having performed the Prāyaniyī rite, one performs the Pada rite.
17.23.7	Having done the Pada rite, one buys the king and performs the Atithya rite.
17.23.8	Having performed the Atithya rites, one should offer this five-oblation sacrifice: an offering to Agni on eight potsherds, to Indra on eleven potsherds, a universal offering on twelve potsherds, rice-gruel to Brhaspati, and to Vishnu on three potsherds.
17.23.9	Some say that having performed it once, one should not perform it again.
17.23.10	Some say that one should offer the sacrifice every day with this (rite) for a year.
17.23.11	On the first day, every day with all (rites), on the sixth day, every day, with each (rite).
17.23.12	Some say that one should build the fire on the first twelve-day period.
17.23.13	They say that this is indeed Rudra, who is Agni.
17.23.14	He is born now, when he is built completely.
17.23.15	Just as a newly born calf seeks its mother's teat, so does this (sacrificer) now seek his share.
17.23.16	The share is obtained after a year.
17.23.17	One should not go beyond this (year).
17.23.18	One should build the fire on the last twelfth day. This is another (view).
17.24.1	Now, the discussion about the daily building of the fire.
17.24.2	They conclude the building on the same day.
17.24.3	Then they lay down the bricks of the Lokamprana (bricks) and go to the month.
17.24.4	In the month he makes the deity.
17.24.5	In the second month, the fire-altar is built with clay.
17.24.6	They complete the fire-altar in one day.
17.24.7	Then they go to the month of the Muṣṭi (bricks).
17.24.8	In the month, he makes the deity of that (Muṣṭi).
17.24.9	In the third month, the fire altar is built with wood.
17.24.10	In the fourth month, the fire is built with clay.
17.24.11-17	In the fifth month, the middle layer of bricks. In the sixth month, the layer of excrement. In the seventh month, the layer called Vanda. In the eighth month, the layer consisting of excrement. In the ninth month, he lays down seven layers of bricks, up to the stars. In the tenth month, the layer made of excrement. Up to the eleventh month, he lays the layers called Samyag and Praceta, up to the Vikarna.
17.24.18	The twelfth month has twenty-eight days.
17.24.19	The thirty-first day is the Satrurudriya.
17.24.20	The next day is the Vasordhara.
17.25.1	Then they say that the month is over.
17.25.2	On the first day of the month, they perform the Sada-citi rite, which is associated with the deity Satya and the Sudadoha.
17.25.3	They proceed to the month with the Pravargya and Upasads.
17.25.4	On the first day of the second month, the Pūriṣa-oblation is offered.
17.25.5	They perform the Sada-oblation with the Sada-deity and the Sūda-oblation.
17.25.6	They proceed to the Pravargya and Upasads for the second month.
17.25.7	On the first day of third month, the Vanda-oblation is performed.
17.25.8	On the firat day of the fourth month, the Pūrīṣa-oblution is performed.
17.25.9	On the first day of the fifth month, the middle layer is piled up.
17.25.10	On the first day of sixth month, the layer of clay is piled up. 
17.25.11	On the first of the seventh month, the layer made of wood is piled up.  
17.25.12	On the first da of the eighth month, the layer is made of clay.
17.25.13	On the frst day of the ninth month, he piles up seven layers of bricks up to the time of the Naksatra bricks.
17.25.14-18	On the first day of the tenth month, the Pūriṣaciti. On the first day of eleventh month, he lays down the two bricks named Saṃyaci and Pracetas, up to the Vikarṇi. On the firat day of the twelfth month, the Pūrīṣaciti. The Śatarudriya is performed on the thirty-first day. The Vasordhāra is performed on the next day.
17.26.1	Then they say that the month is in front.
17.26.2	They go to the month with Pravargya and Upasad.
17.26.3	On the last day of the month, they perform the Sada sacrifice with the Sada deity and the Suda-doha.
17.26.4	They go for the second month with Pravargy and Upasad
17.26.5	On the last days of the second month, there is the Pursha-chiti.
17.26.6-10	They stand in the Citī of the present day, with the deity and the Sūda, and with the Ohas. On the last day of the third month, the Vanda-citī. On the fourth day of the fourth month, the Pūriṣa-citī.  On the last of the fifth month, the Madhyama-citī. On the last of the sixth month, the Pūrīṣa-citti.
17.26.11-14	On the last day of the seventh month, the Vanda-bricks are deposited. On the last day of eighth month, the Pursha-bricks are deposited.
17.26.15	On the eleventh day of the eleventh month, he lays down the bricks called Ekādaśa and Pracetas, up to the Vikarṇi.
17.26.16	On the twenty-eighth day of the twelfth month, the earth.
17.26.17	On the thirty-first day, the Satarudriya.
17.26.18	On the next day, the Vasordhara.
17.27.1	Now, the discussion of the Uthānas.
17.27.2	The Brāhmaṇas should rise after the Abhijit sacrifice.
17.27.3	Or, having performed the Abhijit sacrifice, they should offer this Savanești sacrifice: an Agniya cake on eight potsherds, an Indra cake on eleven potsherds, and a Visvedeva cake on twelve potsherds.
17.27.4	They resume with that complete or incomplete (sacrifice).
17.27.5	Having placed a lump of clay in the Vasatīvarī waters, they go on carrying the Vasatīvari waters every day.
17.27.6	Then they say that the year is completed and the path of Brahma is attained.
17.27.7	They go for four months with consecratory rites, four months with Upasads, and four months with Prasutis.
17.27.8	They say, "Who, having performed austerities for so long, would do anything else?"
17.27.9	If he wishes to make an offering to his students, they should offer him a fee.
17.27.10	He wishes to make an offer to his students, and they offer him a fee."
17.28.1	Now, it is said:
17.28.2	"One should perform a sacrifice with the intention of obtaining cattle."
17.28.3	He performs a sacrifice with the intent of obtaining cattle.
17.28.4	Wherever the oblation arrives, one should offer there.
17.28.5	Then whatever is other than the oblations, he recites the Yajus in that (place) which is like the body, the Yajus for the reins, the Yajur for the horse and the donkey, the Yajurs for the yoke and the plough, the Yajura for the cow-pen.
17.28.6	He sacrifices with the Vayu animal.
17.28.7	He consecrates.
17.28.8	He recites the Yajur in the place where the fire is dug out for the purpose of purification, the Yajur for the placing of all the bricks.
17.28.9	He offers the Satarudriya.
17.28.10	He performs the Vasordhara.
17.28.11	One should perform the Syenacit if one desires heaven.
17.28.12	This is the Syenacita.
17.28.13	One should construct the Kankacita if one desires to be the head in the other world.
17.28.14	From this very one, at a distance of a span, he places the head towards the east.
17.28.15	It is to be measured in such a way that the sacrificial post does not go beyond the altar.
17.28.16	One should erect a post of the size of a palm, having four corners, if one desires stability.
17.28.17	The tips of the wings of this post are smaller by the size of a span.
17.28.18	The wings are larger by the same size.
17.28.19	They are slightly bent and smaller at the end.
17.28.20	He sows each one with a verse.
17.28.21	One who has an enemy should perform the Prāg-cit (rite).
17.28.22	Having taken the two shoulders of this very (animal), he extends them towards the east.
17.28.23	The sacrificial post should be such that it is not outside the altar.
17.28.24	One who desires to drive away his enemies who have offspring and are about to be born should perform the Prâg-cit (rites).
17.28.25	Having taken this very same (wood), he extends the girdle backwards.
17.28.26	It becomes measured in such a way that the sacrificial post is not outside the altar.
17.29.1	One should pile up the wood in the shape of a chariot wheel, if one has an enemy, it is known.
17.29.2	The change in shape is due to the combination of words.
17.29.3	Having made a circular piece of ground the size of the span of Agni, he collects bricks with a fringe and an inner fringe.
17.29.4	Then from the end, then from the middle.
17.29.5	In the same way for the self-sprouting.
17.29.6	Then around the self-sprout.
17.29.7	He makes the navel in the middle, as it were.
17.29.8	He lays them in the direction and sub-directions of it, like the spokes of a chariot-wheel, like bricks.
17.29.9	This is the wheel-shaped altar for one who has an enemy.
17.29.10	One who desires food should build it with a mound in the middle.
17.29.11	He makes the front part of it like a snout, the size of an arm-span.
17.29.12	Then he makes the middle part like a depression.
17.29.13	This is the Drona-shaped brick for one desiring food.
17.29.14	One should make a pile for one desiring cattle, so it is known.
17.29.15	They say that the characteristics of this are the lotus leaf, gold, and a golden man in the ladle.
17.29.16	They do make it.
17.29.17	Then he arranges the bricks of the same size as the soil.
17.29.18	This is to be piled up for one desiring cattle.
17.29.19	One desiring a village should pile up the bricks in a circle.
17.29.20	He piles up the bricks in the form of a line and a line.
17.29.21	Then from the end and then from the middle.
17.29.22	In the same way for the self-sprouting one.
17.29.23	Then he piles up the bricks around the self-sprout.
17.29.24	This is the one to be chosen for one who desires a village.
17.30.1	One should build a cremation ground for one who desires, "May I prosper in the world of the ancestors."
17.30.2	Six men facing east, three in front, two transverse in the back, and two transverse in the front, that is the self.
17.30.3	Its measurements:
17.30.4	If it is shoulder-high in front and navel-high in the back,
17.30.5-10	If it is knee-high in front and ankle-high in back, If it is ankle-high in front, and equal to the ground in back, This is the cremation ground-like (fire), for one who desires the world of the ancestors. Then indeed this (fire) is the tortoise-like (fire) for a non-Brahmin. The middle of the back should be enclosed.
17.30.11	When he is alive, he places him in front of himself, as if he were a stick, with his head.
17.30.12	He places the bricks in the intermediate directions, as if they were feet.
17.30.13	This is the tortoise-shaped altar, which is to be enclosed on all sides.
17.31.1	One who is going to perform the Sautrāmaṇī sacrifice.
17.31.2	He prepares a red hide, a horn, a castrated goat, grass, a woollen blanket, a handful of rice, a handful of chaff, three vessels of different trees, three kinds of barley, three kinds of wool, a sacrificial post with an eagle-feather, a pregnant she-buffalo, a couch, a pot, a jar, a cart, two kinds of wood, a long bamboo, a net, a hundred-stringed instrument, a hundred measures, gold, a hundred, a thread, and a Brahman who receives the remnants of the oblation. If he does not find a Brahman, then a termite mound.
17.31.3	Then having offered the oblation of the New-moon sacrifice, he sleeps on the skin of a red animal in the house with the constellation Vāgṛa at the head, with Sura-Soma.
17.31.4	A eunuch attends him on the right side.
17.31.5	With lead, the eunuch buys the grass, saying, "This is yours, this is mine."
17.31.6	"Sura-Soma is bought."
17.31.7	Then having taken it, having led it into the hall through the eastern door, he places it behind the Garhapatya.
17.31.8	Then they roast half of these grains.
17.31.9	Then they put the other half on the Garhapaty fire in a single-pot and roast them.
17.31.10	Those of them that are roasted become seeds.
17.31.11	Those that are not roasted become chaff.
17.31.12	Having placed a new pot on the Garhapatya fire, they cook the rice like water.
17.31.13	Then, having drained it, they put it in a hard or soft vessel.
17.31.14	Then they pound the rice.
17.31.15	They scatter the small grains and the husks on the mound.
17.31.16	They call it "the month of rice".
17.31.17	Then taking the measure, he measures one handful of grass, two of chaff, three of grains, four of naked barley.
17.31.18	Then sprinkling the cooked rice with the powder and sprinkling it with the juice of the sugarcane, he prepares it.
17.32.1	"I sprinkle you with the sweet, with the sweet, the intense with the intense, the immortal with the immortal. I sprinkle you with Soma."
17.32.2	Then having moved this stool towards the Ahavaniya fire, he places it to the right (of the fire).
17.32.3	He places the Indravastu on the stool, the pot on the Indravastu, and the Karotara on the pot.
17.32.4	Then he encloses the rice with the Karotara all around.
17.32.5	Then having covered him, he touches him, saying, "May Soma be cooked for him, may be cooked for the Asvins, may be cooked Sarasvati, may be cooked Indra, the holder of the good."
17.32.6	The three nights are spent together.
17.32.7	The Brahman says, "Soma is bought for three nights."
17.32.8	Then when the three nights have passed, there is a sacrifice with three or four animals.
17.32.9	Now on the previous day, the Sautrāmaṇī altar is measured out for him.
17.32.10	Having spread it, he carries the Stambayajus.
17.33.1	This is well-known as the Pāuroḍāśika.
17.33.2	Three times with the Yajus, silently the fourth.
17.33.3	He takes up the eastern boundary.
17.33.4	He murmurs the Karana.
17.33.5	He lifts it up.
17.33.6	The Agnidhra takes three times from the Uddhatā.
17.33.7	When the Agnidhra takes thrice, then he encloses the Cātvāla and draws a line around it.
17.33.8	Having enclosed the Uttaravedi, he pours down the Uttaravedi.
17.33.9	Having dug out the pit for the sacrificial post, having dug out the pit of the sacrificial post, the Adhvaryu and the Pratiprasthātṛ take out the two fires from the Āhavaniya and Anvāhāryapacana fires, having covered them.
17.33.10	Having taken up the northern enclosing stick with the formula, "Thou art Agni," having gone around, having placed the transverse piece of wood, he gives out the call, "Do thou place the Prokṣaṇi-water; do thou place the sacrificial grass and the sacrificial post; do thou cleanse the spoon, the wooden sword and the ladles; do thou silently take up the ladle for the Pṛṣadājya; do thou bind the wife; do thou bring clarified butter and curds; do thou prepare the Sura and Soma."
17.33.11	The Adhvaryu performs the well-known animal-sacrifice.
17.33.12	Then the Pratiprasthātṛ, having churned out the Soma and taking it along with the weapons, having taken it out through the eastern door, places it within the altar.
17.34.1	The Pratiprasthātṛ, while the Adhvaryu is performing his functions, purifies the Soma with the stalk of grass pointing towards the north with the verse, "May the daughter of Surya purify the Soma that has been spilled. May she purify it with the eternal strainer."
17.34.2	If the Soma is over-purified, he purifies it with the verse, “Purified by Vayu, purified by the strainer.”
17.34.3	He then takes a leaf-vessel.
17.34.4	Then he takes it with the formula, "O Angiras, do thou take it." Having followed it, he takes it with "Thou art taken with a support; I take thee agreeable to the Asvins."
17.34.5	Having covered the two darbha-blades, he consecrates with the flour of Kvala-grains and the hair of a lion.
17.34.6	Having taken out the two sacrificial grasses, he cleanses them with the hawk-shaped (spoon) and places them with the formula, "This is your place; for you belonging to the Asvins."
17.34.7	Then he takes up the fig-wood vessel.
17.34.8	With that he takes up the Soma with the formula, "O Angiras, you who know, the barley-drinkers." Having recited this, he takes it up with the formula, "Thou art taken with a support; I take thee dear to Sarasvati." He places it with the formula, “This is thy place; for thee belonging to Sarasvati." 
17.34.9	Having covered the two sacrificial grass-blades, he consecrates with Badara-grains and tiger-skin.
17.34.10	Having removed the two sacrificial grass blades, he cleanses with the hawk-feather and places it with the formula, "This is your place; for thee Sarasvati."
17.34.11	Then he gives the vessel made of ashvattha wood.
17.34.12	Then he takes it with the formula, "O Indra, do thou take the barley-grains." Having taken it with the formula "Thou art taken with the Upayāma-formula," he says, "I take thee dear to Indra, the upholder of the Law."
17.34.13	Having covered the two darbha-blades, he offers the cakes of sugarcane and the flesh of a jackal.
17.34.14	Having taken out the two sacrificial grasses, having wiped them with the hawk-shaped (spoon), he places them with the formula, "This is thy place; for Indra thee, O Sutrāman."
17.35.1	He arranges the ladle and the spoon-handle either towards the east or towards the west.
17.35.2	Then taking the Sura with the Prasara, he approaches the southern fire.
17.35.3	He digs a pit around it.
17.35.4	He places it near (the fire) - a long-stemmed basket, a hundred-stringed net, a hundred-man gold, and a hundred-man wool.
17.35.5	Then he makes a mound in front of the old ashes of the southern fire.
17.35.6	He places it near (that mound) - a Brahman who is the receiver of the remnants of the oblation.
17.35.7	If he does not find a Brahman, then a mound of an anthill.
17.35.8	Then having sprinkled water, he raises the sacrificial post in the enclosure.
17.35.9	Having released the sacrificial post reaching the heaven, he then prepares these animals - a tawny horse for Indra, a ram for Sarasvati, a bull for Indra.
17.35.10	If there is Soma-purification, then a sheep for Brhaspati is the fourth animal.
17.35.11	Having performed the Vapa rites for them, the Adhvaryu takes up the cups of Asvins and Sarasvati.
17.35.12	The Pratiprasthātṛ takes up the cup of Indra.
17.35.13	Having taken up the cups, he rises and says, "Recite the Sūktas of Soma to Asvins, Sarasvati and Indra, the dispenser of wealth."
17.35.14	He recites this verse, "O Asvins, you are the dispensers of wealth."
17.35.15	Having crossed (the altar) and having called out, he says, "O Asvins, Sarasvati, Indra, the distributor of wealth, the Soma-juices which are proceeding, may they be offered."
17.35.16	The Maitrāvaruṇa priest says, "May the Asvins, Sarasvatī, Indra, the dispenser of wealth, be worshipped."
17.35.17	He offers with the verse, "Like a son to his parents, both the Asvins."
17.35.18	At the Vasat-utterance, he offers with the verse "O Agni, the oblation is in your mouth."
17.36.1	Having offered the Aśvina-graha, he pours down the Aśvina's spillings into the Sarasvata vessel.
17.36.2	The Sarasvata's spillings are poured into the Indra vessel.
17.36.3	A Brahman consumes it with the two verses, "Your divine gift is different here."
17.36.4	If he does not find a brahmin, he should offer it in the anthill with this same mantra.
17.36.5	Then, having filled these vessels with grass and leaves, he should cover the hawk-leaf in the leaf made of leaves.
17.36.6	Having placed the two Visakhâs, with their points towards the south, he throws the bamboo-stick on the bamboo-stick, the string on the bamboo-string, the thread on the string, the gold on the thread.
17.36.7	Then taking the Sura with the Prâraka, he puts it on the thread, saying, "The Fathers, resembling Soma, are satisfied."
17.36.8	"He flows forth, pierced a hundred times." They stand up with this verse. "Pavamana, the giver of gold." With this verse consisting of eight syllables.
17.36.9	If the Soma has been over-poured, they stand up with the Yajya and Anuvakya verses of the Pitrs. The Adhvaryu, the Hotri and the Brahman stand up with the verse, "May the Pitrs, the givers of good gifts, be pleased with me. May there be salutations to the Pitrs today."
17.36.10	Where he places the hundred-perforated (cup), there he places it, saying, 'For stability.' So says the Brāhmaṇa.
17.36.11	Having placed it there, he places it on the right side.
17.36.12	Then he places these vessels on a heap of old ashes.
17.37.1	To the fathers, to the fathers who have Svāhā, Svāhā salutations to the grandfathers, to the grandfathers who have Svāha, Svāhā salutaions to the great-grandfathers, to the great-grandfather who have Svāhã, Svāhā saluations.
17.37.2	Here he gives a pregnant mare.
17.37.3	Then having touched water, he requests the animal-sacrifice of Brhaspati.
17.37.4	He proceeds with it beginning with the deity and ending with the needle.
17.37.5	Then he performs with the animals, beginning with Manota and ending with Idā.
17.37.6	Then he requests these cakes: Indra's cake on eleven potsherds, Savitr's cake on twelve potsherds, Varuna's cake on ten potsherds.
17.37.7	He performs with them, beginning with the deities and ending with Idã.
17.37.8	Having performed the Anuyājas, having turned by the right, having hastened towards the west, having offered the Samyājas to the wives, having approached towards the east, having swollen the Dhruva vessel, he offers three Samitsya-yajus offerings pertaining to the animal-sacrifice, with the formulas, "O sacrifice, go to the sacrifice. This is thy sacrifice. O lord of sacrifice, the gods know the path."
17.37.9	Here they place the Avabhṛtha (rite). Whatever is smeared with oil becomes together with the heart-disease.
17.37.10	Taking this, they go out towards the north between the Catvāla and the mound.
17.38.1	I heard two Vedas of the Pitrs and of the gods and of men. By them this entire world has come together, between the former and the latter sign.
17.38.2	Having wandered with the well-known heart-pain, he places these vessels at the water's edge, saying, "O god Varuna, the noose of the Gayatri metre is established in the Brahman. I release it with this." The one made of leaves.
17.38.3	"O god Varuna the noose of Triṣṭubh metre is established in royalty. I release it by this." The one of banyan wood.
17.38.4	The Aśvattha tree is the one that is bound by the Gāyatrī metre, the noose of Varuna, the god, which is established in the cattle. That one is bound by this.
17.38.5	The Śatātrīṇā plant is the one that bound by the Anushtup metre, the nouse of Varuna, which is established among the animals. That one is tied by this.
17.38.6	Silently, the Valam and Satam.
17.38.7	The Avabhrtha is well-known.
17.38.8	"The waters and the goddesses, and the womb of you all."
17.38.9	Then they go without waiting, for the disappearance of Varuna.
17.38.10	They make the kindling-sticks on the path, saying, "May we be kindled by his kindling."
17.38.11	Having come, he puts them on the Āhavanīya fire, saying, "You are the kindling-stick, you are the brilliance, bestow brilliance on me."
17.38.12	Then they attend upon the Ahavaniya fire, reciting, "I have followed the waters, I have united with the sap, I have come to the Agni with milk, may that unite me with radiance."
17.38.13	Then he performs the Kuside oblation with barley-flour.
17.38.14	Then having attended upon the deities, he attends upon the sacrificial post and concludes the Sautrāmaṇī.
17.39.1	Having studied the Veda, he prepares himself for the bath, with a piece of wood, a towel, a barber, a razor, wood for the couch, a broom, tooth-wood, hot and cold water, well-ground fragrant unguents, collyrium, a garland, a polished mirror, a garment, an inner garment, a pearl, a golden thread, a string, a staff, sandals, an umbrella, a leather bag, a leather shield, and a leather couch. All these are to be of red colour.
17.39.2	These are his well-prepared requisites.
17.39.3	The examination of bathing.
17.39.4	One should bathe on Rohini, they say.
17.39.5	This is the Prajapati constellation.
17.39.6	So his bathing is in the Prajapati-like constellation.
17.39.7	And also all the rising ones, the rising ones.
17.39.8	One should bath on Pushya, they say.
17.39.9	This is the constellation of Jupiter.
17.39.10	So his bath is taken in the constellation of Jupiter itself.
17.39.11	And he becomes born under the influence of Jupiter.
17.39.12	One should bathe in the two northern Phalguni constellations, says one.
17.39.13	This is the constellation of fortune.
17.39.14	So his bathing is taken in the very constellation of fortune. 
17.39.15	And he becomes fortunate.
17.39.16	One should bathe in Hasta.
17.39.17	This is indeed the Savitra constellation.
17.39.18	One bathes in the Savitra constellation,
17.39.19	and one becomes blessed by Savitri.
17.39.20	One should bathe in Citra.
17.39.21	This is the Indra constellation.
17.39.22	One thus bathes in the Indra constellation,
17.39.23	and becomes blessed by Indra.
17.39.24	One should bathe on the two Viśākhās.
17.39.25	This is indeed the Indra-Agni constellation.
17.39.26	So his bathing is done in the Indra-Agna constellation.
17.39.27	And also, he becomes one with the Viśākhā constellation, with offspring and cattle.
17.39.28	On one of these, in the waxing fortnight, before the moon rises, one approaches the village.
17.39.29	The sun does not shine on him that day. Indeed, he shines with the splendour and glory of those who have bathed that day.
17.39.30	They drive away the cattle-pen with the skin having hair inside.
17.39.31	Having placed the fire in the middle of the eastern half of the cattle-pen, having strewn it around, they bring all these materials together.
17.39.32	The Brāhmaṇa who knows this is the one who is together with all men.
17.39.33	The Brāhmaṇa sits to the south.
17.39.34	To the north, he places a water pot and a Palāśa twig.
17.39.35	Having spread a mat of Erāka grass with its ends pointing towards the north and facing east, he sits on it facing east.
17.39.36	The barber sits to the north.
17.39.37	The robe is to the north.
17.39.38	One should give alms at midday.
17.39.39	If one cooks a cow here, it would be under one's control.
17.39.40	Here, having anointed the Palashi wood with ghee, one offers it at midday.
17.40.1	We have made this praise for the worthy Jātavedas, as one would mount a chariot with a thought. For his good counsel is indeed good for us. May we not be deprived of your friendship, O Agni. Svāhā!
17.40.2	Then he lies down on the ground with his head towards the east, saying, "May I have a life of three years like that of Jamadagni, Kasyapa, Agastya, the sages, and the gods. May I have a life span of three years."
17.40.3	He recites the following verse as he rises: "May you be auspicious and touch me."
17.40.4	He recites over the razor, "Thou art the razor, thy father is the razor. Obeisance to thee, do not injure me."
17.40.5	He recites over the hair being cut, "What thou dost with the razor, thou dost with the reaper. Do thou bless my hair and beard. Do not injure my life."
17.40.6	He shaves the beard first, then the armpits, then the hair, then the other parts of the body.
17.40.7	For from this (head) they go first to old age, and then to death. Those who know this, and shave their hair, become eaters of food.
17.40.8	If he is going to shave his hair, he should first shave his beard and hair, then shave his body hair and cut his nails.
17.40.9	Then, having collected them together, he should give them to a student, saying, "Take these and place them on a bundle of darbha grass or at the root of an udumbara tree."
17.40.10	He places them there.
17.40.11	Having sat down facing the east, beyond the fire, he loosens the girdle and says, "I am loosening this noose of Varuna."
17.40.12	He gives it to the son or the son-in-law who is there, saying, "Having taken this, deposit it at the foot of a banyan or a fig tree."
17.40.13	He puts it there, saying, "I remove the evil of so-and-so, the son of so-and so, for the sake of his grief, for the sake (of his) northern enemy."
17.40.14	He makes the teeth fall out with the twigs, saying, "Remove the food for me. The king Bhaga has come. May his mouth enter me for prosperity and for Bhaga."
17.40.15	He sprinkles water from both sides.
17.40.16	The cold ones are brought in by the exclusion of the divine and human.
17.40.17	Having offered them in the palm of the hand, he sprinkles with the three verses, "The waters are firm, the bountiful ones," and with the three verses "The golden-colored ones, the pure ones, the shining ones."
17.40.18	The person is composed of six parts. This is known from this Brāhmaṇa.
17.41.3	Then he puts on the unpierced garment, saying, "May my body enter thee; may my body enter thee for welfare."
17.41.4	In the same way the upper garment.
17.41.5	In the same manner thereafter.
17.41.6	Then having put this Badara gem with a golden base on a thread, having placed it on a ladle, having bound it with a thread on the handle of the ladle, he offers with the verse, "O plant, O one who saves, O one who endures, O one who is enduring, may she make me having the lustre of Soma, having the lustre of the Sun, having the lustre due to Brahman, having food. Svāhā."
17.41.7	Then he sprinkles him with water from the water-pot, saying, "May we all, with thy help, cross over the stream as if it were a ditch, against the enemy."
17.41.8	Having said, "Thou art the unfettered one," he removes him with the eye-ball. For they release the victim facing them, turning away from it. This is according to that Brāhmaṇa.
17.41.9	Then having placed these two threads on the wooden stick, and having wound them around the stick with the thread, he offers with the verse, "May this gold, for long life, for lustre, for good vigour, for prosperity, for abundance, for victory, for prosperity, enter for the sake of prosperity. Svāhā to this wealth."
17.41.10	He offers the second oblation with the verse, "I have taken the name of the golden father like a dog. May that make me one who has the lustre of Soma, the lustre of the sun, the lustre of Brahman, and one who eats food. Svāhā!"
17.41.11	He offers the third (oblation) with the verse, "The horse is the conqueror of the army, the conqueror of the assembly, the conqueror of wealth, the conqueror of all. The prosperity, the prosperity of gold, which is well-established, svāhā."
17.41.12	He offers the fourth (oblation) to Viraj and Svaraj, to the one who is praised, and to the Lakshmi who is in our house, and to the one who resides at the mouth of the kingdom, svāhā.
17.41.13	"He offers the fifth oblation with the verse, "May I have fame among the Brahmanas, may I have fame among kings, may I have fam among the Vaishyas, among the Shudras I am your fame, svāhā."
17.41.14	Then he sprinkles her with water from a pot with the verse, "May we all be with you."
17.41.15	Taking one of them, he ties it to the right ear with these five verses: "For life, for lustre."
17.41.16	Then he turns him around with the verses addressed to the seasons, with the seasons, with (the verses) of the year, with the rays of the year. With them I follow you.
17.41.17	In the same way he ties the upper end.
17.41.18	Then he releases the garland.
17.42.1	O auspicious one, mount my head and adorn my face. May my face be adorned and may my fortune be increased.
17.42.2	"The one whom Jamadagni took away for Shraddha, for Kamayani, I release this one for prosperity and fortune."
17.42.3	The ointment that is applied with the Trikakud (ointment) is the Trikakud ointment. It is applied to you with that which is on the Himālaya. May there be the lustre of the mountain in me.
17.42.4	One sees in the mirror what has gone astray in one's mind. Seeing in the mirror, one sees this in oneself. May there be longevity and lustre in me.
17.42.5	Then he puts on his sandals, saying, "Thou art the sky" on the right foot, "Thou art earth" on the left.
17.42.6	Then he takes up the staff, saying, "My friend, protect me."
17.42.7	He takes up the umbrella, saying, "You are divine, you are the Suparna bird, protect me from the atmosphere."
17.42.8	He remains there till the rising of the stars.
17.42.9	Then, when the stars have risen, having gone out, he stands towards the directions, saying, "The six goddesses, the Urvīs, do you make us vast. All the gods here do you generate."
17.42.10	"May we not be deprived of progeny, may we not be deprived by our bodies." The stars.
17.42.11	"May we be deprived of the hater, O Soma, O king." The moon.
17.42.12	Having stood up, he goes wherever he wishes.
17.42.13	This is the return.
17.43.1	Now the other one.
17.43.2	One emerges from bathing in the sacred place silently.
17.43.3	If one obtains a chariot, one touches the right wheel with the words "You are Rathantara", the left wheel with the words "You are Brihat" and the middle wheel with the words "You are Vamadevya"
17.43.4	Then, when the chariot is being started, he recites, "This is your chariot, O Asvins, may it not be harmed in happiness or unhappiness."
17.43.5	Then, if one is going to make a chariot of reeds, having touched water, he touches this (chariot) with the verse, "Here is firmness, here is support, here is joy, here is delight, may there be delight here."
17.43.6	Then the teacher makes him take up the seat.
17.43.7-10	Having circumambulated him, he sits down facing him, having turned around. He places him in front of him, facing him. "He says, "The upholder of the kingdom, the teacher's seat, may your wife not be harmed." Then he offers him water. He washes his feet with it. He touches the hands of the one who has anointed, saying, "May greatness be in me, may splendor be in me, may radiance be in me, and may fame be in me."
17.43.11	Having touched water, he touches his chest with the formula, "I have touched the Indra-like power."
17.43.12	Then he gives him something to eat.
17.43.13	He accepts it with the formula, “May I have gone to you with lustre and fame, with milk and brilliance. May he make me dear to the people, the lord of cattle."
17.43.14	"May he be dear to the cattle, may he be the lord of the people." This is for the king.
17.43.15	Having touched it, he says, "Let it be sprinkled first."
17.43.16	He recites the Madhuparka formula, saying, "May he protect me, may he guard me, may he be pleased with me."
17.43.17	He receives it with both hands.
17.44.1	May he go with radiance and fame, may he be united with milk and energy. May he be the beloved of the people, the lord of cattle. Thus says the Brahman.
17.44.2	May he be the beloved and lord of cattle, the lord of the people. Thus says the Rajanya.
17.44.3	If anything should fall on it, he should take it up with his thumb and the great name and cast it in this direction, saying, "I do not wish to injure you. Your terrible body, by that may he be afflicted whom we hate and who hates us."
17.44.4	Then having sipped water, he eats three times, saying, "This is your oblation, O Prāṇa. Make me the best, the lord."
17.44.5	"You are Soma. Make me the Soma-drinker." This is the second time.
17.44.6	"You are food. Make me the eater of food." This is the third time.
17.44.7	Having drunk three times, he gives the leftovers.
17.44.8	He should give the remaining to the one whom he wishes to be superior to himself.
17.44.9	He recites the verse, "Destroy my sin, O cow, that I may lead you to the pasture."
17.44.10	They either make her or release her.
17.44.11	If he is about to do something, he says, "Do it."
17.44.12	Then if he is going to let her loose, he recites over her: "The cow, the mother of the Rudras, the daughter of the Vasus, the sister of the Adityas, the navel of immortality, I proclaim for the one who heals the people. Do not kill the cow, the non-cow, Aditi."
17.44.13	"Drink water, eat grass. Om, let loose."
17.44.14	Then he makes him eat the cooked rice.
17.44.15	He eats it, saying, "May Brahman eat thee; may Brahman eat thee."
17.44.16	It is offered to four deities: curd, honey, ghee, and water.
17.44.17	Some say it is offered to five deities: curd, milk, honey, ghee and water.
17.45.1	The Brahman Soma-artha met him on the way, with his head broken and blood flowing, and with a white and tawny-eyed man.
17.45.2	He said to him, "Do you know the story of the Blessed One?"
17.45.3	He replied, "I am King Soma."
17.45.4	The Adhvaryu, who knew the rites, then approached him.
17.45.5	Where the Adhvaryu, knowing the Nishyaya rites, performs the offering, there I shall be present to remove the faults.
17.45.6	That Brahman knows the Nishyaya rituals.
17.45.7	I shall go to him.
17.45.8	He will establish these castes.
17.45.9	When they perform the Avabhrtha rite, then they offer the Rijiṣa oblation with the twig of the Udumbara tree or with the twig of Palasa tree or with the ladle smeared with ghee or with curd and milk mixed with honey, at the end of the year.
17.45.10	With the Anuvāka beginning with "O Soma, king, what they have cut with the stone" and the verse "What is not deficient from that" they offer the Rīṣiṣa with fourteen verses.
17.45.11	When they are about to conclude the Avabhrtha rite, he should say to them: "Those who have pierced the skin of the king and made it cruel with stones,
17.46.1	Those who do not pacify the dead, but go to the dead, they go thus, the sinners.
17.46.2	Those who, having not established Soma, mix with water, and say, "Soma is established," they go thus, he destroys them there.
17.46.3	They strike him with swords and spears, he who does not pacify the departed, but goes to the dead, then he ascends the heaven.
17.46.4	Having become wind, he blows the excellent heaven, the sky. Having pacified the seasons, he then ascends the sky.
17.46.5	The Adhvaryu, the sacrificer, the Pratiprasthātṛ, the Agnīdh, the Brahman, the Hotṛ, the Udgātṛ, the Rājā - these take the world of the gods. There are fourteen.
17.46.6	Those who offer these fourteen oblations of curds, the king does not take away their world, their offspring, or their wealth.
17.46.7	The priests, increasing the king with the harsh gravas, pacifying him with milk, offer fourteen oblations to him.
17.47.1	Now indeed it is said,
17.47.2	The Brahmanas say, "One should offer the Darsha-Paurnamasa sacrifices, for those who offer them are Indra-like."
17.47.3	The Vaimrddha sacrifice is to be performed at the Full Moon.
17.47.4	By that the Full Moon becomes Indra-like.
17.47.5	Curd dedicated to Indra is to be offered at the New Moon.
17.47.6	By it the New Moon becomes Indra- like."
17.47.7	"By what does one become Indra-like without performing the sacrifices?"
17.47.8	He should say, "With the cake to Indra-Agni."
17.47.9	Now, indeed, it is said:
17.47.10	"Whatever the gods did at the sacrifice, the Asuras did that.
17.47.11	The gods saw this Iṣṭi:
17.47.12	A cake on eleven potsherds to Agni-Viṣṇu, a cooked oblation to Sarasvatī, and a cooked oblation for Sarasvatī.
17.47.13	Having established it on the full moon day, they offered it.
17.47.14	Then the gods became victorious over the Asuras.
17.47.15	One who has an enemy should perform this Isti after establishing the Full Moon sacrifice.
17.47.16	By means of the Full Moon sacrifice, one strikes the enemy with the thunderbolt, and by means of the Agni-Vishnu (rite), one conquers the enemy's deities and sacrifice. This is the Brahmanical text.
17.47.17	This is the procedure for one who has an enemy, as desired.
17.47.18	The animals in pairs are offered to Sarasvati.
17.47.19	Whatever he has, all that he takes away. Thus says the Brāhmaṇa.
17.47.20	Now indeed it is said:
17.48.1	One who has an enemy should offer the Full-moon sacrifice, and one who has no enemy should offer the New-moon sacrifice.
17.48.2	He offers the Full-moon.
17.48.3	One who has a foe should offer the Full Moon sacrifice, and one without a foe should offer New Moon sacrifice.
17.48.4	Having slain the enemy, one does not nourish oneself. This is the Brahmanical text.
17.48.5	This is the text of the Sataratra and the Vāprodyā.
17.48.6	Now it is said:
17.48.7	One should perform the Sākamprathasthīya sacrifice for the sake of cattle.
17.48.8	One who is going to perform this sacrifice should prepare a large wooden vessel, plenty of ghee.
17.48.9	Then having made the first step with the formula, "For thee, O Agni, born of Savitr," he offers an oblation to Agni on eight potsherds, to Indra on eleven potsherds, and to Indra-Suniri on twelve potsherds.
17.48.10	Having performed the rites in connection with the Agniya oblation, he mixes the two oblations in a large Udumbara vessel and says, "Do thou recite the yajus for Indra" or "for Mahendra" if one is offering to Mahendra.
17.48.11	It should be offered with a large vessel.
17.48.12	After having crossed the boundary, he should call out, "Indra is to be worshipped" or "Maheendra is to be worshipped", if one is worshipping Maheendra.
17.48.13	At the Vaṣaṭ-utterance, he offers together with the vessel.
17.48.14	Indra, being satisfied, nourishes him with progeny and cattle. So says the Brahmana.
17.48.15	Now indeed it is said:
17.48.16	One offers with a wooden vessel.
17.48.17	For he did not offer a lump of clay.
17.48.18	It is of Udumbara wood.
17.48.19	Udumbara is energy, and cattle are energy.
17.48.20	He has indeed won energy and cattle for himself, says the Brāhmaṇa.
17.48.21	This is either a praise of what is obtained or a praise of what has been known.
17.48.22	Now, it is said:
17.49.1	One whose prosperity has not yet come should sacrifice to Mahendra.
17.49.2	The three who have lost their glory, the Shushravana, the Gramani, and the Rajanya, their deity is Mahendra.
17.49.3	He who would offer to Mahendra other than these, having offered to Indra for a year, offers a cake on eight potsherds to Agni, the lord of vows.
17.49.4	That well-known offering comes to an end.
17.49.5	Then when the new moon comes, he offers to Mahendra on that day.
17.49.6	Then he becomes the great Indra's priest.
17.49.7	Now indeed it is said:
17.49.8	One should sacrifice to Indra for a year.
17.49.9	For a year one does not transgress the vow.
17.49.10	His own deity, being worshipped, makes him prosper. He becomes more prosperous. So says the Brahmana.
17.49.11	Now indeed is said:
17.49.12	After a year, one should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni, the lord of vows.
17.49.13	Agni, the lord of the vows, bestows the vow on him who has slain Vritra in the form of a year.
17.49.14	Then one may offer according to one's desire." This is the Brāhmaṇa.
17.49.15	Now, indeed, it is said:
17.50.1	One who has not offered Soma should not be united.
17.50.2	The milk of one who does not offer Soma is not yet to come.
17.50.3	If one who does not perform the Soma sacrifice were to make a vow, he would be making a false vow.
17.50.4	He would be excluded.
17.50.5	One should make a vow only if one performs the Soma sacrifice.
17.50.6	Soma is milk, the Saṁnāyya is milk.
17.50.7	One places milk within oneself through milk. So says the Brahmana.
17.50.8	Now, it is said,
17.50.9	He who offers a sacrifice before the moon rises, is deprived of his progeny and cattle; his enemy prospers.
17.50.10	One should divide the rice into three parts.
17.50.11	The middle ones should be used to make an eight-pot cake for Agni Datra.
17.50.12	The largest ones should be used for making a porridge for Indra Pradatra.
17.50.13	Those who are not settled, to Vishnu, the Shipi-visht, a cooked oblation of rice.
17.50.14	For her these are the verses: "O Agni, give to the giver, give us wealth. We invoke Agni, the bestower, the bestower with the thunderbolt. What is that of yours today? What is your name? What is your secret name?" This is for one who is offering.
17.50.15	One performs the first sacrifice with a vow, the second without a vow.
17.50.16	One should not sacrifice with two (kinds of) oblations.
17.50.17	If one were to sacrifice with the former (kind of) oblation, one would make a mistake with the latter.
17.50.18	If one would sacrifice with the latter (kind of) offering, one would make an error with the former.
17.50.19	There is no sacrifice, no offering.
17.50.20	One becomes timid, timid, and timid.
17.50.21	If one sacrifices with only one (kind of) offerings, one becomes bold.
17.50.22	Ignoring that, one should sacrifice with two (different kinds of) offerings.
17.50.23-29	He seizes the mouth of the sacrifice with the former (verse). He offers with the latter. He wins the deity with the former (offering), the power with the latter. He wins the world of the gods with the former, the world of men with the latter. One goes to a greater number of sacrificial rites. Thus says the Brāhmaṇa. Now indeed it is said: This is indeed the Isti named Sumana.
17.50.30	The moon rises today and tomorrow, and in this world it shines half-way. This is the Brahmanical text.
17.50.31	Now it is said:
17.51.1	One desiring heaven should sacrifice with the Dakshayana sacrifice.
17.51.2	One should perform the full-moon sacrifice with the Maitravaruni oblation, and the new-moon sacrifice.
17.51.3	One about to perform this sacrifice prepares a new garment.
17.51.4	Then on the day of the full moon, he offers a cake on eight potsherds to Agni, the lord of vows.
17.51.5	The offering proceeds as prescribed.
17.51.6	On this day, the calves are separated from their mothers for Indra.
17.51.7	Having milked the Indra-cow, he observes fast, either with the Saṁnāyya or silently.
17.51.8	Then in the morning he offers the Agniya oblation on eight potsherds and the Saṁnāyya oblation to Indra.
17.51.9	The sacrifice with two oblations is concluded.
17.51.10	Here they consume the Saṁnāya oblation to Indra after invoking it.
17.51.11	Then, having put on a new garment, he observes the vow of the dark fortnight.
17.51.12	This is his vow: He does not speak untruth, does not eat meat, does not approach a woman, his clothes are not washed in a washing-pot.
17.51.13	Then when the new moon comes, on its eve he offers a cake on eight potsherds to Agni, the lord of vows.
17.51.14	This is the well-known Iṣṭi.
17.51.15	Now on this day his calves are driven away for Mitra and Varuna.
17.51.16	Having milked the milk for Mitra and Varupa, he observes fast, either with the Saṁnayya or silently.
17.51.17	In the morning he offers an oblation to Agni on eight potsherds and a cake on two potsherds to Mitra and Varupa.
17.51.18	This is the Iṣṭi with two oblations.
17.51.19	At the time of Vājinī, one performs the Vājinī rite.
17.51.20	One puts on the garment.
17.51.21	One releases the vow.
17.51.22	One releases one's vow. This is the first half of the month.
17.51.23	Then comes the full moon.
17.51.24	The vow-keeper falls ill.
17.51.25	One performs with whatever remains above the vow-keeper.
17.51.26	This is the Soma-based vow that lasts for a year.
17.52.1	Then they call it 'edada'.
17.52.2	It is equal to the garment and the vow-master.
17.52.3	Having milked the Indra-cow, he observes fast. He is silent, or covered, for the Saṁnāyya.
17.52.4	Then in the morning he offers an oblation to Agni on eight potsherds, to Agni-Soma on eleven potsherds, and to Indra the Saṁnāya.
17.52.5	This is the Trihaviṣṭi sacrifice.
17.52.6	Here they consume the Indra-dedicated Saṁnāyya after having invoked it.
17.52.7	Thus having put on the garment, he observes the vow in the dark fortnight.
17.52.8	The new moon comes.
17.52.9	On its eve, he performs the Upavasatha rite.
17.52.10	Having milked the cow for Maitrāvaruṇa, he observes fast, either silently or with the Saṁnāyyas being covered.
17.52.11	Then in the morning he offers an oblation to Agni on eight potsherds, to Indra on eleven potsherds, and a milk-rice oblation to Mitra-Varuna.
17.52.12	This Iṣṭi with three oblations is concluded.
17.52.13	At the time of Vājinī, he performs the Vājinī rite.
17.52.14	He puts on the garment.
17.52.15	He releases the vow.
17.52.16	Having released the vow, this is the first half of the month.
17.52.17	Then comes the full moon.
17.52.18	The Vrata-pati (the priest) falls down.
17.52.19	He is made to fall down by what is above the Vrata-pati.
17.52.20	This is the Soma-based rite of a year.
17.53.1	Now there is a sacrifice for one who has an enemy, with four wheels.
17.53.2	The garments and the Vrata-pate are equal.
17.53.3	Then, having milked the Indra-cow, he observes fast. The Saṁnāyya is covered. Silently.
17.53.4	Then in the morning, he offers an oblation to Agni on eight potsherds, to Sarasvati an Upāṁśuyāja, to Agni-Soma on eleven potsherds, and to Indra the Saṁnāyya.
17.53.5	This sacrifice with four oblations is concluded.
17.53.6	Here they consume the Indra-dedicated Saṁnāyya after having invoked it.
17.53.7	In the same way, he wears a new garment and observes the vow in the dark fortnight.
17.53.8	The new moon arrives.
17.53.9	He does not perform the Upasad rites.
17.53.10	Having milked the cow dedicated to Mitra-Varuna, he observes the fast, either silently or as prescribed for the Saṁnāyī.
17.53.11	Then in the morning he offers the Agniya oblation in eight potsherds, the Upāṁśuyāja oblation to Sarasvati, the Indra oblation in eleven potsherds, and the Maitrāvaruṇi oblation of curds.
17.53.12	This four-oblation sacrifice is concluded.
17.53.13	At the time of Vājinī, he performs with Vājinī.
17.53.14	He puts on the garment.
17.53.15	He releases the vow.
17.53.16	Having released the vow, this is the first half of the month.
17.53.17	Then when the full moon comes,
17.53.18	the Vrata-pati (priest) falls ill.
17.53.19	He is cured by whatever is above the Vrata-pati.
17.53.20	This is the Soma-based sacrifice spread over a year.
17.54.1	This sacrifice is for one who has enemies and has four wheels.
17.54.2	Just as one who has come to destroy the enemy in a battle with four wheels, so indeed, having performed this sacrifice, he comes to destroy the evil enemy.
17.54.3	This is the sacrifice of Vasishtha, the sacrifice of Keshi, the sacrifice of Sarvasena.
17.54.4	Vasishtha, when he attacked the Saudāsa, attacked them thus.
17.55.3	He performs the Isti with the New-moon oblation before the full moon of Phalguna or Chaitra and consecrates himself.
17.55.4	His consecration is unlimited, and there are three Upasads.
17.55.5	He buys the king in such a way that he thinks, "May the Soma-pressing be accomplished on the full moon day for me."
17.55.6	It is accomplished for him in that way.
17.55.7	He proceeds to the Upavasatha day with the well-known rite.
17.55.8	Now on this day the calves are driven away for the Visve Devas.
17.55.9	He milks the milk for the Visve Devā, silently, for the Sāṁnāyya.
17.55.10	Having taken the Vasantīvarī round, they spend the night separately.
17.55.11	Then in the morning the three-fold sacrificial grass.
17.55.12	He spreads it as one.
17.55.13	Then he prepares the animal for Agni.
17.55.14	His (Agni's) oblation is offered at the Vaishvadev (sacrifice).
17.55.15	The oblations of the Vaishvadeva (sacrifice) follow the oblations of the morning pressing.
17.55.16	The oblations are accompanied by the injunctions.
17.55.17	"Recite! Offer!" (are the injunctions) for the other oblations.
17.55.18	The Agniṣṭoma with three stomas proceeds in a straight line.
17.55.19	He performs the Vājina (sacrifice) before the Soma-offerings.
17.55.20	The Avabhṛtha (rite) is the same as the Soma-offerinngs.
17.55.21	The Avabhrtha is well known.
17.55.22	Having performed the Udayanīya Iṣṭi, one offers the Vasa animal to Mitra-Varuna.
17.55.23	For it, there is the Dyāvāpṛthivi animal.
17.55.24	Having performed as prescribed the two oblations to them, one offers the Pasupuroḍāśa oblations.
17.55.25	It concludes as prescribed. As in the case of the animal sacrifice involving two animals.
17.55.26	Now, having performed the Full-moon and New-moon sacrifices, he says.
17.55.27	Now, then, in the four months.
17.56.1	One who is going to perform the Soma sacrifices of Varuna-prastha and the New-moon sacrifices.
17.56.2	He consecrates himself.
17.56.3	His consecration is unlimited, and the Upasads are twelve.
17.56.4	He buys the king in such a way as he thinks, "May the second day be accomplished for me on the full-moon day."
17.56.5	It is accomplished for him in that way.
17.56.6	He comes to the Upavasatha day with the well-known rite.
17.56.7	On this day of his, the calves are driven away for the Maruts.
17.56.8	He milks the Marut-milk, either for the Saṁnāyya or silently.
17.56.9	Then, having performed the Vasatīvari rites, they observe the special fast.
17.56.10	Then in the morning he performs the animal sacrifice to Agni.
17.56.11	It has Marut as the Upakalambha.
17.56.12	The seven Varuna-grahas follow it at the morning pressing.
17.56.13	Where he arranges the sacrificial posts at the morning pressing, there he performs the continuous Marjālīya rite.
17.56.14	Having placed the Karambha vessels over the Garhapatya fire near the oblations, he proceeds with them to the Marjalyan fire.
17.56.15	The Savaniya offerings are accompanied by instructions.
17.56.16	"Recite! Offer!" for the other oblations.
17.56.17	The Ukthya sacrifice with fifteen verses is concluded in a straight line.
17.56.18	He performs the Ahina sacrifice with a continuous flow.
17.56.19	Now on this day the calves are driven away for Varuna.
17.56.20	He milks the milk for Varuna, silently, after the Saṁnāyya (milk) has been finished.
17.56.21	Having taken the Vatsa-milk, they observe fast separately.
17.56.22	In the morning he dedicates the animal to Agni.
17.56.23	The animal dedicated to Varuna is its substitute.
17.56.24	The offerings to Varuna and to Ka are performed at the morning pressing.
17.56.25	The Savaniya offerings have the Prāṣaṅgiya formula.
17.56.26	One recites the Anubrūhi formula for the other two oblations.
17.56.27	The Ukthya sacrifice with seventeen Stotras is concluded in a straight line.
17.56.28	One performs the Soma-pressing before the pressing of the Dhānā-Soma.
17.56.29	The Avabhṛtha rite is similar.
17.56.30	Then at this Avabhṛtha they take up the grains of corn, saying, "For Varuna, the grains of corn."
17.56.31	The Varuna oblation is to be offered at the Avabhṛtha.
17.56.32	They scatter the grains of corn together with the flour.
17.56.33	The Avabhṛtha is well known.
17.56.34	Having performed the Udayanīya sacrifice, he prepares the Vasa oblation for Mitra-Varuna.
17.56.35	For it there is the Kaiopalambha rite.
17.56.36	Having performed the Vapa rites for them, he offers the Pasupurodāsa oblations.
17.56.37	It concludes as in the case of the animal sacrifice involving two animals.
17.56.38	Now, it has been said, 'having performed the Full-moon and New-moon sacrifices'.
17.56.39	Now, then, in the four months.
17.57.1	One who is going to perform the Soma sacrifices with the Sākamedhas
17.57.2	undergoes consecration.
17.57.3	His initiation is unlimited, and the Upasads are twelve.
17.57.4	He buys the king in such a way that he thinks, "May the third day of my sacrifice on the full moon day be accomplished."
17.57.5	It is accomplished for him in that way.
17.57.6	He proceeds to the Upasads with the well-known rite.
17.57.7	Having removed the Vatsapari (milk) and having separated the milk, they observe the fast.
17.57.8	Then in the morning he offers the animal dedicated to Agni.
17.57.9	The animal dedicated to Agni has the Anīkavata as its Upakalmabha.
17.57.10	The animals dedicated to the Savitr deities follow the animal dedicated to the Savitrs.
17.57.11	The animals of the Savitr deities have the Prāṣa as their mantra.
17.57.12	"One should say, "Recite! Offer!"
17.57.13	The animals dedicated at the midday pressing follow the animal dedicated at the midday pressings.
17.57.14	The animals at the midday pressing have the Prāsa as their mantra.
17.57.15	"Recite! Offer!" to Sāntapana.
17.57.16	The Ukthya of twenty-one verses is completed.
17.57.17	He performs the Ahīna-samsați.
17.57.18	Then, having performed the Vasatīvari ceremony, they observe fasting with special rites.
17.57.19	Then in the evening he performs the Gṛhamedhiye rite.
17.57.20	Then in late night he performs the Pūrṇadavy rite.
17.57.21	Then at dawn he prepares the Agniya animal.
17.57.22	His (the Adhvaryu's) is the Kraidin (cup).
17.57.23	It follows the Savanīya cups.
17.57.24	The Savanīya (cups) have Prāṣa (cups).
17.57.25	"The Kraidin says, "Recite! Offer!"
17.57.26	The Ukthya of thirty-nine verses is concluded in a straight line.
17.57.27	He performs the Ahīna-sāntati.
17.57.28	Then having taken the Vasatīvari waters, they observe the fast separately.
17.57.29	Then in the morning he offers the animal dedicated to Agni.
17.57.30	The animal dedicated to Prajapati is the supplementary animal.
17.57.31	The great oblations follow the oblations at the morning pressing.
17.57.32	The oblations at the Savaniya pressing are accompanied by instructions.
17.57.33	"One should recite, one should offer" (are the instructions) for the other oblations.
17.57.34	The great offerings at the Pitryajna follow the oblations of the third pressing.
17.57.35	When he moves to the Dhishnya fires at the third pressing, he performs the Ajashra Marjalyana.
17.57.36	When the oblations are near, having cooked the oblations for the Mahapitryajna on the Garhapatya, he performs the Marjalyana with them.
17.57.37	The Savaniya oblations are accompanied by instructions.
17.57.38	"Recite! Offer!" for the other oblations.
17.57.39	The Ukthya sacrifice of thirty-three Stotras is concluded.
17.57.40	Before the Soma-pressing, he performs the Triyambhaka rites.
17.57.41	The rites are similar to those of the Avabhrtha.
17.57.42	The Avabhrtha is well-known.
17.57.43	Having performed the Udayaniya Iṣṭi, he offers the Vasa animal dedicated to Mitra-Varuna.
17.57.44	For it, the Upālambha rite is performed for Viśvakarman.
17.57.45	Having performed the Vapa rites for them, he offers the Pasupurodāsa oblations.
17.57.46	The sun follows them.
17.57.47	The Pasupurodāsas are accompanied by Prāṣa.
17.57.48	"Recite! Offer!" to the sun.
17.57.49	It concludes like the animal sacrifice for two animals.
17.57.50	Now it is said, having performed the Full Moon and New Moon sacrifices.
17.57.51	Now, then, about the four months.
17.58.1	One who is going to perform the Soma sacrifice with the Shunashīrīya rite is consecrated.
17.58.2	He is consecrated.
17.58.3	His consecration lasts for an unlimited time, and there are three Upasads.
17.58.4	He buys the king in such a way that he thinks, "My Soma sacrifice will be accomplished on the full moon day."
17.58.5	It is accomplished for him in that way.
17.58.6	He proceeds to the Upavasatha day with the well-known rite.
17.58.7	Then, having performed the Vasatīvari rites, they observe the special fast.
17.58.8	Then, on that night, the calves of the cows are removed.
17.58.9	In the morning, he milks the cow for Vayu, and the cow for Sannāyya is covered. Silently.
17.58.10	Then he prepares the animal for Agni.
17.58.11	The bull for Indra is the sacrificial animal.
17.58.12	The offerings to Suna-Sira follow the morning offerings.
17.58.13	The Savaniya offerings are accompanied by the Prāṣa.
17.58.14	"One should say, "Recite! Offer!" to the other offerings."
17.58.15	The Agniṣṭoma rite concludes with the straight path of light.
17.58.16	The Avabhṛtha rite is the same as the Agniṣṭoma.
17.58.17	The Avabṛtha rite is well-known.
17.58.18	Having performed the Udayanīya Iṣṭi, he offers the Vasa animal to Mitra-Varuna.
17.58.19	For it, there is the Sūrya Upālambha.
17.58.20	Having performed the prescribed Vapa offerings, he offers the Pasupuroḍāśa oblations.
17.58.21	It concludes as in the case of the animal sacrifice involving two animals.
17.58.22	Now, it has been said that one should perform the Full Moon and New Moon sacrifices.
17.59.1-8	Now, they say, 'From here on, the Jyotiṣṭoma.' One who is going to perform the Soma sacrifice with the Vaisvadev rite becomes one who is going to offer the Soma sacrifice. The Pratipada is the same. Only this much is different. The Agnistoma here is Trivṛt. The Jyotiṣṭōma there. Now, one who is going into the Soma sacrifice with Varuna-Prāghasa in the four months becomes one who is offering the Soma sacrifice. He consecrates.
17.59.9	His initiation is unlimited, and there are six Upasads.
17.59.10	He buys the king in such a way that he thinks, "My Soma sacrifice will be accomplished on the full-moon day."
17.59.11	It is accomplished for him in that way.
17.59.12	He proceeds to the Upasads with the well-known rite.
17.59.13	On this day, two calves are driven away for him, for the Maruts and Varuna.
17.59.14	The two (priests) milk the cow for the Saṁnāyya (oblation) silently or with recitation.
17.59.15	Then, having taken away the Vasatīvari (milk), they observe fast separately.
17.59.16	Then in the morning he prepares the animal dedicated to Agni.
17.59.17	The Marut and Varuna oblations are to be offered in between.
17.59.18	The seven oblations dedicated to Varuna follow the morning Savanīya oblations.
17.59.19	Where he performs the Dhishnya rites at the morning pressing, he performs the Marjalyana rite continuously.
17.59.20	Having placed the Karambha vessels on the Garhapatya fire near the oblations, he performs the rite of Marjalyana with them.
17.59.21	The Savaniya rites are accompanied by instructions.
17.59.22	"Recite! Offer!" for the other oblations.
17.59.23	The Madhyandina and Varuna and Kaya rites are followed.
17.59.24	The Savaniya rites have Prishas.
17.59.25	One should recite and offer the other two oblations.
17.59.26	The Ukthya rite concludes with the straight path and light.
17.59.27	The subsequent rites are the same as in the Dviratra.
17.59.28	Now, about the four months.
17.60.1	One who is going to perform the Soma sacrifice with the Saikamedha rite becomes initiated.
17.60.2	He becomes initiated.
17.60.3	His initiation is unlimited, and there are six Upasads.
17.60.4	He buys the king in such a way that he thinks, "My Soma sacrifice will be accomplished on the full-moon day."
17.60.5	It is accomplished for him in that way.
17.60.6	He goes to the Upasads with the well-known rite.
17.60.7	Then, having removed the Vatsapari (milk), they observe the fast separately.
17.60.8	Then in the morning, he prepares the Agniya animal.
17.60.9-14	The Prajapati-s are the Upalambha-s. The Prajapati-related ones follow the morning Savaniya-s. Savaniya-s have instructions. "O Anīkavata, recite and offer." The Santāpana-s follow the midday Savaniya-s.
17.60.15	"Recite! Offer!" to Sāntapana.
17.60.16	The great oblations beginning with the Grīhīmaṇḍala are performed in the course of the third pressing.
17.60.17	When he performs the Dhishnyas in the course of third pressing, he performs the Marjālīya continuously.
17.60.18	Having performed with the great oblations, having cooked the oblations for the great Paitṛyajña in the Garhapatya, he performs the Mārjālīya with them.
17.60.19	The Savanīya (sacrifices) have Prāṣaṇḍas.
17.60.20	"One should say, "Recite! Offer!" to the other oblations."
17.60.21	The Ukthya sacrifice on the straight path is concluded.
17.60.22	The subsequent rites are common as in the Trirātra.
17.60.23	The Śunāsīrīya is indeed so.
17.61.1	Now they say, "This is the great sacrifice."
17.61.2	Some say, "The Jyotiratītrātra."
17.61.3	One consecrates.
17.61.4	His initiation is unlimited, and the Upasads are twelve.
17.61.5	He buys the king in such a way that he thinks, "May the Soma-pressing be accomplished on the full-moon day for me."
17.61.6	It is accomplished for him in that way.
17.61.7	He goes to the Upasads with the well-known rite.
17.61.8	On this day of his, three calves are driven away for the All-gods, Maruts and Varuna.
17.61.9	He milks three cows, silently, for the Saṁnāyya.
17.61.10	Having then taken the Vatsavārī (water) around, they observe fast separately.
17.61.11	Then in the morning, the sacrificial grass is spread in three rows.
17.61.12	He spreads it as one.
17.61.13	Then he prepares the animal for Agni.
17.61.14	The following are the oblations to be offered at the morning pressing: to Visvedevas, Maruts, Varuna, Anika, Kradi, Prajapati, Tupa, Indra and Rishabha.
17.61.15	The oblations to Visvedevas are followed by those to be offered at morning pressing.
17.61.16	The oblation to be offered at pressing is accompanied by the Prāṣa.
17.61.17	"Recite, offer" are the words for the other oblations.
17.61.18	All the oblations to Varuna are performed in accordance with the Madhyandina school.
17.62.1	When he is engaged in the Madhyandina Savana, he performs the Marjalyi rite continuously.
17.62.2	When the oblations are near, having placed the Karambha vessels on the Garhapatya fire, he performs the rite of Marjalyi with them.
17.62.3	The Savaniya rites are accompanied by instructions.
17.62.4	"Recite! Offer!" for the other oblations.
17.62.5	The great oblations beginning with the Anīkavata are performed in succession to the Savanīya oblations.
17.62.6	When he distributes the Dhishnya oblations at the third pressing, he performs the Ajastra and Marjalyi rites.
17.62.7	Having performed with the great oblations, having cooked the great Paitr yajna oblations in the Garhapatya, he performs the Marjalyi rite with them.
17.62.8	The Savanīya (sacrifices) are accompanied by Prāṣa (offerings).
17.62.9	"One should say, "Recite! Offer!" to the other oblations."
17.62.10	The Rjūdha-Jyotiṣṭoma Atiratra is concluded.
17.62.11	Having performed the Soma-sacrifice with the Vājinīya and Traiyambaka (formulas) before the Hāna Soma-sacrifice, one performs the Soma-sacrifice.
17.62.12	The rite is the same as the Avabhṛtha.
17.62.13	Then at this Avabhṛtha they take up the grains of husks for the Varuna-rite.
17.62.14	The Varuna-rite is to be performed with the Varuna-oblation.
17.62.15	They scatter the husks together with the flour.
17.62.16	The Avabhṛtha is well known.
17.62.17	Having performed the Udayanīya-rite, he prepares the Vasa-animal dedicated to Mitra-Varuna.
17.62.18	The oblations to the two worlds, to the two worlds of the sun, are offered in a taunting manner.
17.62.19	Having performed the prescribed animal sacrifice, he offers the Pasupurodāsa oblations.
17.62.20	The other Havis offerings, beginning with the Sun, follow these.
17.62.21	The Pasupurodāsas are accompanied by instructions.
17.62.22	For the other Havis offerings the instruction is "Recite! Offer!"
17.62.23	The rite ends as in the case of the five-animal Pāśubandha.
17.62.24	Having performed the Full-moon and New-moon sacrifices, the sacrificer sits down in his own house and shaves his head with a razor of red iron and a three-edged blade. He shaves first from the front, then from the right, then from the back, then from the left, then from above.
18.1.4	The officiating priest is Parisrajī, Arun, Mimirā, Triśukra.
18.1.5	He indeed is Parisrajya who is bald, with hair all around.
18.1.6	And he indeed is Mimirā who is white, with a dishevelled head, with a mole, with red eyes.
18.1.7	And he is Triśukra who knows the three Vedas.
18.1.8	He consecrates himself.
18.1.9	For him who is to be consecrated for one night, they buy Soma.
18.1.10	There are three Upasads.
18.1.11	The Agniṣṭoma sacrifice with three stomas, the Rathantara Sāman and the Pravargya rite is performed.
18.1.12	One stoma in the Gāyatrī verses.
18.1.13	The Agniṣṭoma is the known rite for offering oblations to the gods.
18.1.14	The Atigrahya rite belongs to Brhaspati.
18.1.15	The animal sacrifice belongs to Brhaspatī.
18.1.16	The consecration rite is performed at the same time.
18.1.17	At the time of consecration, he spreads a black antelope skin with its neck towards the east and its fur upwards in the place where the sacrificer is.
18.1.18	Having seated the sacrificer facing east, having worshipped him with golden and silver plates, having brought ghee in a leaf-vessel, he consecrates with the verse, "Brihaspati, being born first, of great light, in the supreme sky, seven-faced, greatly born, with rays, he conquered the darkness with seven rays.
18.1.19	"In the impulse of the divine Savitr, with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of Pusan, with the instrument of Sarasvati, the controller of speech, with the impulse of Brihaspati, I sprinkle thee."
18.1.20	"Having sprinkled, they cry out together, until the mouth is wiped."
18.2.1	At the morning pressing, when the Nārāśamsa verses have been recited, eleven sacrificial fees are given.
18.2.2	At the Madhyandina Savana, when the Nara-samsa hymns are recited, there are eleven.
18.2.3	At the third Savana, when Nara-samsa is recited, there are twelve horses.
18.2.4	Maudgalya said that one should give a horse at the Madhyandina savana itself.
18.2.5	This indeed is the sacrificial rite of purification.
18.2.6	Just as this river Gaigari cleanses, so does he, having performed this sacrifice, cleanse his evil foe.
18.2.7	He should offer the Agniṣṭoma sacrifice with four stomas on the same day, before the break, for the sake of peace.
18.2.8	The king who wishes to perform the Rājasūya sacrifice and be consecrated with the Brhaspati Savana.
18.2.9	They say, however, that one who has been consecrated in the Rājasūya should not be consecrated in another sacrificial rite.
18.2.10	For he would be without a descent.
18.2.11	One should be consecrated in both, the Brahman and the Kshatra.
18.2.12	He is consecrated.
18.2.13	He has three consecrations and three preparatory rites.
18.2.14	The time of consecration is the same.
18.2.15	At the time of consecration, the Madhyandina priests sprinkle him with the cups.
18.2.16	It consists of twenty-four verses.
18.2.17	When the king is about to perform the Rajasuya sacrifice, he studies the three castes, the anointed, the anointment, the Purohita, the Sthapati, and the Suta.
18.2.18	The Purohita consecrates himself.
18.2.19	He has three consecrations and three Upasads.
18.3.4	He has three consecrations and three Upasads.
18.3.5	The Agnesti is followed by the Marut, Prisni, Pashtya and Upa-lambhya.
18.3.6	Seven oblations follow the morning Savanīya oblations. When it is Agnesti, it is because Agni is the face of prosperity. These are the reasons.
18.3.7	The time of consecration is the same.
18.3.8	At the time of consecration, he spreads the bull-skin, with the neck towards the east and the hairy side upwards, in the sacrificial hall of the sacrificer.
18.3.9	Having seated the sacrificer facing east, having worshipped him with golden and silver plates, having brought curds in a Udumbara vessel, he consecrates him with the formula, "I consecrate you with the impulse of god Savitr, with the arms of Asvins, with the hands of Pusan, with the instrument of Sarasvati, the controller of speech, with the instrumentality of the Sthapati-Savana."
18.3.10	The one who is being wiped off the mouth is the same as the one who is crying out.
18.3.11	This is the seventeenth Agniṣṭoma of the Sthapati Savas.
18.3.12	This is indeed the Sthapati Sava.
18.3.13	This is Vaishya Sava.
18.3.14	This one is the month Sava.
18.3.15	The months were performed before this.
18.4.1	One who is going to perform the Sūta Sava becomes a Sūta.
18.4.2	He prepares a black antelope skin, gold and silver ornaments, a leaf-made vessel, and ghee for consecration.
18.4.3	He is consecrated.
18.4.4	He has three consecrations and three Upasads.
18.4.5	The offerings at the morning pressing follow the Agniya offerings. The Agniya offerings are as follows: Agniya, Agniya, Agniye, Agniya, Agnimate, Agnimate. "Agniya is for the Brahmana. Thus these are the Agniya offerings."
18.4.6	The consecration is similar to the time of consecration.
18.4.7	At the time of consecration, he spreads a black antelope skin with the neck towards the east and the fur upwards in the place where the sacrificer is.
18.4.8	Having seated the sacrificer facing east, having worshipped him with golden and silver plates, having brought ghee in a leaf-vessel, having melted it with gold, he consecrates with the formula, "I consecrate you with the impulse of the divine Savitr, with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of Pusan, with the instrument of Sarasvati, the controller of speech, with the Sutasva."
18.5.2	He prepares a Soma-vessel, a vessel of leather, a black antelope skin, two golden and silver vessels, a vessel of leaves, and milk for the consecration.
18.5.3	Then indeed there is a Brahmanical text:
18.5.4	Whatever is the Rajasuya sacrifice except Soma, all that is done.
18.5.5	Having performed the Aṣṭamāsa sacrifice with the Aṣṭakā oblations, he proceeds with the eight days beginning with Ānuṣṭubh. With the Cāturmāsya sacrifices beginning with Indra Turayā, he proceeds for a year.
18.5.6	Then he performs the Ratni sacrifices.
18.5.7	Then he offers the Devasuva oblations.
18.5.8	Then he dedicates the Soma-sacrifice to Sūtavasha.
18.5.9	He spreads the skin of a black antelope, with its neck towards the east and with the hairy side upwards, on the place for the sacrificer not yet occupied.
18.5.10	Having seated the sacrificer facing east, having worshipped him with golden and silver plates, having brought milk in a leaf-vessel, he consecrates him with the verse, "O Indra, the conqueror of foes, the knower of all, the great, the protector of the Vrjina people, the lord of waters, the bearer of burdens, the well-established, the well-renowned, the conqueror, may we follow you, O Soma."
18.5.11	"With the impulse of the divine Savitr, with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of Pusan, with the instrument of Sarasvati, the controller of speech, I sprinkle thee with Soma-juice."
18.5.12	"Having sprinkled, they cry out together, till the mouth is wiped."
18.5.13	Then he offers the oblations in the manner of the Samasropa sacrifice.
18.5.14	Then he performs the sacrifice with the five oblations and the offerings to the directions.
18.5.15	Then he performs the sacrifice of the animal offering with two animals.
18.5.16	Then he offers the oblations of the Satyadutas.
18.5.17	Then he makes offerings with the oblations of his own choice.
18.5.18	Then, having performed the Full Moon and New Moon sacrifices, he makes offerings with oblations of his choice.
18.5.19	Then he worships with the oblations dedicated to the goddesses.
18.5.20	Then he performs the Traidhātavīya sacrifice.
18.5.21	Then he performs the Sautrāmaṇī sacrifice.
18.5.22	The Soma-sacrifice is concluded in fifteen and a half months.
18.6.1	When one is about to perform the Pṛthivīsvārya sacrifice, he procures a red hide of an antelope, two golden and silver plates, an Udumbara vessel, a four-cornered vessel, and water collected from the four directions.
18.6.2	Then there is a Vedic text:
18.6.3	"Whatever is related to the Rājasūya, all that is here."
18.6.4	Having performed the Iṣṭi with the New-moon oblation, he proceeds with the eight days beginning with Ānuṣṭhīya and ending with Indraturyā.
18.6.5	Then he performs the Iṣṭis with the oblations of the Ratnis.
18.6.6	Then he offers the oblations of Devasuva.
18.6.7	Then he performs this sacrifice with four oblations: an oblation to Agni on eight potsherds, to Indra on eleven potsherds, a universal oblation on twelve potsherds, and a rice-pap to Brhaspati.
18.6.8	On the place of sacrifice not yet prepared, he spreads a red hide of a cow, with the neck towards the east and the hairy side upwards.
18.6.9	Having seated the sacrificer facing east, having worshipped him with golden and silver garments, having taken four kinds of water in a basket of Ficus glomerata, he consecrates him with the verse, "Those who gave me fifty horses, O Agni, the praiseworthy, make my fame great, like the immortal men, like the generous men."
18.6.10	"With the impulse of the divine Savitr, with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of Pusan, with the instrument of Sarasvati, the controller of speech, with the instrument, with the impulse of the earth, I sprinkle thee."
18.6.11	"Having sprinkled, they cry out together, until the mouth is wiped."
18.6.12	Then he performs the Sarpam offering with oblations.
18.6.13-17	Then he offers to the directions with the five oblations. Then having crossed over, he offers to the Satyadutas with oblations of two animals at the animal-sacrifice. Then he offers with the oblations of the Prajapatis. Then having performed the Full-moon and New-moon sacrifices, he offers with the remaining oblations of the prajapatis. Then he offers with the Devikā oblations.
18.6.18	Then he performs the Traidhātavīya sacrifice.
18.6.19	Then he performs the Sautrāmaṇī sacrifice.
18.6.20	The Pṛṣṭi Sāman comes to an end with half a month.
18.7.1	When one is going to perform the Goṣava sacrifice, one prepares the following: a hundred thousand as Dakṣiṇā, two golden and silver ornaments, a leaf-made vessel, and a milch cow for consecration.
18.7.2	One consecrates.
18.7.3	He has six consecrations and six preparatory rites.
18.7.4	The time of consecration is the same.
18.7.5	At the time of consecration, a black antelope skin is spread out at the place of the sacrificer, not more than the Veda.
18.7.6	Having seated the sacrificer facing east, having worshipped him with golden and silver plates, having brought the milk in a leaf-vessel, he consecrates him with the Brihat-stotra, saying, "Thou art born, thou hast grown suddenly, thou art the most powerful among the Kshatriyas, thou art the protector of the people, thou art great, thou art established in greatness, thou art awake in the Kshatra and the kingdom. I consecrate thee with the sovereignty of Prajapati, the supreme lord.
18.7.7	"In the impulse of the divine Savitr, with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of Pusan, with the instrument of Sarasvati, the controller of speech, I sprinkle thee with the Gosava."
18.7.8	"Having sprinkled, they cry out together, until the mouth is wiped."
18.7.9	This Gosava is the thirty-sixth, all Ukthya, both Sama, with gifts for the Yajamana.
18.7.10	In the Pavamāna (Stotra) they perform the Kanva-Rathantera.
18.8.1	When one is about to perform the Odanasava sacrifice, he procures a red hide of an antelope, two golden and silver vessels, a hundred gold coins, a plough, four colors - Brahmin, Kshatriya, Vaishya, and Shudra, four tastes - honey, wine, milk, and water, four vessels - golden, silver, copper, and earthen, four Dakshina - a hundred gold coins with three bows, eight maunds of beans, a water pot, four kinds of sticks - made of leaves, Nyagrodha, Ashvattha, and Falguna, four vessels made of different trees, parched grains, three bundles of Darbha grass, an Udumbara vessel, a four-spoked chariot, and four kinds of water collected from the directions, and a hundred chariots.
18.8.2	With this (kindling) wood he goes to sleep on the approaching Rohini.
18.8.3	Then he recites the verse, "Rohini" (to the eastern fire), "Uttāpanīya" (to the southern fire), "Shālīna" (to the western fire), "Anvāhāryapacana" (to the northern fire), "Āhitāgni" (to the central fire).
18.8.4	Then the Adhvaryu, having hastened at the end of the night, instructs (the sacrificer), "Cook a single rice-cake."
18.8.5	They cook it in such a way that it is cooked before sunrise.
18.8.6	The Brāhmaṇa says, "The sun is raised for the purpose of this (offering)."
18.8.7	Having cooked this rice and poured clarified butter over it, he places it in the Udvāsana vessel.
18.8.8	Having cleaned the vessel and spread it, he takes out the rice without breaking it.
18.8.9	Having sprinkled clarified butter and brought plenty of ghee,
18.8.10	Then he makes the four castes sit down facing the south.
18.8.11	When the sacrificer has begun, he offers four spoonfuls of clarified butter, with the verses, "The lion, the tiger, and the two leopards."
18.8.12	Having offered, he pours down the melted butter with the verses, "Thou art the king, thou art the universal king, thou art supreme king, thou art self-sovereign king."
18.8.13	Then having taken this Pravarta (twig) in front of the Ahavaniya fire, he places it on the right side.
18.9.1	Then he asks for this golden vessel.
18.9.2	Having brought honey with a strainer in it, and having mixed it with parched grains, he churns it with two birch-wood sticks, saying, "For thee Indra, for the lustrous, I churn the lustrous."
18.9.3	"Thou art splendour." He gives it to the Brahman.
18.9.4	The Brahman receives it, saying, "I give it to thee."
18.9.5	Then the sacrificer, having cleansed his face, says, "May my face be resplendent, may my head be resplendent; may all be resplendent. May thou unite me with splendour."
18.9.6	Having sipped thrice, he praises.
18.9.7	Therefore he gives this vessel and a hundred pieces of gold.
18.9.8	Then he asks for this silver vessel.
18.9.9	Having brought the Soma into it, having mixed it with parched grains, he churns it with two Sallaki-sticks, saying, "For Indra, for the vigorous, I churn the vigorous."
18.9.10	He gives it to the king, saying, "Thou art vigour."
18.9.11	The king accepts it, saying, "I give this to you."
18.9.12	Then the sacrificer touches his face and says, "May my face be vigorous, may my head be vigorous, may I be vigorous from all sides, may you spread me with vigor."
18.9.13	Having sipped three times, he praises.
18.9.14	Therefore he gives this vessel and the bow with three strings.
18.9.15	Then he asks for this copper vessel.
18.9.16	Having brought milk under the strainer into it, and having put in parched grains, he churns with two twigs of the ashvattha tree, saying, "For thee Indra, the milker, I churn the milky one."
18.9.17	He gives it to the Vaishya, saying, "Thou art milk."
18.9.18	The Vaishya receives it, saying, "I give it to thee."
18.9.19	Then the sacrificer, having cleansed his mouth, says, "May my mouth be rich in milk, may my head be rich in milk. May all be rich in milk; may milk be spread on all sides."
18.9.20	Having sipped thrice, he praises.
18.9.21	Therefore he gives this very vessel and the ladle.
18.9.22	Then he asks for this earthen vessel.
18.9.23	Having brought water through the strainer, having mixed it with parched grains, he grinds it with two sticks of Ficus glomerata and Ficus infectoria, saying, "I offer you life to Indra, the long-lived, for the long-lived."
18.9.24	He gives it to the Śūdra, saying, "You are life."
18.9.25	The Śūdra receives it, saying, "This I give to you."
18.9.26	Then the sacrificer, having cleansed his face, says, "May my face be long-lived; may my head be long-lived. May I be long-lived everywhere. May you spread long life for me."
18.9.27	Having sipped thrice, he praises.
18.9.28	Then he gives this very vessel, filled with beans, and a water-pot.
18.9.29	Then, having taken up this rice, he eats it.
18.9.30	Whatever he cannot bear, he puts into water.
18.9.31	Then he drinks ghee from the gold.
18.9.32	He recites this verse while drinking: "O Agni, make this dear seed for life and radiance. O Varuna, O Soma, O King, like a mother, grant protection to this one. May all the gods grant long life as it was before."
18.9.33	Then having washed this Pravarta with water, he should tie it to the right ear, saying, "May it bestow life on you from all sides."
18.9.34	Then he should turn it around, saying, "You are life, you are universal life, you are all life, you are the entire life."
18.9.35	Then he consecrates him with three darbha-grass-tufts, saying, "From where the wind blows with the speed of mind, from where the rivers flow, with the lustre of all of them I consecrate thee for splendour."
18.9.36	Then he places the right eye-ball on it, saying, "Thou art like the ocean, like Soma, like Agni, like the sun, like the light, like the all-pervading."
18.10.1	The Adhvaryu performs the rite as long as he does. The Pratiprasthātṛ pours four kinds of water in the cauldron of Udumbara and takes four cups, saying, "I take the juice of flowing water for the brilliance and lustre of this person, the son of Amuṣya."
18.10.2	The sap of the waves of the waters, that I take for this Amuṣyāyana, for strength and vigour, with the banyan tree.
18.10.3	The sap in the middle of the waters, I take for this Amūṣyāyana, with the ashvattha tree, for prosperity and reproduction.
18.10.4	The water-offering is the sacrificial juice of the waters; I take it for the long life of this one, for his long life." With the Udumbara (vessel) he takes it.
18.10.5	Then he spreads the red hide of a cow, with the neck towards the east and the hairy side upwards.
18.10.6	Having seated the sacrificer facing east, and having surrounded him with golden and silver plates, he consecrates him with the formula, "With the juice that is the flowing of water, I consecrate this sacrificer, the son of Amuṣyā, with splendour and brilliance." With a leaf-vessel.
18.10.7	"With the sap of the waters, I anoint this son of Amuṣyā for strength and vigour." With the banyan tree.
18.10.8	"With the sap in the middle of the waters, anoint this son for prosperity and progeny." With the ashvattha tree.
18.10.9	"With the sacrificial juice of the waters, I anoint this (person) for long life." With the Udumbara (wood).
18.10.10	"When the earth is cleansed, they cry out." Up to the wiping of the mouth, it is the same.
18.10.11	The chariot stands here for a hundred days, facing north.
18.10.12	Having approached that (place), approach, O hero, be thou fierce, the slayer of foes, stand thou, the increaser of friends, the gods have proclaimed to thee.
18.10.13	Then he touches the wings of the chariot, saying, The wings on both sides of the chariot.
18.10.14	He mounts the chariot, reciting, "Mount, O slayer of Vrtra!" The verse, "May he who knows the path, the one who knows the way, lead us to the path of the gods," is recited.
18.10.15	Then he goes around the fire three times to the right, leading the way.
18.10.16	He gives it to the Adhvaryu.
18.10.17	This is the sacrifice for a king, a brahmin, or a vaishya who desires prosperity.
18.11.1	When one is going to perform the Pañcaśāradīya sacrifice, one procures seventeen calves that have been weaned for a year.
18.11.2	He establishes them in front of the autumnal full moon.
18.11.3	Having performed the Isti with the New Moon offering, he dedicates seventeen calves that are one-year-old and have been weaned.
18.11.4	Having sprinkled them, they are released after establishing the calves.
18.11.5	Then they perform the consecration with the other (cows).
18.11.6	When a year has passed, he dedicates seventeen heifers to the Maruts with heat.
18.11.7	Having placed the heifers for sprinkling, they are released.
18.11.8	Then they perform the consecration only with the other (heifers).
18.11.9	In the second year, when the Maruts have passed, he dedicates seventeen tawny heifers to the Maruts.
18.11.10	Having sprinkled the heifers, they are released after being placed.
18.11.11	Then they establish them with the others.
18.11.12	In the third year, when the Maruts have passed, he offers seventeen heifers to the Maruts, the sportsmen.
18.11.13	Having sprinkled the calves, they are let loose.
18.11.14	Then they settle down with the others.
18.11.15	In the fourth year, when the Maruts have passed away, he offers seventeen heifers with calves to the Maruts, the singers.
18.11.16	Having sprinkled the calves, they are let loose.
18.11.17	They then establish the others.
18.11.18	This is the day of consecration.
18.11.19	He carries the fire for a year.
18.11.20	There are twelve Upasads.
18.11.21	Its days are: a three-day Agniṣṭoma, a fifteen-day Ukthya, a seventeen-day Ukthhya, a fifteen- day Ukthya, and a seventeen-day Atiratra.
18.11.22	Its Stoma is Marut.
18.11.23	Now of these animals, on the first day, three are offered: the Indra-Marut, the Ox, and the Savaniya.
18.11.24	Thus the second, thus the third, and thus the fourth.
18.11.25	On the fifth, the best day, they are offered.
18.11.26	For they consider this day as the best, and one becomes the best among equals. This is the Brahmanical explanation.
18.11.27	Now if any of these animals perish or die, the expiation for the horse sacrifice is performed and then another animal of the same kind and form is offered.
18.11.28	This is the five-year-old animal for a king or a brahmin.
18.11.29	One who desires, "May I be more abundant," should perform this sacrifice.
18.11.30	He becomes greater than many.
18.12.1	One who is going to perform the Agniṣṭoma becomes (a sacrificer).
18.12.2	For him everything is similar except the Purorucas.
18.12.3	"O Agni, the immortal, do thou purify our life-spans." This is for the Indra-Vayu.
18.12.4	"Do thou sacrifice for us, O Mitra-Varuna." This is for Mitra-Varuna.
18.12.5	"O Asvins, do drink the Soma." This is for Asvins.
18.12.6	Two (verses) are recited by the two who move in the east and west, and by the two who are moving in the east and the west, and by those who are moving in a circle.
18.12.7	Three hundred and three thousand (verses) are to be recited in the Agnihotra.
18.12.8	The Ukthya is recited with three hundred and three thousand verses.
18.12.9	The Dhruva is recited with three thousand verses. The Dhruva is always recited.
18.12.10	The Indra-Agni is recited with the verse, "Agni is kindled by Agni."
18.12.11	Agni is the belly of the gods. This is of the Visvedevas.
18.12.12	I praise Agni, the best of the shining ones, Agni, my own protector. These are the three verses of the Marutvatis.
18.12.13	Listen, O Agni, with your hearing, with your fires. This is of Indra.
18.12.14	O Agni, you are the most excellent of all, O Aditi, of the gods worthy of sacrifice. These are the Aditi verses. O Agni, you are Agni. These are the first three verses of the Aditi graha.
18.12.15	"Thou art the means of sacrifice." This is of Savitr.
18.12.16	"Always" is of Patnivat.
18.12.17	"He binds" is of Hariyajana.
18.12.18	This is the three-fold Agni-stut, the purifying.
18.12.19	Just as the plants, which have been cut down and are now growing again, grow up in abundance, so he who has performed this sacrifice becomes pure, purified, and fit for sacrifice.
18.12.20	If he thinks that he has committed a sin with his mouth, he should perform the Trivrit.
18.12.21	He indeed commits a sin with his face, who understands what is difficult to understand of one who speaks little or is silent.
18.12.22	If he has committed a crime with his arms, he should perform a Pancadasa.
18.12.23	He indeed does a crime with his hands, who tries to harm a brahmin.
18.12.24	If he commits a crime with his belly, he should perform an Saptadasa.
18.12.25	He who eats food without fasting commits a sin with his stomach.
18.12.26	If one were to make a single-twenty with one's feet,
18.12.27	He commits a sin with the feet.
18.13.1	He who goes to the countries of Paratas, or Gandhara, or Sauvira, or Karasaka, or Kalinga,
18.13.2	If one thinks that he has committed all kinds of sins, he should perform the Catuṣṭoma Agniṣṭoma sacrifice.
18.13.3	By this sacrifice, Rtuparna Bhaṅgāśvin, the king of Shaphalas, performed the sacrifice.
18.13.4	Having performed this sacrifice, he went to hunt.
18.13.5	Indra, knowing this, said to him, "I will give you what you want, if you do not obstruct my sacrifice."
18.13.6	He went to the place where the water was heated.
18.13.7	There he made her a woman.
18.13.8	She was named Sudevala.
18.13.9	She ascended this very kingdom.
18.13.10	She, being a chaste woman, gave birth to sons.
18.13.11	Indra gave them a common share.
18.13.12	They, being killed, were united.
18.13.13	He made them cry between the two of them.
18.13.14	Then Indra came to her.
18.13.15	She approached him.
18.13.16	He said to her, "You are Sudevalā."
18.13.17	"Yes, sir," she replied.
18.13.18	"What you have done is pleasing to me."
18.13.19	"What will be pleasing to me, sir?"
18.13.20	"It was unpleasant to me that you obstructed my sacrifice. Choose which of your sons should live."
18.13.21	He said to the Blessed One, "I have attained the truth."
18.13.22	Therefore they say, "A woman's sons become more dear."
18.13.23	He should offer a four-stoma Agniṣṭoma sacrifice on this very same occasion before the lapse of time for the sake of peace.
18.14.1	One who is going to perform a sacrifice with Indra as the praised deity.
18.14.2	For him everything is the same as before, except for the Purorucas.
18.14.3	Stand, O Hari, the bull of whose sons is Indra.
18.14.4	We, O Indra, are of great wealth. This is for Maitrāvaruṇa.
18.14.5	He who is the slayer of Vṛtra is two-fold. This is for Āśvin.
18.14.6	The sun has generated light, and Indra has attained the state of a horse. This is for Śukra and Amānta.
18.14.7	In the bearing of burdens, Indra. This is for Aggrayaṇa.
18.14.8	For Nitya Uktha.
18.14.9	He yokes the Dhruva.
18.14.10	"The great field, the man, the moon" - this is of Indra-Agni.
18.14.11	"You know our vast world" - this is for the Visve Devas.
18.14.12	The Marutvatis are always (to be recited).
18.14.13	The Maheendra is always (to be chanted).
18.14.14	"Come to us with all your powers, never be stingy, O Indra, for the cows to be given" - these three are for the Aditya Graha.
18.14.15	This is your wisdom, O Savitar.
18.14.16	It binds the Pātnīvata.
18.14.17	It is always the Hariyajana.
18.14.18	This is the fifteen-fold Indra-stotra for one who desires strength.
18.14.19	One whose elder brother has become inferior should perform this sacrifice.
18.14.20	He will attain superiority.
18.15.1	One who is going to perform the Apto-ryama sacrifice becomes initiated.
18.15.2	He becomes initiated.
18.15.3	His initiation is unlimited, and the Upasads are twelve.
18.15.4	The Bahispavamāna is three-fold, the Hotr's Ajya is fifteen-fold, the Maitrāvaruṇa's is seventeen-fold, the Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin's is twenty-one-fold, and the Acchāvāka's is twenty nine-fold.
18.15.5	The Madhyandina Pavamāna is thirty-three-fold.
18.15.6	The Hotr's twenty-four verses are Rathaṃtara and Vairāja. They praise with one or the other.
18.15.7	The Maitrāvaruṇa's forty-four verses are Vāmadevya and Śakvara. They praise with either one or the other.
18.15.8	The Brahmana-sambita-singers praise the two Samas, Naudha and Vaivarta, with either of the two.
18.15.9	The Acchivaka-singers praise either of the two Samas Kalaya and Raivata.
18.15.10	The Chandogas call this the Ashtasirsa.
18.15.11	The Pavamāna Stoma is of twenty-seven, the Agniṣṭoma Sāman is of thirty-three, the Ukthas are of twenty-one, the other Ukthas are of sixteen, the Rathantara Sāman is five-fold, the Sāman is three-fold.
18.15.12	The small animals went beyond that.
18.15.13	Soma went beyond this.
18.15.14	The gods said, "This is the excess of Apti. Who will be its protector?"
18.15.15	That is why the Aptohyama is called Aptohyama.
18.15.16	Therefore they instituted these additional cups: the Trivrit for the Hotri, the Jarabodhiya, the Pancadasa for the Maitravaruna, the Sauhaviṣa, the Saptadaśa for the Brahmanachchāsin, the Udvaṃśiya, the Ekavimśa for the Acchāvāka, the Varavantiya.
18.15.17	They say that if the sacrifice were to end with the cup of the Acchāvakas, it would come to an end.
18.15.18	Then the sacrificer would be at the end.
18.15.19	They should praise the Hotr alone, the Hotr should recite the Anushtubh verse. Thus the sacrifice is completed in the middle.
18.15.20	They say, all the verses of the Asvins should be praised and recited.
18.15.21	Whatever is left over at night, all that is Asvin. This is one view.
18.15.22	Now the other (sacrifices) are the Trivrt, Pañcadaśa, Saptadaśa and Ekavimśa.
18.15.23	Now these deities are Agni, Indra, Viśve Devas and Viṣṇu.
18.16.1	One who is going to perform the Mṛtyusava sacrifice.
18.16.2	He procures a tiger-skin, two golden and silver ornaments, two leather shoes, two leather shoes with feathers, a garment of wool, a garment of linen, a couch with three bows, a couch with a cover, a drum, a wooden vessel of measured size, a wooden vessel with four corners, the four kinds of water collected from the directions, a hundred and a chariot.
18.16.3	He rests in the bright, the distant, with this (fire) thus prepared.
18.16.4	Then he lays down the fire for the Citra rite, the Anvārabdha, the Anvāhārya-pācana, and the Upasthita.
18.16.5	When the sacrifice has begun, he offers six oblations with the ladle, saying, "This tiger moves in the fire, having entered."
18.16.6	Then on the place for the sacrificer he spreads the skin of a tiger with the neck towards the east and with the hair upwards, with the verse, "O Indra, whatever skill of thine is shining, powerful, excellent, variegated, in which the seven suns are placed, in that we may dwell over the king."
18.16.7	Then he puts on the shoes of a tiger, saying, "Thou art the sky" on the right foot, and "Thou art the earth" on the left.
18.16.8	Then he approaches the right knee, saying, "The tiger is on the tiger; may it be thy support. May all the regions of the earth desire thee; may thy kingdom not be destroyed."
18.16.9	Then he gives him the bow, as in the Rājasūya.
18.16.10	Having seated the sacrificer facing east and having surrounded him with golden and silver garments, he consecrates him with the four kinds of water collected in a fig-wood vessel.
18.17.1	The divine waters that have become mixed with milk, those in the sky and those on earth, of all of them I anoint you with their radiance.
18.17.2	May Savitar anoint you with the divine milk, as the one who increases the kingdom, so may Savitar make you.
18.17.3	Indra, the Vasus have increased, the songs of the ocean-like one, the best of charioteers among charioteers, the lord of treasures, the lord.
18.17.4	"The Vasus sprinkle you from the front with the Gāyatrī metre." From the front.
18.17.5	"The three Rudras, having run after them, sprinkle you from the right with the Triṣṭubh metre." From the right.
18.17.6	"May these three Anudrutya deities sprinkle you from the west with the Jagata metre." Thus from the west.
18.17.7	"May these three Anudhrutias deities sprinkle you from north with the Anushtubha metre." Thus from north.
18.17.8	These three (verses) are recited in succession. Brihaspati anoints you from above with the Paṅkti metre.' Thus (he anoints him) from above.
18.17.9	Then he wipes off the dust from his head, saying, 'The tawny, fierce, devouring wolf.'
18.17.10	Then he strokes his arms, saying, 'Let your arms spread out for life.
18.17.11	Then he takes it up with the formula, "I take up thy arms of Indra, the doer of deeds."
18.17.12	Here he gives him the bow if it has not been given before.
18.17.13	When the earth is sprinkled, they cry out together till the face is wiped.
18.17.14	The chariot stands here for a hundred days after being fumigated.
18.17.15	Approaching that, approach. Be heroic. The fierce one is the slayer of enemies. Stand up. The slayer of Vritra. The gods have praised you.
18.17.16	Then he touches the two sides of the chariot, the two sides of a chariot which move along the edge of darkness, the two wings of Indra, the far-reaching, the two wings which are the most powerful. May our Agneys, the two wings, lead us across.
18.17.17	Then he stands by the chariot, saying, "Salutations to the sage, to the Gad."
18.17.18	Then he takes up the reins, saying, "O Brahman, let it be yours. Stand on the chariot. The one with the thunderbolt in his hand, O god, has put on the reins and his own horse."
18.17.19	He stands on the chariot, saying, "Stand on the chariot, O slayer of Vritra. Indra has stood on the chariot. All have increased Indra."
18.17.20	Here he makes the bow with the string attached, saying, "May the troops of the army be around me; may my permission be permitted." With two (verses).
18.17.21	Then he goes around this hundred times, going clockwise, leading (the horse).
18.17.22	Here he places a seat for him to descend on.
18.17.23	He descends from it as in the Rajasuya.
18.18.1	The Pratiprasthātṛ priest then recites the Vāruṇa Sruti verse while the Adhvaryu priest is performing the rites.
18.18.2	The Vāruṇa and Svishtakṛt verses are recited.
18.18.3	Here, the king gives him a hundred (cows).
18.18.4	Then they strike him with a measured blow.
18.18.5	On the northern side of that (blow), he places the Dundubhi drum.
18.18.6	When the sun has set, they strike him.
18.18.7	Then he instructs him: "Control your speech, and be vigilant in the kingdom."
18.18.8	From then on, he is one who controls his speech.
18.18.9	Whatever he utters, he utters only "I give."
18.18.10	The royal households, the Sutas, the village chiefs, the Kshatra-collectors, and the Karus approach him.
18.18.11	He gives them the post-slaughter oblation.
18.18.12	They, cooking it, enjoy and keep awake.
18.18.13	Then the Adhvaryu, having hastened at the end of the night, having churned the four kinds of water, having tasted it, gives it to be eaten or not to be eaten.
18.18.14	He eats it silently.
18.18.15	Then he anoints him with fresh butter, saying, "May the tiger embrace thee."
18.18.16	Then he approaches the rising sun, saying, "Let the sun rise up, let this my speech rise up. Rise up, O divine Sun, with the Vāyu. I am the speaker, may my speech be in me for a long time."
18.18.17	When he is going away from Rājagṛha, he recites the following formula: "May the rivers flow, may the rains fall, may the herbs be luxuriant, may there be plenty of food, rice, and milk. May I be the king of them."
18.19.1	Here he performs the twelve-day vow.
18.19.2	If he goes east or north, wearing a woolen garment from the two sides of the armpits.
18.19.3	If he is on the right or left side, wearing a garment of Vrsnivasa.
18.19.4	Then, when the twelve twilight-offerings have been made, he offers two oblations with the verses, "Those who dance for Kesin" and "Those who dance in the forest."
18.19.5	Then he ascends the Proshtha (altar), reciting, "Ascend the Proshtha, conquer the enemies."
18.19.6	Then he anoints his head, reciting, "The line that Kankata drew for you."
18.19.7	Then he shaves his hair with the verse, "Savitar shaves with the razor."
18.19.8	While shaving, he recites, "May your hair not fall out. This is your lustre."
18.19.9	Having collected them together, he places them on a bundle of darbha grass with the verse, "He who has distributed the deposit in many ways."
18.19.10	Then he bathes him in warm water with the verse, "May Savitar bestow strength on your arms."
18.19.11	By means of this sacrifice, Death performed a sacrifice, saying, "May I attain lordship, sovereignty and kingdom over creatures."
18.19.12	Then indeed he attained lordship, sovereignty and the kingdom over creatures.
18.19.13	One who desires, "May I obtain lordship, sovereignty and a kingdom over equals," should perform this sacrifice.
18.19.14	He obtains lordship, sovereignty and dominion over equals.
18.20.2-6	He cuts down a tree for the sacrificial post and another for the plough. He makes a yoke for the sacrificial post, and a plough for the plough. They join them together and either eat or put them aside. Then for him this is prepared in front of him, in the place of sacrifice, which is measured according to the altar. He ploughs it with that plough.
18.20.7	Having sown barley in the lower part of the field, he ploughs it.
18.20.8	Then for him these chariots are prepared, yoked with four horses, a chariot with a pole, and a two-wheeled chariot.
18.20.9	On them they put the curd and buttermilk.
18.20.10	When the barley has been harvested in the last days of summer, the sacrificer invites the priests by saying, "Will you perform the sacrifice for me? Or will you make me a meal?"
18.20.11	When they have assembled, he offers the Agnihotra at the proper time in the morning.
18.20.12	The priests approach him.
18.20.13	Then he says to them, "Perform the sacrifice for me today."
18.20.14	The others reply to him, "So be it."
18.20.15	They immediately build a hut for him.
18.20.16	Immediately after that, he brings him from the sacred place, purifies him, and performs the Isti of Initiation.
18.20.17	When that is completed, he neither makes a fist nor speaks.
18.20.18	He places this oblation, the remnant of the vow-offering, for him.
18.20.19	Then he performs the Prāyaniya Isti.
18.20.20	He releases speech after the oblations have been offered.
18.20.21	Here they give him this oblation, which is the remnant of the Vrata-offering.
18.20.22	The chariots start running in the race as soon as they are released.
18.20.23-27	The eastern boundary is one yojana in length, with four divisions and three subdivisions. The southern boundary is a gavyu (i.e., 2000 dandas). The western boundary is two yojanas in length. The northern boundary is one krośa in length. Those who belong to which of these boundaries, they inform the king, saying, "This so-and-so, son of so-and-such, grandson of so-and such, great-grandson of so-and so, is performing the Sada sacrifice." The chariots come.
18.20.28	When the chariots have come, the fresh butter that has settled down is taken out and put into the vessel of melted ghee with the formula, "For the one who is to be offered immediately."
18.21.1	Then he performs the Pravargya rite.
18.21.2	Having performed the Pravargya, he performs the Pada rite.
18.21.3	Having perfored the Pada rite, he buys a king with a three-year-old bull, a bullock and a calf, and offers hospitality.
18.21.4	The Upavasatha rites are performed with hospitality.
18.21.5	Having performed the Upavasatha rite in the middle, he lays down the Khalevali in the northern half of the Vedi at the proper time.
18.21.6	Then having yoked the oxen, they plough the barley.
18.21.7	The northern half of the altar is made of barley-manure.
18.21.8	Then having joined the oxen in the middle, they proceed towards the east, taking the barley.
18.21.9	This is the great altar of Yavabarsha.
18.21.10	Then he places the Ahavaniya fire.
18.21.11	Having placed the Ahavaniya, he joins the Sadah and the Havirdhana fires.
18.21.12	Having joined the Sadah and Havirdhana fires, he places the Agnis and Soma fires.
18.21.13	Having placed Agnis and Soma, he takes the Vasatavari waters.
18.21.14	Having taken them, he performs the morning recitation.
18.21.15	Having put on the morning-hymn, he goes to the water.
18.21.16	He goes to the water with water.
18.21.17	He approaches the Agniṣṭoma sacrifice.
18.21.18	The pressing is well-known.
18.21.19	The Grahas are taken in the well-known manner.
18.21.20	The rite is the same as in the Aśvinī Graha.
18.21.21	Having taken the Aśvin graha and taking three girdles, he goes to a place with a fence.
18.21.22	For her, the vessel is like a pot.
18.21.23	Having released the animals at the end of the line, he offers them to Agni-Soma, Agni, and Anūbandhya.
18.21.24	They chase them with the omentum offerings.
18.22.1	The Adhvaryu approaches first with the omentums of Agni-Soma.
18.22.2	The others bring it in the reverse direction.
18.22.3	When the pot-full of milk is cooked, he proceeds with the offering of the animal to Agni-Soma.
18.22.4	They place it on the bed.
18.22.5	The animal-sacrifice to Agni-Soma is the principal offering at the morning pressing.
18.22.6	At the recitation of the Pavamāna verses at midday, he proceeds with that to Agni-Soma.
18.22.7	The animal-sacrifice of the Anūbandhya is performed without interruption.
18.22.8	The animal-sacrifice of Anūbandhya belongs to the third pressing.
18.22.9	The animal sacrifice of Anūbandhyā is performed without interruption,
18.22.10	The animal-sacrifiice of Anūbandhīya is the principal one.
18.22.11	The animal sacrifiice of Anubandhya is performed without being mentioned.
18.22.12	The Sadyaskrī comes to an end.
18.22.13	Whatever is done for him when he is not present, that becomes ineffective. The sacrifice itself is his.
18.22.14	Now the Adityas and the Angiras were contending for the world of heaven.
18.22.15	The Angiras approached the Adityas with Agni as their messenger, saying, "Tomorrow we will have the world of heaven."
18.22.16	"Tomorrow we will have it," said the Adityas.
18.23.1	The Adityas said:
18.23.2	"They said to him, 'You are our Hotṛ.'
18.23.3	They led that white horse, the sun, as the sacrificial fee, with golden girths and straps.
18.23.4	Therefore, for the immediate performance, the white horse is the sacrificial fee, having golden girths and golden straps.
18.23.5	The white horse is the form of the sun.
18.23.6	And the golden girths and gold straps are the rays.
18.23.7	The two Savanas of the Madhyandin and Arvabuda are of twenty-four stomas.
18.23.8	The Hotr's Stoma is of forty-four.
18.23.9	The Agniṣṭoma Sāman is of twenty-four.
18.23.10	All other stomas are of three.
18.23.11	He gives a white horse.
18.23.12	One who is going to perform the Anukramya consecrates himself in barley.
18.23.13	It lasts for two days, one day being the Upavasatha day and the other the Suti day.
18.23.14	For it, the Madhyamdina and Arvabhava Stomas are forty-three.
18.23.15	The Hotr's Stoma is forty-four.
18.23.16	The Agniṣṭoma Sāman is forty-four
18.23.17	All the other Stomas are fortythree.
18.23.18	He gives a white mare.
18.23.19	The one who is about to perform the sacrifice consecrates himself in the Masha grains.
18.23.20	It lasts for three days, one day before the purchase, one day of fasting, and one day of the actual sacrifice.
18.23.21	For him, the two Madhyamdina and Arvabhava Stomas are forty-eight in number, starting from the Trivrit.
18.23.22	The Hotr's Stoma is forty-eight.
18.23.23	The Agniṣṭoma Sāman is forty-eight.
18.23.24	Everything else is three-fold.
18.23.25	One gives according to one's faith.
18.23.26	One who is about to perform a sacrifice takes initiation in sesame seeds.
18.23.27	It lasts for four days, one day before the purchase, one day before Uttaravedi, one day before fasting, and one day for the actual sacrifice.
18.23.28	This becomes a four-stoma (sacrifice).
18.24.1	One who is going to perform the Vratya Stoma becomes.
18.24.2	They want to receive gifts from the king or a brahmin for a month's sustenance.
18.24.3	They make him the chief who they recognize.
18.24.4	He observes their vows.
18.24.5	He lies down below, without meat, and without having sexual intercourse with a woman.
18.24.6	That is the vow of consecration.
18.24.7	Then, when he wears a black garment and a black turban, it is the form of the garment worn by one who has been consecrated.
18.24.8	Then, when he wears black and tawny skins, it is the forms of the black and tawny skins.
18.24.9	Then, if he wears golden and silver ornaments, it is the appearance of the golden and silver ornaments.
18.24.10	Then, he wears a black turban, which is the form of a turban worn by one who is consecrated.
18.24.11	Now, when he holds the three-stringed bow made of leather like an arrow, that is the form of the consecrated staff.
18.24.12	Now, when he speaks the Vratya speech, that is the speech of the consecrated.
18.24.13	Now, why he wears sandals made of leather is that, being consecrated, he should not stand on unclean things. That is why.
18.24.14	Now, this is the form of that sacrifice: the sacrificial post is indeed the goad-staff.
18.24.15	The whip is the ladle.
18.24.16	The mouth of the chariot is the Āhavanīya fire.
18.24.17	The yoke is the altar.
18.24.18	The axle is the Uttaravedi.
18.24.19	The northern axle is the Uttaranaḍi.
18.24.20	The bow is the Havirdhāna.
18.24.21	The wings are the Āgnīdhriya and Mārgālīya fires.
18.24.22	The ridge is the Sadas.
18.24.23	The servants are the Dhishnyas.
18.24.24	The axle-tree is the Patnīśāla.
18.24.25	The chariot-seat is the Garhapatya.
18.24.26	The Adhishthana is the ancient Garhapatya.
18.24.27	The animal which they cook without killing is their animal.
18.24.28	The Apup, the Sthalipaka, and the Caru are the Purorasa and Purorasa-Purushas.
18.24.29	The Pariskanda which is called out is the Puronuvakya.
18.24.30	What is brought is the Yajya.
18.24.31	What they eat is the Vasatkara.
18.24.32	The Kumbha which is called out in doubt is the Puronukya.
18.24.33	The Adhivākyā is the Yājyā.
18.24.34	The Prati-gar of the Sastra is the one to whom one calls out in a loud voice.
18.24.35	The Ud-gītha is what one shouts out.
18.24.36	Those who, having approached this sacrificial rite indirectly, do not approach it directly,
18.25.1	they would be like those who have been initiated, scattered, and whose Soma-drinking has been interrupted, and who do not eat the food of the dead.
18.25.2	Therefore, for one who is in the state of a Vratya and has not performed the Vratya Stoma, there is no expiation.
18.25.3	For he is like one who has been excluded from drinking Soma.
18.25.4	Those among them who have not established the sacred fires, having returned to their respective homes and established the fires, approach the Sthapati with thirty-three and thirty-three Dakṣiṇās.
18.25.5	The Brāhmaṇas, the Magadhas, the Magadha-speakers, the Brāhmaṇabāndhus, the Apumśalū, the Pumśalū-speakers, and the Jaratkādravas, the Jaratprajñā-speakers, are united.
18.25.6	He who is a Brāhmaṇabandhu, a Magadha-speaker, and a Magadha, is indeed contrary.
18.25.7	The Brāhmaṇabadhus, the Apamśalū, and the Pumśalūs are contrary.
18.25.8-11	The chariot is yoked with the old and worn-out horses. The old and worn- out horses are yoked with the worn-out chariot. The worn-out horses are yoked to the worn-out chario t. This is the wealth of the Vratyas, which has been brought together. It is the staff, the shoes, the blanket and the skin. Standing in the chariot, Subrahmanya calls out to Subrahmanya. This is the time for the Dakshina. This is what he gets.
18.25.12	The priests distribute the sacrificial fees.
18.25.13	They follow the offerings at the morning pressing, which are known.
18.25.14	Those who perform the Vratya rite wander as if unknown.
18.25.15	They make them known.
18.25.16	They follow those at the midday pressing, which are the Indra-Maruts, with eleven potsherds.
18.25.17	The Vratya is Indra, the village is Maruts.
18.25.18	He makes them equal to the village.
18.25.19	The oblation for the third pressing is followed by the oblation for the sun and the gods who are present.
18.25.20	Those who perform the Vratya rite wander as if they were non-existent.
18.25.21	They make them attain prosperity.
18.25.22	The animal-sacrifice of Anūbandhya is followed by the offering to the sun.
18.25.23	Those who perform the Vratya rite move as if without a resting place.
18.25.24	This is Aditi.
18.25.25	They rest in her alone.
18.26.1	This is the Agniṣṭoma of the eldest ones.
18.26.2	It has four Şoḍaśī verses, two Pavamāna verses, and both the Aśāvasya and the Stotra.
18.26.3	This is indeed the Ukthya of the younger ones.
18.26.4	All the Pavamāna hymns and all the Acchāvāka hymns are his.
18.26.5	The Maruts worshipped with this very (hymn).
18.26.6	Among them Vishnu was the Sthapati.
18.26.7	Then the divine Vrātyas worshipped with this very one.
18.26.8	Among them Soma was the Sthapti.
18.26.9	Then the sons of Kuru-Brahman worshipped with this very hymn.
18.26.10	Among them, Upodati Gaupalayana was the Sthapati of the Vyagrapadyas.
18.26.11	Having performed the sacrifice, they went to the Vrātyas, attacking the Panchālas.
18.26.12	Their fathers said to them, "O sons, do not go to the Panchāls. The Panchāls will slander you."
18.26.13	Ignoring them, they went.
18.26.14	They went to the fast-day of the Dālbhya Keshi.
18.26.15	They followed them on the next day when they were going out for the Bahispavamāna (Sāman), saying, "We shall purify ourselves with the Pavitra, the Bahispavamaṇa."
18.26.16	Then in Panchala country there was a Gandharvayana Valleyan Agnivesya Anūchana.
18.26.17	He asked them who were moving together, "Who are moving together?"
18.26.18	They said, "We are the Maruts."
18.26.19	He asked, "Who is your chief?"
18.26.20	Upodhiti Gaupalayana of the Vyaghrapady family replied, "I am Vishnu."
18.26.21	He said, "What did you do? Who did it?" He instructed the Parokhavrata.
18.26.22	He said to them, "You are ignorant. I have instructed you."
18.26.23	They said to him, "You have instructed your sons like a father." They said to him, "Your progeny will be sinful."
18.26.24	And so it was.
18.26.25	Then the Gandharvayanas of Panchala, the Valelyas of Agnivesa, became sinful.
18.26.26	That was a great family in ancient times.
18.27.3	The Agnistoma-sāman is the fifteenth, the Agniṣṭoma-sāman the seventeenth, and all the Pavamāna-sāmans are sixteen.
18.27.4	The Agniṣṭoma sāman is the seventeenth, the Agniṣtoma-sāman twenty-first, and all the Pāvamāna-sāmas are sixteen.
18.27.5	 The Agniṣṭoma -sāman is twenty-first, the Agniṣțoma-sāma twenty-ninth, and all the Pa vamāna-sāmaṇs are sixteen.
18.27.6	The Triṇava is the Abhivarti, the Trayastrimsa is the Agnistoma-sāman, all the Pavamānas are sixteen.
18.27.7	The Trayastrimsa becomes the Abhivarti; the Triṇava is Agnistoma-Sāman; all the Pavamāna-s are sixteen.
18.27.8	Triṇava becomes the Abhivarți, Ekavimśa is the Agnistomastaman, all the Pavamanas are sixteen.
18.27.9	The twenty-first is the Abhyavarti, the seventeen is the Agniṣṭoma Sāman, all the Pavamānas are sixteen.
18.27.10	The seventeen is the Abhyāvarti, the fifteen is the Agniṣtoma Sāman, and all the Pavamāna are sixteen.
18.27.11	Fifteen is the Abhyavartis, the three-fold is the Agniṣțoma Sāman and all the Pavamanas are sixteen.
18.28.1	Now it is said,
18.28.2	The gods did what they did at the sacrifice, the Asuras did what they did.
18.28.3	Prajapati thought, "How can I separate the gods from the Asuras?"
18.28.4	He saw this sacrifice, the Anirukta, the Upahvya.
18.28.5	He called them in that."
18.28.6	When he says, "To the morning deities," he says, "to the morning deities Maruts."
18.28.7	When he says, "Soma is flowing," he says, "Indra is flowing."
18.28.8	When he recites, "For Indra, the cakes," he says, "For Indra, the lord of the cakes."
18.28.9	Then where he says, "To Vayu, to Indra-Vayu," he says, "to the controller, to the controller of Shakra."
18.28.10	Then where he says, “To Mitra-Varuna,” he says, “to the truthful, to the truthful one.”
18.28.11	Then where he mentions the Ashvins, he says, “the two Asvins.”
18.28.12	Then where it says, “to Indra, to Soma,” he says, " to Shakra, to Soma."
18.28.13	Then where he says, "To Indra and Agni," he says, "to Shakra and Jātavedas."
18.28.14	Then where he says, “To all the gods,” he says, “to the Maruts and all the gods.”
18.28.15	Then where he speaks of Indra, the lord of the Maruts, he says, “Shakra, the lord of a group.”
18.28.16	Then where it says, “To Mahendra,” he says, "Mahāshakra."
18.28.17	Then where he says, "To the Adityas," he says, "to the great Adityas."
18.28.18	Then where he says, “To the Vanaspati,” he says, “to the king of the forest.”
18.28.19	Then where he say, “To the god Savitr,” he says, " to the great god Savitr."
18.28.20	Then where be says, “To all the gods,” he says, ” to the great all the gods.”
18.28.21	Then where he says, "To the wives of the gods," he says, "to the great wives of the gods."
18.28.22	Then where he says, “To Indra, the giver of wealth,” he says, “to Shakra, the giver of riches.”
18.28.23	Some indeed instruct, "To the Indras."
18.29.1	This is indeed the later part of the Yajñāyajñiya hymn.
18.29.2	He indeed said this in the Yajñayajñiya hymn.
18.29.3	The Asuras, however, remained indifferent, thinking, "What does he do? What does he not do?"
18.29.4	When he knew that they were not doing anything, he said to them, "The god who gives wealth is yours."
18.29.5	Prajapati is the god who gives wealth.
18.29.6	"The full one is the one who pours down."
18.29.7	"You pour out the full (cup) with the ladle."
18.29.8	"You pour out or you fill up."
18.29.9	"You fill up every desire."
18.29.10	"The god has indeed helped you."
18.29.11	To the gods who are to be accomplished, Prajapati helps every desire.
18.29.12	The Stoma becomes seventeen.
18.29.13	Prajapati is seventeen.
18.29.14-19	For the attainment of Prajapati. A horse with black knees is the fee. The horse is related to Prajapati. For the similarity to Prajapati, One who wishes to separate from an enemy with evil should offer this sacrifice. One does indeed separate from an enemy through evil.
18.29.20	Indra, having slain Vritra, went to the farthest end, thinking that he had done no wrong.
18.29.21	The gods sought him with a sacrifice.
18.29.22	They made him give a hundred cows, saying, "He will return with a greater share and greater affection."
18.29.23	He did not come to the morning pressing.
18.29.24	They all ate the morning pressing.
18.29.25	Who will partake of Soma without Indra?
18.29.26	When the Soma-pressing ceremony was being concluded, they partook of the Acchavaka's portion at the morning pressing.
18.29.27	All the Adhvaryus of the cups were delighted and prepared to partake of the Acchavakâs portion.
18.29.28	They thought that they were like Indra.
18.29.29	Therefore, at the Soma-sacrifice, all the Adhvaryus of the cups, being delighted, chant the Sastra in response to the Acchāvāka.
18.29.30	They think that they are like Indra.
18.29.31	Then indeed it was so.
18.29.32	They say that now the sacrifice is like Indra.
18.29.33	They anointed him.
18.30.1	Here, here, here, here! Thus they said to him.
18.30.2	Great, great, great!
18.30.3	This is your great food. Accept it. Thus they said to it.
18.30.4	This is the basis of the midday pressing.
18.30.5	He should offer the cooked pot at the morning pressing for those who have only one wealth.
18.30.6	Curd is offered at the Madhyandina Savana.
18.30.7	The churned (curd) is offered at the third Savana.
18.30.8	It has a sharp taste.
18.30.9	The Stoma becomes seventeen.
18.30.10	Prajapati is seventeen.
18.30.11	For attaining Prajapati.
18.30.12	A pregnant heifer with a white spot on the forehead is the Dakshina.
18.30.13	The embryo is indeed the strength.
18.30.14	The white spot on the head is the strength.
18.30.15	For the sake of having strength.
18.30.16	He who has been brought down by his enemies or by his own people should offer this sacrifice.
18.30.17	He certainly attains supremacy.
18.30.18	Indra desired, 'May I overcome evil and attain supremacy among the gods.'
18.30.19	He saw this sacrificial rite.
18.30.20	He performed it.
18.30.21	He offered it.
18.30.22	Then indeed he, having destroyed sin, attained the highest position among the gods.
18.30.23	One who desires, "May I destroy sin and attain the highest position among equals," should offer this sacrifice.
18.30.24	He indeed destroys sin and attains the highest position among his equals.
18.30.25	O Indra, do thou destroy the most difficult to be overcome of our foes. Do thou place the foe in a lower position. Do thou make him who attacks us low. Thou art taken with a support. Thee to Indra, the destroyer of foes, I take thee, agreeable.
18.30.26	Having wiped (the vessel), he places it (on the altar) with the formula, "This is thy birth-place. Thee to Indra the destroyer of foes."
18.30.27	His Stoma is Trivrit and Pañcadaśa.
18.30.28	They are six Gāyatrī verses.
18.30.29	Gāyatrī indeed is the most excellent of all metres.
18.30.30	The sacrificer thus overcomes sin by means of Gāyatrī.
18.31.1	Indra desired: "May I attain the foremost position among the gods."
18.31.2	He saw this sacrificial rite.
18.31.3	He brought it.
18.31.4	He performed a sacrifice with it.
18.31.5	Then he attained the pre-eminence and supremacy among the gods.
18.31.6	One who desires, "May I attain pre-eminence among my equals," should perform this sacrifice.
18.31.7	One indeed attains pre-eminence, supremacy among one's equals.
18.31.8	This Soma, the Rishi, the Brahman, is taken for Indra, the Udbhid, with the hymn. You are taken for Indra, Udbhid, I take what is dear to you."
18.31.9	Having wiped it, he places it, saying, "This is your birthplace, for Indra, Udbhida."
18.31.10	His Stoma has fifteen and twenty-one verses, in reverse order.
18.31.11	Those six are the Brihatī verses.
18.31.12	The Brihatī is the foremost of the metres.
18.31.13	The sacrificer thus becomes foremost.
18.31.14	Indra desired, "May I release the animals after breaking the wall."
18.31.15	He saw this sacrifice.
18.31.16	He brought it.
18.31.17	He performed it.
18.31.18	Then he released the animals after breaking down the wall.
18.31.19	One who desires to create animals by breaking the barrier should offer this sacrifice.
18.31.20	He creates animals by breaking the very barrier.
18.31.21	He (Indra) broke the sky, removed the obstruction, and became the subduer of the hostile. Thou art taken with a formula. For Indra, the remover of obstructions, I take thee, the agreeable.
18.31.22	Having wiped (the vessel), he places it (on the altar) with the formula, "This is thy birth-place. For Indra, remover of obstructions, thee."
18.31.23	His Stoma is seventeen and twenty-one.
18.31.24	Those are six Gāyatrī verses.
18.31.25	Gāyatrī indeed broke the strength of the metres.
18.31.26	The sacrificer, having broken the strength by means of Gāyatrī, releases the animals.
18.32.1	One who is going to perform the Rtapeyya sacrifice.
18.32.2	When he desires to eat, he performs the consecration after eating. Or when he gets (food).
18.32.3	He eats after one day of fasting. Then he eats.
18.32.4	He eats after two days of fasting. Then eats.
18.32.5	He fasts for three days and then eats.
18.32.6	Here he attains Viraj.
18.32.7	Having bought the king, he offers hospitality.
18.32.8	If he eats after four days, he eats.
18.32.9	If he eats after five days, he eats
18.32.10	If he eats six days, he eats,
18.32.11	There are three Upasads.
18.32.12	They amount to thirty.
18.32.13	The Viraj has thirty letters.
18.32.14	Food is Viraj.
18.32.15	He obtains food by means of Viraj.
18.32.16	Now that one which is the eleventh, that is hers.
18.32.17	He milks her with that.
18.32.18	Now that one which is thirty-one, that is hers,
18.32.19	He milks with that.
18.32.20	He becomes a butter-vow at the Upasads.
18.32.21	He strikes with three fingers of cold butter, then with two, then with one.
18.32.22	He strikes the cold ghee with three, then with two, then with one.
18.32.23	When the ghee has melted, he puts in three lumps, then two, then one, making the forms of three-uddered, two-uddered, and one-uddered.
18.32.24	He does not turn away from the sun by day, nor from the fire by night.
18.32.25	The Udumbara vessel is the Soma vessel with four corners.
18.32.26	Brahma is the three Vedas, of the same lineage.
18.33.1	The Stoma becomes seventeen.
18.33.2	Prajapati is seventeen.
18.33.3	He did not bow down to Prajapati, the food.
18.33.4	The gods sought him through truth and reality.
18.33.5	Whatever he eats, that is included in eating. That is why.
18.33.6	Whatever he does not eat, that is included by not eating. That is the reason.
18.33.7	Then, when one observes the Upavasatha rite, one observes the vow of ghee.
18.33.8	This is indeed the beloved abode of the gods, namely, ghee.
18.33.9	One obtains the beloved abode of gods. That is the purpose.
18.33.10	Now, that which turns away from the sun during the day and from the fire at night,
18.33.11	these are the truth and the truth of the gods. "He thinks, "I should not do the truth and the truthful of the gods from behind." That is why it is so.
18.33.12	Now, why it is made of Udumbara wood,
18.33.13	Udumbara is food and nourishment.
18.33.14	It is for the purpose of securing food and nourishment. That is why it happens.
18.33.15	Now, what is the reason for it being made of Soma-cups,
18.33.16	This is indeed the supreme food of the gods, namely Soma.
18.33.17	By means of the supreme food, he obtains the inferior food. That is why.
18.33.18	And why it has four corners.
18.33.19	The food that entered the directions, he obtains by means of that. That is why
18.33.20	And why it is three-versed.
18.33.21	For one who knows this alone is not worthy of receiving the Dakṣiṇā.
18.33.22	If he belongs to the same family as the sacrificer,
18.33.23	one should know that the self is the same family. One should establish the fame, food and prosperity of the sacrifice in the self.
18.34.1	Having brought it together with the Madhyandina cups, they offer it.
18.34.2	At the time of offering the Dakṣiṇās, the priests offer it to the Brahman.
18.34.3	Having sat down near the Brahman, they consume it, thinking it is true.
18.34.4	What they consume without truth, that is the truth-drinking nature of the truth-drink.
18.34.5	They desired, "May we have food; may we obtain food; may food be established in us."
18.34.6	They saw this sacrifice.
18.34.7	They brought it.
18.34.8	They performed it.
18.34.9	Then they had food, obtained food, and food was established in them.
18.34.10	He who desires, 'May my progeny be without hunger, may I obtain food, may it be established in me', let him offer this sacrifice.
18.34.11	His progeny becomes food, he obtains food, it is established in him.
18.34.12	And the four Bahispavamānas, eight Ajyas, twelve Madhyandina Pavamānas, sixteen Prsthas, twenty-one Arbhava Pavamānas and twenty-four Agnistomasam.
18.34.13	It is called the Catustoma of the directions.
18.34.14	The Chhandas-s desired, "May we attain fame, may we obtain fame, may fame be established in us."
18.34.15	They saw this sacrifice.
18.34.16	They brought it.
18.34.17	They performed the sacrifice with it.
18.34.18	Then they attained fame, obtained fame, and fame was established in them.
18.34.19	One who desires, 'May I attain fame, may I obtain fame, may fame be established in me', should offer this sacrifice.
18.34.20	He attains fame, obtains fame, and fame is established in him.
18.34.21	They praised him in one (verse), then in three, then in one, then in three.
18.34.22	This is called the Ekātrika of the metres.
18.34.23	The Stoma-s desired... The narration is the same.
18.34.24	Of that, three Trivṛt-s, then three Pañcadaśa-s, then one Trivṛt, then three Saptadaśa-s and then three Ekavimśa-s.
18.34.25	This is called the Ekâtrika of the Stoma-s.
18.35.1	Indra and Agni desired to be in the same world, to go to the same world.
18.35.2	They saw this sacrifice.
18.35.3	They brought it.
18.35.4	They performed it.
18.35.5	Then they became of the same world, went to the same world, and became of the same worlds.
18.35.6	Now, if a king and his priest should desire to be of the same world and to go to the same world, they should offer this sacrifice. They become of the same world, and go to the same hereafter.
18.35.7	A horse-chariot, a weapon of sacrifice, a cup of metal, and a Brahman's fee are the Dakshina.
18.35.8-11	The chariot with horses, all weapons, without spears, with bronze, and with a quiver, is the fee for the king. Its Stoma is Trivrt and Pañcadaśa, in reverse order. The Trivrt is for the Brahman, the Pañcadaśin is for the king. This is called the Kulaya of Indra and Agni.
18.35.12	This is the father-son relationship, this is the friendship, this is the sacrifice of brothers.
18.36.1	One who is about to perform a Soma sacrifice for the purpose of subjugation.
18.36.2	He prepares two kinds of sacrificial implements - those made of wood and those made of bone, and two testicles of a human being made of wood and bone for the Adhiṣavaṇa vessel.
18.36.3	When the Adhvaryu is about to take up the Upāṁshu-graha, he sprinkles the king. The drop that falls down, he puts into this vessel, and then says, "Let it go away. Then I shall offer to you."
18.36.4	He remains near it.
18.36.5	Then he strikes the broken (pot) on the Ahavaniya with the words, "I am striking down this one, the son of so and so, with the broken (pot)."
18.36.6	Here the sacrificer mentally thinks of the one whom he hates.
18.36.7	Then he places that vessel in the Khara at its proper place with the words, “I am placing you on the breath of so and so.”
18.36.8-13	When he seizes any deity, he seizes it in this way. When he places any vessel, he places it in this way.
18.36.14	The three Trishtup verses are sung.
18.36.15	The Rathantara is the Havirdhana.
18.36.16	Now the Sandamshas.
18.36.17	The craft of the Abhicharaniya is the same.
18.36.18	The two Trishtup verses in the middle are the Stoma.
18.36.19	There are two Havirdhana verses.
18.36.20	Now the Indravajra.
18.36.21	The craft for the Abhicharaniya remains the same.
18.36.22	This becomes fifteen.
18.37.1-4	When one is about to perform the Duras sacrifice, one prepares sixty measures of gold, thirty of silver, and many other things. Having performed the New-moon sacrifice, one offers a rice-cake to Surya. In that (sacrifice) one gives a hundred measures of gold.
18.37.5	Then, having offered the Agnihotra in the evening, he offers a rice-cake to the Moon.
18.37.6	In it he gives a silver coin weighing one hundred.
18.37.7	Thus the sacrificer goes through this rite every day for a month.
18.37.8	Then he consecrates himself.
18.37.9	At the Diksaniya (rite) he gives a gold coin weighing twelve.
18.37.10	At the Prayaniya (rite), he gives a gold piece weighing twenty-four.
18.37.11	At the Atithya sacrifice, he gives twenty-four.
18.37.12	At the first Upasad, he gives four.
18.37.13	At the second Upasad, eight.
18.37.14	At the third Upasad, sixteen.
18.37.15	At the fourth Upasad, thirty-two.
18.37.16	At the fifth Upasad, sixty-four.
18.37.17	On the sixth day, he gives twenty-four measures of grain.
18.37.18	Now, the hundredfold distribution.
18.37.19	When the omentum of Agni-Soma is offered, he gives two hundred (measures).
18.37.20	When the omental offering to Agni is made, he gives four (measures).
18.37.21	At the morning pressing, he gives eight (measures).
18.37.22	In the midday pressing, he gives sixteen (measures).
18.37.23	At the time of the Dakṣiṇās, he gives thirty-two.
18.37.24	At the third Savanīya, he gives sixty-four.
18.37.25	When the Vapa has been offered at the Anūbandhya, he gives eighty-two hundred.
18.37.26	When he performs these two Iṣṭis daily, he attains union with the Sun and Moon and attains the same world as them.
18.38.1	Now, when the sacrificial fee is gold, then the sacrificer makes himself of gold.
18.38.2	What is above the navel is gold, what is below is silver.
18.38.3	When one becomes of gold, then one becomes immortal.
18.38.4	The gods are of gold.
18.38.5	Therefore they are immortal.
18.38.6	The Stoma is seventeenfold.
18.38.7	Prajapati is the seventeenth.
18.38.8	For the attainment of Prajapati.
18.38.9	Both the Sāman chants are performed.
18.38.10	These two sides are composed of the Vedas. The sacrificer makes himself pure.
18.38.11	For the conquest of this world.
18.38.12	When he performs this sacrifice, he conquers the union and the world of the sun and the moon.
18.38.13	By that, the Durasas.
18.38.14	The world is indeed like a bad dream to these two deities.
18.38.15	Now, when one is about to perform a sacrifice with the bad dream,
18.38.16	he prepares a bull and thirty-three gold coins.
18.38.17	By this he conquers the world of the bull.
18.38.18	By this, he conquers the luminous world.
18.38.19	By this alone, he conquers heaven.
18.38.20-27	The Stoma is seventeenfold. Prajapati is seventeenfold. For the attainment of Prajapati. Two Sāman chants are performed. The two wings are made of metres. The sacrificer makes himself (fit). For the conquest of this world. He who performs this sacrifice does not perish. Therefore, he is Durnasha. That is the reason for Durnasha being Durnasha.
18.38.28	Keśī, the son of Dālbhya, being desirous of Apaciti, fought with Apaciti. They (the two) said, "Let us not use our names."
18.38.29	Then indeed they (the two) used the names of the kings of Pañcāla.
18.39.1	They call the hair "Śīrṣaṇyā."
18.39.2	They call the Kuśa grass "Kuśa."
18.39.3	They call two rivers "Gaireyaka and Vimati."
18.39.4	Then indeed he became Apaciti.
18.39.5	He who desires, 'May I be without enmity,' should offer this sacrifice.
18.39.6	He indeed becomes without enmity.
18.39.7	His Bahispavamāna is twenty-four, the Ajyas are three, five, and fifteen.
18.39.8	Those three are Gāyatrī.
18.39.9	The Madhyandina Pavamāna is twenty-five, the Prsthas are fifteen and seventeen.
18.39.10	Those two are Tristubh.
18.39.11	The Pavamāna is Triṇava, the Agniṣṭoma Sāman is Ekavimśa.
18.39.12	That is one Jagatī.
18.39.13	These are the most refined of the metres.
18.39.14	One who knows this becomes refined.
18.39.15	The sun desired, 'May I be radiant.'
18.39.16	He saw this sacrifice.
18.39.17	He brought it.
18.39.18	He performed this sacrifice.
18.39.19	Then he became radiant.
18.39.20	One who desires to become radiant should perform this sacrifice.
18.39.21	He becomes radiant.
18.39.22	The Soma-offering is dedicated to Surya.
18.39.23	The animal-offering is dedicated for the purpose of atonement.
18.39.24	This sacrifice consists of twenty-one Soma-offerings.
18.40.1	Indra desired, "May I attain lordship, sovereignty, and kingship over the gods, like a bull over the cattle."
18.40.2	He saw this sacrificial rite and performed it. He offered sacrifice with it.
18.40.3	Then he attained lordship, sovereignty, kingship over the cattle, like a bull, and over the gods.
18.40.4	One who desires to be like a bull among animals, to attain lordship, sovereignty, and supremacy over his equals, should offer this sacrifice.
18.40.5	He attains lordship, sovereignty, supremacy over his equals like a bull among the animals.
18.40.6-7	The bull, the most difficult to grasp, the one who is most difficult to grasp is the one who is the most difficult to be grasped. The one who is the one who has the most difficult to grasped is the one who is the one who is difficult to be grasped, the one who has been grasped by the one who is grasped by the one who is the one who grasps the one who is being grasped. The one who is being grasped by the one being grasped is the one being grasped by the one being grasped. The bull, the one who possesses the most difficult to be grasped, the one possessing the most difficult to have grasped, the one possessing the most difficult to possess, the one possessing Soma, the one who possesses the most difficult of all to possess, the bull, the one possessing the most difficult to possess. The one possessing the most difficult to possess is the one possessing the one who is possessing the most  Translation: The bull, the difficult to grasp, is the one who possesses Soma, the one who belongs to Indra, the one who follows the truth, the one who lives for a hundred years. May the bull make me the beloved of all men, the most heroic of heroes. You are taken with a purpose. I take what is pleasing to Indra, the bull. Having wiped it, he places it, saying, "This is your birthplace. For Indra, the bull."
18.40.8	The Hotr's verse is twenty-one in number, the Kakud form.
18.40.9	In the past, indeed, they used to perform the Vaniṣṭhusava sacrifice with Indra, saying, "Indra will be satisfied and will appear. We shall then make our wishes known to him."
18.40.10	One who is going to perform the Vāniṣṭhusava
18.40.11	He prepares a hundred wooden vessels, a hundred vessels of clarified butter, a hundred vessels for milk, a hundred vessels with curds, a hundred vessels filled with fat, a boat made of Udumbara wood, having two sides, and surrounded, and the steersmen.
18.40.12	He enjoys the extensive and long-lasting prosperity thus prepared.
18.40.13	Then he places the fire-sticks in the eastern fire, the fire-sticks for heating, the fire-stick for the Ahavaniya, the fire-sticl for the Anvāhārya-pācana.
18.40.14	Then he places these wood-sticks in the fire at dusk.
18.40.15	They burn the fire-sticks which are shining and burning.
18.40.16	Then they melt the fat of the animals which are the best of their kind.
18.40.17	Then when the sun has risen, he causes to be brought the boat of Udumbara wood, which is provided with two sides and is held by the steersmen.
18.40.18	On it he spreads fifty vessels of ghee, fifty vessels of milk, fifty vessels of curds, and fifty vessels of fat.
18.40.19-20	Having recited the verses, "In that (sacrifice) the fat is the best," he pours down the oblations. With fifty vessels of fat, fifty vessels of curds, fifty vessels of milk, and fifty vessels of ghee.
18.41.1	Indra, the king of the settled, the king of peace, the horned one, with the thunderbolt in his hand, he is the king of the people, the protector, the one who has not been overcome.
18.41.2	Indra, the king, worships the people, the one who knows the various forms, whatever exists, may he give wealth to the giver. May he send forth gifts, even when praised, from afar, svāhā.
18.41.3	Indra, indeed, becomes satisfied and manifests himself to him.
18.41.4	To him they declare their desires.
18.41.5	Brihaspati, the son of Angiras, performed the sacrifice for the blind Kanadha.
18.41.6	On the day before the sacrifice, his faith was exhausted.
18.41.7	He said, "O Adhvaryu! My faith has gone away. Please establish my sacrifice."
18.41.8	He said to him, "The Upavasatha is different. Your sacrifice will be established tomorrow."
18.41.9	He said, "Establish it for me today.
18.41.10	He, having known that, placed the pestle and mortar on the skin in front of the sacrificial post and made the sheaves of grass fall down. He said, "You are indeed used as a pestle in every house. Speak here like the most brilliant one, like a drum in a victory."
18.41.11	Then having poured out water from the Vasatīvari vessels into the Hotr's goblet, and having mixed it together, he caused it to be offered with the formula, "As the people are united, so may the vows of those who observe vows be united. May the vow of the one who observes vows be free from greed. May the path of the blind one, the one who is proceeding, the one who has been led away, the son of Tīvrasūta, be heard by Indra. Svāhā!"
18.41.12	This is the sacrifice for one who is mad, or who has lost faith, or who has been led to death.
18.41.13	If she has come, then one should offer a sacrifice with the Catuṣṭoma Agniṣṭoma for the sake of peace before the lapse of time.
18.42.1	Manu Vaivasvata desired, "May I create offspring, may I obtain offspring, may I acquire offspring, may not my offspring be lost."
18.42.2	He saw this sacrificial rite and performed it. He offered a sacrifice with it.
18.42.3	Then he created offspring, he obtained offspring, he found offspring, they call him by his offspring.
18.42.4	He who desires, 'May I create offspring, may I obtain offspring, may I find offspring, may they not call me by my offspring,' let him offer this sacrifice.
18.42.5	He creates offspring, he obtains offspring, he finds offspring, they call hin by his offspring.
18.42.6	His three Stotras are of three, five, seven and eleven verses.
18.42.7	He desired, 'May my progeny be without hunger, may it obtain food, may it be established in food.'
18.42.8	He saw this sacrifice, brought it and performed it.
18.42.9	Then indeed that (sacrificer) became the eater of food, he obtained food, food was established in him.
18.42.10	If one desires, 'May my progeny be the eater of food; may it obtain food; may food be established in it', then he should offer this sacrifice. Indeed his progeny becomes the eater of food. He obtains food. Food is established in it.
18.42.11	He has ten Stotras.
18.42.12	He praises in ten and eleven (verses). The form of Viraj.
18.42.13	Speech, having the form of Ambhṛni, desired, 'May I attain unlimited fame.'
18.42.14	She saw this sacrifice, brought it, and performed it.
18.42.15	Then indeed she attained unlimited fame.
18.42.16	One who desires to attain unlimited fame should perform this sacrifice.
18.42.17	He attains unlimited fame.
18.42.18	The ten, hundred, thousand, ten thousand, hundred thousand, million, ten million, hundred million, billion, ten billion, hundred billion, thousand billion, ten thousand billion, hundred thousand billion, ten hundred thousand billion, hundred hundred thousand billion, thousand hundred thousand billion, and ten thousand hundred thousand billion are the ten, hundred, etc., in the outer Pravargya.
18.43.1-4	Yama Vaivasvata desired, "May I attain lordship, sovereignty, and rule over the ancestors." He saw this sacrificial rite and performed it. By that he attained lordship, sovereignty, rule over the ancestors. Whoever desires, "May I obtain lordship, sovereignty, dominion over equals," should perform this sacrificial rite.
18.43.5	The sovereignty, lordship, and kingdom of equals are enjoyed.
18.43.6	For him, the Bahispavamāna is performed in a hundred, the Sahasra in a thousand, the Ayuta in ten thousand, the Niyuta in a hundred thousand, the Prayuta in a million, the Arbude in ten million, the Nyarbude in a hundred million, the Samudra in a billion, the Madhyam in a trillion, the Anta in a quadrillion, the Parartha in a quintillion, the Padva in a sextillion, and the Palva in a septillion.
18.43.7	Having said "always," one praises mentally, thinking, "I have praised this much."
18.43.8	Now, the single Pravargya.
18.43.9	Having performed the Atithyesti, he offers the Pravargya in the Garhapatya.
18.43.10	He performs with it in the Ahavanīya.
18.43.11	He pours it out at the proper time.
18.43.12	The Atithyesti is indeed the head of the sacrifice.
18.43.13	The Pravargya is fame.
18.43.14	He places fame on the head of the sacrificer.
18.43.15	Thus is the single Pravargya.
18.43.16	Now the Pravargya with Soma.
18.43.17	Having performed the Pavamāna (Stotra), he offers the Pravargya in the Agnidhra chamber.
18.43.18	He performs it on the Ahavaniya fire itself.
18.43.19	He removes it at that very moment.
18.43.20	Pravargya is fame.
18.43.21	He places fame at the head of the sacrifice.
18.43.22	Thus is the Pravargya at the Sutyā.
18.43.23	Now the single Pravargya.
18.43.24	Now the Pravargya after the Soma has been pressed.
18.43.25	Now the Sutyā-Pravargya.
18.44.1	Purūravas, the son of Ila, was a king in the past.
18.44.2	He was approached by Urvaśī, a celestial nymph.
18.44.3	She followed him for a year, desiring him.
18.44.4	This is how the ancients used to pursue.
18.44.5	But he thought it was too long.
18.44.6	While he was running, she showed him a chariot in front.
18.44.7	Seeing it, he stopped.
18.44.8	But when he stopped, he could not see it.
18.44.9	Then he again stood up.
18.44.10	Standing on it, he saw.
18.44.11	He asked the charioteer, "O charioteer, what do you see?"
18.44.12	He said, "O revered one, I see you, the chariot, the horses, and the path."
18.44.13	He looked and said, "I am indeed seeing."
18.44.14	Speech said to him, "I am not angry with you. I wanted you to do this."
18.44.15	"Then who are you?"
18.44.16	"I am Urvashi, an Apsara."
18.44.17	"I followed you for a year, desiring you."
18.44.18	"Find her as your wife."
18.44.19	"The gods are difficult to serve."
18.44.20	"Who serves them?"
18.44.21	May there be a hundred of my attendants.
18.44.22	May a hundred pots of ghee come to me every day, and I shall eat them.
18.44.23	You should not see me naked.'
18.44.24	He said, 'All this is easy for the Blessed One.'
18.44.25	But how can a wife not see her husband naked?'
18.44.26	He said, ‘You should wear an inner garment. So that you will not be naked.'
18.44.27	He lived with her, wearing a robe of bark.
18.44.28	She would throw away the sons as soon as they were born.
18.44.29	The king said to her, "We are indeed human beings, desiring sons, but you throw away the sons soon after they are born."
18.44.30	She said, "They die within a few nights, others have exhausted life.
18.44.31	Let us do something pleasant again.
18.44.32	He begot Ayus, Amavasu, and Janu.
18.44.33	She said, "I will support both of them. All life will come to them."
18.44.34	Ayus went east.
18.44.35	His are the Kurus, Panchalas, Kasis, and Videhas.
18.44.36	This is the eastern direction.
18.44.37	Amavasu went west.
18.44.38	His are Gandharas, Yavanas, and Arabs.
18.44.39	This is the new-moon sacrifice.
18.45.1	And indeed, this was the sister of the Apsarases, the first to be born.
18.45.2	She saw and said, "My sister has gone to the human world. Let me go and bring her back."
18.45.3	Having come with her, she did not find any opportunity for union.
18.45.4	Then she placed a herd of cattle in front of him.
18.45.5	Thus indeed, the form of the former queens is.
18.45.6	Having made the form of a buffalo, he struck Pramatha.
18.45.7	Then indeed, the buffalo was bound to the legs of the couch with a rope, and was tied to the legs of a couch.
18.45.8	She struck him.
18.45.9	When he was being carried away, he cried out, "This is the deed of a coward!"
18.45.10	Hearing this, the king sprang up.
18.45.11	He rushed at her, she approached him.
18.45.12	She approached him, becoming a naked woman.
18.45.13	He had intercourse with her.
18.45.14	Then she gave birth to lightning.
18.45.15	She saw him naked in the lightning.
18.45.16	Then the king came, saying, "I am the one who has conquered the invincible, the one who has overcome the unconquerable. I will conquer you every day."
18.45.17	What happened?"
18.45.18	He said to him, "You are naked, like a mirror."
18.45.19	When she had gone forth, he wandered about grieving, pierced by the unpleasant.
18.45.20	He said to him, Brihaspati Angiras, "I will sacrifice you with a sacrifice, and then I will revive you."
18.45.21	Brihaspati Angiras sacrificed him with a sacrifice.
18.45.22	She saw him coming from afar.
18.45.23	The two sons, having seen her, said, "Take us to where your destination is. We are strong and have wept for our father."
18.45.24	She said, "I will give birth to you both. I will stay here for three nights only. The words of a brahmin should not be false."
18.45.25	He lived with her for three nights, wearing a robe of bark.
18.45.26	He emitted semen in her.
18.45.27	She said, "How can this be?"
18.45.28	The king replied, "How can it not be?"
18.45.29	She said, bring a new pot."
18.45.30	She poured it into that.
18.45.31	Then there were ponds named Bisavati in Kurukshetra,
18.45.32	The Suvarnasavani is the last of them.
18.45.33	He dug it up there.
18.45.34	The Ashvattha was born, surrounded by the Shamia. The Ashvattha came from the seed, the Shamia from the womb.
18.45.35	This is the creation of the Shamia-womb, this is the origin.
18.45.36	Now indeed it is said:
18.45.37	"All the gods went to the heavenly world."
18.45.38	When the sacrifice descended from the gods to men, it descended on the ashvattha tree.
18.45.39	They made the fire-sticks of it, saying, "This is the sacrifice."
18.45.40	And indeed, whatever ashvattha tree there is, it is the embryo of the shami.
18.45.41	When he says, "O Vashti, thou art the life of this (king), Puru-ravas," he takes the names of these fathers and sons.
18.45.42	And he may also think of them in a general way.
18.45.43	When she had gone forth, he wandered about, pierced by grief, and lamenting.
18.45.44	Then Brihaspati Angiras said to him, "I shall consecrate you with the Upaśada rite. Your enemies will certainly go away."
18.45.45	Brihaspati Angiras consecrated him with the Upašada rite.
18.45.46	Then his enemies went away.
18.45.47	These two are the Paurauravas, the two Shadas and Upaśadas.
18.45.48	He who desires to acquire wealth should be sacrificed to with the Sadaha (rite).
18.45.49	For him the Bahispavamāna (verse) is recited ten times.
18.45.50	Each one is recited once, and then twenty-one times.
18.45.51	He who desires to remove an enemy should be sacrificed to by the Upaśada (rite).
18.45.52	In his case the Bahispavamaņa (verse) is chanted twenty-one times,
18.45.53	Each one is chanted once, and then ten times.
18.45.54	Then the two verses named Prajapati are the Sadas and Upasada.
18.45.55	In the three (verses) there is the Bahispavamāna.
18.45.56	Three by three are added up to thirty-six.
18.45.57	In thirty-six (verses) there are the Bahispavas.
18.45.58	Three by threes are added up to three (verses).
18.45.59	Then the two verses named Nidhruva of Kashyapa are the Sadasand Upasada.
18.45.60	And the four Bahispavamānas.
18.45.61	Four each are added, making forty-eight.
18.45.62	There are forty-eight Bahispavamānās.
18.45.63	Four each is added to the four.
18.46.1	When the gods and the Asuras fought a great battle, then these beings were divided into two groups, some following the gods and others following the Asuras.
18.46.2	Brihaspati was the priest of the gods and Usanas Kavya was the priest of Asuras.
18.46.3	The gods were the sons of Brahma and the Asuras were also the sons of Brahma.
18.46.4	They fought many battles, but were not victorious.
18.46.5	They did not know who would be the victor.
18.46.6	Only Gandharva Sūryavarchas knew.
18.46.7	Indra was mocking his wife.
18.46.8	He said to her, "O Amutaṅgi, ask this Gandharva why the gods and demons are not victorious."
18.46.9	He said, "So be it." "Come tomorrow."
18.46.10	He made love to her in a golden boat in the middle of the ocean.
18.46.11	Then Indra came.
18.46.12	He became a golden fish and entered the boat.
18.46.13	When he came, he asked him, "Tell me, why are the gods and demons not victorious?"
18.46.14	He said loudly, "The gods and demons are not victorious because of the river Karṇī."
18.46.15	He said, "The gods are Brahma-like, and the demons are Brahma-like."
18.46.16	Hearing this, Indra took the form of a monkey and flew up.
18.46.17	When he saw him, he said, "O Maghavan, who among them will be victorious?"
18.46.18	He went to Uśanas Kāvya and consulted with his daughter Jayantī and the four wish-yielding cows.
18.46.19	When he was commanded, he went to the gods against the Asuras.
18.46.20	Then indeed the gods won the great battle against the Asuras.
18.47.1	He thought, "I am like a teacher, having spoken like a teacher, I have taken much wealth from the Asuras."
18.47.2	He said, "I am as if a teacher, having uttered like a teacher, taking much wealth from the demons, please do not perform the sacrifice for me."
18.47.3	Bṛhaspati, the son of Aṅgiras, performed the sacrifice for him with the twelve-stoma Agniṣṭoma.
18.47.4	Having performed that, he obtained gold above.
18.47.5	Seeing it, he thought, "I shall take this away from the Asuras."
18.47.6	Indra, knowing that, made a stone.
18.47.7	They are the ones known as Oṣadhas, the mountain-dwellers in Kuru-kṣetra.
18.47.8	He acted as if he were light and unsteady.
18.47.9	He said, "I am like a light and unsteady one."
18.47.10	"Let me perform your sacrifice."
18.47.11	Brhaspati Angiras performed his sacrifice with the Ekavimsati-stoma Agniṣṭoma.
18.47.12	Then he became steady.
18.47.13	Then Indra, the bestower of desires, took possession of it.
18.47.14-19	He said to him in the evening, "Tomorrow." In the morning he said, "Tomorrow." He did this for a year. He said, "Tomorrow," and he said, "In the evening." "Do not say in the evening, say in the evening." Do not say in morning, say in morning. What is this? What is this?
18.47.20	Having said, "O Maghavan, you are speaking about him," he went away.
18.47.21	Then Indra made the praises to be like a wish-yielding cow.
18.47.22	He gave it to Varuna, saying, "This is yours, mine, and his. We have it together."
18.47.23	To Brihaspati and Angirasa he said, "Tell me this. You are holding it back. You are not giving it to me." To Vishnu and Sipivishta.
18.47.24	This is the creation of the Ukhthas, this is the reason.
18.47.25	Then Manu Vaivasvata, being empty-minded, laughed at his friend.
18.47.26	And he gave him the fourth one.
18.47.27	He placed it in this one.
18.47.28	This is the cultivation itself.
18.47.29	This is creation of cultivation, this is the cause.
18.47.30	Those two are the two Stotras called Oshanasa.
18.47.31	If one thinks that he is like a teacher, or if he has performed a sacrifice for one who should not have been sacrificed for, or if he accepts a gift from one who should not be given to, then he should sacrifice with the Agnishtoma having twelve Stotras.
18.47.32	He indeed attains lightness.
18.47.33	Now he who moves as if lightly, without resting, should be sacrificed to with the Agniṣṭoma of twenty-one Stotras.
18.47.34	He indeed stands firm.
18.48.1	Now the Prāṇoda.
18.48.2	The same as the Abhicaraṇa.
18.48.3	The Prātaḥsavana offerings are followed by a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Pravata.
18.48.4	This is the Trivṛt (Stoma).
18.48.5	Now the Vibādha.
18.48.6	The rite of cursing is the same.
18.48.7	The rite of cursing is performed in accordance with the Madhyandina reciters. The oblation to Agni Vibadhavat is a cake on eight potshards.
18.48.8	It is indeed Trivrit.
18.48.9	Now the rite of counter-cursing.
18.48.10	The rite is the same as that of cursing.
18.48.11	The rite for counter-cursing is performed in accordance to the Trityasavaniyas. The oblation is a cake on 8 potshards to Agni Pratikavat.
18.48.12	It is indeed three-fold.
18.48.13	Now, the Agni-athavya-dha.
18.48.14	The craft of the one who is to be cursed is the same.
18.48.15	The animal-oblation of the one who has been cursed follows the one who has performed the Anubandhya sacrifice. The cake to Agni, the lord of wealth, is on eight potsherds.
18.48.16	It is indeed three-folded.
18.48.17	Now, Indra-vajra.
18.48.18	The craft for cursing is the same.
18.48.19	This is the fifteenth.
18.48.20	King Shaivy Shunaskarna, who was virtuous and performed many sacrifices,
18.48.21	asked his priests, having rejected the people who were against him, "Is there a sacrifice by which I can go to heaven after performing it?"
18.48.22	The priests replied, "There is."
18.48.23	Therefore the Adhvaryu grasped the Grahas in the proper order.
18.48.24	The Udgātṛ chanted the Svara-s, the Udgatṛs the Sama-s, the Nidhanas.
18.48.25	The Hotṛ recited the Parāṅ-s.
18.48.26	He died after rising from Avabhṛtha.
18.48.27	One should perform a sacrifice for one whom one hates or one who has approached.
18.48.28	He soon departs from this world.
18.48.29	Then they say, "The heap and the mound."
18.48.30	At the four-day sacrifice, one gives grain that has been heaped up.
18.48.31	That is the heap.
18.48.32	At the fourfold mound sacrifice, one gives what has been heaped up at the mound.
18.48.33	That is mound.
18.48.34	Then they call it "the ointment and the anointment."
18.48.35	The officiating priests proceed with anointed eyes and adorned.
18.48.36	He is the one who anoints.
18.48.37	They are anointed, wearing woolen garments.
18.48.38	He is the one who is anointed.
18.48.39	Now, the sacrifice of one who has a brother-rival is the one with the uneven hall.
18.48.40	He arranges the sacrificial place so that it slopes towards the east from the Āhavaniya and towards the west from the Garhapatya.
18.48.41	They build this uneven hall.
18.48.42-47	Those who go forward go forward. The Garhapatya is in the middle. They bring the oblations to one who is seated in the middle. (The Hotr) recites the Stotras in the order of the directions. This is one. They should be the Ekavimsa stotras. This is one more. Ignoring this, they perform the Catuṣṭoma.
18.49.1	The gods and the Asuras fought a great battle there, and Shibi of the Ushinara tribe defeated the Asuras in the battle of the gods.
18.49.2	Indra gave him the prize of victory.
18.49.3	He said to Shibi, "You will not have to fear the end."
18.49.4	He performed the sacrifice for him at Varsithiyaprastha, facing all directions.
18.49.5	Then indeed Shibi does not have to fear his end.
18.49.6	He who desires to conquer the unconquered should offer sacrifice to him in the Varshisthiyas, facing all directions.
18.49.7	He conquers the unconquered.
18.49.8	They build four houses in the directions.
18.49.9	They proceed eastwards, southwards, westwards, and northwards.
18.49.10	The Garhapatya is in the middle.
18.49.11	Those who are seated in the middle are served with food by horses, chariots and elephants.
18.49.12	One should have Stotras in the middle. This is one view.
18.49.13	One should make them twenty-one. This is one opinion.
18.49.14	Ignoring this, they make them four Stotras.
18.49.15	Partha
18.49.16	Partha, the architect, desired the gods.
18.49.17	He offered a thousand Soma-pressings with a thousand gifts.
18.49.18	He then approached the gods.
18.49.19	He, about to offer these Soma-pressings, prepares a thousand sheds, a thousand horses and chariots.
18.49.20	They build these sheds in the directions, two hundred and fifty in front,
18.49.21	so also on the right, so also behind, so also on the left.
18.49.22	Those who go east, those who go south, those who go west, those who go north, go.
18.49.23	The Garhapatya is in the middle.
18.49.24	Those who are seated in the middle bring the oblations in chariots drawn by horses.
18.49.25	"One says, 'The Stotras should be in the order of the directions.' This is one view."
18.49.26	"One says 'They should be twenty-one.' This is one opinion."
18.49.27	And they do not heed that four-fold (number).
18.50.1	One who is going to perform the sacrifice with these two Stotras,
18.50.2	he arranges the sacrificial place in such a way that there is a channel of water between the Cātvāla and the mound.
18.50.3	They build these two houses of straw.
18.50.4-7	Having settled in the southern half of the hall, having churned out the fires and performed the rites, he offers the Diksaniya Isti. Then having settled in the northern half of the hall and having churned out fires and performed the rite, he offers the Dikṣaṇīya Isti. Here one performs the rites of initiation and then performs the rites in the other world. Here one offers the oblations of initiation and then in the other world.
18.50.8-12	Here one performs the Pravargya and Upasads, and there (in the other world). Here one performs the Pravara and then performs the Upasads. Here one performs with the first two Pravargya and Upaasads, and then (in the otherworld).
18.50.13-17	Here one performs the Pravargya and Upasads with the middle (rites), then there. Here one performs the Parigraha rite with the Mahavedi in front, then there.  Here one performs the Upasads and Pravargya with the highest (rites), then here. Here one places the Ahavaniya, then there. Here one mixes the Sadas and Havirdhana, then there.
18.50.18	Here one offers Agni-Soma, and then there.
18.50.19	Here one erects the sacrificial post, covering it with the Yūpa-grass, and then releases the post, and then offers the animal to Agni-Soma, then there.
18.50.20	Having performed the rites here with the Vaya grass, one takes up the Vasatīvari waters, and then there
18.50.21	Here one offers the Pasupurodāsa oblation, and then there.
18.50.22-26	Therefore one acts here and acts hereafter. Here one acts with the Agniṣṭoma, and hereafter. Here, having performed the Vasatīvarī rites, one observes fasting with special care, and hereafter. Here one enters (the fire). Here one takes up the king (Soma) and performs the Prātaranuvāka, and hereafter.
18.50.27	Here the Savanas are concluded in due order, until the Samudita.
18.50.28	In the same way, the Savanas are completed in the northern hall, until the Samudite.
18.50.29	Here one proceeds with the Avabhrtha rite, and then there.
18.50.30	Here one performs the Udayaniya Isti, and then there (in the next life).
18.50.31	Having performed here, one performs there.
18.50.32	Here alone one offers the Maitravaruni Vasa, and then there.
18.50.33	Here he performs the rites, and there he performs them.
18.50.34	The Udasnīyesti is common.
18.50.35	Now, because rites are performed before the Savanas, therefore the two are joined together in the belly and lie together.
18.50.36	And because the Savanas are completed in order, therefore the two sons are born in order.
18.50.37	Now, because the rites performed after the Savanas are connected, they sleep together, drink together, and move together.
18.50.38	And because the fire-sticks are equal, therefore the womb is equal.
18.50.39	Now Agni and the sun, desiring to conquer the same world, saw this sacrifice; they brought it and offered it.
18.50.40	Then they became of the same world, and went to the same world.
18.50.41	He who desires to go to the same world as Agni and Aditya should offer this sacrifice.
18.50.42	He goes to the same world of Agni and Aditya.
18.51.1	One becomes a winner of wealth by offering the Vajapeya sacrifice, another by offering the Rajasuya sacrifice.
18.51.2	He who performs the Vājapeya after performing the Pāyas sacrifices is indeed the performer of the Vājapeyas. He who performs the Pāyas sacrifice and then performs the Vāja is indeed the performer.
18.51.3	Therefore one should perform the Vāja after performing the Pāya.
18.51.4	One who is going to perform the Pāya sacrifices.
18.51.5	He initiates without performing the Full-moon sacrifice.
18.51.6	His initiation is unlimited, and the Upasads are twelve.
18.51.7	He buys the king in such a way that he thinks, "May my Soma-pressing be accomplished on the new-moon day."
18.51.8	It is accomplished for him in that way.
18.51.9	He goes to the Upavasatha (day) with the well-known rite.
18.51.10	Having taken away the Vatsapari (milk), they observe the Upavastha with special milk.
18.51.11	Then he offers this Savaniṣṭoma sacrifice: an eight-pot Agni-offering, an eleven-pot Indra-offering, and a twelve-pot Visvedeva-offering.
18.51.12	He performs the sacrifice for twelve days.
18.51.13	On the thirteenth day, he performs the sacrifice with the full-moon offering, with which he performs the sacrifice that was not performed.
18.51.14	Then on the fourteenth day, he performs with the New-Moon oblation, with which he performs what has not been performed.
18.51.15	Then he performs with one of these sacrificial rites.
18.51.16	Then he again consecrates himself.
18.51.17	He performs in this way for a year.
18.51.18	The days are of three, five, fifteen, three, seventeen, three, twenty-one, three, nineteen, three, thirty-three, three, four-and-thirty.
18.51.19	The months are of the form of the Peya.
18.51.20	The year is of the form of Vaja.
18.51.21-22	Thus his year is completed, thus he becomes accomplished.
18.51.23	The days are of three, five, seventeen, four, three, twenty-one, twenty-nine, four, three; then thirty-three, four, three. Then forty-four, four, and then an Atiratra.
18.51.24	Twelve months, seventeen sacrifices.
18.51.25	In nine months one performs nine sacrifices.
18.51.26	Then three months and eight sacrifices remain.
18.51.27	He makes two three-night sacrifices and one two-night sacrifice.
18.51.28	If one has to perform this, one should perform the Agniṣṭoma with four stomas.
18.51.29	The forms of the months are the praises and hymns, the form of the year is the Agniṣṭoma and the Vāja.
18.51.30	Thus this year of his becomes completed, thus he becomes attained.
18.51.31	Now then, the odd and even (verses).
18.51.32	One sings in one (verse), then in three. Thus the odd (verses).
18.51.33	Then the even (verses).
18.51.34	The four and the eight are praised. Thus the even ones.
18.51.35	Those who go by this path and those who know it thus attain union with the even and the uneven.
18.52.1	Now, indeed, about the directions.
18.52.2	The Trivṛt (Stoma) is for the eastern direction.
18.52.3	The Pañcadaśa (Stoma) for the southern direction.
18.52.4	The Saptadaśa (Stomat) for the western direction.
18.52.5	The twenty-one (verses) are for the northern direction.
18.52.6	The twenty-nine (verses) are above for the upward direction.
18.52.7	The thirty-three (verses) are below for the downward direction.
18.52.8	All of them together make up the fourfold (set).
18.52.9	Those who go by this path and those who know it thus attain union with the directions and their world.
18.52.10	Now, indeed, of the seasons.
18.52.11	The Trivṛt (Stoma) is of spring.
18.52.12	The fifteen days are of the summer.
18.52.13	The seventeen days are of the rainy season.
18.52.14	The twenty-one days are of the autumn.
18.52.15	The twenty nine days are of the winter.
18.52.16	The thirty three days are of the cold season.
18.52.17	All these are of four months.
18.52.18	Those who go by this way and those who know it thus, attain union with the seasons and their world.
18.52.19	Now, indeed, of the sages.
18.52.20	Trivrit is of Vasishtha.
18.52.21	Panchadasha is of Bharadvaja.
18.52.22	Saptadasha is of Vishvamitra.
18.52.23	Ekavimsha is of Jamadagni.
18.52.24	Trinava is of Kashyapa.
18.52.25	Trayastrimsha is of Gautama.
18.52.26	Agastya's is Catustoma.
18.52.27	Catustoma is of all.
18.52.28	Those who go by this path and those who know it thus, attain union with the sages and their world.
18.52.29	Now, then, about the deities themselves.
18.52.30	The Trivrit is of Agni.
18.52.31	The Pañcadaśa is of Indra.
18.52.32	The Saptadaśa is of Prajapati.
18.52.33	The Ekavimśa is of the Shining One.
18.52.34	The Trinava is of the Moon.
18.52.35	The Trayastrimsa is the world of the thirty-three gods.
18.52.36	The Catuṣṭoma is the world of all gods.
18.52.37	Those who go by this path and those who know it attain union with the gods and their world.
18.53.1	Now, they say, the path of the Darsha-Pūrnamāsa sacrifices.
18.53.2	Some say that the path of the sun and the moon.
18.53.3	When he is going to perform the Full-moon sacrifice with Soma,
18.53.4	he consecrates himself.
18.53.5	His consecration is unlimited, and the Upasads are six.
18.53.6	He buys the king in such a way that he thinks: "My Soma-sacrifice will be accomplished on the Full-moon day."
18.53.7	It is accomplished for him in that way.
18.53.8	He proceeds to the Upasads after the prescribed rites.
18.53.9	Then, having performed the Vasatīvarī rites, they observe the special fast.
18.53.10	Then in the morning, he prepares the animal dedicated to Agni.
18.53.11	The animal dedicated to Agni and Soma is the supplement to it.
18.53.12	The offerings of the Full-Moon sacrifice follow the offerings of the morning pressing.
18.53.13	The Savanīya offerings are accompanied by the Prāṣa instructions, and the other offerings are accompanied by "Do thou offer."
18.53.14	The Soma-sacrifice of the Upavasatha day is concluded.
18.53.15	One who is going to perform the Soma-sacrifice on the New-moon day
18.53.16	undergoes consecration.
18.53.17	His consecration is unlimited. The Upavasatha days are twelve.
18.53.18	He buys the Soma-grass as he thinks: "May the Soma-sacrifice be performed on the New-Moon day for me."
18.53.19	It is so performed.
18.53.20	He proceeds to the Upavasathayā after the prescribed rites.
18.53.21	Now on this day the calves of her are driven away for Indra.
18.53.22	He milks Indra's milk, silently, for the Saṁnāyya.
18.53.23	Having taken the Vatsa-varī round, they observe fast separately.
18.53.24	In the morning he prepares the animal for Agni.
18.53.25	For it there is a bull for Indra as an oblation.
18.53.26	The offerings at the New-moon sacrifice follow the offerings at the morning pressing.
18.53.27	The offerings at the Savaniya pressing are accompanied by the Prāṣa-call. The other offerings are accompanied by the call "May the gods be worshipped".
18.53.28	The Atiratra sacrifice is concluded in a straight line.
18.53.29	Those who go by this path, and those who know it thus, and those who will know it thus, they attain union with the Sun and Moon.
19.1.1	One desiring heaven should perform the Savitrī sacrifice.
19.1.2	If a sacrificial post is being erected, having offered the Hotr-oblation and the Yūpa-oblation, having made the sacrificial post with the Yajus-formula, one measures out the altar.
19.1.3	It is understood that one should worship the altar in the third part.
19.1.4	The measure of the altar is the same as that of the Soma sacrifice, except for this difference.
19.1.5	The measure should be the third part of the Soma sacrifice. One should measure the altar with that.
19.1.6	Or, the measure of the side should be the length of a foot. The distance between the two should be the length equal to the ear. That is considered the measure.
19.1.7	The ninth step from the foot, and the distance between the eyes, and the distance from the ear to the corner of the eye, these are the measures of the Prākramas. By these the Sautrāmaṇī altar is measured.
19.1.8	One should place the fires, undertake the vow, bind the sacrificial grass and wood, and carry the Stambayajus.
19.1.9	This is the well-known Pāuroḍāśika rite.
19.1.10	Three times with the Yajus, and the fourth time silently.
19.1.11	First he takes up the enclosing sticks.
19.1.12	He recites the formula.
19.1.13	He raises (the enclosing sticks).
19.1.14	The Agnidhra takes it three times from the raised (sticks).
19.1.15	When the Agnidhra takes (the enclosing sticks) three times, then he measures the Agni-fire towards the east, from the post of the sacrificial post, from the corner.
19.1.16	It should be measured according to the wing. This is said to be only the size of a chariot wheel.
19.1.17	Or, as it is said, the first wheel is two cubits, the middle one is two and a half, and the last one is three parts less than three.
19.1.18	Having made a rope of the length of any one of them with a noose at both ends, having fixed a peg in the middle of the northern altar, having tied the rope to it, having placed another peg at the end, he draws it around in a circular manner.
19.1.19	Having removed the rope, they dig the furrow.
19.1.20	They raise the embankments.
19.1.21	And they make the southern and western ones smaller.
19.1.22	Then he asks for the vessel of clarified butter with the ladle, the wooden sword, the bunch of darbha-grass, the water-pot, the materials belonging to the northern part of the altar, curds mixed with honey, gold, sand, and darbha-grass.
19.1.23	Taking all this, they place it in the northern half of the altar.
19.1.24	Then with two (verses) he takes Agni in himself, with the words, "I take Agni first in myself; Agni who is ours."
19.1.25	He mutters the Svayambhuva verses, "Those thy kindling woods, O Agni, those thy abodes;
19.1.26	Having touched the white horse, he places this (stone) with a hole in it, with the formula, "May Prajapati place thee; may it be firm like Angiras; with that deity."
19.1.27	Having taken out the peg, having placed the water-vessel near, he places the darbha-bunch, silently or with the formula, "May speech place thee in the ocean.
19.1.28	Then he offers to him with oblations of ladlefuls, with five verses, "The year, the companion, the illuminator, the light, the shining one, the bright one."
19.1.29	Having made it the deity, he performs the Sudadoha rite.
19.2.1	Having covered the sacrificial grass, he draws the line around the sacrificial grass.
19.2.2	Having covered up the northern altar, he spreads the northern altar.
19.2.3	Having sprinkled and besprinkled the pit for the sacrificial post, having adorned it, he pours sand with the six Anushtubh verses beginning with "O Agni, thy fame is our fame."
19.2.4	Then he places the upper layer of bricks with the verse, "May the layers of bricks be placed above, may the upper layers of bricks be settled. May they be firmly settled with that deity, like the Angiras."
19.2.5	Then he arranges them with the verse, "Grow thou" in the Gāyatrī metre, and "May thy streams" in the Tristubh metre.
19.2.6	He arranges them as well as he can, as much as he can.
19.2.7	He draws nine circular lines on it.
19.2.8	Then having mixed honey with curds and having arranged the grains of sugar, having offered the evening Agnihotra, having strewn the fires, he observes fast.
19.2.9	Then, in the morning, having offered the Agnihotra, he asks for a pot of water, ashes, dung, salt, sand, and a piece of gold measuring up to the tip of the thumb, equal to the size of the sacrificial grass. He prepares eighty-five hundred bricks or sand smeared with ghee, or an unlimited number. He prepares four self-prepared bricks, a thousand gold plates, and three upward-pointing ones.
19.2.10	Some say that they are unlimited.
19.2.11	If they are a thousand, then two hundred each are placed in the veins of the leaves.
19.2.12	Then when the sun has risen, one takes fire on oneself twice, saying, "I take Agni first, the Agni who is ours."
19.2.13	He recites the Svayambhuva verse: "Those are your kindling woods, O Agni, those are your abodes."
19.2.14	Touching the white horse, he recites the Adhi-dravana verse: "This is the descent of the waters, salutations to them." With two verses.
19.2.15	Then he places the second half of the water pot, reciting: "May the speech place you, O ocean, for the sake of good offspring and prosperity for me, the sacrificer."
19.2.16	Having made that the deity, he performs the Sūda-dohāna.
19.2.17	Then, while spreading the materials, he says, "You are the ashes of Agni." The ashes are the excrement of Agni. "You are the excrement." "You are the knower." "You are what fulfills desires." "May your fulfillment of desires be in me." The gravel.
19.2.18	Then he joins them together: "May your dear bodies be joined together, may your dear hearts be joined together, your soul be joined together. May your dear bodies be united."
19.2.19	Then he arranges them: "May heaven and earth be arranged, may the waters and plants be arranged, may Agni be arranged separately for my supremacy, with the same vows."
19.2.20	He arranges them in such a way that the lines do not disappear.
19.2.21	Or everything is done at once, at the time of Sadyaskala.
19.3.1	Then on the day of the last line of the Antamaya, he places the bricks of the eastern side with the formula, "May you be firm like Angiras, with the knowledge of that deity." "May you be steady like Angiras, having the knowledge of that divinity." Thus fifteen.
19.3.2	In the interstices of these days, he lays down the Muhurta-bricks with the following formulas: "May Citra, with that deity, be firmly established like Angiras. May Ketu, with that deity be firmly established like..." Thus fifteen.
19.3.3	At the end of all, he performs the Sudadohas.
19.3.4	Then on the inner line he lays down the bricks of the eastern half of the Prākīṇya-layer with the verse, "May I be firm like Angiras with the deity Darsa. May I be firm like the deity Dṛṣṭa."
19.3.5	In the interstices of these (bricks) he lays down the Muhurt-bricks of the same deities, with the formulas, "The giver, with that deity, be firm like Angiras; the bestower, with that deity be firm like Angira." Thus fifteen.
19.3.6	At the end of all, he performs the Sudadohas.
19.3.7	Then on the line of the intermediate quarters, he lays down the bricks of the dark fortnight with the verse, "May it be firm like Angiras, may it be praised like Angiras."
19.3.8	In the interstices of these days, he lays down the Muhurta-bricks. "He lays down with the verse, "May Savitar, with that deity, be firmly seated like Angiras. May Prasavitr, with that deity be firmly seated like Aṅgiras." Thus fifteen (bricks).
19.3.9	At the end of all, he recites the Sūdadohas verse.
19.3.10	Then on the line inside, he lays down the bricks of the waning fortnight with the verse, "May I be blessed by that deity, may I be firm like Angiras. May I be blessed by the deity of the Soma-pressing, may I be firmly like Angiras." Thus fifteen.
19.3.11	In the interstices of these same nights, the Adhvaryu lays down the bricks of Muhurta, with the formula, "May I be firm through that deity, like Angiras." The Pratiprasthātṛ lays down with the formula, “May I be firm like Angiras through that deity." Thus fifteen.
19.3.12	At the end of all, he performs the Sudadohas.
19.3.13	Then on the line inside, he places the bricks of the eastern side with the verse, "May it be firm like Angiras, purifying, with that deity. May it be firm like the Angiras, purifying with that deity." Thus twelve.
19.3.14	At the end of all, he performs the Sūdadohas rite.
19.3.15	Then on the line inside, he places the bricks of the waning fortnight with the formula, "Be firm with that deity, like Angiras. Be more firm with that deity like Angiras." Thus twelve.
19.3.16	At the end of all, he performs the Sūdadohas rite.
19.3.17	Then he lays down the bricks in the inner line, with the verse, "May I be firm with that deity, like Angiras. May I be firm with the deity of the red dust, like Angiras." Thus thirteen.
19.3.18	At the end of all, he performs the Sudadohas.
19.3.19	Here some scatter sand in the spaces between the lines, with the verses, "May I have the strength of the moving, the strength of the flowing."
19.3.20	Then on the line inside, he places the bricks of Muhurtas, saying, "Now with that deity, be firm like Angiras." "Now with that same deity, be firm as Angiras." Thus fifteen times.
19.3.21	At the end of all, he performs the Sudadohas.
19.3.22	Then he places the bricks called Crutvikṣa and Crutvikṣā in the space between the two lines, with the formulas, "May Agniṣṭoma be firm through that deity, like Angiras. May Ukthya be firm through that divinity, like Angiras." Six.
19.3.23-24	Agni is the season, with that deity, he settles down like Angiras. The sun is the season, with that deity, he sits down like Angiras, thus three. He makes the last of all the seasons.
19.3.25	Then in the middle, at the navel, he places the bricks of the year, with the formula, "May Prajapati, with that deity, be firmly seated like Angiras. May the year, with that deity be firmly seated like the Angiras." Four.
19.3.26	At the end of all, he performs the Sūdadohas.
19.4.1	He asks for these four bricks of his own accord.
19.4.2	She places them in the directions: "Bhuḥ, Agni and earth" in front; "Bhuvah, Vayu and space" in the south; "Svah, Aditya and heaven" in the west; "Bhuḥ Bhuvah Svah, the moon and the directions" in the north.
19.4.3	At the end of all, he performs the Suddoha.
19.4.4	Then he lays down the Lokampranas (bricks) with the verses, "Fill up the world, fill up the void, and then be settled. Thou art auspicious. Indra and Agni have settled thee in this womb. Brihaspati has settled thee in this abode."
19.4.5	He makes it his deity. With that deity he settles himself firmly like Angiras.
19.4.6	Then he performs the Sūdadohas (offering). The Sūdadohas offer Soma to him. The Prashnas (verses) are the birth of the gods. In the three luminous (regions) in heaven.
19.4.7	Here, with the Lokampṛṇā (verse), he proceeds towards the east. They cover Agni with the eastern (verses).
19.4.8	He covers it with a Palasha branch, reciting, "Fill the world, fill the gap."
19.4.9	Then (the Adhvaryu) touches the fire with the Citti-formula.
19.4.10	Then he touches the fire with two formulas, "What is not touched by thee, what is touched by thee, O Agni."
19.4.11	Here he touches the fire in the Citti-rite with the formula, "The Citti and the Acitti, the knower of both, he touches."
19.4.12	"O Agni, bring the gods here." Having touched this layer with the Gayatri addressed to Agni, he recites the two Avadravana verses: "Speech was my body, the giver of life."
19.4.13	Then, having touched a black horse, he places the Tanu-puriṣa (layer) with the verse, "Pressed on the back of heaven."
19.4.14	Having made it the deity, he performs the Sūdadohasa.
19.4.15	Then having brought the gold-dust into the vessel and scattered it, he sprinkles it with two hundred (drops) each, with the formulas, "Thou art the measure of a thousand," in front; "Thou art the image of a thousand," on the right; "Thou art a thousand," behind; "Thou art an increase of a thousand," to the left.
19.4.16	Then he sprinkles the middle with two hundred (each), with the formulas, “Thou art a thousand; for a thousand thee.”
19.4.17	Then, standing in the northern half, he makes the bricks the cows, saying, "May these bricks of mine be cows for Agni." This is the end of the Anuvaka.
19.4.18	Here some offer on the last brick with Arka leaves and cow's milk.
19.4.19	If he is going to make it, then having made a cavity in the leaf of the arka plant, and standing towards the north, holding it at the mouth of the fire, he says, "Bring the fire."
19.4.20	When he reaches the brick, he takes it up, reciting from the end of the Anuvaka, "You are Agni, Rudra..."
19.4.21	Here he places the Arka leaf on the path of him whom he hates.
19.4.22	If he does not hate him, he places it in a hole made by a rat.
19.4.23	Then he worships it with the Anuvaka, "You alone know yourself, you are what you are."
19.4.24	Then he attends to it with the two verses on dissolution and sport.
19.4.25	Then he says, "O Hotṛ, praise Agni with the eulogy."
19.4.26	If the Hotṛ does not desire, then the sacrificer himself, sitting on the grass spread out behind the fire, praises Agni with the eulogy.
19.4.27	With these three verses, each one thrice, he recites. The joining is done with the Pranava. Similarly, in other cases also, the joining is done with Pranava.
19.4.28	Here, if the Brahmanas who know much do not give Dakshina, it would be a bad offering.
19.4.29	They should offer Agni to him.
19.4.30	He should give them according to his faith.
19.4.31	This is indeed a well-performed rite.
19.4.32	The Brahmanas say, "Do not make a fire for him."
19.5.1	Then the rites connected with the animal sacrifice are performed, starting from the kindling of the fire.
19.5.2	Having performed the Agni-praṇayana (the carrying of the fire to the new shed), having placed the fire in the new shed, having offered oblations to the Adhvaras, he offers these oblations with four spoonfuls each.
19.5.3	"O Agni, you are Rudra" is the form of Shatarudriya.
19.5.4	"O Agn-Vishnu" is for the flow of wealth.
19.5.5	"O Lord of food" is the oblation of food.
19.5.6	"Thy seven fires, O Agni, are seven, thy tongues are seven."
19.5.7	Then with the ladle he offers twenty-one oblations, saying, "To Asvin, svāhā! To Vasu, svāhā!"
19.5.8	Having offered, he pours the remnants into the palms of the sacrificer.
19.5.9	With these, the sacrificer anoints his face, saying, "Queen, not queen." With this Anuvāka.
19.5.10	The ritual of the animal sacrifice, beginning with the Uttaraparigraha, is performed.
19.5.11	Having accomplished the Manota, one follows it, touches the animal's offerings, and takes the Mṛtyugraha in the Udumbara vessel, reciting "For the wise Pavamāna" and following it with "You are taken with the offering, for Mṛtyu you are taken, for Mṛti you are taken."
19.5.12	Having wiped (the vessel) with darbha-blades, he places it on the northern altar, with the formula, "This is thy birth-place; for death thee."
19.5.13	Then he performs the animal sacrifice.
19.5.14	Then he performs with the Vanaspatis.
19.5.15	Then, before the Sviṣṭakṛt offering, while about to offer this cup, he touches water with the formula, “Thou art lightning; lightning remove my sin.”
19.5.16	Then he offers, "I have overcome death, I have overcome hunger, I have overcome the curse. Do not let me be deprived of the thousandfold prosperity of Agni."
19.5.17	"Those thousands and tens of thousands of snares of death for the mortal to kill, we have released them all by the power of sacrifice, svāhā."
19.5.18	Having offered, one should touch oneself, saying, "You are rain, destroy my sin."
19.5.19	Then he proceeds with the Svishtakrit.
19.5.20	When the Ida is being invoked, they take up the cup.
19.5.21	The sacrificer consumes the invoked cup. The consumption is his; it is the consumption of the immortal. Of thee who hast drunk the nectar, who hast drunk the immortal, who hast drunk what is well-sung, who hast drunk that which is sweet, who hast been invoked, I consume thee who hast been invoked.'
19.5.22	Having eaten, he touches himself with the verse, "The gentle one, the lord of the sacrifice, the lord of all beings, the lord of heaven, the lord of earth, the lord of men, the lord of cattle, the lord of horses, the lord of sheep, the lord of goats, the lord of birds, the lord of trees, the lord of herbs, the lord of grasses, the lord of water, the lord of fire, the lord of wind, the lord of space, the lord of time, the lord of light, the lord of darkness, the lord of day, the lord of night, the lord of death, the lord of life, the lord of birth, the lord of growth, the lord of decay, the lord of destruction, the lord of creation, the lord of sacrifice, the lord, the lord of lords, the lord of gods, the lord of demons, the lord of humans, the lord of animals, the lord of plants, the lord of beings, the lord, he is the lord of all." This is the end of the Anuvaka.
19.5.23	The animal sacrifice begins with the Anuyājas.
19.5.24	The time for giving Dakṣiṇās is fixed.
19.5.25	At the time of giving Dakṣiṇa, one gives a cow, a bull, and a horse, and gives twenty-one Dakṣiṇā.
19.5.26	He gives a hundred.
19.5.27	He gives a thousand.
19.5.28	He gives the Dakshina of the sought-after.
19.5.29	If he does not find it, he should give that much in the form of cooked rice.
19.5.30	He should give a cow with a calf.
19.5.31	He gives gold.
19.5.32	He gives clothes.
19.5.33	This is the Brahmanical text: "One's lifespan is restored by that."
19.5.34	If one were to perform a Soma sacrifice, then the consecration should be done on the first day.
19.5.35	The placing of the fire should be done between the middle and last days of the consecration.
19.5.36	The Agnihotra should be offered at the proper time.
19.5.37	The Dakṣiṇās should be given at the proper time for giving Dakṣiṇā.
19.5.38	The Mṛtyugraha is offered at the Savanīya Yūṣṇa.
19.5.39	If one were to perform the first day of the Sattra, then the Dakṣiṇās should be given on the first day. The Graha of Death is the first day.
19.5.40	Dakṣiṇās are not taken in the Sattra.
19.5.41	The Graha of Death would be only the first day. This is another view.
19.5.42	Having performed the Agnihotra, one should offer the Sautrāmaṇī sacrifice with the Maitrāvaruṇa oblation of cooked rice.
19.5.43	After the evening Agnihotra has been offered, the evening milking is done; after the morning Agnihotra has been done, the morning milking is done.
19.5.44	The cooking together with the Pasupurodāsa.
19.5.45	The procedure is not mentioned.
19.5.46	The Savitra is concluded.
19.6.1	Now the Naciketasa.
19.6.2	The demarcation of the area is well-known, as in the Savitra.
19.6.3	Only this much is different.
19.6.4	There are no lines here.
19.6.5	Then he lays down the Yajus-bricks, with the formulas, "Thou art the world, thou art heaven." He lays down twenty-one bricks in the form of a palm. He lays them down here and there.
19.6.6	This is the placing of the scattered bricks elsewhere also.
19.6.7	If the altar is five-fold, then five in front, five on the right, five behind, five on the left, and one in the middle.
19.6.8	Now if (the bricks) are three, seven in front, three on the right, seven behind, three on the left, and one in the middle.
19.6.9	Now if (the bricks are) above, from the corner behind, above, from the space of self-strewing.
19.6.10	Now if they are towards the east, from the space for self-strewed, towards the east.
19.6.11	From the Svayambhuṇābhṛt onwards, it is accomplished.
19.6.12	If one desires, "May I be lustrous, glorious, and brilliant," one should offer from the east, near the Hotr's Dhishnya.
19.6.13	"May that which is in front, glorious, shine upon me with splendor, glory, and brilliance."
19.6.14	He becomes brilliant, famous, and endowed with brahmic glory.
19.6.15	If one wishes, "May they have more faith in me, may they give more Dakṣiṇā," then when the Dakṣiṇās are being given, one should offer with the ladle, saying, "Come east, come east! May the east be pleased. Svāhā to the ghee."
19.6.16	Most of them believe in him.
19.6.17	Most of the Dakshina is taken away. This is the Brahmanical text.
19.6.18	The Naicheta rite is concluded.
19.7.1	Now the Brahman-oriented rite.
19.7.2	The area for the rite is well-known, as in the case of Savitri.
19.7.3	Only this much is different.
19.7.4	There are no lines here.
19.7.5	Then he lays down the bricks of the eastern and northern directions, with the verse, "The ladle is the mind; by that deity, may I be firm like Angiras. The clarified butter is the mind; may I be firm by that deity like Angiras." Thus ten.
19.7.6-7	Then he lays down the brick of the heart, reciting the verse, "The golden heat has been proclaimed by the gods. The self of men is born of mind." Then he lays down a brick of the Yajur Veda, reciting the verse "Agni with the Yajur Veda has settled down in the Angiras way. Savitar with the Stoma has settled down in Angiras way."
19.7.8	Then he lays down the Patniṣṭaka bricks with the formula, "Do thou be firm like Angiras with that deity, the Indra of the army." "Do thou be firmly like Angiras with the deity of Brihaspati, the Indra of wealth."
19.7.9	At the end of all (bricks) he recites the Sūdadohasa formula.
19.7.10	Then on the right side he lays down the four bricks of the Hotṛ in the east with the formulas, "The earth is the Hotṛ, with that deity, like Angiras, be firm." "The heaven is the Adhvaryu, with that deity like Angiras, he is firm." Four.
19.7.11	Then he lays down the heart-brick, reciting the verse, "Brahma, Indra, Agni," and then the verse, "The wise have found this sacrifice of the four Hotṛs as their own self."
19.7.12	Then he lays down the bricks of the Yajus-hymn, with the verse, "Indra, with the hymns, with the blessings of Mitra-Varuna, may I be firm like Angiras."
19.7.13	Then he lays down the Patni-bricks, with the verse "Pathya of Pusan, with the blessings, may I be steady like Angiras. Speech of Vayu, with the blessings..."
19.7.14	The Suddha-dohâ (brick) is placed at the end of all.
19.7.15	Then he places five bricks belonging to the Udici-direction, with the formula, "Agni is the Hotri; may it be firm in the manner of Angiras with that deity." "The Asvins are the Adhvaryus; may it be stable in the manner of the Angiras with that divinity." Four such bricks.
19.7.16	Or, with the same mantra, "The Asvins are the Adhvaryus," he places two bricks of equal size, having the same deity.
19.7.17	He recites the mantra, "May you be firm like Angiras, with that deity."
19.7.18	Then he places the heart-brick, reciting, "A hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand, I know." Having recited this, he says, "I am the embryo of life, created by that nectar."
19.7.19	Then he lays down the bricks of the Yajurveda, with the Agni-bricks of the Angirasas, with that deity, be firm like Angiras. With the Sadasiras and Havirdhana of the Maruts, with that deity be firm like Angira
19.7.20	Then he lays down the Patniṣṭaka bricks with the formula, "Thou art the consecration of Soma. Do thou be firm with that deity, as Angiras did. Thou art the earth of Agni. Do thou be steady with that deity, like Angiras."
19.7.21	At the end of all (the bricks) he performs the Sūdadohasa rite.
19.7.22	Then he lays down six bricks in the northern direction, each of the size of a span, with the formula, "Thou art the voice, thou art the deity, thou art the firm one, thou art Angiras. Thou art the wife of consecration, thou art the divine, thou art the firmly established one." Thus six.
19.7.23	Then he lays down the heart-brick with the formula, "The golden pot is surrounded by silver." Having recited this, he recites the formula, "Indra's self moving in a hundred ways."
19.7.24	Then he lays down the bricks of the Yajurveda, sprinkling with water, with the verse, "May it be firm like Angiras, with that deity. May the herbs be firm like the sacrificial grass, with that deity."
19.7.25	Then he lays down the Patniṣṭaka bricks with the formula, "Thou art firm like Angiras with the Gayatri metre of the Vasus, with the Trishtup metre of the Rudras."
19.7.26	At the end of all (the bricks) he performs the Sūdadohasa rite.
19.7.27	Then he lays down seven bricks towards the east above (the first layer). The Hotri is the great oblation; do thou be firm in the manner of Angiras with that deity. The Adhvaryu is the true oblation; do you be firm in the way of Angiras with this deity. Six.
19.7.28	Or, with the verse, "The two most invincible ones are the two most invincible ones of the sacrifice," he places two bricks of equal size, having the same deity.
19.7.29	He recites the mantra, "May you be firm like Angiras, with that deity."
19.7.30	Then he places the heart brick, reciting the mantra from the end of the chapter, "Indra, the king of the world, who is the lord..."
19.7.31	Then he lays down the bricks of the Yajurveda, with the formula, "Aditi is the altar; may it be firm in the manner of Angiras with that deity." "Soma is the consecration; may it be firmly in the manner of the Angiras with that divinity." Thus thirteen.
19.7.32	Then he lays down the Patni-bricks, the Jagati of the Adityas, with that deity, be firm like Angiras. The Anushtup of Vishnu, with that deity be firm like Angira. Thus eighteen.
19.7.33	At the end of all, he performs the Soodadohas.
19.7.34-35	Then he lays down the bricks of the Grahas in accordance with the space (available). He lays down the bricks with the formulas, "O Vācaspati, O Vidhe, O Namni" for the ten-hotr; "O Vāca-pati, by the power of speech" for the four-hotr; "O Soma, the leader of Soma" for the five-hotr; "Bhuvah, Bhuvah, Suvah" for the six-hotr; “O Vācaspate, O Hṛdvidhe, O Namani" for the seven-hotr. He places them at the end of all. He places the Sudadohas at the end of the Hotr bricks.
19.7.36	Then he lays down the bricks of acceptance in accordance with the space (available).
19.7.37	Having recited the verse, "By the impulse of the divine Savitr," he says, "This is your Dakshina, the one who is stretched out, may the Angirasas accept you." This is the nineteenth (verse).
19.7.38	Or, with this mantra, "To the Gandharvas and Apsaras, for garlands and ornaments," he lays down two bricks of equal nature and deity.
19.7.39	With the verse, "May you be seated firmly like Angiras, by that deity," he recites the mantra.
19.7.40	From the self-sprouting grass onwards, it is accomplished. From here onwards,
19.7.41	the Brahma-mind concludes.
19.8.1	Now for the entire (ritual):
19.8.2	The demarcation of the area is well-known, as in the case of Savitri.
19.8.3	Only this much is different:
19.8.4	Savitri Agni is the first layer.
19.8.5	Lokamprana is the second.
19.8.6	Nachiketas is the third.
19.8.7	Lokamprana is the fourth.
19.8.8	Brahmachit is the fifth.
19.8.9	In all the layers, the layers are self-spread.
19.8.10	The layers end with excrement.
19.8.11	He touches the five layers with these verses: "O Agni, bring the gods here."
19.8.12	If the Somasacrifice is to be performed on an auspicious day, then one should perform the consecration on the last day. One should offer to the Svanis on the day of consecration and to the Apas on the day of conclusion.
19.8.13	Having applied once, one joins together.
19.8.14	It concludes with the complete (sacrifice).
19.9.1	Now, of the Visvasrj.
19.9.2	The demarcation of the area is well-known, as in the case of Savitr.
19.9.3	This much is different.
19.9.4	There are three lines.
19.9.5	Then he places on the last line, "What is immortal and what is mortal," making eighteen.
19.9.6	He makes the Sūdadohas at the end of all.
19.9.7	Then he puts on the inner line, "All directions in the directions," making fifteen.
19.9.8	He makes Sūdadohas on the end of all.
19.9.9	Then he places the line within (the altar). All the gods, all the heaven, in heaven. Nine times.
19.9.10	He makes (the altar) on the other side of all the Sūda-cows.
19.9.11	From the Svayamātrṇṇā onwards, it is accomplished. From here onwards.
19.9.12	If he were to perform it at a hundred-night sacrifice, then at the time of giving the Dakṣiṇās, the Brahman, seated among the members, would explain the Vaishvajit, reciting the verses in the eastern direction, which is said to be the great direction. In the Brahmana, the verses are recited in the reverse order, either in half-verses or in complete verses.
19.9.13	Therefore the Adhvaryu recites, "Oṃ, the great truth, the great truth of the great, the great of the great."
19.9.14	In the last section, "the great of the great" is completed.
19.9.15	The creation of the universe is concluded.
19.10.1	This has been explained by Āruṇaketu.
19.10.2	As long as the mantras are recited, the bricks are placed.
19.10.3-7	The Lokampṛṇā, Svayamātrīṇā and the bow are the same. The lotus leaf, gold, golden man and tortoise are the same. The sun and rain are as mentioned. The Palvalya means not dried up. At the time of digging the northern altar, he digs it silently up to the knee and scatters the soil elsewhere.
19.10.8	The verse beginning with "Vidyut" is omitted.
19.10.9	One should understand that it is Dhruvasiti.
19.10.10	One should place the bricks with the hand, not with the stones.
19.10.11	Having performed the peace with the two verses beginning with "Bhadraṃ karṇebhiḥ," one places them with those two.
19.10.12	With the five verses beginning with "Apaṃ apaṃ," one places hot water.
19.10.13	"May the auspicious waters be for our welfare." The Adhvaryu gives (the waters) to the waters.
19.10.14	Having received them, he places them with the formula, "May they be auspicious."
19.10.15	He should place the one with the formula, 'May they be gentle' in front of these.
19.10.16	The eight formulas are 'Smriti, Pratyaksa' and 'Sukram te anyat'.
19.10.17	The eleven formulas are 'Saakmanjana' in front.
19.10.18	The six verses beginning with "The eye is the source of pain" are to be recited on the right side.
19.10.19	The four verses beginning with "Very red" are to be chanted by those who are angry. The peace is to be performed at the beginning and end like in the Pravargya.
19.10.20	The three verses beginning with "Above the eye" and "The eye is above" are to be used for the seasons. The three verses beginning with "Av drapsa" are to be used.
19.10.21	"May you be healthy." Thus, with the eight names of the Sun, and with the words "Your skill is in each step,"
19.10.22	Having recited the Vyāhṛtis, the sacrificer stands up with the words "Water is here."
19.10.23	Similarly, with the subsequent offerings, having recited the Vyāhritis,
19.10.24	Seven suns, seven directions, many suns, the sky, and the variegated gods. Four solar verses in front: "Where is that cloud?" one verse.
19.10.25	"Half-months" above.
19.10.26	"Time enters the waters" on the right.
19.10.27	"What is here?" five Vaishnavi verses.
19.10.28	I ask you, the supreme death, four times.
19.10.29	I ask you, the one who has committed a sin, four times. The one who has committed sins.
19.10.30	"To which Agni, the one who leads, two times."
19.10.31	Agni and the one who knows, eight times. The directions are the directions. The one who offers.
19.10.32	Shining ones, eleven Rudras.
19.10.33	The eleven Rudras shine forth, each in his own place.
19.10.34	The sacrificer is the forms of us.
19.10.35	The eleven groups of Gandharvas are the brothers of us, each in his place behind.
19.10.36	The one is the one who shines forth.
19.10.37	The seven winds are the boars, the self-tapers, each in their place.
19.10.38	This is the same as the one who is endowed with rain.
19.10.39	The world is the syllable that is not.
19.10.40	Jamadagni is the one who is nourished.
19.10.41	"The one called Shanyu is the one called Shanyu."
19.10.42	"The one with a thousand increases is the one with eight Sanyani."
19.10.43	"The collection is the one called Sangramam."
19.10.44	"Those who are pure have the pure. The Brahman of the gods is the one who exists suddenly." There are four verses about purity.
19.10.45	"These are the ones who are Rishis." There are seven in the middle.
19.10.46	The blind one says, "The gem is the five goddesses." The northern one.
19.10.47	"O Agni, that chariot" - three.
19.10.48	"Stretch out" - four.
19.10.49	"With the gentle ones" - one, the sacrificer should place.
19.10.50	"With subtle ones" - two.
19.10.51	"O Subrahmanya" - one.
19.10.52	"The red horses" - four Revatīs.
19.10.53	"Thou art the crossing of Brahman." There are four Brahman-seats.
19.10.54	"The eight-natured one." There are eight directions.
19.10.55	"Mitra and Varuna." There are eight direction.
19.10.56	"The lotus leaf, the golden, the golden man, the tortoise." Like the great Agni.
19.10.57	Having placed them, "The swan, the pure one." Two Dūrohana (verses) around the man.
19.10.58	These are the two in the middle.
19.10.59	The eight beginning with "the Vasus, the Rudras" are in the north.
19.10.60	"The rays are yours" is the sacrificer.
19.10.61	The eight starting with "for health" are above.
19.10.62	"The waters are yours" is said by the sacrificer. "
19.10.63	The eleven beginning with "shining" and the eleven beginning with "the shining ones" are in the middle. "
19.10.64	"The forms are yours" is spoken by the sacrificer.
19.10.65	The eight directions of Agni are in the east.
19.10.66	The sacrificer says, "The directions are yours."
19.10.67	In the southeast, there are four directions with hell, as per the signs.
19.10.68	"In which Indra has a hundred powers," there are two directions to the south.
19.10.69	"Indra's roar is your recognition," there are six directions.
19.10.70	"O Aditya, all," there are five directions.
19.10.71	"The six beginning with 'Eva' are the directions.
19.10.72	The nine beginning with 'Apama' are above.
19.10.73	The one beginning with 'Apaṃ rasaṃ' is the one.
19.10.74	The one containing the word 'Kama' is the one containing the word.
19.10.75	The one with the word 'Oghā' is the one with the word.
19.10.76	'Having created the worlds' is the one that contains the word 'stambha'.
19.10.77	The one beginning 'Ketā' is the single one.
19.10.78	The three beginning with 'Imā nu kam' are the three.
19.10.79	"Obeisance to the waters, the seven and the seventeen."
19.10.80	"Obeisance to you, O you with the head of a lion."
19.10.81	"O obeisance to you, the lord of rain."
19.10.82	"O you, the lord, come back to me."
19.10.83	The rest is the same as in the Savitri.
19.10.84	These waters, the self-matronized and the Lokamprana, are the five kinds of offerings.
19.10.85	And cover the funeral pyres in each direction with lotus leaves, etc.
19.10.86	Others like the first funeral pyre.
19.10.87	Not lotus leaves, etc.,
19.10.88	The final release is to the north with Lokampṛṇā.
19.10.89	Having made a bench with long wood, and having been asked, "Is the excrement removed?"
19.10.90	The Śatarudriya Homa is performed on the last brick.
19.10.91	The Agni Prāṇayana is performed at the end of the Anuśaṃsana.
19.10.92	When the oblations are being offered, the Brāhmaṇa explains the sacrifice to Vaiśravaṇa. At every new and full moon, one should perform the sacrifice to Vaiṣravaṇa for the sake of food or for all desires.
19.10.93	One should perform the sacrifice on the northern altar in accordance with the Brāhmaṇas.
19.10.94	This is his vow, as per the Brāhmaņas. The vows and their collections are determined.
19.10.95	The waters are not disgusting, as the Brahman is.
19.10.96	It is known from the Brāhmaṇa that water is everything. Water is Brahman. When water is deposited, it places the Self in Brahman. He who builds this fire attains union with Brahman and the same world as Brahman.
19.10.97	May the sacrifice be accomplished. May the sacrifice be completed.
20.1.1	This is the Upavasatha day.
20.1.2	How does one know about the Upavasathai day?
20.1.3	The evening twilight is to be performed, then the morning twilight.
20.1.4	Indeed, the evening twilight is good, and the performance of the evening twilight is also good.
20.1.5	Indeed, all this is like the evening twilight.
20.1.6	Baudhayana said, "One should know that the day on which the moon rises red in front of the setting sun is also a day of fasting."
20.1.7	Here Shakalya said, "This day has passed."
20.1.8	One should perform the Sandhyā rites or offer a full oblation.
20.1.9	If the sun has set while he is fasting, and the moon rises in front of him, looking as if it were red, he should say, "Let us proceed with the Agnihotra," and then proceed with the Parvan offering.
20.1.10	When the Parvan offering is completed, one should offer the Agnihotra.
20.1.11	Thus, indeed, on the full moon day.
20.1.12	Now, on the new moon day.
20.1.13	Baudhayana said, one should observe the fast without being seen.
20.1.14	Shaliki said, one should do it like this. There is a fast which is seen.
20.1.15	Where the moon, having attained its full size by the nights, is seen in the sky with the stars, and is not seen the next day, one should know that it is the Upavasatha day.
20.1.16	The rekindling of the fires.
20.1.17	The thread of the son of Upanamya.
20.1.18	Herein Baudhayana says that one should place the fires in the manner of the Vihavya-s, placing each one with three each, those who would make nine.
20.1.19	Those who would make eight should repeat the first or the last one twice.
20.1.20	Those who make ten should place each one with three three and standing to the north of the Ahavaniya should recite the tenth one.
20.1.21	Here Śālīki said, "The Garhapatya is indeed kindled only once."
20.1.22	The Anvāhāryapacana is the source of the village.
20.1.23	One should kindle the Ahavanīya alone with the Vihavyā.
20.1.24	One should recite the remaining verses standing to the north of the Ahavanīyī."
20.1.25	Herein, indeed, Oupamanyava said, "One should kindle the fires with the Vihavya verses, one by one, with each verse."
20.1.26	"One should recite the remaining verses standing to the north of the Ahavaniya fire."
20.1.27	Herein, indeed, Maudgalyāyana said, "One should kindle only the Āhavanīya fire. I take up Agni, the companion of Surabhi, who rises up to the rising sun, the Aditya, the supreme light of lights, for the delight of the sacrifice and the deities tomorrow."
20.1.28	The Vasus, Rudras, Adityas, and Indra, the gods, I take them first, in my own place, with my mind.
20.1.29	Those who have entered this fifteen-fold energy, I take those gods first. May Agni, the bearer of oblations, bring them here. This is the full-moon offering for them. It is in me. At the full moon.
20.1.30	This is the oblation for the New-moon sacrifice. This is mine. This is for the New-Moon sacrifice.
20.1.31	Here Maitreya said: One should place the Ahavaniya alone with the Vyāhṛtis, silently the other two. Then standing to the north of the Ahavaniya, one should recite.
20.1.32	One should place the fires with the Vyāhritis alone. This is said by Rathitara.
20.1.33-37	In the case of the sprinkling of the oblations. Baudhāyana says, these are the sprinkling of the offerings. Śālīki says, curd is seen to be used for sprinkling. In that case, since one of them is not available, it should be sprinkled with one of them.
20.1.38	Baudhayana says that one should undertake the vow at the time of the Sanga-sacrifice, or when the cows are being milked, or when the oblations are being carried forward.
20.1.39	Here Śālīki says, "The Vrata-food is to be taken at the time of the morning meal." The Brāhmaṇa says, "One performs the Vrata at the Full-Moon sacrifice with the Barhis and with the calves at the New-Moon sacrifice." One should perform the Vrata at Sangava time.
20.1.40	Aupamanyava says, "Starting from Anvādhāna."
20.1.41	It is said in the Abhiuditīya Iṣṭi.
20.1.42	Baudhayana said that one should perform the rites of the new moon with the oblations of the Siddhas and then again observe fast and perform the rites of Kaliya on the next day when the sun has not risen and is not obstructed.
20.1.43	Shaliki said that one should first perform the rites of Brahmana-jeshti and then again observe the fast and perform the Kaliya rites on the next day.
20.1.44	Thus, indeed, is the arrangement.
20.1.45	Now, indeed, is non-arrangement.
20.1.46	The Kalpa of Baudhayana is similar.
20.1.47	Here Śālīki said, "Having cooked these oblations in water, one should again fast and offer them on the next day when the sun has not risen and is not setting. Or, indeed, one should increase the fast."
20.1.48	"The shade" is said.
20.1.49	Baudhayana said, One should cut off the branch of a tree and spend the day in silence.
20.1.50	One should spend the day thus.
20.1.51	Shaliki said, One should speak with a brahmana only, laughing at him in a friendly manner, and not with a non-brahmana.
20.1.52	Cutting off the branch of the tree.
20.1.53	Baudhayana says that one should cut the branch with the formula, "To Isha thee!" and should rub it with the formula, “To Urja thee!” or should look at it.
20.1.54	Shaliki says that one should look at it only.
20.1.55	With the formula, "For the calf to be taken away."
20.1.56	Baudhayana says that the male calf should be taken away with the formula, "To Vayu thee!" and the female calf with the formula, "To Upayu thee!"
20.1.57	If they are of different kinds, then one should not abandon the mantra.
20.1.58	Śālīki says that one should move with the mixed one.
20.2.1	One should move to the branch.
20.2.2	Baudhāyana says that one should make it move in front of the Āhavanīya.
20.2.3	Śālini says that one should do it behind the Garhapatya.
20.2.4	This is the moving to the branch in all cases, and the moving of the milk-offerings elsewhere except for the Pravargya.
20.2.5	Both should be transferred to the other side, says Aupamaṇyava.
20.2.6	The sacrificer should go away, says Baudhāyana.
20.2.7	Baudhāyana says, The sacrificer goes away along with the sacrificer.
20.2.8	He should mentally contemplate him wherever he may be.
20.2.9	If he comes back after the rite has been disturbed, he should proceed with the rite after having recited the concluding formula.
20.2.10	Here Śālīki said, if his son is a student, then he should be sent there.
20.2.11	If he comes back after being absent or goes away after death, then he should not be given.
20.2.12	Both of them should eat the share of the sacrificer.
20.2.13	The procuring of the sacrificial grass and wood.
20.2.14	The sutra of the two teachers.
20.2.15	In the afternoon, having given to the Pitrs, one should prepare the sacrificial grass and fire-wood. So says Angiras.
20.2.16	On the next day, one should offer oblations to the Pitrs. So says Upanishad.
20.2.17	One should offer oblations with the mantra, "You are the one who burns, the one who is burnt."
20.2.18	Baudhayana said, "One should offer oblation to the one who burns and the one who is burned. Thus, one should offer the horse-pestle for the destruction of demons."
20.2.19	Here Śālīki said, "One should not heat the fire with fire. These mantras are seen to be in the form of a horse's head."
20.2.20	"One should heat only the horse's head, not the horse's tail, for the purpose of removing cruelty."
20.2.21	In the case of the sequence of rites.
20.2.22	Baudhayana says that one should go to the place where one thinks he will find the sacrificial grass, after having taken three or four steps towards the east from the Ahavaniya fire.
20.2.23	Shaliki says that one should proceed towards the place where one intends to find the sacrificial grass from the Ahavani ya fire itself, but not through the southern door.
20.2.24	One should go around the sacrificial grass.
20.2.25	Baudhayana says that one should recite the mantra thrice and perform the rite thrice.
20.2.26	Thus for the scraping of the Yūpa-pit, for the Soma-purchasing cow, for the Audumbara-pit, for Uparava-pit.
20.2.27	Shaliki says that one should only recite the mantra once and perform the rite three times.
20.2.28	For the cutting.
20.2.29-34	Baudhayana says that the Sūtra is seen to be a mantra for the Prāgāsahi. It should be a mere touching of the mantra, says Śālīki. Baudhāyana says that one should bind the Prāstara from the middle and from the sides. Baudhāyāna says that one should make the binding from the middle and the sides. One should make the binding in an uneven number, says Śālki.
20.2.35	Here Śālīki says that one obtains the entire mantra of the sacrificial grass by obtaining the mantra of the Prāstara grass, and one should not tie it together from the middle. This is also the most unequal.
20.2.36	It is said to be the making of a hook.
20.2.37	Baudhāyana says that the fourth should be the basis.
20.2.38	Śālīki says it should be the third itself.
20.2.39	The verse is "Barhiṣaḥ sambaraṇa" (O Agni, do thou cover the sacrificial grass).
20.2.40	Baudhāyana says, one should first collect the other sacrificial grass with a mantra, and then collect the sacrificial grass of the Yajurveda with a mantra.
20.2.41	Here Śālīki says that the other oblations of the Yajurveda should be offered silently, and then the oblation of the Yajurvedic mantra should be offered.
20.2.42	Herein, Oupamanyava said, "One should first collect the sacrificial grass along with the grass for the sacrificial post, using the mantra, and then silently collect the other grasses. Having collected them, one should make a knot."
20.3.1	Making a knot.
20.3.2	Baudhayana says that one should make a bundle of grass.
20.3.3	Saliki says that one should recite this mantra while collecting the grass.
20.3.4-8	Then he places it facing east. Baudhāyana says that one should place it facing east. Śālīki says that one should put it facing west. It is the placing of the sacrificial grass. Baudhāyanasaid, having placed the wooden sword or a chip inside the altar, and having established it with a mantra, one should then place it as well as one can.
20.3.9	Where he is going to place it, he should place it with the mantra. This is what Śālīki says.
20.3.10	Regarding the making of the paridhi:
20.3.11	Baudhāyana says that the middle one should be the size of the chest, and the other two should be the size from the elbow to the tip of the middle finger.
20.3.12	All of them should be the size between the elbow and the tip of the fingers, says Śālīki.
20.3.13	Regarding the preparation of the wood:
20.3.14-21	Baudhayana says that one should place the kindling wood for the Anusamidha offerings. Saliki says that it should be of unlimited size. It is the making of the Veda. Baudhayana says that the animal should have a dewlap. Saliki says that it should be done for the sake of the cow. Aupamanyava says that it should have three layers. Aupamanavaputra says that it should have a tip pointing upwards. It is for the Pitryajna.
20.3.22-25	Baudhayana says that the grass should be with roots because of the similarity with the Pitryajna. It is seen that this is the Mahapitryajna. The grass should be without roots, says Saliki. It is a sacrifice of the Iṣṭi.
20.3.26	Baudhayana said, if the rites of different kinds are performed on the same day, then one should go to the sacrificial grass for each rite. One should spread the grass that has been cut. Having undertaken the vow for each rite, one should release the vow at the end of the rites.
20.3.27	Here Śālīki said, "If all the rites are performed on the same day, then the grass should be spread only once for all of them. The grass should be spread from the cut grass. Having approached the vow at the end of all of them, the vow should be released at the end of them all."
20.3.28	The spreading of the Parṇatsarūṇā.
20.3.29	This is the Sutra of Śālīki.
20.3.30	Herein Baudhayana says that one should erect the third fire-chamber, should place the third within the altar, and should drive away the calves with the third (fire-chamber).
20.3.31	Thus indeed, the cattle are not driven away.
20.3.32	One should perform the Upvesa-rite on the full-moon day.
20.3.33	Baudhayana says that it should be done.
20.3.34	Saliki says that it should not be done.
20.3.35	The making of the milking-strainer is thus.
20.3.36	Baudhāyana says that having tied the roots, one should extend the rope twice and then tie it at the end.
20.3.37	Thus the end of this becomes well-connected with the ends.
20.3.38	Here Śālīki says that having tied the roots, one should extend a double rope, and having turned around the roots, one then extends a triple rope and binds it at the tip.
20.3.39	Thus its tip becomes well-connected with the tips.
20.4.1	It is said to be the making of the Agnihotra leftovers.
20.4.2	Baudhayana said, if the Agnihotra has been performed with ghee or with a medicinal herb, one should offer that night with milk and should perform the Agnihotra with milk alone.
20.4.3-5	Here Śālīki says that one should not repeat the offering if it is not completed. If it is started with ghee or medicinal herbs, then having offered that, one should perform the Agnihotra with the remaining of that. Regarding the sprinkling of the vessels for the Saṁnāyya offering, Baudhāyana says that one should sprinkle silently with sanctified water.
20.4.6	The Salīki reciters say that the embers should be taken up with the pot.
20.4.7	Having sat down with the back towards the Garhapatya, one should take up the embers with the Upaveṣa towards the north.
20.4.8	This is the Sutra of Salīki.
20.4.9	Here Bāudhāyana says that one should take up embers silently.
20.4.10	The entire Adhiśramana mantra should be used, says Baudhāyana.
20.4.11	The placing of the milking-strainer is prescribed.
20.4.12	Baudhāyana says that one should place it in the pot with the mantra.
20.4.13	Śālīki says that one should silently place it in the vessel.
20.4.14	Āupamanyava says that one should make half and place half in the pot.
20.4.15	The recitation of the mantra for the cows is prescribed.
20.4.16	Baudhayana said that one should recite the mantra over each of them and then milk each of them.
20.4.17	Shaliki said that one should first recite the mantra over all of them and then should milk each of them.
20.4.18	Here, Oupamanyava said, "One should recite the formulas for all of them only once, and milk them only once, also let the leftovers remain here."
20.4.19	Oupamanyavaputra said, "One can let them remain with all the rites for each one."
20.4.20	This is the recitation for the leftovers.
20.4.21	This is the Sutra of Saliki.
20.4.22	The statement of Aupamanyava.
20.4.23	Herein Baudhayana says that one should recite the Stoka formulas over the milk that is being churned.
20.4.24	For this is the end of the Stoka formulas.
20.4.25	One should churn the milk that is left over.
20.4.26	Baudhayana says that having released speech, one should churn the milk left over without beginning again.
20.4.27	Kátyayana says that one should begin to churn the milk that has been brought and restrain speech.
20.4.28	One who is getting milk.
20.4.29	Baudhāyana says that one should perform the rites beginning with the removal of the calf.
20.4.30	Śālīki says that one should begin with sprinkling.
20.4.31	One should sprinkle.
20.4.32	Baudhāyan says that one should bring the fourth ladle as much as one thinks one will be able to mix.
20.4.33	Śālīki says that one should bring the spoon in the third (stage).
20.4.34	One should bring the remnant of Agnihotra and the Ātāñcana.
20.4.35	This is the Sutra of Śālīki.
20.4.36	Baudhāyana says that having brought the remnant of Agnihotṛ, one should bring the Ātāṅcana.
20.4.37	In this way both are brought together.
20.4.38-42	He covers with the water. Baudhayana says that one should sleep the whole night after covering with the water. Saliki says that one should cover with the water and sprinkle water on it. The covering of the fires. The sutra of the two teachers.
20.4.43	Herein, Oupamanyava said, one should spread the fires as they have arisen on the Upavasatha day itself.
20.4.44	For thus one becomes a brahmin, the deities dwell in this (house) when one who knows this spreads the fire."
20.4.45	"Eating and not eating."
20.4.46	One should eat forest-produce and water, says Baudhayana.
20.4.47	Salīki says that it should be water alone.
20.4.48	Aupamanyava says that it should not be from the forest and not from water.
20.5.1	One should touch the hands.
20.5.2	Baudhāyana says that one should touch the hands standing to the north of the Āhavanīya.
20.5.3	Śālīki says that one should do so to the north of Gārhapatya.
20.5.4	One should spread the fires.
20.5.5	The Sūtra of Śālīki.
20.5.6	The explanation of Aupamanyava.
20.5.7	Herein Baudhayana says that one should first spread the Garhapatya in front, then on the right, then behind and then on the left.
20.5.8	One should spread the Anvähäryapacani in the same way, then the Ahavaniya.
20.5.9	The placing of the vessels.
20.5.10	This is the Sutra of Saliki.
20.5.11	Herein Baudhayana says that one should spread darbha-blades to the north of the Garhapatya and place the utensils on them.
20.5.12	One should place the utensils to the north of Agni's house.
20.5.13	One should take them in the proper order. So says Rathitar.
20.5.14	One should sit down for the Brahma-offering.
20.5.15	Baudhayana says that having moved away, one should sit down to the south of the Ahavaniya.
20.5.16-22	On the right side of the Ahavaniya, says Saliki. One should sit down near the sacrificer, says Baudhayana. One should not sit down on the right side of Ahavaniya, but should sit down on the left side, says Saliki One should spread the Prsthya, says Baudhayaṇa. Baudhāyana says that one should spread the Soma. Salīki says that one should strew the Prsthyal
20.5.23	The making of the two Pavitras is prescribed.
20.5.24	Baudhāyana says that the Pavitras should be made of the grass called Prishthya.
20.5.25	Aupamanyava says that the Pavitra should be made of grass called Trna.
20.5.26	Salīki says that the Pavitrās should be made of any other grass not used before.
20.5.27	One should remain silent while the Pavitras are being taken up and while the oblations are being offered.
20.5.28	Baudhayana says that one should speak to the Sampați-priests while smiling.
20.5.29	Śālīki says that one should release the speech.
20.5.30	This is the explanation of the Hotr-priests.
20.5.31	One should offer the oblations with the exception of the Grahas and the Svāhā-utterance, says one recension.
20.5.32	One should make the oblations with exception of the Graha and the Svāha-utterance,says another recension.
20.5.33	All, says another recension.
20.5.34-39	The first is of Baudhayana, the latter two are of Saliki. This is the explanation of Dashahotri. The teachers say that the Dashahotri is explained by those who have composed and are composing. Oupamanyava says that one should take the handful only. The Sutra of Saliki is this.
20.5.40	Herein Baudhayana says that one should offer from the cart itself.
20.5.41	Having touched the axle, one should move towards the axle-guard with the verse, "May Vishnu move thee."
20.5.42	Having looked at the Purorvasiya cakes, one should touch them with the verse, “May the five be satisfied.”
20.5.43	One should touch them three times with the Yajus and once silently. One should touch the four corners.
20.6.6	The Atiśiṣṭas are to be sown.
20.6.7	Baudhāyana says that they should be sown in a pit or a pond.
20.6.8	Śālīki says that they should sown here itself.
20.6.9	The offering of clarified butter.
20.6.10	The sūtra of Śālīki.
20.6.11	In this context Baudhāyana says that one should offer clarified butter after reaching the end of the medicine.
20.6.12	Thus his sprinkling with the oblations becomes proper.
20.6.13	Giving away.
20.6.14	Baudhāyana says, one should give away as per the description.
20.6.15	Here Śālīki says, one should say, "O Agni, protect the oblation" and "O Viṣṇu, protect the milk" and "O Agni, protector of herbs."
20.6.16	Viṣṇu is the protector of milk and Agni is the protector of herbs.
20.6.17	Sprinkling the Prokṣaṇī water.
20.6.18	The Sūtra of Baudhāyana.
20.6.19	Reciting this verse, one should sprinkle three times, says Śālīki.
20.6.20	Sprinkling of the oblations.
20.6.21	One should sprinkle separately, says Baudhāyana.
20.6.22	Having followed the deities, one should sprinkle thrice, says Śālini.
20.6.23	Sprinkling the vessels.
20.6.24	The text of Śālīki is the same.
20.6.25	Herein Baudhayana says that one should purify the vessels for the divine rite and for the offering to the gods.
20.6.26	One should spread the remaining ones.
20.6.27	Baudhayana says that they should be spread in the same way.
20.6.28	Śālīki says that one should sprinkle them and then spread other ones above them.
20.6.29	One should sprinkle the skin of black antelope.
20.6.30	Baudhayana says that one should shake the Kṛṣṇājin in the northern direction, in a separate place, after having gone out of the fire-chamber.
20.6.31	Śālīki says that one should do it within the same direction.
20.6.32	One should spread the Kṛṣṇa-skin.
20.6.33	Baudhāyana says that one should perform this rite without discarding it, by shaking the Kṛṣna-skin and spreading it.
20.6.34	Thus, from the placing of the mortar to the pouring of the oblations.
20.6.35	Thus, from the placing the pestle to the taking up of the chaff.
20.6.36	Thus, till the pouring of the Soma juice.
20.6.37	Thus, until the placing of the potsherd and the pouring of the juice.
20.6.38	Thus till the placing of the Prāstara and the pouring of Soma juice.
20.6.39	Till the taking up of Soma juice. Till the taking up of water.
20.7.4	The crushing of the barley grains is done by the bull with a loud noise.
20.7.5	This is the Sutra of Baudhayana.
20.7.6	Shaliki says that it should be done silently.
20.7.7	The crushing of the barley is done silently.
20.7.8	This is a Sutra of Shaliki.
20.7.9	In this regard, Baudhayana says that the crushing of the barley should be done silently.
20.7.10-15	He should offer the Puronuvākyā verses with the same mantra, "You are the one who grows with the year, I know you as the one who grows." Then, turning towards the north, he should sprinkle. This is the view of Baudhayana. One should sprinkle, turning towards any direction, says Saliki. The removal of husks. This is the view of Saliki.
20.7.16	Herein, indeed, Baudhayana says, "Having offered the oblations of the size of the thumb, one should place the skin of black antelope with its neck towards the north, saying, 'Thou art the share of Rakshas.' Then one should touch water."
20.7.17	One should again spread the skin of black antelopes.
20.7.18	This is the sutra of the two teachers.
20.7.19	The neck of the skin of black-antelope should be towards the east, the fur towards the north, says Auparnara.
20.7.20	This is a grinding.
20.7.21	This is Saliki's sutra.
20.7.22	Herein Baudhayana says that one should offer the eastern one with the verse, "For Prāṇa thee", the western one with the verse "For Apāna thee", and the southern one with the verse "For Vyāna thee".
20.7.23	Then one should offer the long eastern one with the formula, "For life, for the abode."
20.7.24	One should scatter the ground with flour on a black antelope skin with the verse, "May Savitr, the god, with golden hands, accept it."
20.8.1	Śālīki says that one should not take up Dhṛṣṭi either in one or many fires.
20.8.2	In this connection, Baudhāyana says that one should take up Dhṛṭi at the very outset, saying, "You are Dhṛṣṭī, protect the Brahman."
20.8.3	One should recite over the Garhapatya fire, "O Agni, do not take up the raw flesh."
20.8.4	One should remove the embers of the Dakṣiṇā fire, saying, "Remove the flesh-eater."
20.8.5	Then he should imagine others, saying, "May it carry the offering to the gods."
20.8.6	And in them he should place the rice-ball, saying, "You are the firm earth, you protect life, you protect offspring, you protect the kinsmen for this sacrificer."
20.8.7	Then he should encircle it with embers, saying, "The Rakshas is burnt, the evil ones are burnt."
20.8.8	He should place all the potsherds and bowls in this way.
20.8.9	In the case of potsherds with mouth-like openings.
20.8.10	Baudhāyana indeed says that one should take up the Dhṛṣṭi at the very beginning.
20.8.11	One should prepare the principal oblations.
20.8.12	Here Śālīki says that the taking up of Dhṛṣṭis is done at the joining of the potsherds.
20.8.13	He who is about to place the potsherds should take up the Dhṛti.
20.8.14	One should prepare the oblations from the Purorasa.
20.8.15	The placing of the potsherds.
20.8.16	The sutra of the two teachers.
20.8.17	Here Aupamañyava said: The potsherds are placed according to the prescribed manner.
20.8.18	The mantra that is recited over the embers should be recited first over the potsherds, and then the embers should be spread over them silently.
20.8.19	One potsherd, two potsherds.
20.8.20	Baudhayana said, whether it is one potsherd or two potsherds, one should spread it with all the potsherd mantras.
20.8.21	Here Śālīki said, one should place the potsherds according to the authority.
20.8.22	But one should not lead to the union of Yoga and the contemplation, and one should recite the mantra of Tapana here, saying, "You are being heated by the penance of Bhṛgus and Angirasas, you are being heated, you are being heatd."
20.8.23	The union of potsherds.
20.8.24	The sutra of the two teachers.
20.8.25	Herein, indeed, Oupamanyava said, "These are the mantras with which they are connected, with which they are offered."
20.8.26	And the other is the mantra of release.
20.8.27	"For the Madanti-s to be deposited."
20.8.28	Baudhayana says that one should deposit the strainer after having brought it from the water.
20.8.29	Saliki says that one should do as one can.
20.8.30	"For churning."
20.8.31	The Sūtra of Śālīki.
20.8.32	Herein Baudhāyana says that one should offer with the ladle after having taken up from the offered (rice).
20.8.33	So also from the rice that is being cooked.
20.8.34	Having brought both, one should recite the formula, "The waters have united with the waters."
20.8.35	It is a touch.
20.8.36	Baudhāyana says that one may touch the oblation of one kind.
20.8.37	So also the seeds of different kinds.
20.8.38	Here Śālīki said, "By contact, there is touching.
20.8.39	One should not touch the oblations without mixing them, nor the oblations of one kind.
20.8.40	For what is the touching of seeds of different kinds?"
20.8.41	It is the pouring of ghee.
20.8.42	This is the Sutra of Śālīki.
20.8.43	Baudhāyana has declared.
20.8.44	Herein, Oupamanyava says that one should offer the clarified butter after having offered all the oblations.
20.8.45	One should offer the oblations in the fire.
20.8.46	Baudhayana says that one should take the oblations from the Gārhapatya and offer them in the Āhavanīya.
20.8.47	Śālīki says that one should do so with the front part.
20.8.48	Oupamanyava also says that one should either do so with the frontal part or with the rear part.
20.9.1	One should take the grass.
20.9.2	The Sūtra is of Śālīki.
20.9.3	Herein Baudhāyana says, one should first recite the mantra for the removal of the pestle, then silently remove the pestle.
20.9.4	The Veda is to be recited.
20.9.5	The Sūtra is by Śālīki.
20.9.6	Herein Baudhayana says that one should first take up the hip, then the right shoulder and then the left.
20.9.7	One should take it around from the front, says Aupamanyava.
20.9.8	This is the view of Yaupanayana.
20.9.9	This is Baudhayana's view.
20.9.10	Śālīki says that one should take up the fourth and then take up the fifth.
20.9.11	Taking up the Prokṣaṇī water.
20.9.12	Baudhāyana says that one should place the grass on the path of the sacrificial grass and then take it up.
20.9.13	Śālīki says one should not place it.
20.9.14	Taking up of the kindling woods and sacrificial grass.
20.9.15	The Sūtra of Baudhāyana.
20.9.16	Śālki says that one takes up the northern kindling wood.
20.10.1	In the case of the Veda-related rites, it is as prescribed.
20.10.2	Baudhayana says that one should rub the spoons after dividing them into five parts.
20.10.3	Saliki says that one should sprinkle them with all the water.
20.10.4	The rubbing of the spoon used for taking the Prasitra is prescribed.
20.10.5	This is the Sutra of Baudhayana.
20.10.6	Saliki instructs that one should rub them silently.
20.10.7	Aupamanyava says that one should not rub them.
20.10.8	The sprinkling of the ladle is the offering.
20.10.9	The Sūtra is of Śālīki.
20.10.10	Here Baudhāyana says, having sprinkled with water, one should move away and sit down on the heap or on the ground.
20.10.11	So also for the binding of the kindling wood.
20.10.12	The binding of the wives.
20.10.13	Baudhayana said that one should tie each of them, look at each of them at the Garhapatya and look at each of the clarified butter.
20.10.14	Shaliki said that one should bind all of them together, look at each one at the Garhaptya and look at the clarified butter.
20.10.15	Here Aupamaṇyava said, "One should bind them all together at one time, look at the Garhapatya once, and look at the clarified butter once."
20.10.16	One should complete each of them with all the rites. This is the view of Aupamaṇavīputra.
20.10.17	The making of the knot.
20.10.18	The Acharya-s say that the rope should be lowered and released upwards.
20.10.19	Dirghavatsa says that the rope should go upwards and be released downwards.
20.10.20	Thus, indeed, beings are born.
20.10.21	If the wife is not present.
20.10.22	Baudhayana said, "The sacrificer should recite these mantras while seated at the sacrificer's seat."
20.10.23	Here Śālīki says that these mantras are seen to be connected with the wife.
20.10.24	If she is not there, one should not take them.
20.10.25	Then one should look at the clarified butter.
20.10.26	This is the text of Śālīki.
20.10.27	Here Baudhāyana says that one should take it after looking at it with the wife, saying, "You are brilliance."
20.10.28	Then he should offer it with the ladle, saying, "May I follow your brilliance."
20.10.29	Then he should place it on the Āhavanīya fire, saying, "O Agni, may your brilliance not leave me."
20.10.30	Then, having taken it, he should place it to the north of the Prokṣaṇī water, having looked at it, and sprinkle it with the Prokṣani water mixed with ghee, saying, "The Prokṣani waters mixed with ghee."
20.10.31	The sprinkling of ghee.
20.10.32	Baudhāyana says that it should be done with a thread.
20.10.33	All should look at the clarified butter while it is being poured back, says Śālīki.
20.10.34	The taking of the clarified butter is the taking of the Grahas.
20.10.35	Baudhāyana says that the Adhvaryu should take the Grahas with both kinds of formulas, those pertaining to the Puroḍāśa and those pertaining to the Yajamāna.
20.10.36	The Yajamāna should recite the formulas pertaining to the Yājamāna, says Aupamanyava.
20.10.37	Here Śālīki said, the Adhvaryu should take up both kinds of formulas, those of the Puroḍāśa and those of the Yajamāna.
20.10.38	The Yajamāna should not be addressed by the Yajamana-formulas.
20.10.39	Herein, Oupamanyava said, "Just as the mantras of the Purodasa offering do not return, so also the mantras of offering do not return."
20.10.40	"One should sprinkle the sacrificial grass and wood."
20.10.41	Baudhayana says, one should sprinkle each one three times.
20.10.42	Shaliki says, one should do it once each.
20.11.1	"One should not sprinkle the sacrificial grass."
20.11.2	The Sūtra of Śālīki.
20.11.3	Here Bāudhāyana says, "Standing, he should sprinkle the tops with 'To the heaven thee!' Sitting, he should sprinkle them with 'To the atmosphere thee!' and the roots with 'To the earth thee!'
20.11.4	Having thrown the knot of the Prāñca towards the east along with the ladle, he should lead the remaining Prāñcī-sprinklings towards the southern and northern buttocks, saying, "May Svāhā be the food for the fathers, may energy be for those who have the sacrificial grass, may energy go to the earth."
20.11.5	"May the ladle be raised."
20.11.6	Baudhāyana says that one should raise it towards the north in front of oneself.
20.11.7	Salīki says that one should move towards the east with the buttocks.
20.11.8	One sprinkles the purifying stone, saying, "I place the Prāṇa and Apāna in the sacrificer," or silently.
20.11.9	Baudhāyana says that the former option is to be followed. Śālīki says that the latter option is to be adopted.
20.11.10	One should give it to the sacrificer or the Brahman.
20.11.11	Śālīki says this. Baudhāyana says that the latter is to be followed.
20.11.12	The spreading of the sacrificial grass is the spreading of the sacrificial ground.
20.11.13	This is the rule of Baudhayana.
20.11.14	One should spread the sacrificial grass on the southern end of the sacrificial ground, says Saliki.
20.11.15	The spreading of the sacrificial area.
20.11.16	This is a rule of Baudhayaṇa.
20.11.17	One should strew it towards the east, says Śālīki.
20.11.18	The covering of the sacrificial vessels.
20.11.19	Baudhayana says that one should offer the oblation to the right and should offer the Upasad oblation to the left.
20.11.20	Saliki says that one should place them touching the line.
20.11.21	One should place them facing the sun.
20.11.22	This is Baudhayana's view.
20.11.23	Saliki however says that one should stand with this formula facing the Ahavaniya.
20.11.24	One should put the two kindling woods above.
20.11.25	Baudhayana says that one should not let the two ends of the sacrificial grass fall down.
20.11.26	Shaliki says that one should let them fall down.
20.11.27	The two ends of the grass should be held.
20.11.28	This is the view of the two teachers.
20.11.29	Here Dakshinakara Rathitara says that both should be placed on the altar.
20.11.30	Aupamanyava says that they should be placed on either side of the middle part of the altar.
20.12.1-5	The obtaining of the milking-strainer. Baudhāyana says that one should obtain the Prastara after having spread it out. Śālīki says that one should do so without having spread it out.
20.12.6-9	Here Śālīki says that one should place them in order and should not take the Upāṃśu with the two Upasthitas. Regarding the removal of oblations: Baudhayana says that those which are not removed first should be removed from the rear and those which are removed first should be taken from the front. Śālīki says those which are not taken first should be taken last and those which are taken first should be removed first.
20.12.10-15	The Upanisads say that it is to be cut off. It is to be wiped off. Baudhayana says that one should wipe off both the oblations and the skull-bones. Saliki says that one should do so only with the skull-bones.
20.12.16	The Upamaṇyava school says that one should release the skull-cups while eating.
20.12.17	The two fires are called Āghāra.
20.12.18	Baudhāyana says that they should be placed together like two arrows.
20.12.19	Śālīki says that they should touch each other.
20.12.20	The instruction is called Samprāśa.
20.12.21	Baudhāyan says that one should say, "O Agni, the fires."
20.12.22	Śālīka says that one should address Agni as "O Agni, O Agni."
20.12.23-28	The Agni-priest should place the enclosing sticks and the fire, says Aupamañava. One should step over while giving away, says Baudhayana. One should give away while stepping over, says Salīki. One should call out, says Baudhayaṇa. One should say "O, call out", says Baudhayāna.
20.12.29	Śālīki says that one should announce.
20.12.30	Aupamanyava says that one should make the announcement.
20.12.31	It is the Pravara.
20.12.32	The Sūtra is of Śālīki.
20.12.33	Here Baudhāyana says that having struck the sacrificial grass with the tip of the spade pointing upwards, one should choose the Pravara and should put down the spade here itself and sprinkle water above it.
20.12.34	It is for choosing the Hotṛ.
20.12.35	Baudhayana says that if his father, teacher or the Hotṛ is senior to him, he should take the names of these teachers in a low voice.
20.12.36	Salīki says that one should take the name of the Hotṛ in a loud voice.
20.13.1	One should offer while advancing.
20.13.2	Baudhayana said, one should advance with all the steps, with oblations, and with the chanting of the Sāman.
20.13.3	One should offer the oblations in an increasing order.
20.13.4	Śālīki said, one should offer the oblatioṇs in a uniform manner, advancing with all the steps.
20.13.5	Standing at the same place, one should proceed with oblations, says Aupamaṇyava.
20.13.6	Standing at the same place itself, offering in the clockwise direction, one should offer the Svāhā sound in the middle, says Āñjīgavi.
20.13.7	Homa is offered in the Ajyabhāgas.
20.13.8	One should offer facing the east, with outstretched arms, says Baudhāyana.
20.13.9	Śālīki says that the offering of the first half should be made first.
20.13.10	The offering of oblations is to be made.
20.13.11	Baudhāyana says that one should first offer the first half of the principal oblation and then the second half.
20.13.12	Thus the oblations are offered in a clockwise direction.
20.13.13	Here Śālīki says, one should first offer the principal oblation from the latter half, then from the former half.
20.13.14	So that the oblations are placed in front of him.
20.13.15	From the middle, from the former half, from the latter half - so says Aupamaṇyava.
20.13.16	The place of oblations.
20.13.17	Baudhayana says that these three are the prescribed places, namely, the two Ajyabhāgas and the Sviṣṭakṛt.
20.13.18	One should offer the other oblations as per availability.
20.13.19	Śālīki says that one should offer the oblations of the Prāṣṭṛs in the eastern half and the Svișṭakṛt in the western half.
20.13.20	Aupamanyava says that one should make the offering with the ladle in the path of pouring the oblation.
20.13.21	In the middle, the circular one is to be performed clockwise, says Raṭhītara.
20.13.22	The performance of the Upāṃśuyāja is to be done, says Baudhāyana.
20.13.23	The Sūtra of Maudgalya.
20.13.24	Herein, Baudhāyana says that one should perform the Upāṃshuyaha for the medicinal purpose, the Agnisomiya on the full moon day, and the Vaishnava on the new moon day.
20.13.25	Here Śālīki says that one should offer the Upāṁśuyāja of ghee, to Soma on the full moon day and to Viṣṇu on the new moon day.
20.13.26	Here Aupamañjavy says that one should make the Upāṁshuyāja of medicinal herbs, to Sarasvatī on the full moon and to Sarasvatī again on the new moon.
20.13.27	Both of them say that the Upāṁshuyaaja of ghee is to Viṣṇus. This is said by Rāthītaras.
20.13.28	Herein, Kauṇapīti said, "The oblation should be for Viṣṇu, and the sacrificer himself should eat."
20.13.29	"By the increase of the fifth oblation," says Baudhāyana.
20.13.30	Baudhayana says, "One should increase the medicine."
20.13.31	Śālīki says, "Only ghee."
20.13.32	"One should offer the ladle," says Śālīki.
20.13.33	The sūtra of Śālīki is this.
20.13.34-40	Herein Baudhayana says that one should not offer the Vapa and the Shrāmaṇī in the manner of the Meṣaṇī. One should offer the Prāṣitra in the manner of Avadāna. This is the view of Baudhayana. Śālīki says that one should offer the Prāsitra while taking it away. One should perform the Anvāhārya with ghee. Baudhāyana says that one should do so. Śālīsūka says that one should not do so.
20.13.41	The Anvāhārya is to be placed in the middle.
20.13.42	Baudhāyana says that one should place it in the middle of the southern thigh, having moved it away from the sacrificer and the Brahman.
20.13.43	Śālīki says that it should be placed in the southern thigh itself.
20.14.1	The Anvāhārya should be removed.
20.14.2	Baudhāyan says that one should remove it towards the north of the ladle.
20.14.3-8	Salīki says that one should offer the oblations with the ladle facing towards the east. Baudhāyana says that one should make the offering with the ladle facing the east. Salīki says that the ladle should be held with the handle towards the east. Translation: With the ladle facing towards oneself, says Śālīki. With the ladle facing towards one's back, says Śālali. With the handle of the ladle facing towards himself, says Baudhāyana. With the back of the ladle facing oneself, says Śāliki. With the oblations of the Anuyājas, says Baudhāyaṇa. The Sūtra of Baudhāyana is
20.14.9	Śālīki says that one should offer the oblations in the opposite direction.
20.14.10	The arrangement of the oblations dedicated to Vāyu and Agni.
20.14.11	Baudhāyana says that one should take the opposite Upabhṛt ladle with the eyes closed and touch it with water.
20.14.12	Here Shaṭali said, "One should draw them only from the eastern lotus pond and not touch the water with the Upabhṛt."
20.14.13	"One should mix the Prāstara."
20.14.14	Baudhāyana says, "One should mix each one three times."
20.14.15	Śāṭṭī says, "One time each."
20.14.16	"One takes up the Prāstāra."
20.14.17	Baudhayana said that the Adhvaryu should strike with both kinds of formulas, those pertaining to the Purodāsa and those pertaining to the Yajamāna.
20.14.18	The Yajamāna should be addressed with the formulas pertaining to the Yājamāna.
20.14.19	Here Śālīki said that the Adhvayu should strike with both kind of formulas, those pertainig to the Purodāsas and those pertaining to Yājamāna.
20.14.20	The sacrificer should not be addressed by the priests.
20.14.21	Here Aupamañava said, "Just as the mantras of the Puroḍāśa are not recited, so also the mantras of Yājamāna should not be recited."
20.14.22	Regarding the placing of the Paridhīs:
20.14.23	Baudhāyana says that one should place them at the beginning.
20.14.24	Śālīki says that one should put them down at the beginning.
20.14.25-31	Then he offers them with the Saṃsrava offering. Baudhāyana says that one should offer the Prāstara and the Paridhi. Śālīki says that one should release the two ladles. The former option belongs to Baudhāyana, the latter to Śālīki. Regarding the Patnīsaṃyājas, the movement of the priests is as follows. The sūtra of Baudhāyana says that one moves towards the east.
20.14.32	All should circumambulate the Garhapatya from the north, says Śālīki.
20.15.1	The offering to the wives of the gods.
20.15.2	Baudhāyana says that one should offer to the wives of gods with the Dhruva-vessel and with the Dhvāna-verse.
20.15.3	Śālīki says that one should make the offering to the wives with the Dhruvājya and the Dhvāna verse.
20.15.4	Baudhāyan says that one should perform the offering to the gods' wives after covering them.
20.15.5	Śālki says that one must not cover them.
20.15.6	At the Patnisaṃyājas, the Sāmyāvāka is to be performed.
20.15.7	Baudhāyana says that one should do so.
20.15.8	Śālīki says that one should not do so.
20.15.9	The offering of the Dhruva vessel.
20.15.10	Baudhāyanasaid that both the Adhvaryu and the sacrificer should offer the Dhruva.
20.15.11	The Adhvaryu should offer the Dhruva-cup after having filled it with the Samitsya-yajus, says Saliki.
20.15.12	The offering is to be made with the Samitsyajus.
20.15.13	This is the sutra of the two teachers.
20.15.14	Here Gautama says: Having offered with the words "Svāhā to speech", having mixed the contents of the grass and the Dhruva, one should offer with the words "May the wind be svāhā" and "May the sky be svāhā".
20.16.1	Now we shall explain the Agnihotra.
20.16.2	In the collection of materials.
20.16.3	The sutra is of Rathitaras.
20.16.4	Here Baudhayana says, one should perform the sacrifice for one killed by lightning, which is of a terrible form.
20.16.5	One should perform the sacrifice only for one killed by lightening.
20.16.6	But not for one killed by a Muñja grass.
20.16.7	Because it is not known whether this is a known or an unknown sacrifice, says Saliki.
20.16.8	The making of the vessels.
20.16.9-12	Baudhayana said, one should make the pots for pouring clarified butter in front of the fire. So that the pots for pouring oblations are placed in front of the oblations. Shaliki said, one should place the pots for pouring the clarified butter at the root of the fire. So that the pots for oblations are placed at the root of oblations.
20.16.13	Therefore, it is known that the trees are growing from the earth, with their roots below and their tops above.
20.16.14	The size of the ladles is mentioned.
20.16.15	Baudhayana says that they should be the size of the arm.
20.16.16	Shaliki says that they should the size of the forearm.
20.16.17	Aupamanyava says that they should have the size of the palm.
20.16.18	The shape of the ladles.
20.16.19	Baudhayane says that they should resemble the hand and the lips.
20.16.20	The Salīki says that it is like the tail of a crow.
20.16.21	The Āupamanyava says that it is a cutting like the mouth of a swan.
20.16.22	It is like the Ambarīṣa.
20.16.23	Baudhāyana says that one should make the Ambarīșa to the north of the fire-chamber.
20.16.24	Śālīki says that one should go to the place where the Ambarīsa is.
20.16.25	It is the circumambulation of the fire-house.
20.16.26	Baudhāyan says that it is to the south.
20.16.27	Śālīki says that it should be done to the north.
20.16.28	Baudhāyana says that it should have a skin of a red animal.
20.16.29	The Sūtra says,
20.16.30	Śālīki says, it may not have a skin.
20.16.31	Regarding the offering of Brahmaudana, whether it should be with or without a mantra,
20.16.32	Baudhāyana prescribes that it should be with a mantra, Śālīki that it should be silent.
20.16.33	Regarding the pouring of Brahmaudana,
20.16.34	With a pure vessel and with the mantra, says Baudhayana.
20.16.35	With an impure vessel and silently, says Saliki.
20.16.36	The cooking of the Brahmaudana.
20.16.37	One should cook it in milk, says Baudhayaṇa.
20.16.38	In water, says Saliki
20.16.39	One should not pour it in nor pour it out, says Baud-hayana.
20.16.40	Śālīki says that one should pour it in, not pour it out.
20.16.41	Aupamanyava says that one should drain it after pouring it in.
20.16.42	It is the spreading of the Brahmauḍana.
20.16.43	Baudhāyana says that one should spread it.
20.16.44	Śālīki says one should not spread it.
20.16.45	It is pouring of the Brahmauṣṇa.
20.16.46	Baudhāyanas says that one should not pour it.
20.16.47	Here only they should sit down, says Śālīki.
20.16.48	This is the offering of Brahmaudana.
20.16.49	One should offer silently, saying "May the sacrifice be offered."
20.16.50	Baudhāyana says that the former alternative is to be followed. Śālīki says that the latter alternative is to be adopted.
20.16.51	This is eating of Brahmaudana
20.16.52	Baudhāyana prescribes that only the Ārsheya should eat Brahmaudana.
20.16.53	Those who are determined to drink, says Katyāyana.
20.16.54	Here, Oupamanyava said, the great priests should eat the Brahmaudana.
20.16.55	For here they become the Satyanaptas.
20.16.56	In the offering of the Samidha.
20.16.57	This is the Sutra of Saliki.
20.16.58	Herein Baudhayana says that one should place the kindling woods after having sprinkled them once and not having scraped them.
20.16.59	Herein, Oupamanyava says that one should arrange them on both sides of the fire.
20.16.60	When they have eaten everything, then having washed the vessel and placed it below, if there is leftover ghee in the pot, then having poured it once, having anointed the kindling woods with it, one should place it.
20.16.61	It is said to be done with cow's horn.
20.16.62	Baudhayana says that one should do it.
20.16.63	Shaliki says that one should not do it.
20.16.64	One should do it even if there are many.
20.16.65	And Kātyāyana says that this would be a meritorious act.
20.16.66	The offering of the kindling woods.
20.16.67	The sutra of the two teachers.
20.16.68	Here Upamaṇyava said, "One should offer the kindling woods in the last part of the night."
20.16.69	One should only utter the words, 'I give a boon.'
20.16.70	The anointing of the fire places.
20.16.71	The sutras of the two teachers.
20.16.72	Here, Oupamanyava says that one should smear only the place of the Garhapatya.
20.16.73	Because it becomes burnt.
20.16.74	It is the placing of the materials.
20.16.75	The sutra of the two teachers.
20.16.76	Here, Oupamanya says that having completed all the mantras in the place of the Gārhapatya, one should place them in three ways.
20.17.1	The carrying of the wood.
20.17.2	Baudhāyana says that one should first carry the wood to the height of the knee, then to the height of navel, then to the neck.
20.17.3	One should not carry the wood beyond the height of the neck.
20.17.4	He should accomplish these measures while taking them.
20.17.5	Śālīki says that one should not carry the breath beyond the height of neck.
20.17.6	The crossing of the materials.
20.17.7	The Sūtra of Śālīki.
20.17.8	Herein Baudhāyana says, one should make the animals enter the sacrificial place by turning them towards the east and then towards the south, and then towards the north, so that the embers of the fire placed as per the prescribed procedure may not be disturbed.
20.17.9	The gift of a horse.
20.17.10	Baudhayana says that one should give the horse to the Adhvaryu and another to the Brahman.
20.17.11	Saliki says that one should offer the horse to the Brahman and another to the Adhvaryu.
20.17.12	At the place of the kindling wood.
20.17.13	This is as per Baudhayana.
20.17.14	Saliki however says that one should silently place the kindling wood at its place.
20.17.15	At the Sabya and Avasyatha.
20.17.16	Baudhayana says that one should do so.
20.17.17	Shaliki says that one should not do so.
20.17.18	One should carry the fire from the sabhya and avasathayas.
20.17.19	Baudhayana says that it should be carried from the Ahavaniya alone.
20.17.20	Shaliki say that it should be from the village fire.
20.17.21	Aupamanyava says that the two fires should be carried.
20.17.22	Herein, Oupamanyavaputra said in the assembly itself, "One should offer oblations to Brahma on the Sabhya and Avasatha days, having cooked two pot-cooked meals on the Avasatha and Parvani days."
20.17.23	Even this one should not do, says Angiras.
20.17.24	The making of a chariot wheel.
20.17.25	Baudhayana says, one should make it.
20.17.26	Śālīki says that one should not do so.
20.17.27	In this regard, Oupamanyava says that one should move the chariot facing east, which is already yoked.
20.17.28	One should give it to the priests.
20.17.29	Āñjīgavi says that one should also not do this.
20.17.30	It is the instruction regarding the bodies.
20.17.31	Baudhāyana says that one should direct it after having turned around.
20.17.32	Śālīki says, "One should say, 'May those terrible forms of yours, O Agni, go to him.'
20.17.33	In the Virajkrama."
20.17.34	Baudhāyana says that one should recite the Sūtra.
20.17.35	Śālīki says that one should say, "Protect my offspring, O woman."
20.17.36	In the full oblation.
20.17.37	Baudhāyana lays down the Sūtra.
20.17.38	Śālīki says that one should offer the full oblation only.
20.18.1	One should offer the full offering silently, says Baudhāyana.
20.18.2	The Sūtra of the Rāthītaras.
20.18.3	Herein, Baudhāyana says that one should make the full offering only, not the silent Agnihotra.
20.18.4	Śālīki says one should offer the silent Agnihotra only, not the full offering.
20.18.5	This is the explanation of Daśa-hotṛ.
20.18.6	Baudhāyana says that wherever one is going to offer oblations, or is going to recite the Sāmidhenī verses, one should recite the Daśa-hotr verses there.
20.18.7	Śālīki says that this is seen in the texts related to the Agnihotra.
20.18.8	Now, this is seen in the Agniyeṣṭaka with eight potsherds. So say the followers of Aupamanyava.
20.18.9	This is the procedure.
20.18.10	Baudhayana says that there should be fifteen kindling woods, the two Ajyabhāgas should be offered to Vārtraghna, the deities should be invoked loudly.
20.18.11	Here Śālīki says that there should be seventeen kindling verses, the two Ajyabhāga portions should end with Vṛdhanvant, and the Upāṁshu deities.
20.18.12	Herein, indeed, Aupamaṇyava said: The two Ajyabhāgas should be in the Agniyeṣṭi, the two Vṛdhanvantā in the Indra-Agni and Aditya, the two Rayimantā and Puṣṭimantā in the Pavamāna-offerings, the two Vītavantā in the Anvarambheṣṭi.
20.18.13	It is for the sacrificer to do.
20.18.14	Baudhāyana says that one should perform the Abhiṇāman for the sacrificer.
20.18.15	Śālīki says that the sacrificer should be as per the space available.
20.18.16	It is the giving of Dakṣiṇās.
20.18.17	This is the Sutra of Śālīki.
20.18.18	Here Bāudhāyana says that all these Iṣṭis should be with Dakṣiṇā.
20.18.19	One should give three each in each, and two in the last one.
20.18.20	It is a combination of two.
20.18.21	There is no summary of the ritual in the two teachers.
20.18.22	Here, indeed, Oupamanyava said, "The Agniye Pavamanaya (offering) on eight potsherds to Agni Pavamana should be the first ritual.
20.18.23	Then to Agni Pavaka and Agni Succhi. That is the second.
20.18.24	Then the oblations to Indra-Agni and Aditya should be the end.
20.18.25	The giving of Dakshina."
20.18.26	The Sūtra of Śālīki.
20.18.27	The statement of Baudhāyana.
20.18.28	Herein, Oupamanyava said, "One should perform all these Iṣṭis with Dakṣiṇās, and should give four each to each one, and a pair to the last one."
20.18.29	The performance of expiation for the Darsha-Pūrṇamāsa which has not been commenced.
20.18.30	Baudhāyana says, one should perform.
20.18.31	Śālīki says that one should not do so.
20.18.32	At the Anvarambha-Iṣṭi.
20.18.33	Baudhāyana says that one should perform the Catuhotr, the Sārasvata and the Anvarambhā-Iṣṭis on the Upavasatha day and the other Iṣṭis on another day.
20.18.34	Śālīki says that one should perform the Caturhotṛ and the Sārasvata Homa on the Upavasatha day, and the other rites on the day of the Iṣṭi.
20.18.35	Aupamanyava says that one should only perform the Caturhotr on the Upavaṭha day, and the others on the day of Iṣṭi
20.18.36	Aupamānavīputra says that one should do all this on the day of Isti.
20.19.1	Now, therefore, we shall explain the Puna-adheyam.
20.19.2	In the Serpent-Queen-verses.
20.19.3	The Sutra of Saliki.
20.19.4	Herein Baudhayana says that one should place the Garhapatya with the Serpent-Queen verses. Having placed it with six (verses) one should conclude with the seventh.
20.19.5	For the full oblation.
20.19.6	Baudhayana says that it should be done.
20.19.7	Śālīki says that one should not do so.
20.19.8	This is the procedure.
20.19.9	This is a sūtra of Śālīki.
20.19.10	Here Bāudhāyana says that one should perform both kinds of rites, those that are repeated and those that are related to the installation of fire.
20.19.11	One should offer an Agniya oblation of eight potfuls.
20.19.12	If it is not mentioned, one should give the Dakṣiṇā related to the installation.
20.19.13	Now the Agniya oblation with five potfuls.
20.19.14	If it is not completed, then one should give the Dakṣiṇā that is to be given.
20.19.15	Then the oblations for Indra-Agni and Aditya.
20.19.16	Then the Varuna-Agni oblation.
20.19.17	On the other side of the twelve-day sacrifice, the body.
20.19.18	Of the cases, the grain.
20.19.19	The Sūtra of Śālīki.
20.19.20	Here Baudhāyana says, having recited all the verses, one should offer.
20.19.21	The Aupamanyava school says that one should offer the Agniyeemantra with two syllables.
20.19.22	Baudhayana says that one should make an offering to the Purorasa.
20.19.23	One should make an offering with the Devatamantra, says Baudhayana.
20.19.24	Saliki says that one should recite the Svasvitakrit mantra.
20.19.25	The Svishtakrit is the name of a deity, says Baudhayaṇa.
20.19.26	One should recite it in its own place, says Baud-hayana.
20.19.27	Śālīki says that one should recite the Svayambhuva hymn in its own place and then recite the other hymns.
20.19.28	In this regard, Oupamanyava says that there are five places for the Svishtakrit hymn.
20.19.29	One should recite all of them.
20.19.30	Then, if the fire is removed or lost, one should recite the Nāṣṭāranī hymn.
20.19.31	This is the rule of Śālīki.
20.19.32	Herein Baudhayana says that if the fires are lost or stolen, one may not be bothered to perform the rite of setting up the fires.
20.19.33	From the setting up of the fires onwards, the fires belong to the sacrificer.
20.19.34	His Prāṇa is Gārhapatya, Apāna Anvāhāryapacaniya and Vyāna Āhavanīya.
20.19.35	One may offer after descending, says Baudhāyana.
20.19.36	One may carry the fires, says Śālīki.
20.19.37-43	Baudhayana says that the Ajyapasus should be performed from the Ādhāna onwards. Sālīki says that the vessels should be placed in a heap. The verse of Sālīki. Here Bāudhayana says that one should place the vessels on a couch or on grass. The wood should be placed with the left side facing the right. One should offer on two fires.
20.19.44	Baudhayana said, if the former one is defective, one should perform the expiation with the latter one.
20.19.45	If the latter one is defective, both would be defective. One should perform the expiations with the other one.
20.19.46	Here Śālīki said, if either of the two is defective, both will be defective. One may perform the expiation only with the other one.
20.20.1-7	This is the Ābhijvalaṇa. Baudhāyana says that one should take out embers from the Garhapatya fire and make three rounds around it. Śālīki says that one should move towards the north while making the path. The Sūtra of Śālīki says: Here Bāudhāyana says that one may move towards the north, as if establishing it three times. These are the three worlds.
20.20.8	He stands in these very worlds.
20.20.9	This is the raising.
20.20.10	Whether full or not.
20.20.11	Baudhayana's view is that the first option is to be followed. Saliki's view is the second option.
20.20.12	This is touching.
20.20.13	Baudhayāna says that one should touch both, that which has fallen into the ladle and that which has not.
20.20.14	Sāliki says that one should only touch that which has fallen.
20.20.15	Then one should place the Gārhapatya to the rear.
20.20.16	Baudhāyana says that one should place it with the front part towards the Ahavaniya.
20.20.17	Śālīki says that one should do so with the front part facing the Atithya.
20.20.18	One should offer the Homa.
20.20.19	Baudhāyan says that one should offer it oneself.
20.20.20	Śālki says that if one's son, student or servant is present, he should offer it while sitting to the right.
20.20.21	One should make the offering between the two Ahuti offerings.
20.20.22	Baudhayana says that one should offer the oblations in the eastern and western directions.
20.20.23	Salīki says that one should make the offering in the eastern direction.
20.20.24	Baudhayana says that after wiping twice, one should wipe twice again.
20.20.25	Salīka says that after wiping once, one should wipe it twice again.
20.20.26	Having sipped twice with the fingers, one should turn towards the north and consume the oblation with the ladle turned towards the east.
20.20.27	This is the Sutra of Baudhayana.
20.20.28	Śālīki says that one should consume it with the ladle held towards the north.
20.20.29	Having wiped the spoon, having heated it, having filled it with water, having directed it towards the north, one should pour the water towards the south of the Garhapatya with the formula, "This I offer to Agni Vaisvānara, the immortal, svāhā." One should offer an inexhaustible oblation on the inexhaustible earth.
20.20.30	The former is Baudhayana's view, the latter is Śāliki's view.
20.20.31	One should perform the Upasthāna rite with the Agnipāvamānī verses.
20.20.32	Baudhāyana says that one should perform the Upāsthāna rite of the Āhavaniya fire for a year as per the prescribed procedure and then perform the Upasthaņa rite of the Garhapatya fire with the Agnipāvamanī verses. Then with the Gāyatrī verses, then with the Dvipadā verses, and then on the next day as per the prescribed order.
20.20.33	Here Śālīki says that one should first establish the Āhavaniya fire as per the prescribed procedure for a year, then establish the Garhapatya fire with the Agniparamanī verses, then with the Gāyatrī verses, then with Dvipada verses, and then on the next day, as per the prescribed order.
20.20.34	Thus, Oupamanyava. Thereafter, the Agnipariyamanis should not go to the Ahavaniya or the Garhapatya.
20.20.35	Thereafter, they should be for the purpose of studying.
20.20.36	Having approached with the Vyahrtis, one should say, "May I be able to serve you. May my faith not diminish." This is what Anjigivi said.
20.20.37	The blessings are to be recited thus.
20.20.38	Baudhāyana says that one should first bless oneself, then the born ones, and then the threads.
20.20.39	Śālīki says that one should bless the born ones first, then oneself, and then the thread.
20.20.40	Oupamanyava says that one should not bless the unborn ones, but oneself and the thread.
20.20.41	Even in the evening and morning one should sleep with the desire to do so, says Aupamaṇavīputra.
20.21.1	This is the performance of the Piṇḍapitryajña.
20.21.2	Baudhāyana says that one should wear the sacred thread from the beginning itself.
20.21.3	One should wear it from the beginning itself, until the offering of oblations.
20.21.4	One should put on the sacred thread while offering oblations.
20.21.5	He should wear the sacred thread, until the covering is cut once.
20.21.6	One who is going to cover it once should make it the left-side-first.
20.21.7	He should wear it as the left-side first, until the Prajapati-rite.
20.21.8	One should worship the Garhapatya with the Prajapati verse, wearing the sacred thread.
20.21.9	Here Śālīki said: One should make it the right-side-first from the beginning.
20.21.10	He should turn his upper garment towards the east, until the Prajapati-rite.
20.21.11	He should turn his upper-garment towards the north, until the Prajapaty-rite.
20.21.12	Having sprinkled once silently, having sprinkled once, he should make the form of the oblation once, says Baudhayana.
20.21.13-17	Having made them fruitful only once, having deposited them in a vessel with Pavitravati, having cooked the Sthalipaka, having poured clarified butter, one should pour it out in an upward direction, says Saliki. Homa of oblations. Baudhayana says that one should not offer the middle oblation here. The third should be the Mekshana, says Saliki.
20.21.18	The covering should be cut only once.
20.21.19	Having gone out of the fire-room, one should spread the covering in the intermediate space to the south or east, and place the torch to the south, says Baudhāyana.
20.21.20	Within this direction only, says Śālīki. And here one should not place the torch.
20.21.21	The offering of balls.
20.21.22	The Sūtra of Śālīki.
20.21.23	Herein Baudhāyana says that one should offer the balls of rice from the east to the west, in the reverse direction.
20.21.24	Anointing and rubbing are a means of concealing the mind.
20.21.25	Baudhāyana's view is the former, Śālīki's the latter.
20.21.26	The offering of the balls of rice.
20.21.27	The Sūtra of Salīki.
20.21.28	Baudhayana says that the balls should be eaten here only because they are left over after being eaten by the Pitrs.
20.21.29	Eating of what is left over.
20.21.30	Baudhayana says that one should eat it oneself.
20.21.31	Saliki says that one should give it to one's son or to a guest.
20.21.32	One should make the wife eat it.
20.21.33	The Upamaṇavins say that this is for the sake of progeny.
20.21.34	One should offer the other part in the fire after smelling it as much as one's finger can reach, says the son of Upamaṇyavī.
20.21.35	One should cover it with a heap of ashes, says Āñjīgavi.
20.21.36	One should drink water, says Maudgalya.
20.22.1	This is the summary of the procedure for the Āgrayaṇa rite.
20.22.2	There is no difference between the two teachers.
20.22.3	Here, Oupamanyava said, "Having offered the Soma oblation, one should offer the other oblations."
20.22.4	Thus his oblations would have the form of rice-gruel."
20.22.5	Here, Oupanayana's son said, "The Soma oblation should be offered only after the other oblations, to avoid the fault of excess."
20.22.6-12	If one were to perform the Vaiśvadeva and Ekakapāla offerings in between, then one should offer the Ekakapāla offering first. Here Anjigavi said, "These are the three oblations." These are the three worlds. One establishes oneself in these worlds. One obtains this through the stone slab of Śyāmāka." The offering of the Ajyānī is mentioned in the sūtra of Baudhāyana.
20.22.13-20	One should offer the Ajyâni oblations before the Svishtakrit oblation, says Saliki. The cooking of the oblations for the Agrayaṇa rite. One should cook in milk, says Baudhayana. In water, says Saliki The making of the one-pot oblation for the Agrayaṇas. One should make it, says Baudhayaṇa. One should not make it, says Saliki.
20.22.21	Baudhayana said that there should be fifteen kindling verses, the two oblations to Agni-Vratrahan are to be offered loudly, the deities are to be invoked loudly.
20.22.22	One should perform the Yajamana rite.
20.22.23	Shaliki said that there should seventeen kindling verses, two oblations to Vritrahan are to offered in a low voice, the deities are invoked in a low voice.
20.22.24	One should offer the Yajamāna rite.
20.23.1	The rite of transference is as follows.
20.23.2	Baudhāyana says that one should go forth after transferring the fires to the Āhavanīya alone.
20.23.3	After having gone away and returned, one should establish the Āhavanīyā fire with all the mantras.
20.23.4	Śālīki says that one should transfer the fires as per availability.
20.23.5	Having gone away and returned, he should attend each one with all the mantras.
20.23.6	If he does not attend, then he should go forth.
20.23.7	Baudhāyana says that one should attend him constantly from where one remembers him being absent.
20.23.8	If one does not remember, then having gone away and returned one should attend him with the constant one. Śālīki says that
20.23.9	When one goes away, one should offer oblations.
20.23.10	Baudhayana said, If the expiation has been performed, one should not perform the Homa there.
20.23.11	If it has not been performed, one may offer it there.
20.23.12	Shaliki said here, The expiations mentioned in the context should be performed for the omissions.
20.23.13	Now those faults for which no expiation is prescribed, one should not bother about them.
20.23.14	Here Aupamañava said, "If one has performed the expiation, or if one has not performed it, one should offer the Pravasatha-oblation."
20.23.15	In the Viraj-order.
20.23.16	Baudhayana's view is that the former option is to be followed, while Saliki's view is the latter.
20.23.17	Sipping water is done with the formula.
20.23.18	Baudhāyana says that one should sip water twice with the formula and once silently.
20.23.19	Śālīki says that one should recite the formula once and sip water twice silently.
20.23.20	The rite of bearing witness.
20.23.21	Baudhāyanasaid, "One should make all these deities bear witness: 'O Agni, lord of vows, I shall observe the vow.'
20.23.22	Agni is the overlord of the vows of the gods. This is what Śālīki says.
20.23.23	If the skull is lost or broken,
20.23.24	The sutra of the two teachers.
20.23.25	Here Aupamaṇyava said, "The mind is the light of those who enjoy the thirty-three threads." Having offered the oblations of the ladle, one should then offer another, saying, "May the heat reach the gods."
20.23.26	This is the mantra: "I sprinkle you with the Yajus."
20.23.27	One should sprinkle the milk and ghee with this very mantra.
20.23.28	The taking of the Grahas of clarified butter is (thus) described.
20.23.29	Baudhāyana says that the Adhvaryu should take them with both kinds of formulas, those pertaining to the Puroḍāśa and those pertaining to the Yajamāna.
20.23.30	The Yajamāna should recite the formulas pertaining to the Yājamāna.
20.23.31	Here Śālīki said, the Adhvaryu should take up both kinds of formulas, those pertaining to the Puroḍāśa and those pertaining to the Yajamāna.
20.23.32	The Yajamāna should not be addressed by the Yajamana-formulas.
20.23.33	Here Upamaṇyava said, just as the Puroḍāsa-formulas do not come up, so also the Yajamānas-formulas do.
20.23.34	The enclosing sticks are called paridhāni.
20.23.35	Baudhāyana says that the Adhvaryu should enclose (the fire) with both kinds of formulas, those pertaining to the Puroḍāśa and those pertaining to the Yājana.
20.23.36	The formulas pertaining to the Yajamāna are those with which the Yajamana recites.
20.23.37	Here Śālīki says that the Adhvaryu should offer both kinds of oblations, those prescribed in the Pūroḍāśa and those prescribed in the Yājamāna. The Yājamāna should not recite the mantras.
20.23.38	Here Aupamañava says that just as the mantras prescribed in the Pūrṇḍāśa do not come up, so also the mantras prescribed for the Yājamana do not come up.
20.23.39	When two Samidhás are being offered, one should recite the mantra.
20.23.40	This is the Sutra of Baudhayana.
20.23.41	All these mantras should be used in the Agnihotra rite, says Saliki.
20.24.1	One should offer Agnihotra with these Vyahrtis: "Bhuvah, Bhuvah, Suvah."
20.24.2	This is the sutra of Saliki: "In this way, every year."
20.24.3	Herein, indeed, Baudhayana says that when the year is completed, one should offer the Upasads on that very night on which he had commenced them and thereafter one should not offer them.
20.24.4	Herein, indeed, Oupamanyava says that the year has been ascended.
20.24.5	On the night of which he would begin to prepare, if a year were to pass, then on the night before that, having prepared, one should not attend to it thereafter.
20.24.6	One who is performing the Darśa and Pūrṇamāsa sacrifices should offer oblations with these Vyāhṛtis.
20.24.7	This is the Sutra of Śālīki: "In this way, every year."
20.24.8	Herein, indeed, Baudhayana says that when the full-moon day on which one has commenced the rite comes round again after a year, one should commence it then and not thereafter.
20.24.9	Herein, indeed, Oupamanyava says that the year has indeed been ascended by him.
20.24.10	If one were to begin on the full moon day of the month of Āṣāḍha, then the full moon day that comes after a year would be the same month of Āṣāda. One should begin on that full moon day and not thereafter.
20.24.11	One who is performing the Cāturmāsya sacrifices should begin the oblations with these Vyāhṛti verses.
20.24.12	This is the text of Śālīki: "In this way, every year."
20.24.13	Herein Baudhayana said, One should offer the oblations to Visve Devī at the full moon when the year is completed. Having offered the oblations to Viśve Devī, one should not offer them thereafter.
20.24.14	Herein Upamanyu said, The year is indeed ascended.
20.24.15	In which full-moon day one should offer the oblations to Visvedevas, when the year is completed, if there is a full-moon day before that, then having offered the oblations to Suna-Siriya on that day, one should not attend to it thereafter.
20.24.16	The Vyahrtis are the grains.
20.24.17	Baudhayana's view is that the former option is to be followed. Saliki's view is the latter.
20.24.18	One should recite while eating is being announced.
20.24.19	The Sūtra of Maitreya.
20.24.20	When the two Ācāryas are being addressed, he recites, "May Agni protect me from evil deeds, and Savitā from sin."
20.24.21	In the portion for the sacrificer, he says, "He who is far from me, the enemy, I conquer him with this."
20.24.22	All this is the Svishtakṛt mantra, to be recited by the Anumantrayin, says Aupamaṇyava.
20.24.23	The Veda is recited by the sacrificer.
20.24.24	This is the Sutra of Saliki.
20.24.25	Here Baudhayana says: The Veda is recited for the sacrificer. You are the Veda, you are the knowledge, you are the knowable.
20.24.26	Whatever one thinks of his enemy, he should take his name.
20.24.27	He takes away all that belongs to him.
20.24.28	If the sacrificer becomes a drunkard or goes away.
20.24.29	Baudhayana said that one should offer the share of the sacrificer along with the Prastara while the sacrificer is away. Having placed the clarified butter around the Dhruva, having placed the Juhu, one should offer.
20.24.30	The share of the sacrificers becomes Prastara.
20.24.31	Here Śālīki said that one should not mix it with Surapa at the very outset.
20.24.32	If he were to mix, then he should recite the mantras. What is the harm in not eating the oblations?
20.24.33	One should eat the oblations, says Aupamaṇyava.
20.24.34	The standing near the sun.
20.24.35	Having gone out from the fire-room, one should stand near the sun, says Baudhāyana.
20.24.36	One should stand right here, says Śālīki.
20.24.37	The rite of Upāveśa is to be performed on the full-moon day.
20.24.38	Baudhāyana says that one should do so.
20.24.39	Śālīki says that one should not do so.
20.24.40	The rite of relinquishing the vow.
20.24.41	Baudhāyan says that one should relinquish the vow after sipping water with the mantra and then again with the mantra.
20.24.42	Śālki says that one shoud relinquish the vow after silently sipping water and then with the mantra.
20.24.43	The Upanayana ceremony is to be performed with the Upavesa ceremony, and the Vrata is to be concluded with the Upaveśa ceremony, says Upanayana.
20.24.44	One should recite the Yajus again while taking up the sacrifice, says Baudhayana.
20.24.45	This is the Sutra of Baudhayana
20.24.46	One should stand by reciting this Yajus near the Ahavaniya fire, says Saliki.
20.25.1	Now we shall explain the animal sacrifice.
20.25.2	Baudhayana says that the animal sacrifice should be performed with the fasting ceremony.
20.25.3	Those who are fasting or those who are performing the sacrifice on the same day, says Śālīki.
20.25.4	It is the making of bricks.
20.25.5	One should offer to Agni with an eight-pot offering, says Baudhāyana.
20.25.6	This is seen in the case of a black-eared goat and a black-eared sheep, says Śālini.
20.25.7	The sacrificial post is made of wood.
20.25.8	Baudhayana says that the sacrificial post should be with a cup and of the shape of a spade.
20.25.9	Salīki says that it should be without a cup and of a spade-shape.
20.25.10	It should be of the shape of Viśākha.
20.25.11	After the time of the fastening of the rope, the two branches should be square and the cup should be square. The other post should be octagonal, says Baudhayana.
20.25.12	The branch should be without a cup. The other post may be octagonal, say Saliki.
20.25.13	The making of flour.
20.25.14	Baudhayana says that the thread should be made of cotton.
20.25.15-20	Śālīki says that one should also do so for the vrīhi grains. The Homa is performed for six Hotṛ priests. Baudhāyana says that one should perform the Homa for six Hotṛs on the Upavasatha day itself. The Hotr priest offers the Yūpāhuti. Śālīki says in the sūtra that one should offer the Yūpāhutis.
20.25.21	Herein Baudhayana says that having taken up the clarified butter and the ladle, one should kindle fire near the sacrificial post and offer the oblation to the sacrificial post.
20.25.22	One should offer the oblation at the time of wrapping.
20.25.23	This is the view of Śālīki.
20.25.24	Herein Baudhayana says that one should offer the gold after having withdrawn the Juhu with the verse, "O Vanaspati, grow with a hundred shoots, svāhā."
20.25.25	One should touch oneself with the verse, “May we grow with a thousand shoots.” Then one should touch water.
20.25.26	This is the invocation of the sacrificial post.
20.25.27	If one goes east or north, one should invite him. This is the view of Baudhayana.
20.25.28	If one goes in any direction and is not afflicted, one should invite. This is the opinion of Saliki.
20.25.29	The Veda is the instrument.
20.25.30	This is the sutra of the son of Upanayana.
20.25.31	Herein Baudhayana says that it should be of the size of a chariot, one axle-length behind, obliquely towards the west, straight towards the east, obliquely towards the north, with the northern axle-hole.
20.25.32	Saliki says that it should have the size of the eye or it should be of ten steps in all directions.
20.26.1	The marking of the sacrificial grass is done.
20.26.2	This is the Sutra of Saliki.
20.26.3	Herein Baudhayana says that one should draw the lines outside and in front and behind.
20.26.4	Regarding the carrying of the fires of the worlds.
20.26.5	The sutra of Saliki.
20.26.6	Herein Baudhayāna says that one should carry the fires of the world after making the Agnidhra sit on the northern altar.
20.26.7	One should carry the fires from the place of destination itself, says Aupamanyava.
20.26.8-14	The measurement of the northern altar is the same as that of the southern altar. This is the rule of Śālīki. Baudhāyana says that one should measure the northern altar with the same distance as the southern altar. The middle altar is not to be measured. The scraping of the Yūpa-pit is well-known. The decoration of the northern altar. This rule is of Baudhāyana.
20.26.15	On the previous day itself one should place the northern axle, so says Śālīki.
20.26.16	The Agnīdhra should follow the Hotr's steps while sprinkling with the grass, so says Baudhāyana.
20.26.17	This is the Sutra of Śālīki
20.26.18	Herein Baudhāyana says that one should sprinkle the northern axle after collecting the grass from one step to another.
20.26.19	Sprinkling with the northern axle of the altar.
20.26.20	The Sūtra of Śālīki.
20.26.21	Herein Baudhāyana says that one should sprinkle it with the recitation of mantras and look at it with the recitation.
20.26.22	The placing of the remaining ones.
20.26.23	Baudhāyana says that one places them on the right shoulder of the Veda.
20.26.24	Śālīki says that one places it on the northern Veda.
20.26.25	On the southern shoulder, in the Ratha-sāmitā (Sāman) alone, one should place the oblation, so says Aupamaṇyava.
20.26.26	The Vyāghāraṇa is done on the northern altar.
20.26.27	Baudhāyana says that one should do the Vyāghāraṇā on the opposite side.
20.26.28	Śālīki says that one should perform the Vyāghārana on the northern shoulder.
20.26.29	Aupamaṇyavas say that one should perform Vyāghāraņa on the northern shoulder after performing in the middle.
20.26.30-37	The placing of the kindling wood is done silently. Baudhāyana says that one should place the kindling wood silently. Śālīki says that one should silently place the kindlingwood. The offering of oblations to the gods is done. Baudhāyanasaṃhitā says that one should offer four spoonfuls. Śālīmukhya says that one should make four spoonfuls. The taking of clarified butter and the cleaning and spreading of the fire is done. Śālīnukhya says that the taking of clarified butter is done with four spoonfuls.
20.26.38	Śālīki says that one should obtain the Upabṛt by means of sprinkling and cleaning.
20.26.39	Aupamanyava says that one should not sprinkle.
20.26.40	Baudhayana says that one should take up the clarified butter.
20.26.41	Śālīki says one should take it up to the heart.
20.26.42	Aupamanava says that one may take up the clarified butte and curd by means of these five (verses).
20.26.43	Here Aupamaṇyavīputra said, "One should pour twice silently, then take the curd with all the mantras and pour twice silently."
20.26.44	This is the expiation for the loss of clarified butter.
20.26.45	Baudhāyana says that one should perform the expiation here itself, because of the omission of the taking and the omission of the first step.
20.26.46	Śālīki says that it is so because of the act of pressing down and because of the feet being at the front.
20.26.47	But Āupamanyava says that it is not just the pressing down of the skin.
20.26.48	Regarding the washing of the sacrificial post:
20.26.49	Baudhāyana says that one should wash it with water.
20.26.50	Śālīki says, one should wash the sacrificial post silently.
20.26.51	Regarding the sprinkling of the sacrificial post:
20.26.52	Baudhayana says that one should place the sacrificial grass, the staff of Maitrāvaruṇa, the piece of wood of the sacrificial post, gold, and a pot of water and then sprinkle the sacrificial post.
20.26.53	So also one should sprinkle the yokes of the sacrificial post with the sacrificial post and the yokes of an animal with an animal, says Śālīki.
20.26.54	One should move around the sacrificial post, says Baudhāyana.
20.26.55	Baudhāyana says that one should move around it on the right.
20.26.56-63	To the north, says Śālīki. To the north of the sacrificial post, says Baudhāyana. The one nearest to the fire, says Śālini. To place the water-pot, says Baudhāyaṇa. One should place it clockwise, says Baudhâyana. As much as is possible, says Śālīnī. To remove the sacrificial post,
20.26.64	Baudhayana says that one should recite the mantra thrice and perform the rite thrice.
20.26.65	Saliki says that one should only recite the mantra once and perform the rite once.
20.26.66	One should not perform the rite on the navel.
20.26.67	This is the view of Baudhayana.
20.26.68	Saliki views it as the middle region.
20.27.1	One should cover the sound.
20.27.2	This is a sutra of Baudhayayana.
20.27.3	Śālīki says that it is for Agniṣṭoma.
20.27.4	It is for the animal to be offered in sacrifice.
20.27.5	This is the sūtra of the son of Aupamañjavi.
20.27.6	Here Bāudhāyana says that one should do it in this way only and not make it firm.
20.27.7	Śālīki says, one should make it firm and also offer it for the purpose of making it firm.
20.27.8	Herein, indeed, Aupamaṇyava said: "One should sprinkle him, turned towards the east, with the two sacrificial grass-blades and the Ficus glomerata branch, and having placed the heart on this Ficus glomerata twig, one should offer."
20.27.9	"On the kindling woods, one should rub."
20.27.10	This is the Sutra of Saliki.
20.27.11	Herein, indeed, Baudhayana said: "One may take up the wedge with the formula, 'Thou art the womb of Agni.'
20.27.12	He should place the two testicles on the Dūrvā grass or on the pieces of wood.
20.27.13	"He should take up the lower churning stick, saying, "You are Urvaśī."
20.27.14	" "He should take up (the upper churning stick), saying, "You (are) Purūravas."
20.27.15	" "Then, having joined them in the vessel of ghee smeared with ghee, he should place the testicles, saying, "Place them together."
20.27.16	" "One should take (the sticks) with the mantra, "For the sake of taking the animal."
20.27.17	Baudhāyana says, one should take (the two sticks) with a mantra.
20.27.18-25	Śālīki says that one should remain silent. Baudhāyana says that one should name the animal. The Sūtra says, Śālīki says one should name the neck. Baudhāyan says one should bind the animal. Sālīki says, one should bind the sacrificial post. One should sprinkle the animal.
20.27.26	Baudhayana says that one should sprinkle with silent (mantras) and with sanctified water.
20.27.27	Saliki says that one should do so with water pots.
20.27.28	One should smear the animal.
20.27.29	This is the Sutra of Saliki.
20.27.30	Herein, Baudhayana said that one should place the ladle on the forehead and draw it without cutting, up to the right buttock.
20.27.31	The Svara is the production of the sound.
20.27.32	Baudhāyana says that the Yūpa produces the sound.
20.27.33	Śālīki says that the animal.
20.27.34	Āupamanyava says that the Veda.
20.27.35	Āupamanavīputra says that the deity.
20.28.1	The Atiśrāvaṇa is the recitation of the Svara.
20.28.2	The sūtra of Baudhāyana.
20.28.3	Śālki says that Soma alone should be recited.
20.28.4	The Samana of the animal.
20.28.5	Baudhayana said, one should not cook with the same fire with which one has cooked the Samñyā-oblation.
20.28.6	Śālīki says, one should cook as per one's capacity.
20.28.7	One should perform the Paryañca-rite for the animal.
20.28.8	Baudhāyana says, one should perform the Pāryañca-rite along with the Śāmitra-rite.
20.28.9	Śālūki says, one may perform the Pāryañca-rite separately.
20.28.10	Rāthītaras says, one should offer the animal and the clarified butter.
20.28.11	The animal itself, says Aupamañava.
20.28.12	The offering to the Apāyas, says Baudhayana.
20.28.13	One should offer one oblation in the first Pravargya, two in the middle and two in the last, says Baudhayaṇa.
20.28.14	As per availability, says Śālīki.
20.28.15	The Upamantras and the invocation, says Baudāyaṇa.
20.28.16	This is the Sutra of Baudhayana
20.28.17	One should not invoke, says Śālki.
20.28.18	The killing of the animal, says Baudāyana.
20.28.19	Baudhayana says that the animal should be made to face the west with its head and the east with its feet.
20.28.20	Salīki says that the animal's head should face the east and its feet the west.
20.28.21	Aupamanyava says that the animal’s head should face east and its feet west.
20.28.22	The animal should be made facing the north with its mouth.
20.28.23	Baudhayana says that one should place the rope in the Catvāla.
20.28.24	Salīka says that one should sprinkle it with water and then place it.
20.28.25	The wife is to be led forward by the husband.
20.28.26	The Sūtra of Śālīki.
20.28.27	Herein Baudhāyana says that one should lead her forward with the words, "Lead her forward without (the sun) shining." Then one should lead her, looking at the sun, with the words, “Lead her forward without shining.”
20.28.28	Looking at the water.
20.28.29	Baudhāyana says that one looks at the water above the sacrificial grass.
20.28.30	Salīki says that it should be placed at the side of the animal.
20.28.31	It should be placed on the sacrificial grass, says Baudhāyana.
20.28.32	This is the view of Salīki.
20.28.33	Herein Baudhāyana says that the other parts should be anointed as stated.
20.28.34	Having anointed the other parts, one should remove it, saying, "You are the share of Rakṣas."
20.28.35	One should touch water, says Baudhäyana.
20.29.1	It is the offering of the omentum, says Śālīki.
20.29.2	The ladle may be made of ghee or gold, in the second and fourth (offerings).
20.29.3	Baudhayana's view is that the former is to be followed. Salīki's view is the latter.
20.29.4	One should offer the Pasupurodāsa, says Baudhāyana.
20.29.5	The Sūtra of Baudhāyana is:
20.29.6	One should offer a cake after having performed the animal sacrifice, says Śālīki.
20.29.7	One should drive away the animal, says Baudhāyaṇa.
20.29.8	Baudhayana says that one should throw away the heart and tongue.
20.29.9	Shaliki says that one should only throw away the heart.
20.29.10	One should cook the heart.
20.29.11	This is the sutra of Shaliki.
20.29.12	Herein, Baudhayana said that one should cook the heart on a spit.
20.29.13	Herein the heart-spit should be placed.
20.29.14	And sprinkle above with the mantra.
20.29.15	This is the offering of the Pasupurodāsa.
20.29.16	This is a sūtra of Śālīki.
20.29.17	Herein Baudhāyana says that one should offer the Svishtakṛt oblation to the Idā without taking it out.
20.29.18	So also for the Savanīya oblations.
20.29.19	This is about the preparation of the Idāsūna.
20.29.20	This is Baudhāyana's sūtra.
20.29.21	Salīki says that one should place the heart on the Bārhaspatya branch and then offer.
20.29.22	This is the rule regarding the exchange of the animal.
20.29.23	This is Salīki's sutra.
20.29.24	Here Baudhāyana says that one should ask and then proceed, saying, "May Pūṣan, the protector of animals, protect me."
20.29.25	Having asked the second time, one should proceed, saying, “May Pūṣa protect me on the path.”
20.29.26-31	Having asked the third, one should proceed, saying, "May Pūṣan, the lord of the sacrifice, protect me." This is the sprinkling of the animal. Baudhāyana says that one should sprinkle the heart with clarified butter and the other organs with ghee. This is the offering of the animal. Here is the corrected and aligned text: Baudhāyana prescribes that one should offer the animal to the five Hotr priests.
20.29.32	Śālīki says that one should remain silent.
20.29.33	It is the offering to the animal.
20.29.34	Baudhāyana says that one should offer on the heart, tongue and chest in this order. One should make the third offering to the five-layered animal.
20.29.35	Here Śālīki says that one should offer all the oblations in order, and that one should not offer the third oblation to the five fires.
20.30.1	The touching of the animal.
20.30.2	Baudhāyana says that one should touch both the animal and the ladle.
20.30.3	Śālīki says one should touch only the ladle.
20.30.4	One should take the fat from the pot.
20.30.5-11	Baudhayana says that one should offer the Vasahomas with the entire side. Salīki says that one should perform the Pratiparihara of the animal. Baudhayana says that it should be performed. Salīka says that it should not be performed. Atikramana. Baudhayāna says that one should not perform the Atikramaṇa.
20.30.12	Śālīki says that one should circumambulate the northern altar from the rear and announce.
20.30.13	One should announce the directions after taking an oath.
20.30.14	This is the Sutra of Śālīki.
20.30.15	Here Bāudhāyana says that one should offer to the directions in front of the tree, saying "To the directions, svāhā."
20.30.16	Having offered, one should stand up, saying "Svāhā to the directions, salutations to the directions."
20.30.17	This is the procedure for the tree.
20.30.18	Baudhayana says that one should offer with four spoonfuls of clarified butter.
20.30.19	Saliki says that one should perform with four spoonfuls.
20.30.20	Baudhayana says that the offering should be made in the Vaniṣṭha vessel.
20.30.21	Baudhayāna says that one should make it complete with six parts.
20.30.22	Śālīki says that it should be complete.
20.30.23	In the Upayajas.
20.30.24	Sālīki's sūtra.
20.30.25	Herein Baudhayana says that one should make the embers from the Ahavaniya fire and offer on them.
20.30.26	One should offer on the embers from the Gutha.
20.30.27	Baudhayana says that it should be offered eleven times.
20.30.28	Saliki says that it should not be offered at all.
20.31.3-8	Śālīki says that one should offer the oblations after taking four spoonfuls. One should offer to the wives of the gods. Baudhāyana says that one should make an offering to the wives of gods with ghee. One should make an offering with the verse, "To the wives of the Gods, to the thighs of the Gods, the Lord of the House Agni." Baudhāyana lays down the procedure.
20.31.9	All this should be done for the buttocks lying supine, says Śālīki.
20.31.10	One should offer the Iḍā oblation to the Hotṛ with the buttocks lying supinely, and the six Avattas to the Agnīdh with the buttocks lying down.
20.31.11	Baudhāyana says that one should offer the Iḷā oblation to Hotṛ with the head lying down.
20.31.12	All this should be done with the buttocks lying upine, says Śāliki.
20.31.13	The performance of the Phalikaraṇa Homa.
20.31.14	Baudhāyana says that one should do so.
20.31.15	Śālīki says that one should not do so.
20.31.16	One should offer the Dhruva vessel.
20.31.17	Baudhāyana says that both the Adhvaryu and the sacrificer should offer the Dhṛva vessel.
20.31.18	Śālini says that the Adhvaryus alone should offer the Dhuruva vessel and offer the Samitsya verses.
20.31.19	The offering of the Samits is done with the Samits.
20.31.20	Baudhayana says that one should offer three or four spoonfuls.
20.31.21	Saliki says that one should make three or four spoonfulls.
20.31.22	The removal of the heart-pain.
20.31.23	Baudhayanasays that one should do it with the Sūktas beginning with "Sumitrā duḥmitrā".
20.31.24	Saliki says one should not do it.
20.31.25	The making of the Samits.
20.31.26	All should be moist and with sprouts, says Baudhāyana.
20.31.27	The sacrificer and his wife, says Śālīki.
20.31.28	One should perform the rite of paryupāsan around the sacrificial grass.
20.31.29	One should do it on the right shoulder of the altar, says Baudhāyaṇa.
20.31.30	On the northern part of the altar, say Śālīki
20.31.31	One should perform a homa with flour.
20.31.32	Baudhayana says that one should offer three oblations of flour.
20.31.33	Shaliki says that one should make only one oblation.
20.31.34	Aupamanyava says that one should perform the Pradava rite with an oblation of flour.
20.31.35	The invocation of the deities has been mentioned.
20.31.36	The invocation to the sacrificial post.
20.31.37	This is the Sutra of Baudhayana.
20.31.38	Shaliki opines that one should invoke the Ahavaniya fire with this formula.
20.31.39	"The Sutra says, 'One should offer the Anvāyanīya.'
20.31.40	Baudhayana says that one should offer the Anvähārya-rice.
20.31.41	Salīki says that one should not offer it.
20.31.42	One should offer the full oblation.
20.31.43	Baudhayana prescribes the offering of the full oblation,
20.31.44	Salīki does not prescribe it.
20.31.45	One gives the Dakṣiṇā.
20.31.46	Baudhayāna says that one should give a cow or a bull.
20.31.47	Other than that, one should give a single cow. This is the view of Śālīki.
21.1.1	Now we shall explain the four-monthly rites.
21.1.2	Baudhāyana says that the four-monthly sacrifices should be performed throughout life, and they should be performed within the same year.
21.1.3	One should perform the vow in the first year itself.
21.1.4	Here Śālīki says that the four months of winter should be observed as celibacy.
21.1.5	Aupamanyava says that they should be observed according to the rules of the respective seasons.
21.1.6	The milking should be done with or without mantras.
21.1.7	Baudhāyana says that the milking should be done in the evening and morning with mantras.
21.1.8	Śālīki says it should be done silently.
21.1.9	Herein, Oupamanyava says, "The offerings of milk at the Cāturmāsya rites should be silent before the Soma-sacrifice, and afterwards the mantras should be used."
21.1.10	Here Anji-gavi said, "These five offerings are accompanied by mantras: at the Darsha-Paurnamasa sacrifices, at the Maitravaruni offering, at the Dakshayani sacrifice, at the Kaundapaini offering, and at the Sautrarnani offering."
21.1.11	At the Vaishvanara and Parjanya offerings, one should perform the Karana rite.
21.1.12	Baudhayana says that one should perform.
21.1.13	Shaliki says that one should not perform.
21.1.14	On the full moon day of Phalguna or Chaitra, the calves are separated from their mothers for the sake of all the gods.
21.1.15	Baudhayana says that one should offer the Somas on the full moon day in the ascending node of the moon.
21.1.16	Saliki says that one should recite the auspicious verses on the full moon in the ascending node.
21.1.17	The sacrificial grass should be fresh.
21.1.18	Baudhayanas says that the sacrificial grass should be freshly cut.
21.1.19	Saliki however says that the entire sacrificial grass should be new.
21.1.20-24	The Homa to the five Hotṛ-priests. Baudhāyana says that one should offer the Homa to the Five Hotṛ-prists on the Upavasatha day itself. One should recite the Anumantrana for the Prayājas. Baudhāyan says that one should recite the Anumantras for four with the four and then recite the Anumantraṇa for the fifth with the fifth.
21.1.25-30	The Sālīki says that one should recite the mantra for four times and then recite the mantra for all five times. The mantra for the single-pot offerings is to be recited. Baudhāyana says that they should be with mantras. Śālīki says they should be silent. The single-pot offerings are to be given. Baudhāyanasaṃhitā Here is the corrected and aligned text:  Translation: And the four should be recited with four mantras, and all should be recited with the fifth mantra, says Śālīki. The mantra is to be recited for the single-vessel offerings. Baudhāyāna says they should be with the mantras. Sālīki says silently. The single vessel offerings are to be made. Here Baudhāyana says that one should not recite the mantra for the four-month offerings.
21.1.31-34	Now, should one offer to the others? Here Shaalikhi said, "One should offer to the ones who carry the ritual implements, but not to the others." Here Oupamanyava said, "One shouldn't offer to the one who is the person of the Visvedevah, but to the others." The offering to the single-headed ones is called Abhihoma.
21.1.35	If there is a spill in the ladle, one should offer with that. So says Baudhāyana.
21.1.36	With each of the four names of the seasons, one by one. So says Śālīki.
21.2.1	The collection of the bowls of the single-pot offering.
21.2.2	One should collect them. So says Baudhayana.
21.2.3	One should not collect them. So say Śālīki
21.2.4	The conduct of the Vājinī.
21.2.5	Baudhayana says that one should eat silently.
21.2.6	Shaliki says that one should speak loudly.
21.2.7	One should eat the horse-flesh.
21.2.8	This is the sutra of Shaliki.
21.2.9	In this context, Baudhayana said that the others should eat by just touching the food.
21.2.10	The sacrificer alone should eat directly.
21.2.11	One should return.
21.2.12-14	Baudhayana says that one should shave both the hair and beard after having shaved the hair on the head. Salīki says that one should only shave the beard and not the hair on the head. Āupamanyava says that one should not shave either the beard or the hair on the 
21.2.15	In the Varuna-prastha-satra, the vessels are to be made in the southern resting place.
21.2.16	Baudhayana says that they should be made of gold or silver.
21.2.17	Shaliki says that they should have handles.
21.2.18	Aupamanyava says that they should made of wood.
21.2.19	The Stambayajus is to be taken away.
21.2.20	Baudhayane Stambayajuh parivartate.
21.2.21	Shaliki: Stambayajush saha parivartate.
21.2.22	The sprinkling of clarified butter is done.
21.2.23	Baudhayana says that one should sit to the south of the Darśa-pūrṇamāsa and look towards the south and then towards the north.
21.2.24	Śālīki says that one should look towards the south after sitting at the junction of the altar and then towards the northern direction.
21.2.25	Aupamanyava says that one should do it in the middle.
21.2.26	The winnowing basket is made of Aśīṣa grass.
21.2.27	This is the Sutra of Baudhayana.
21.2.28-35	Śālīki says that it should be made of darbha or kuśa grass. Aupamanyava says that it should directly touch the food. Baudhāyana says that one should sprinkle the food with water. Aupamanava says that one should eat after sprinkling with water. Śālīki says one should sprinkle the water over the food. The Sūtra of Śālīki is as follows:
21.2.36	Herein Baudhayana says that one should offer the sheep in the place of the two kinds of milk-rice. One should not offer the leaves of shami tree in the place of barley. They are mentioned as grass.
21.2.37	One should offer the entire Visvalopa with the last offering, says Aupamanyava.
21.3.1	For Marut and Caryati.
21.3.2	This is the sutra of Baudhayana.
21.3.3	Salīki says that one should move towards the north and perform the Marutīya rite.
21.3.4	Baudhāyana says that one should offer the ladle of the Marutīyas.
21.3.5	Śālīki says that it should be offered. Baudhāyana says that it should not be offered.
21.3.6	Avabhrtha.
21.3.7	The sutra of the two teachers.
21.3.8	Here Aupamañjavy said, "One should perform the Avabhrtha with chaff and the Niskāsa rite."
21.3.9	The offering of water to the departed is mentioned.
21.3.10	The offering of water to a person who has gone to the other world is mentioned.
21.3.11	Placing of the sacrificial grass is mentioned.
21.3.12	Offering of the oblation to the army is mentioned.
21.3.13	According to the two teachers, the rising of the sun is desired by touching the hand.
21.3.14	According to Upanishad Gautama, one who is about to take the fist.
21.3.15-20	The Upamaṇavīputra says that the rays should move together. This is also the section of Sāntapana and Kraidina. The mantra of the Gṛhamedhi is a mantra, says Baudhāyana. Śālīki says it should be silent. The offering of the Gṛhamedhi is to be done,
21.3.21	With a pure vessel and with the mantra, says Baudhayana.
21.3.22	With an impure vessel and silently, says Saliki.
21.3.23	The offering of the Gṛhamedhi-oblation.
21.3.24	One should offer it in milk, says Baudhayaṇa.
21.3.25	In water, says Saliki
21.3.26	The preparation of the Śākalas.
21.3.27	One should do it, says Baud-hayana.
21.3.28	One should not do it, says Saliki.
21.3.29-35	The offering of the Gṛhamedhi is to be made in the same manner as the offering of the Barhis. Baudhayana says that one should make the offering of the Grmēdhi in the same manner. Salīki says that one should offer the Gṛhamedhī in the same manner in which the other grasses are used. The offering of the Gृhamedhi is to proceed in the same manner as the offering of the grasses. Baudhayāna says that one should proceed silently. Śālīki says that it should be done loudly. The offering to the Śākalas is to be made by taking up the ladle.
21.3.36-42	Baudhayana says that one should strike. Shaliki says that one should not strike. One should offer the oblation to the neighbour. Baudhayana says that it should be offered in the Anvāhāryapacana. Shaliki says that it should be done at the head of the village. One should make an offering with the full ladle. This is the sutra of the two teachers.
21.3.43	Having uttered the Vyahrtis, one should offer in the Homa of Brahma. This is said by Gautama.
21.4.1	The sacrificial grass of the Mahapitryajna.
21.4.2	The sacrificial grasses should be with roots. This is said in Baudhayana.
21.4.3	There is no touching back.
21.4.4	It should be with leftovers. This is said Saliki.
21.4.5	There is a touching back. This is said.
21.4.6	Now, Oupamanyava says that one should cut it off without cutting the root.
21.4.7	Now, this is the milk for the cow to drink, half a vessel.
21.4.8	Baudhayana says that one should pour it with water.
21.4.9	If it is small, one should pour it over with water, says Saliki.
21.4.10	They take up barley after having put the grains in the oblation.
21.4.11	The Sūtra of Śālīki.
21.4.12	Herein Baudhāyana says that the rites beginning with the pouring down of water should be performed with the mantras and rites pertaining to barley. The rites should be those pertaining to oblations.
21.4.13	One should pour down water.
21.4.14	Baudhāyana says that one should pour down water from the rear of the Gārhapatya towards the Āpyas.
21.4.15	Śālīki says that one should do so from the front of the Atihaye.
21.4.16	The Upamaṇyavas say that it should be done either in front or behind.
21.4.17	The Veda is the instrument.
21.4.18	Baudhāyana says that one should do it in the southern or eastern intermediate direction after going out of the fire-room.
21.4.19	Śālīki says that it should be within this direction.
21.4.20	The Upamaṇḍalas say that it should surround the Anvāhāryapacana.
21.4.21	The Anvāhāryapacana is to be kindled.
21.4.22	Baudhāyana says that one should kindle it in its own place.
21.4.23	Śāliki says that one should offer the kindling wood.
21.4.24	The taking of the Ājya-grahas.
21.4.25	Baudhāyan says that they should be five or six spoonfuls.
21.4.26	Śāṭki says that they should only be six spoonfuls.
21.4.27	The mantra for the Prastara is "O Agni, do not burn me."
21.4.28	The taking up and placing of this (Prastara) should be done silently.
21.4.29	Baudhayana says that the other (Prastara), too, should be taken up with a mantra.
21.4.30	The taking up of this (Pravara) and its placing should be done silently
21.4.31	Saliki says that the other, too, should be done with a mantra.
21.4.32-38	As long as the placing is silent. Now others say that it should be with mantras. This is the view of Aupamanyava. One should go around three times in the opposite direction while spreading the grass. This is the rule of Baudhayana. One should spread it with whatever grass is available. This is the opinion of Saliki. The spreading is to be done with the Veda. This is the instruction of Baudhayāna.
21.4.39	One should say, "I spread the woolen cloth for you." So says Śālīki.
21.5.1	One should say, "The covering of the pots."
21.5.2	This is the rule of Śālīki:
21.5.3	Here Bāudhāyana says that one should place all the pots around.
21.5.4	When the rites for the Pitṛs are being performed, one should place the pot on the southern side facing north.
21.5.5	This is the procedure for removing the oblations.
21.5.6	This is Bāudhāyanas's rule.
21.5.7	One should pour out the oblations as soon as they are cooked, says Śālīki.
21.5.8	The oblations should be placed in the order of the deities, says Baudhāyana.
21.5.9	To the south, says Baudhāyaṇa.
21.5.10	To the north, says Śālki.
21.5.11	The priests move around and carry the oblations, says Śālini.
21.5.12	This is the view of Baudhāyana.
21.5.13	Here the oblations should not be transferred. So says Śālīki.
21.5.14	Here the oblations should be transferred by the Adhvaryu and Agnīdhra. So says Āupamanyava.
21.5.15	The invocatory formula is to be recited.
21.5.16	One should say "Oṃ svadhā" says Baudhāyana.
21.5.17	One should recite "Oṃ svadha" says Śālīka.
21.5.18	One should pronounce "svadhā" says Āupamānyava.
21.5.19	The Pravara is to be recited.
21.5.20	The Sūtra is of the two teachers.
21.5.21	The learned and the physician, say the Āupamanyavas.
21.5.22	The giving of the balls is declared.
21.5.23	The anointing and unguenting are declared.
21.5.24	The taking of the balls is also declared.
21.5.25	The mantra and non-mantra of the Triyambaka.
21.5.26	They should have mantras, says Baudhāyana.
21.5.27	Silence, says Śālīki.
21.5.28-32	If one is unable to do so, one should offer them in a single pot. This is the view of Aupamañava. One should take out the embers from the fire pit. This is the opinion of Baudhayana. One should do so from the fire of the village. This is the procedure of Saliki. One should approach the Garhapatya fire with this. This is the practice.
21.5.33	Baudhayana said that this mantra is applicable to both the Adhvaryu and the sacrificer.
21.5.34	Shaliki says that it is applicable to the sacrificer alone.
21.5.35	The cutting of the Triyambaka.
21.5.36	The sutra of Shaliki.
21.5.37	Here Baudhayana says that one should cut three times without touching each other and then cut three times with the formula, "For Bhaga thee, for Bhaga thee."
21.6.1	Then he pours the two handfuls of water on the sacrificer.
21.6.2	This is the Sutra of Saliki.
21.6.3	Herein Baudhayana says that one should pour the water on the sacrificers alone with the mantra, silently on the wife and the one who desires prosperity.
21.6.4	Having tied them with two threads, blue and red, one should tie them on a dry tree or a branch.
21.6.5-11	The former is Baudhayana's view. The latter is Saliki's view. The placing of the water-pot. Baudhayana says that one should place it clockwise. Saliki says that one should do as one pleases. The offering to Suna-Siriya and Parusha. The sutra of Saliki.
21.6.12	Herein Baudhayana says that one should perform the Suna-sīrīya-parusara sacrifice in the waning fortnight beginning from the full moon.
21.6.13	It is seen as being for the purpose of the thirteenth month.
21.6.14	It is to be performed for the Veda.
21.6.15	Baudhayana says that it should be performed in the Darśa-Paurnamāsa.
21.6.16	Śālīki says that it should pertain to the animal sacrifice.
21.6.17	The giving of gifts.
21.6.18	The Sutra of Shali.
21.6.19	Herein, indeed, Baudhayana says that one should give gold to Vaisvānara, a milch-cow to Pārvana, twelve to Vaisvadev, twelve to Varuna-prastha-homa, three to Ānīkavata, three to Sāntapana, four to Grīh-medha, a bull to Pūrṇadārvya, three to Kraidina, twelve to Mahā-haviṣ, three to Āditya, twelve to Śunāsīrīya-homa.
21.6.20	Here Aupamañava said, "The fees for the four-monthly sacrifices are mentioned as sixty-four.
21.6.21	If one does not obtain them, one should give as many garments and as many cooked rice-porridges.
21.6.22	By that one attains the desired goal."
21.6.23	At the end of the four-monthly rites.
21.6.24	Baudhayana says that the Soma-cups should be placed at the end.
21.6.25	Saliki says that the animal-cups should be so placed.
21.6.26	Aupamanyava says that one should perform the Savanesti.
21.7.1	Now we shall explain the Agniṣṭoma.
21.7.2	Baudhāyana says that one should not initiate without seeing the king and the priests.
21.7.3	Here Śālīki said, if the initiation is long, then the breathers, the Udgītha and the chanting should be done as desired.
21.7.4	The determination of the hall.
21.7.5	Baudhāyana said, one should determine the hall at midday.
21.7.6	The water should go first, followed by the sacrificer, the king and the attendants.
21.7.7	Here Shaalikii says that one may enter the hall in the morning or afternoon.
21.7.8	One should perform the Dikshaniya (rite) before sunset.
21.7.9	One should carry the fires.
21.7.10	Baudhayana says that one should carry the fires continuously.
21.7.11	Shaalikii says that having placed them on the kindling woods, one should carry them.
21.7.12	One should offer seven oblations to the Hotri.
21.7.13-20	Baudhayana says that one should offer the Saptāhvāṇīya oblations after having offered the Şaḍhāvānīya oblations. One should offer the oblations to the sacrificial post. Baudhayana says that the former alternative is to be adopted. Śālīki says that the latter alternative is to be followed. One should prepare the garments. Baudhayāna says that one should prepare eight. Śālīki says seven. One should make the garments of black antelope skin.
21.7.21	Baudhayana says that there are five.
21.7.22	Saliki says that there are six.
21.7.23	The offering of the black-antelope skin is to be done.
21.7.24	Baudhayana says that it should have three folds.
21.7.25	Saliki that it should have five folds.
21.7.26	Aupamanyava says that it should be complete.
21.7.27	The offering is to be made.
21.7.28	Baudhayanasays that it is a pot.
21.7.29	Saliki: It is a bowl.
21.8.2	Baudhayana said that one should go to this sacred place after turning to the right and then return by going to the left.
21.8.3	Shaliki said that one should turn to the right and go to this sacred spot by going to the right and return by going to left.
21.8.4	One should sprinkle water on the right side of the animal facing east.
21.8.5-11	Baudhayana says that one should anoint with the mantra. Shaliki says that one should do both with the mantra. Here is the mantra: "O ointment, you are the ointment of the earth. You are the ointment-giver, give ointment to me." This is the mantra. Here is the mantra: "O ointment, you have come from the earth. You have come from the sky. You have come to me." Here is the verse: "O ointments, you are the ointments of the earth. You are the ointments, give ointments to me." Ointment, you have come from the earth, from the sky, you have come to me.
21.8.12	Herein, indeed, Baudhayana says, having taken up the eye-ointment with the formula, "Thou art the eye-ointmemt of Vritra," he anoints the eyes with the formula, "Thou art the eye, protect my eye."
21.8.13	One should anoint five times, twice more and then again three times. This is the Brāhmaṇa. One should anoint the right eye five times and the left eye five times.
21.8.14	The former view is of Baudhayana, the latter of Salīki.
21.8.15	Wind.
21.8.16	Baudhāyana says that having divided the body into three groups of seven, one should apply the wind to the region of the breath, then to the region of navel, and then to the region below the knees.
21.8.17	Having sprinkled them with water, one should throw them away in an upward direction.
21.8.18	Here Śālīki says, "One purifies with two, one purifies with three." Having purified him with these twenty-one, then sprinkle them with water and throw them away."
21.8.19	Herein, indeed, Oupamanyava said: "One should sprinkle him with all (the formulas), at the place of the Prāṇa-breathing. May the lord of speech purify thee; may the lord of speech, the god Savitr purify thee with the stainless purifying (cup), with the rays of the shining Vasu-sun."
21.8.20	"One should sprinkle the deity with water, and then throw it away."
21.8.21	Then he should strike him with the left hand.
21.8.22	It is said that the right one.
21.8.23	The former rule is of Baudhayana, the latter of Saliki.
21.8.24	Then he should lead him around in front of the Ahavaniya.
21.8.25	It is stated that he should lead him behind.
21.8.26	The former is the rule of Saliki, the latter of Baudhayāna.
21.8.27	The leading of the wife.
21.8.28	The sūtra of Saliki is:
21.8.29	Herein Baudhayana says that having purified her with the purifying formulas, one should make her sit down behind the Garhapatya with all the verses.
21.8.30	One should initiate the wife at the Prāyaniya offering.
21.8.31	This is the sutra of the two teachers.
21.8.32	Herein Upamanyu says that one should initiate the wife in the Prāyaniye Havis-offering.
21.8.33	One should not make the sacrificer undertake the vow.
21.8.34	The Sūtra of Śālīki.
21.8.35	Herein Baudhāyana says that in the Sāumika system one should perform the Pāuroḍāśika sacrifice for the sacrificer, because the sacrifice is taken up again elsewhere.
21.8.36	One should not bind the wife.
21.8.37	The Sūtra of Shālīki.
21.8.38	Herein Baudhayana says that when the sacrificer has been yoked and is standing, he should be released along with the Adhvaryu and the Yajamana.
21.8.39	Thereafter one should yoke him with the Pāuroḍāśika rite.
21.8.40	The Dhruva is the Apāyanīya rite.
21.8.41	Baudhayana says that both the Adhvaryu and the sacrificer should swell the Dhruva vessel.
21.8.42	Saliki says that the Adhvaryus alone should swell the Dhuruva vessel and offer the oblations to the deities of consecration.
21.8.43	The oblations to the Deities of Consecration are offered.
21.8.44	This is the Sutra of Baudhayana.
21.8.45	Saliki prescribes that one should offer the oblations after reciting the fourth verse and then the fifth verse.
21.8.46	Here Aupamaṇyava said, "One should offer to Akriti." Having offered three oblations in succession, one should offer this oblation: "To Sarasvati, to Pusha, to Agni." Then one should offer the Udgrahana oblation.
21.9.1	On the two skins of black antelope.
21.9.2	Baudhayana says that one should initiate with two oblations offered together.
21.9.3	If it is either, then one should sew the right edge of the skin.
21.9.4	There should be only one black antelope skin, says Śālīki.
21.9.5	One should rub the white and black (parts).
21.9.6	The thumb is white and the fingers are black, says Baudhāyana.
21.9.7	One should thus rub the white and the black, says Baudhayana.
21.9.8	Śālīki says that one should touch the joint with the palm of the hand.
21.9.9	Aupamanyava says that one should only touch it with one finger.
21.9.10	This is the procedure for approaching the skin of a black antelope.
21.9.11	This is a sūtra of Śālīki.
21.9.12	In this context Baudhāyana says that one should first take up the northern or southern half of the verse.
21.9.13	With the third (verse) one should go to the middle country.
21.9.14	The writing of the text is explained.
21.9.15	Now, he should cover his head with the Uṣṇīṣa.
21.9.16	The Sūtra of Baudhāyana:
21.9.17	One should be covered with one's own garment, says Śālīki.
21.9.18	The offering of a black staff.
21.9.19	The Sûtra of Śālīki:
21.9.20	Herein Baudhayana says that one should offer the black-horned animal with the entire mantra.
21.9.21	One should take up the hair-ends silently.
21.9.22	One should touch the hair-ends with water silently.
21.9.23	This is the offering of the staff.
21.9.24	This is a sutra of the two teachers.
21.9.25	Herein, Oupamanyava says, one should give the staff to him with the entire mantra, "The god Vanaspati is well-established, may he protect me from above."
21.9.26	Then he makes him recite the beginning of the sacrifice.
21.9.27	The sutra of Saliki.
21.9.28	Herein Baudhayana says that these mantras are seen to be used in eight ways: Svāhā to the mind, svāhā to the heaven and earth, svāhā from the sky, svāhā I begin the sacrifice from the wind.
21.9.29	This is the use of the word muṣṭi.
21.9.30	Baudhayana says that this is the use of muṣṭi in the absence of the word.
21.9.31-37	Śālīki says that the consecration is performed after the intermediate consecration. Baudhāyana says that one should inform as per the caste. Śālīki says, "This Brāhmaṇa did not consecrate himself." Sūtra of Baudhāyana. Śālini says that the Yajamāna's vow should be performed at the outer door.
21.10.1-6	The two Yajuses are to be recited together. Baudhayana says that they should be recited together upto the offering of the Krsna-ajina. Saliki says that they should go together upto the intermediate initiation. Aupamanyava says that they should continue together upto the bringing of the Dakṣiṇās. The two Yajuses should be recited together. The sutra of Saliki.
21.10.7	Herein Baudhayana says that one should go to sleep with the verse, "O Agni, you are well awake."
21.10.8	One who is going to undertake a vow should sip water with the verse, “I am thinking of the divine mind.”
21.10.9	Then one should send away the rain.
21.10.10	Baudhayana says that it should be done except in the case of a fierce Shudra.
21.10.11	Shaliki says that it should not be done except in case of a fierce one.
21.10.12	All the rites of sacrifice are to be performed, says Aupamanyava.
21.10.13	The Savanayana, the Prajnaya, the Prajana, and the Parayana are the rites of sacrifice.
21.10.14	These rites are to be performed in succession, says Baudhayana.
21.10.15	These rites may be performed once for the day or for the night, says Saliki.
21.10.16	The receiving of Dakshina is to be done,
21.10.17	Baudhayana said, "If one were to receive the animal of any one born, one should receive it again with the mantra."
21.10.18	Shaliki said, "If the animal of any person born is received with the mantra, it is indeed received.
21.10.19	Having come, he should accept it with the mantra.
21.10.20	It is a gift to an unknown person.
21.10.21	Baudhayana's view is that the former option is to be followed. Salīki's view is the latter.
21.10.22	It is the departure.
21.10.23	Salīki's opinion is the former, Baudhāyana's the latter.
21.10.24	If he happens to reach the place of observance while going,
21.10.25	Having churned out the fires, one should perform the Vrata rite, says Baudhayana.
21.10.26	Having placed the kindling woods towards the north and having surrounded them towards the south, one should perform Vrata rite, so says Saliki.
21.10.27	Now if the fires are not available, one should perform it with the help of a thread.
21.10.28	This is the sutra of Saliki.
21.10.29	Herein Baudhayana says, one should recite the verse, "The divine waters, the waters, the waters' feet, the wave that is most powerful, most intoxicating, that I take of you."
21.10.30	One should take three clods of earth.
21.10.31	One should place one of them at the edge of water with the verse, "Do not tread on me."
21.10.32	Then, destroying another, he should run with the unbroken thread.
21.10.33	Then, placing another at the edge of water, he should say, "Following the earth."
21.10.34	One either sinks or crosses.
21.10.35	Having made a bridge, one crosses. This is the Brahmanical text.
21.11.1	On the red skin.
21.11.2	Baudhayana's Sūtra.
21.11.3	Even if it is not red, says Śālīki.
21.11.4	At the time of the sun's eclipse, one should offer gold.
21.11.5	Baudhayana says that one should do so.
21.11.6	Shaliki says that one should not do so.
21.11.7	This is the conclusion regarding the Devayajana.
21.11.8	This is a sutra of the two teachers.
21.11.9	Here, Oupamanyava says that one should conclude the Devayajna before the three-fold division.
21.11.10	It is known that this entire altar is the same.
21.11.11-18	The description of the offering of the Prayaṇīya oblation. The Prayaṇīyī oblation is to be cooked in milk, says Baudhāyana. In water, says Śālīki. The Prayāṇīya oblations are to be cooked in six potfuls of milk, says Baudhayana. Silently, says Śālki. The procedure of the Prayaṇa oblations.
21.11.19	Baudhayana says that one should look at the sun with lowered eyes.
21.11.20	Shaliki says that one should do so with raised eyes.
21.11.21	One should look at the rising sun.
21.11.22	Baudhayana says that having covered the gold, one should look at rising sun.
21.11.23	Shaliki however says that one should not cover it.
21.11.24	One should offer the Soma-purchasing fee after the Soma has been purchased.
21.11.25	Baudhayanasays that one should offer it at the time of the assembly.
21.11.26-31	Śālīki says that it is at the time of the Uparava. Baudhāyana says that one should move towards the southern end of the southernmost step of the Soma-purchasing lady. Śālīki says one should move towards whichever step one likes. Śālini says that one should draw a line on the step of the Soma purchasing lady. This is the Sutra of Śālīki.
21.11.32	Herein Baudhayana says that one should draw the line with the sacrificial grass and the black antelope skin.
21.11.33	The black antelope skin should be inside, says Baudhayana.
21.12.1	One should place the water pot, says Baudhayaṇa.
21.12.2	Baudhāyana says that one should place it clockwise.
21.12.3	Śālīki says that one should do as per the availability.
21.12.4	One should attend upon the king,
21.12.5	Baudhayana said, this is the plant named Ushasa.
21.12.6	One should make it the messenger saying, "This is your Gayatra portion." Tell Soma this. "This is your Tristubha portion." Tell Soma. "This is you Jagati portion." Tell Soma, "May I go to the kingship of the Chandomas." Tell Soma.
21.12.7	Here Śālīki said, "The king is indeed visible. He should stand facing him, saying, 'This is your Gāyatrī portion, this is your Tristubh portion, this is the Jagat portion, this is thy portion of the Chandomas, may you attain the kingdom.'
21.12.8	The king's honor."
21.12.9	Baudhāyana's sūtra.
21.12.10	Śālīki says, "Reciting this verse, one should measure it five times."
21.12.11-18	The king should give the price. Baudhāyana says that one should say, "I am buying a cow from you." Śālīki says that one should take possession of the goat. Baudhāyanasūtra Śālīka says that one should recite the mantra while taking possession of the goat without giving it away. The Maitrāvaruṇa should give the stick. The Ācārya-sūtra
21.12.19	Herein, Oupamanyava says, one should give the staff to the Maitrāvaruṇa priest after having approached him with a pitcher of water.
21.12.20	One should give it back to the king.
21.12.21	Baudhayana says that one should give it back with the skin having the hair inside.
21.12.22	Saliki says that one should do so with the skin having hair outside and with the neck upwards.
21.12.23	One should take it up along with the yoke.
21.12.24-29	Baudhayana says that one should recite the mantra while moving towards the east without beginning. One should move around the king. Baudhayana says that he should move around clockwise. Saliki says that one should move around as much as possible. One should stand in front of the king.
21.12.30	Baudhayana said, one should attend upon the king with rice, Charani-girls and Rajasadya.
21.12.31	Shaliki said, one should serve the king with a goat, a bell-metal vessel and Rajasadhya.
21.12.32	The animal for Agni-Soma should be a bull, a copper-coloured one, a sheep, a goat, or a black one. This is what is understood.
21.13.1	The grass for the Atithya sacrifice is to be prepared.
21.13.2	Baudhayana says that one should recite the mantras beginning with "Asidada".
21.13.3	Saliki says that one should begin with "Shulba".
21.13.4	The Upanisads of Baudhayana, Saliki and Aupamanyava.
21.13.5	The offering of Atithyas is the offering of the Atithyas.
21.13.6	The sutra of Saliki.
21.13.7	Herein Baudhayana says that one should offer the Atithyas after releasing both the kings and then the Rajas.
21.13.8	The service of the king.
21.13.9	The sutras of Saliki.
21.13.10	Herein Baudhayana says that one should attend upon the king with a verse, and should offer the Arghya with a verse.
21.13.11	Arghya means offering.
21.13.12	Baudhayana says that the offering should be made as per the order of arrival.
21.13.13	Saliki says that having offered Arghya to the king, one should offer it to the priests.
21.13.14	Atithya means hospitality.
21.13.15	Baudhayana says that the cake and the cow should be offered.
21.13.16	Shaliki says that only the cake should be offered. 
21.13.17	The taking of the cups of clarified butter is to be done.
21.13.18	Baudhayana says that they should be four or five spoonfuls.
21.13.19	Shaliki say that they should be five spoonfuls. 
21.13.20	The offering of Atithya is to be done.
21.13.21	Baudhayana says that one should offer the four Hotr-priests.
21.13.22	Saliki says that one should do it silently.
21.13.23	One should do it in the manner of Atithya.
21.13.24	Baudhayana says that the chanting should be done in a low voice.
21.13.25	Saliki, however, says that it should be done loudly.
21.13.26	One should eat the Tanunaptra.
21.13.27	The sutra of Saliki is over.
21.13.28	Herein Baudhayana says that one should place the animal in a covered place and then at the time of the vow, one should consume it along with the vow.
21.13.29	The consecration of the sacrificial grass for the Upavasatha rite.
21.13.30	Baudhayana says that the mantras beginning with "asidā" should be recited.
21.13.31	Saliki says that the mantars beginning with "shulba" should be recited
21.13.32	Aupamanyava says that the mantres beginning with "sambharaṇa" should be recited.
21.13.33	The mantras for the Upasads are with or without mantras.
21.13.34	Baudhayana says that they should be with mantras.
21.13.35	Shaliki says that they should not be with mantras at all.
21.13.36	The pouring of clarified butter should be without mantras. The rest should be with mantra.
21.13.37	So says Aupamaṇyava.
21.13.38	All this rite should be performed with mantras, says Aupamañavaputra.
21.13.39	The offering of oblations is called Homa.
21.13.40	Baudhayana says that one should offer the oblations in the eastern direction.
21.13.41	Saliki says that one should place the oblations in an orderly manner.
21.13.42	The offering of oblations at the Upasads.
21.13.43	Baudhayāna says that one should not cross over the Upasads while offering oblations.
21.13.44	Salīki says that one should perform the Upasads without crossing over.
21.13.45	The covering of the ladles.
21.13.46	Baudhāyana says that one should wait for a day and night.
21.13.47	Śālīki says that one should do it on the same day.
21.13.48	Aupamanyava says that one should use the rite for each rite.
21.14.1	The taking of the Stambayajus is mentioned.
21.14.2	This is the Sutra of Baudhayana.
21.14.3	Śālini says that the Agnidhra should take it even after the time of the Uparava.
21.14.4	The scraping of the sacrificial grass is mentioned.
21.14.5	The removal of the fires of the people is mentioned.
21.14.6	The placing of the wooden chips is mentioned.
21.14.7	This is the Sutra of Saliki.
21.14.8	Here Baudhayana says that having taken up the northern enclosing stick, having placed the wooden chips in a line, having placed the sacrificer on the mound, one should place the wooden chips.
21.14.9-14	The rite of the sacrificial grass for the Agniṣṭoma animal-sacrifice. One should recite the mantras beginning with the taking of the knife, says Baudhāyana. Beginning with the taking of a lump of gold, says Śālīki. Beginning with collecting, says Āśvalāyana. The rite of following the Agniṣṭomī animal-sacrifice. One should follow it, says Baudhāyaṇa.
21.14.15	Śālīki says that one should not follow it.
21.14.16	The placing of the sacrificial grass and wood is as prescribed.
21.14.17	The sutra of the two teachers is here.
21.14.18	Here Aupamaṇyava said, "One should bring the sacrificial grass and the wood to the one sitting here."
21.14.19	Taking it, one should go east, with the kuśa grass in hand, and go east, spreading the Prṣṭyā grass at the right time."
21.14.20	The turning around of the Havirdhāna carts is as prescribed.
21.14.21	One should make the wood or grass disappear while entering, says Baudhāyana.
21.14.22	One should not make them disappear, says Śālīki.
21.14.23	One should sprinkle the sacrificial grass and sacred grass, says Baudhāyaṇa.
21.14.24	One should silently sprinkle with the sanctified water, says Baudhâyana.
21.14.25	With the water-pots, says Śālki.
21.14.26	One makes an offering on the path, says Baudhâyana.
21.14.27	The Sutra of Baudhayana
21.14.28	Herein Baudhayana says that one should offer on the axle of the southern Havirdhana cart, should smear all the axles and should touch all around.
21.14.29	Herein Saliki says that one should make offerings on all the axles, should smear all axles and should touch around.
21.14.30	The killing of the Methi is done on the right side.
21.14.31	Baudhayana says that one should kill the Methi on the right side of the southern Havirdhana shed and on the left side of the northern one.
21.14.32	Shaliki says that it should be done on the right and left sides.
21.14.33	Aupamanyava says that it should done in the middle.
21.14.34	The killing of the Methis is done at the door of the arms.
21.14.35	Baudhayana says that one should sprinkle all the doors with the mantra.
21.14.36	Saliki says that one should do the sprinkling of the eastern doors first.
21.14.37	Aupamanyava says that one should start with the sprinkling of the southern doors.
21.15.1	There is an offering on the Udumbara twig.
21.15.2	This is the sutra of Aupamanyavaputra.
21.15.3	Herein Baudhayana says that one should offer the gold after having withdrawn the offering to Agni.
21.15.4	Saliki says that one should make the offering after having deposited the gold in both the Visakha vessels.
21.15.5	Taking up the Vasatīvari waters.
21.15.6	This is the Sutra of Saliki.
21.15.7	Herein Baudhayana says that one should take up the Vasatīvari waters with the Sukra offerings on both sides.
21.15.8	Those are Sukra offerings.
21.15.9	One should nourish with them.
21.15.10	One should sprinkle with them.
21.15.11	Having placed the sacrificial grass, one should take up Vasatīvari water, says Aupamanyava.
21.15.12	One should write the names of the Uparava offerings.
21.15.13	Baudhayana says that one should write each of them thrice.
21.15.14	Shaliki says that one should do it once each.
21.15.15	This is the procedure for taking away the water used for sprinkling.
21.15.16	This is a sutra of Shaliki.
21.15.17	Herein, Baudhayana said that one should take away the grass from under the sacrificer and sprinkle it.
21.15.18	This is procedure for sprinkling the water used for removing the oblations.
21.15.19	Baudhayana says that one should sprinkle each of them thrice.
21.15.20	Shaliki says that one should do it once each.
21.15.21	Aupamanyava says that one should perform this threefold rite in this way: one should pour water on it, one should scatter barley on it.
21.15.22	Aupamanavaputra says that one should complete all these rites.
21.15.23	The placing of the Dhishnyas is the Nivapanam.
21.15.24	Baudhayana says, one should place the Agnidhra-brick at the end of the Veda and the Marjalyaka-brick at the extremity of the Veda.
21.15.25	Having placed the Dhishnyabricks, one should make them face towards the north.
21.15.26	Shaliki says, one should put the Agnidhra brick within the Veda and the Majalyaka brick within the Veda.
21.15.27	Having placed the Dhishnyas, one should not make them stand in an uneven manner.
21.15.28	The Veda should be spread out.
21.15.29	This is the Sutra of Saliki.
21.15.30	Herein Baudhayana says that three should be spread out towards the south, three towards the north, and the seventh in the middle. They should go towards the east at the time of the Prishthya.
21.15.31-35	They should spread it in front of her and then approach her, says Aupamañava. In the case of the Soma-Agni graha, the pouring down of the clarified butter is done in the ladle, says Baudhayana. The clarified butter for Soma-Agni should be taken in the wife's room and poured down in the cart, says Saliki. The pouring down of the Soma-graha is done in the cart,
21.15.36-42	Baudhayana says that one should not offer the Ardhastana-rite. Saliki says that one should offer the Ardha stana-rite. It should be offered either before or after the Pūrṇagārhapatya rite. Baudhayana says that the Ardhastna-rite should be offered either after or before the Pūrṇāgārhapatya-rite. Sālīki says that one should neither offer the Ardha-stana-rite nor the Pūrṇāhuti. The Homa of the Vaisa rjanas. Baudhayāna says that one should perform the Vaisa rjana-homa.
21.15.43-49	One should offer four spoonfuls, says Śālīki. One should collect the remnants of the Vasatīvarī offerings, says Baudhāyana. One should not collect them, says Śālki. One offers the remnants of the Vapa offerings, says Baudhayana. One should offer them one by one, says Baudhayaṇa. One should begin and end with them, says Śāliki.
21.15.50	For those who have heart-ache, it is said to be the removal of the heart-ache.
21.15.51	Baudhayana says that one should remove them one by one.
21.15.52	Saliki says that one should take them all together.
21.15.53	For the removal of the Vasatīvari-water, it is said.
21.15.54	The sūtra of Saliki is
21.15.55	Herein Baudhayana says that having placed them in front of the sacrificial post and having placed them behind the Garhapatya, one should touch them in the Agnidhra-chamber with the verse, "May the sacrifice be awake."
21.16.1	At the taking of the Savanīya clarified butter, one should place them.
21.16.2	This is the sutra of Baudhayana.
21.16.3	One should take the Savanīyaj clarified butter in the Agnidhrā-chamber.
21.16.4	They should be placed in the fire, says Śālīki.
21.16.5	The great sacrificial vessels made of Udumbara wood should be worn, says Śālūki.
21.16.6	The sutra is of the two teachers.
21.16.7	Here Upamañjūvaka says that these should be mantras for the ladle.
21.16.8	The king should be taken away, says Śālini.
21.16.9	The sutras are of the two teachers.
21.16.10-15	Herein, Oupamanyava says that one should offer the king at the morning pressing only. The offering of the five Hotṛs. Baudhāyana says that one should make the offering of the five Hotr after having offered to the four Hotr. The offering at the morning recitation. The Ācāryas say that one should make it at the morning recitation.
21.16.16	Here, indeed, the son of Hartibhāga says that one should perform the morning recitation with a single pot silently.
21.16.17	The offering of the Savanīya oblations.
21.16.18	The sutra of the two teachers.
21.16.19	Here, indeed, Oupamanyava says that one should offer the Savanīyas at the morning pressing itself for all the pressings.
21.16.20	They offer the oblation of barley grains. They take up the barley grains.
21.16.21	This is the Sutra of Saliki.
21.16.22	Herein Baudhayana says that one should perform the rites with the mantras beginning with the pouring down of water on the barley grains. The rites should be performed with the oblation of grains.
21.16.23	The pouring down of water.
21.16.24	Baudhayana says that one should take the Garhapatya with the buttocks and then take it to the Apas.
21.16.25	Saliki says that one should do so with the front.
21.16.26	Aupamanyava says that one should place the vessels either with the front or the buttocks.
21.16.27	This is the placing of the vessels.
21.16.28	The sutra of Saliki.
21.16.29	Here Bāudhayana says that the vessels should be placed on a heap.
21.16.30	One should take them in the proper order.
21.16.31	Then he takes the one with a single name, saying, "I take you, dear to Indra," or silently.
21.16.32	Baudhayana says that the former option is his. Saliki says that the latter option is his.
21.17.1	It is called Aptoḥ Praskandana.
21.17.2	Baudhayayana says that one should sprinkle from the Hotr's goblet.
21.17.3	Saliki says that one should do so from the pot of Vasatīvarī.
21.17.4	It is said to be Kratukarana.
21.17.5-10	Baudhayana says that one should perform the rites of the sacrifice in the same order as they are prescribed. Salīki says that one should take up the ladle for curds. The Sūtra of Salīki. Here Bāudhāyana says that one should offer it in the ladle made of Udumbara wood, and having poured it out, one should offer it again in the same ladle. One should offer it to the southern direction.
21.17.11	This Sūtra is of two kinds.
21.17.12	One should recite the sacrificer in the Nigrābha rites.
21.17.13	This is the Sūtra of Śālīki.
21.17.14	Here Baudhāyana says, one should recite the sacrificers in the Nigrābhas rites, having held them on the thighs or on the chest.
21.17.15	One should offer to the king.
21.17.16	This is a Sūtra of the two Ācāryas.
21.17.17	Herein, Oupamanyava says, one should offer the king at the morning pressing alone for all the pressings.
21.17.18	One should recite the two verses when the two verses are lost.
21.17.19	Baudhayana says that one should recite the two lost verses.
21.17.20	Saliki says that one should only recite the two lost Upamsu verses.
21.17.21	Homa at Upamsu and Antaryama.
21.17.22	Baudhayāna says that one should offer the Upamsu and the Antaryama. 
21.17.23	Śālīki says that one should offer at both times when the sun has risen.
21.17.24	Aupamanyava says that one should make offerings at both times when it has not yet risen.
21.17.25	This is the taking of the Āgrayana cup.
21.17.26	This is Śālīki's sūtra.
21.17.27	Here Baudhāyana says that one should take two cups at the morning pressing, three at the midday pressing, and four at the third pressing.
21.17.28	The Dṛpas are to be recited.
21.17.29	Baudhāyana says that one should offer the spoonfuls.
21.17.30	Śālīki says that one should make offerings with the spoon.
21.18.1	The Grahas of Pavamāna are to be taken.
21.18.2	Baudhāyanas says that one should take them.
21.18.3	Śālki says that one having taken them should place them after wiping them.
21.18.4	The offerings of the Santanīs are to be made.
21.18.5	Śālīsūtra
21.18.6	Herein Baudhayana says that one should offer the Vasatīvari waters with these mantras.
21.18.7	The Pavamāna mantras are to be recited at the beginning of the rite.
21.18.8	This is the sutra of Baudhayana.
21.18.9	One should take the two sacrificial grass-blades from the Sadasi and offer them, says Saliki.
21.18.10	The Brahmana should sit down.
21.18.11	Baudhayana says that he should sit down as in the Sadasi.
21.18.12-17	As in the Darsha-Pūrnamāsa, so here, says Saliki. One should sit down near the sacrificer, says Baudhayana. As in the Darsha Pūrnamāsa so here, says Śālīki. One should give the two sacrificial grass-blades to the Udgātṛ or the Prastôtṛ, says Baudhāyana. Baudhāyana says that one should give the two grass-blades to both the Udgātā and the Prastôtā. Śālīki says that one should first give to the Udgāta and then to the Prastôtä.
21.18.18	Thou art the covering of the Rk and the Sāman, for the begetting of the pair. Thus silently.
21.18.19	The former is the view of Śālīki, the latter of Baudhāyana.
21.18.20	One should recite when the fifth (Sāman) is being chanted.
21.18.21	This is the rule of Baudhāyanas.
21.18.22	One should chant on any one of them, says Śālīki.
21.18.23	Homa to the seven Hotṛs.
21.18.24	This is a rule of Baudhāyaṇa.
21.18.25	One should offer the Saptāhvā-oblation after the Anusavana-oblation, says Śālīki.
21.18.26	One should remove the Dhishnyas.
21.18.27	Baudhāyana says that one should take embers from the Agnidhra-chamber and scatter them over the Agnidhra chamber and then in the other chambers in order.
21.18.28	Having removed the Dhishnyās, one should make them face northwards, says Śālūki.
21.18.29	Here Śālīki says that one should take the embers from the Āgnīdhra and scatter them in the Āgnīdhrā. Then in order, in the other fires.
21.18.30	Having moved the Dhishnyas, one should not make them stand facing north.
21.18.31	Scattering of the Dhishnyās.
21.18.32	Baudhāyana says that the former option is to be followed. Śālīki prescribes the latter.
21.18.33	The producing of the Svara-s and the Uras.
21.19.5	Baudhayana said that one should extend the rites of the third pressing, the Ukthya-saman, the sixteen-fold, the night-series, and the Rathantara-saman.
21.19.6	Shaliki said that this is an extension of the third pressing.
21.19.7	If one were to proceed with the third pressing, then it would be proceeding for them.
21.19.8	One should proceed with the morning pressing for all the pressings, says Auparṇava.
21.19.9	Whether to recite mantras or not for the Āmīkṣā?
21.19.10	One should recite mantras and also complete all the pressings. This is the view of Baudhāyana.
21.19.11-15	It should be silent and all the Savanas should be concluded together, says Saliki. It should be with mantras and should be at the morning Savana, says Aupamanyava. The Savanīya oblations are to be removed, says Baudhayana. The Savaniya oblations should be removed in separate vessels, says Saliki.
21.19.16	"He should say, 'May there be the morning Savaniya.'
21.19.17	This is the sutra of Baudhayana.
21.19.18	One should say, 'There is the morning Savaniya,' says Saliki.
21.19.19	The collection of the Savaniya offerings.
21.19.20	Baudhayana says that one should collect them.
21.19.21	Saliki says that one should not collect them.
21.19.22	The taking of the Grahas for the Prati-Nirgrahya offerings.
21.19.23	This is the Sutra of Baudhayāna.
21.19.24	Śālīki says that one should offer the oblations to the two-deity gods.
21.19.25	The Sūtra says, "One should offer the Āghāra."
21.19.26	Baudhāyana says that one should pour the Āghāra from the cup.
21.19.27	Śālīki says, "One can pour the Āghara from the cup itself."
21.19.28	Aupamanyava says, "One may pour from the Dronakalaśa into a vessel."
21.19.29-34	One should recite the Yajus and not pour the libation, says Angi-ravi. One should cover the dripping part, says Baudhayana. Baudhayana says that one should cover the dripping portion as much as it is. One should arrange the cups, says Saliki. Baudhayane says that one should arrange them towards the east of the ladle.
21.19.35	Salīki says that one should extend the ladle towards the south with the buttocks.
21.20.1	Baudhāyana says that one should join the two ladles together.
21.20.2	Baudhāyanas says that the two ladles should be joined together.
21.20.3	Salīki says that the two should be joined together only.
21.20.4	One should say, "For Sukravat and Manthivat."
21.20.5	Baudhāyana lays down a sūtra.
21.20.6	Salīka says that one should say only "For Manthivat".
21.20.7	The offering of the dripping butter is to be made in the embers.
21.20.8	This is the Sutra of Saliki.
21.20.9	Here Bhauḍāyana says that one should make the offering of the dripping clarified butter in the embers brought from the Ahavaniya fire towards the north.
21.20.10	The offering of the Hotrka-cups.
21.20.11-14	Baudhayana says that one should offer them together with clarified butter and curds at one time, having taken them up twice. Shaliki says that one should not offer them together with curds and clarified butter at one time, but should take them up twice. Translation: The taking of the oblations of the two deities. Baudhayana says that the taking of the oblation of the two deities should be done together with clarified butter.
21.20.15	One should consume the two-deity oblations with the Prāṇāpāna mantra, says Śālīki.
21.20.16	One should consume them with the Dīrghabhakṣa mantra, says Āupamanyava.
21.20.17	One should make these two-deity vessels empty, says Baudhāyana.
21.20.18	The Sūtra says:
21.20.19	They should be empty with Soma, says Śālini.
21.20.20-25	Then he places them on the northern side of the southern Havirdhāna-shed. Baudhāyana says that one should place them below the Upahavya. One should place them silently. The former view is of Baudhāyana, the latter of Śālīki. The Hotr's goblet is to be sipped.
21.20.26-32	Baudhayana says that one should consume the oblations. Salīki says that one should not consume the oblations One should touch the oblations. This is the rule. This is the rule of Salīki. Herein, Baudhāyana says that one should touch the oblation while consuming it. One should consume the oblation of Indra-Agni. This is the view of the Ācāryas.
21.20.33	Herein, indeed, Dirghavatsa said, "One should take it with the principal vessel."
21.20.34	It is the shaking of the Nārāśaṃsa (cups).
21.20.35	Baudhāyana says that one should shake them.
21.20.36	Śālīki says that one should not shake them.
21.20.37	Aupamanyava says that one should neither lift them nor shake them.
21.21.1	In the Madhyandina recension, it is the sprinkling.
21.21.2	Nine times each, they should go to the Nigrābha river. So says Baudhāyana.
21.21.3	Indefinitely, says Śālīki.
21.21.4	The Marutvatīya cups are to be taken.
21.21.5	This is the sūtra of Śālīki
21.21.6	Herein Baudhāyana says that one should take the cup from above the Āgrayana.
21.21.7	This is a world of taking, he says.
21.21.8	He who recites on the eighth day.
21.21.9	The Sūtra of Baudhāyana.
21.21.10	One should recite on whichever day one likes, says Śālīki.
21.21.11	The taking of curd-rice.
21.21.12	The Sûtra of Baudhâyana.
21.21.13	The Agnidh should take it, says Śālîki.
21.21.14	Having placed it on both sides and having performed the Śānti rite, the Agnidh alone, says Aupamanyava.
21.21.15-20	The procedure of the Dadhi-gharma is as follows. Baudhayana says that one should offer it in a low voice. Saliki says that one should do it loudly. The eating of Dadhi-gharmā is as follows. The sūtra of Saliki. Herein Baudhāyana says that the others should eat with the Avadhra-bhāksana, the sacrificer himself should eat directly, in the forest with the Anuvākyā-mantra.
21.21.21	The non-performance of the Dakṣiṇās is mentioned in the sūtra.
21.21.22	The sūtra of Śālīki.
21.21.23	Here Baudhāyana says that one should perform the Dakṣiṇa in the southern direction.
21.21.24	The others should go as per their convenience.
21.21.25	The moving about is mentioned in the sutra.
21.21.26	Baudhāyana says that when the Dakṣiņās have been taken, they should move about as per their purpose.
21.21.27-32	The Adhvaryu should not cross the Sadas with Soma not being placed (in the Sadas). So says Śālīki. The placing of the black-antelope horn. So says Baudhāyana. Having taken the Dakṣiṇās to the Cātvāla, one should place the black-antelopes horn. So says Śālki. The Ātreya view. So says Śāliki.
21.21.33	Herein Baudhayana says that one should ask three times without touching the feet, "Who is Atreya? Who is Atreya?"
21.22.1	"The giving of Dakshina."
21.22.2	Baudhayana says that they should be given to those who are learned in the Veda and not to those who are only officiating priests.
21.22.3	And they should not follow the Hotrakas, nor should he give to the Sadyas, because it is not known that he is entitled to it, says Saliki.
21.22.4	There is an offering in the Marutvatīya verses.
21.22.5	Baudhayana said, The Adhvaryu should offer the one that is to be offered with Vasat and Anuvṣat. The other one should be offered without Anuvṣat.
21.22.6	Both should be without the Vasat-utterance, says Saliki.
21.22.7	Both should be with the Vasat-uttering, says Aupamanyava.
21.22.8	The third cup is for Maruts.
21.22.9	This is the sutra of the two teachers.
21.22.10	Here, indeed, Dirghavatsa said, "One should take it with the principal cup."
21.22.11	The Nārāśaṃsā hymns are to be chanted in succession.
21.22.12	Baudhayana says that one should shake them.
21.22.13	Salīki says that one should not shake them.
21.22.14	Aupamanyava says that one should neither lift them nor shake them.
21.22.15	The mantra for Soma is optional.
21.22.16	Baudhāyana says that it should be with a mantra.
21.22.17	Sālīki says that it should not be with a mantra.
21.22.18-23	The Somasoma is indeed the one who has the mantra. One who is silent is the one with one pot. This is the view of Aupamanyava. In the third pressing, it is the pressing. Baudhayana says that one should say "It is the one with rays" when one sprinkles. The taking of the Aditya-graha. Saliki says that one should take the Aditya-grahas.
21.22.24	Herein Baudhāyana says that one should take it from the front of the strainer, and should pour down the cooked rice silently.
21.22.25	This is the recitation of the Aditya-graha.
21.22.26	Baudhayana says that one should recite half a verse.
21.22.27	Saliki says that one should say "a verse".
21.22.28	This is the placing of the Maitrāvaruṇa-graha and the pouring down of the head.
21.22.29	The Sutra of Saliki.
21.22.30	Herein Baudhayana says that one should offer the Maitravaruna a vessel of milk to drink.
21.22.31	One should recite when the ninth day has been reached.
21.22.32	The Sutra of Baudhayana.
21.22.33	Saliki says that one should recite on any day.
21.22.34	The Hotrkas should be satisfied.
21.22.35	The Sutra is of Saliki.
21.22.36	Herein Baudhayana says that one should offer libations to the Hotr priests at the end of the Soma-pressing.
21.22.37	Five at the morning pressing, six at the midday pressing and seven at the third pressing, says Aupamañava.
21.22.38	At the Upavasatha rites.
21.22.39	Baudhayana says that one should offer the Upasad-oblations after having followed the Anusavana-oblations. One should offer the pieces of the Puronuvākyā-oblations in the cups. Herein he explains the Hotr-priest as having six functions.
21.22.40	Here Shaalikii says that one should offer the pieces of the Puronvisha from the sides of the cups, and should also recite the Hotr verses from above.
21.23.1	At the taking of the Savitr graha, one should place it in the Sadas.
21.23.2	Baudhayana says that one should place it after wiping it.
21.23.3	Shaalikii says that having wiped it, one should place the Sadasan.
21.23.4	He should respond to it from another direction.
21.23.5	Baudhayana says that one should respond to it as if it were a Madhuka tree.
21.23.6	Saliki says that one should say "Modah" as if it were "Modah".
21.23.7	One should not shake the Nārāśaṃsa verses.
21.23.8	Baudhayāna says that one should shake them.
21.23.9	Saliki and Aupamanyava say that one should not shake them.
21.23.10	Aupamanyava says that one should not raise them.
21.23.11	The Sāumya rite is to be performed in a low voice.
21.23.12	Baudhāyana says that one should perform the rite in a low voice,
21.23.13	Śālīki says that one should do it loudly.
21.23.14	The rite of Sāumya is to be performed loudly.
21.23.15	Baudhāyanasaid, "If both Agni and Viṣṇu are present, then one should perform the rites in a low voice."
21.23.16	Śālīkin says that if both are present, then perform in a low voice; if not, then perform loudly.
21.23.17	The carrying of the Dhishnyas of the third pressing.
21.23.18	This is the Sutra of Saliki.
21.23.19	Here Baudhayana says that one should carry the four Dhishnyas with the embers of Soma, whether one has performed or not.
21.23.20	The placing of the Patnivata.
21.23.21	This is Baudhayana's Sutra.
21.23.22	One should offer the Pātnīvata cake with curds or milk, says Śālīki.
21.23.23	One should offer the Pātnivata cake with the remaining ghee from the pouring of the Dhishnya oblations, says Āupamanyava.
21.23.24	The wife should take it down.
21.23.25	Baudhāyana says that one should recite the Sūtra.
21.23.26	Śālīki says that one should sit here itself for the Apōhiṣṭhīya oblations.
21.23.27	One should recite the formula "This is the oblation for both of us" while taking it.
21.24.3-7	He should throw three knots of dūrvā grass and a bunch of darbha grass in each of them. This is the Sutra of Baudhayana. They should be made with water, says Saliki. In the Upayajas, says Baudhayana.
21.24.8	Herein Baudhayana says that one should bring in the embers from the Agnidhra and the Savanīya animal for the Agnisomiya animal. The flesh of the Vasa animal for Maitrāvaruṇa should be brought in from the Sāmantrī.
21.24.9	One should offer the Mindahuti oblations.
21.24.10	This is the sutra of the two teachers.
21.24.11	Herein Upamanyu says that one should offer the Mindahutis before (the main oblations).
21.24.12	Having offered the Miṇḍāhuti, one should take up the Graha at a distance of a Yojana. This is what is said.
21.24.13	The conduct is as prescribed by Śākalya.
21.24.14	The Sūtra is of Śālīki.
21.24.15	Here Baudhāyana says, one should place the Avayajan-sticks as many as the number of animals that one knows have been killed.
21.24.16	The Adhitisthāna of the Sun.
21.24.17	The Sûtra is of Baudhâyana.
21.24.18	They should stand with this formula at the Ahavaniya fire, says Saliki.
21.24.19	The ladle is made of black antelope horn.
21.24.20	Baudhayana's view is that the former is the right one. Saliki's view is the latter.
21.24.21	The Avabhrtha rite.
21.24.22	The sutra of the two teachers is common.
21.24.23-27	Herein, Oupamanyava said, "Having planted him on this very mound, mixed with a pot, one should perform the Avabhrtha rite with the Gravovaiyana and the Sthalis." The sprinkling of the Gravovajyana. Baudhayana says that one should recite the Sthalis after having washed them. Shaliki says that one should pronounce the Sthalis having washed them.
21.24.28	Baudhayana says that one should offer these oblations to the deities.
21.24.29	Shaliki says that one should sprinkle them with water.
21.25.1	Sprinkling of the black antelope skin.
21.25.2	The sutra of Shaliki.
21.25.3	Herein Baudhayana has said that one should sprinkle the black antelope skin with water, and then give it to one's son or to a student. One should not make the support for the ladle.
21.25.4	If one were to perform the consecration again,
21.25.5	if one were to perform a sacrifice again,
21.25.6	the consecration of the sacrificial grass for the Udayaniya (Sraddha) is prescribed.
21.25.7	Baudhayana says that one should recite the mantras beginning with "Asisid".
21.25.8	Shaliki says that one should begin with "Shulba".
21.25.9	Aupamanyava says that one should start with "Samharana".
21.25.10	The offering of the Udayaniya is prescribed.
21.25.11	Having placed the ladle in the ladle, one should offer the oblation in a vessel with a ladle or in a vessel without a ladle.
21.25.12	Baudhayana says that the former alternative is to be adopted. Salīki says that the latter alternative is to be followed.
21.25.13	One should offer the oblations for the rising sun.
21.25.14	Baudhayāna says that one should offer in milk.
21.25.15	Śālīki says that one should do so in water.
21.25.16	One should not offer the oblations of the Cāropakramaṇa.
21.25.17	Baudhāyana says that one should not offer.
21.25.18-25	Śālīki says that one should not perform the Udayanīya rite. Baudhāyana says that one should perform the Udayaniya rite. Śālīki says silently. One should perform the Udyanīya rite in the manner of the Anūbandhya rite. The Sūtra of Baudhāyana is: Śālīka says that one should offer the Udayanîya rite at the Āhavaniya fire. The performance of the Anūbāndhya rite.
21.25.26	Baudhayana says that one should offer the oblation to Mitra-Varuna.
21.25.27	Saliki says that one should perform the Iksha sacrifice to Mitra-Varuṇa.
21.25.28	Herein, Oupamanyava says that one should also offer an animal to Agni.
21.25.29	One should complete the procedure with the animal offered to the eleven deities.
21.25.30	One should offer the oblations to the Vapas.
21.25.31	Baudhayana says that the oblations should be offered in this way.
21.25.32	Śālīki says that one should offer the oblations at the beginning and at the end.
21.25.33	Baudhāyana says that one should make offerings to those suffering from heart ailments.
21.25.34	Baudhayana says that one should perform the offering for each animal separately.
21.25.35	Saliki says that one should do it for all together.
21.26.1	One should offer the oblation to the animals.
21.26.2	Baudhayāna says that one should mix the oblation with the milk of a cow.
21.26.3	Śālīki says, except for the bull and the cow.
21.26.4-8	The mantra for the offering of milk is "O Agni, the lord of oblations, the lord of the house, the lord of wealth, the lord of light, the lord of radiance, the lord of splendor, the lord of brilliance, the lord of heat, the lord of fire, the lord of Agni, the lord who is Agni, the lord, the lord of lords, the lord of all, the lord of everything, the lord of heaven, the lord of earth, the lord of water, the lord of wind, the lord of space, the lord of time, the lord of seasons, the lord of directions, the lord of worlds, the lord of beings, the lord of gods, the lord of men, the lord of cattle, the lord of plants, the lord of herbs, the lord of trees, the lord of fruits, the lord of grains, the lord of food, the lord of nourishment, the lord of strength, the lord of power, the lord of energy, the lord of vigor, the lord
21.26.9-14	Herein Baudhayana says that one should make the enclosing sticks of Bidala wood after having cut the eastern pillar of the sacrificial post or the Havirdhana shed. At the end of the Soma-pressing. Baudhayana says that the Soma-pressing should be concluded with the full-oblation. At the giving of Dakṣiṇā. Baudhayāna says that the Soma pressing should be concluded with a full-oblation.
21.26.15	Śālīki says that the animal-sacrifice should not be offered here without desire.
21.26.16	The offering of the animal-sacrifice to Devīkā is mentioned.
21.26.17	The Sūtra is of Baudhāyana.
21.26.18	Herein Baudhāyana says that three animal-sacrifices should follow the Pasupuroḍāśa and three should follow the Udavasāniyam.
21.26.19	All the offerings should be made in the manner of the Pasupurodāśa, says Śālīki.
21.26.20	One should offer to Devakā with ghee, says Āñjīgavi.
21.26.21	One should conclude with the Agnihotra, says Baudhāyana.
21.26.22	One should perform the Agnihotra continuously, says Baudhāyaṇa.
21.26.23	One should place the fire on the kindling woods, says Śālūki.
21.26.24	One offers the Agnihotra twice, says Śālki.
21.26.25	Baudhayana says that one should offer the oblations in return.
21.26.26	Shaliki says that one should not offer the oblations.
22.1.1	Now we shall explain the rites of fire.
22.1.2	The making of the fire-pan is as follows.
22.1.3	Baudhayana says that it should be made in the north-east corner.
22.1.4	Shaliki also says that it should only be in the north.
22.1.5	The offering to Savitr is as follows.
22.1.6-12	Baudhayana says that one should offer four spoonfuls of clarified butter at the end of the rite. Salīki says that one should take up the ladle of the donkey-skin. Baudhāyana says that one should do so with the mantra. Śālīki says that silently. Baudhāyanas says that one should place the ladle of the ant-hill in the fire and make the vaiśya sit down. Śālīsūtra
22.1.13	Herein Baudhayana says that one should place the pot on an anthill, one should not make a vaiśya sit there, one should go to the place where there is a pit, and one should reply to the one who asks there.
22.1.14	The digging is done in half verses.
22.1.15	Baudhayana says that it should be done in half verses,
22.1.16	Saliki says that it should also be done in verses.
22.1.17	One should cover with the northern end of the lotus leaf.
22.1.18-23	Baudhayana says that one should spread the grass as it is obtained. Salilaka says that one should take out the balls of dough. The sutra of Salilaka. Here Bhauḍāyana says that one should offer all the balls of dough with all the verses. Aupamanyava says that one should remove with the Gāyatrī verses and arrange with the Tristubh verses.
22.1.24	The horse is to be led beyond (the altar) silently.
22.1.25	This is the rule of Śālīki.
22.1.26	Herein Baudhāyana says that one should lead the horse beyond (the altar), silently.
22.1.27	All this should be done with the formula for the ass.
22.1.28	The looking at the sky and the earth.
22.1.29	Baudhāyana says that one looks at both six times.
22.1.30	Śālīki says that one should look at them thrice.
22.1.31	In the eastern direction, while looking at the junction, one should recite this mantra. This is the opinion of Upanayana.
22.1.32	They sprinkle water on the Rasana (a kind of grass) and then eat after sprinkling with water.
22.1.33	Baudhayana's view is that the former is the right one. Saliki's view is the latter.
22.2.1	The making of the Ukhā (a kind of pot) is as follows.
22.2.2	Baudhayana says that one should make the Aṣāḍha brick of the size of a foot for this sacrificial purpose. One should place the bricks of the size of one's own palm in the Ritikā.
22.2.3	Thus his entire Agni becomes sacrificial.
22.2.4	Śālīki says that one should place one brick with the mantra and the others silently.
22.2.5	When all are broken, the Prāyaṇīya is performed.
22.2.6	Baudhāyana says that one should perform the Savitrī mantras and the rites.
22.2.7	Śālīki says that one should do whatever is other than the Savitrī verses.
22.2.8	One should give twenty-one pellets of cow dung, a wooden ladle, and a fire for cooking.
22.2.9	This is the Sutra of Baudhayana.
22.2.10	Śālīki says that one should take the horse of whichever one is available.
22.2.11	Baudhāyana says that one should fumigate the cauldrons.
22.2.12	The Sūtra says,
22.2.13	Śālīki says one should fumigate with unlimited mantras.
22.2.14	Baudhāyan says one should sprinkle the cauldrons with water.
22.2.15	The Sûtra says,
22.2.16	Sâliki says one should sprinkle one cauldron with a mantra and the others silently.
22.2.17	"She stretches out the eastern and the northern directions."
22.2.18	The former is Baudhayana's view, the latter is Śāliki's view.
22.2.19	One should cook in the pot.
22.2.20	Baudhāyana says that one should cook the Ukha, Ṛṣabha, Maṇḍala, Iṣṭaka, Brhaspati, Mahāvīra, Lokampṛṇā from the Garhapatya.
22.2.21	The other one from the village fire.
22.2.22	Whatever is said to be done with the bricks, that should be done with the sacrificial grass. Whatever is said to have been offered in the Gārhapatya, that should be offered in the Āhavanīya. This is the view of Śālīki.
22.2.23	The making of the heads of animals.
22.2.24	The Marīcika offerings should be direct or indirect, says Baudhāyana.
22.2.25	They should be direct only, says Śālīki
22.2.26	They should be made of gold, says Āupamanyava.
22.2.27-31	The son of Upamaṇyavī should recite these mantras at the head of the Vāyu fire. One should sprinkle with the leaves of a tree in an anti-clockwise direction, says Baudhāyana. One should scatter the beans and sing the Yama hymns, says Śālīki. The Āghāra is the offering of clarified butter.
22.2.32	Baudhayana says that one should offer this Āghāra with both the mantras.
22.2.33	Salīki says that one should make this Āghāra offering with the mantra "Hiranyagarbhah samvartata agra".
22.3.1	The Homa of the Adhvara-initiation offerings is to be performed at the first Soma-pressing.
22.3.2	Baudhayana says that having performed the Adhvara initiation offerings, one should offer to Agni.
22.3.3	Śālīki says that it is only the Āgnīdhra.
22.3.4	In the case of the Vairāja initiation, says Baudhāyana.
22.3.5	Baudhayana says that one who is going to perform the Vairāja initiations for less than a year should not perform the Vairājas.
22.3.6	One who is going to be away for a year may perform the Vairājā initiations.
22.3.7	Śālīki says, one may perform the one-day Agnihotra after performing the Vairāja for a year. The Agnihotra is one-day only.
22.3.8	The offering of the Kamayesti is to be performed in the prescribed order.
22.3.9	Baudhayana says that one should offer the Kamayesti after the birth of a child.
22.3.10	Saliki says that one should do so before the birth.
22.3.11	One should offer the Samidhas of Udumbara wood.
22.3.12	This is the Sutra of Saliki.
22.3.13	In this connection Baudhayana says that the offering of the Samidha should be done with five verses.
22.3.14	It would be a protection against Rakshas.
22.3.15	To the goddess of food, the kindling verses are to be recited.
22.3.16	This is the Sutra of Saliki.
22.3.17	Here Baudhayana says that one should recite the kindling verses to the goddess of food and to the goddess of the sacrifice.
22.3.18	The union of Vatsa and Pravisnu is the union.
22.3.19	Baudhayana says that the union should be performed every day.
22.3.20	Saliki says that it should be performed at the beginning and at the end.
22.3.21	If the fire is blown out, one should perform the expiatory rite.
22.3.22	Baudhāyana says that one should offer oblations to the Arka plant after discarding and giving away, and then perform the other rites.
22.3.23	Śālīki says that one should perform the rites after discarding and giving, and then perform other rites.
22.3.24	When going on a journey.
22.3.25	Baudhayana says that one should go with both, the Adhvarika and the Agnicaka.
22.3.26	Shaliki says that one should do so with the Agnicaka alone.
22.3.27	If one reaches the place of sacrifice without the animals, what should be done?
22.3.28	This is the sutra of Shaliki.
22.3.29	Herein Baudhayana says that one should put the ashes in the place where the animals have passed by and not make the womb empty. One should take as much as is required and put it back. Having sprinkled the womb with ashes, one should put the rest in the pots or in the fire.
22.3.30	The conclusion of the Devayajana sacrifice.
22.3.31	Baudhayana says that one should offer the oblations with both the Aghara and Agnika mantras.
22.3.32	Shaliki says that one should do so with the Agnika mantra alone.
22.4.1	The offering of the materials.
22.4.2	The sutra of Shaliki.
22.4.3	Herein, Baudhayana said that one should offer ashes and grass with the mantra.
22.4.4	One should offer the other two materials silently.
22.4.5	The Garhapatya and Anväharya fires are to be piled up.
22.4.6	This is the Sutra of Shalihaka.
22.4.7	Here Baudhayana says that all these rites, viz. taking up of fire, self- piling, touching of the white and black (cows), running towards and running away, should be performed by one who is performing the rites for the first time.
22.4.8	One should pile up a thousand bricks in the first piling, and five hundred in the second.
22.4.9	Baudhayana says that while performing the fourth layer, one should take up the grass upto the knee and above. It should be of five layers.
22.4.10	Shaliki says that while performing fourth layer, one takes up the grass upto neck and above. It is of one layer.
22.4.11	There is a conflict between Vatsa and Pravisnu.
22.4.12	Baudhayana said, if the Vatsapra comes up on the Upavasatha day, one should perform the Vatsaprakrama and then perform the Sannivapa.
22.4.13	If the Visnukramakramas come up on the Upavathastha day, one should do the Visnukramagamas, then perform the Vatsaprarama and then perform the Sannigraha.
22.4.14	Here Śālīki said, "If the Vatsapra is to be performed on the Upavasatha day, then one should perform it on the Vatsapras and then perform the Sannivāpa on the next day."
22.4.15	If the Viṣṇukramas are to be performed on Upavasatha, then one should do them on the Viṣṇu-krama and then perform the Vatsapre and then perform the Sannīvāpa on the following day."
22.4.16	While looking elsewhere, he should drop curds. He should say, "I place this pure curds on you." Or silently.
22.4.17	Baudhayana's view is that the former option is to be followed. Salīki's view is the latter.
22.4.18	Having filled it with sand, he should cover it with curds.
22.4.19	This is Baudhāyana's view.
22.4.20	Having filled it with sand, one should place it in the northern part of the shed, says Śālīki.
22.4.21	Regarding the taking of the basket:
22.4.22	One should take it with a mantra, says Baudhāyana.
22.4.23	Silently, says Śālini.
22.4.24	Regarding the attendance on the Nirṛti deities:
22.4.25	One should perform it here with the mantra "For the offering of the deity," says Baudhāyanas.
22.4.26	One should not perform it, says Śālīnī.
22.4.27	The placing of the water-pot.
22.4.28	Baudhāyana says that one should place it clockwise.
22.4.29	Śālīki says that one should do as one pleases.
22.4.30	The attending to the Garhapatya.
22.4.31	This is the Sutra of Baudhayana.
22.4.32	Śālki says that one attends to the Ahavaniya with this formula.
22.5.1	The carrying of the Stambayajus.
22.5.2	This is a Sutra of Baudhayaṇa.
22.5.3-9	Śālīki says that the Agnīdhra should take them even before the Uparava. The scraping of the Cātvāla is well-known. The carrying of the domestic fires is well-known The placing of the wooden sword is well-known.
22.5.10	The Sūtra of Śālīki.
22.5.11	Herein Baudhāyana says that standing in front of the post-hole, having strung the bow, one should pierce the arrow facing east.
22.5.12	Having pursued it, one should place a stone.
22.5.13	Similarly on the right, then on the west, then on the north.
22.5.14	The placing is for Indra.
22.5.15	The Sūtra of Baudhāyana.
22.5.16	One should place the tail of the sacrificial grass towards the east, says Śālīki.
22.5.17	One should place the vessel of Soma-juice, says Baudhāyana.
22.5.18	One should do so clockwise, says Baudhāyaṇa.
22.5.19	One should arrange it as much as possible, says Śālini.
22.5.20	One should put the bunch of Darbha-grass, says Baudhäyana.
22.5.21	One may say, "May speech place thee in the ocean" or silently, says Śālūki.
22.5.22	Baudhāyana prescribes the former alternative and Śālīki the latter.
22.5.23	The laying of the bricks of Dūrvā grass is prescribed.
22.5.24	Baudhāyana says that one should lay them together with Dūrvā.
22.5.25	Śālīki says that this should be done with Dūrvās having mantras.
22.5.26	The yoke of the plough should be made of Udumbara wood.
22.5.27	This is the Sutra of Baudhayana.
22.5.28	Śālki says that one should make it of a strong tree.
22.5.29	Baudhayana says that the two men should take up the yoke in front and the Adhvaryu at the back.
22.5.30	Saliki says that one should plough after joining them directly.
22.5.31	One should plough.
22.5.32	Baudhayana says that one should take up the plough after having taken it back.
22.5.33	Salila says that one should do so after having made a sound.
22.6.1	One should recite the Anumantrana for the yoked cows.
22.6.2	Baudhayana says that one should recite the relevant mantra.
22.6.3	Salīki says that one should do all of them together.
22.6.4	One should sow all the herbs.
22.6.5	Baudhayana says that the sowing should be done in half-verses.
22.6.6	Salīka says that it should be done in verses.
22.6.7	One should exchange the other with the other.
22.6.8	This is the view of Baudhayana.
22.6.9	Śālīki says that one should perform the rite of taking up the direction.
22.6.10	Aupamanyava says that one should exchange the verses.
22.6.11	One should sprinkle the fire-places with Darbha grass and Payas, saying, "I sprinkle the fires for the fires." Or silently.
22.6.12	The former is Baudhayana's view, the latter is Śāliki's view.
22.6.13	One should place the bricks in the pot, says Baudhāyana.
22.6.14	Baudhāyana says that one should place them in the pot.
22.6.15	Baudhāyan says that one should put them in the wings and tail.
22.6.16	One should distribute the directions with different mantras, says Śāṭṭīni.
22.6.17	Baudhāyāna says that one should perform the Sūda-dohās after reciting the names of the deities in order.
22.6.18	Śālīki says that one should complete the desired number of bricks.
22.6.19	Baudhāyana says that one should place the bricks in the manner prescribed.
22.6.20	Having completed the desired number of stones, one should perform the Sūdadohas rite on the other side, says Baudhāyana.
22.6.21	Śālīki says one should complete the same number of stones.
22.6.22	The Ātharvaṇas say that one should perform the Abhihoma rite at the time of touching.
22.6.23	This is the sutra of the two teachers.
22.6.24	Here Aupamaṇyava said, "One should perform the Sūda-doha of that deity through the Abhimarśa and Abhihoma offerings made before."
22.6.25	The placing of the serpent head is the northern direction.
22.6.26	Baudhayana's view is that the former option is to be followed.
22.6.27	The wooden pestle and mortar are made of Udumbara wood.
22.6.28	This is Baudhayana's Sutra.
22.6.29	Śālīki says that one should make the tree firm.
22.7.1	It is the collection of all herbs.
22.7.2	Baudhāyana says that one should collect it with a mantra.
22.7.3	Śālīki says silently.
22.7.4	It is placing the potsherds.
22.7.5	The Sūtra of Baudhāyana is:
22.7.6	One should place one potsherd with a mantra and the others silently, says Śālīki.
22.7.7	The placing of the heads of animals is to be done.
22.7.8	Baudhayana says that one should place it in the middle.
22.7.9	Saliki says that one should remove it from the ends and place it.
22.7.10	The placing of the head of the Atharva Veda is to be done thus.
22.7.11	Baudhayani says that one should put the head of the atharva veda in front, facing all directions, with its own grass, and with nine verses.
22.7.12	Saliki does not say so.
22.7.13-20	The Sūtra of Baudhāyana (says), "One should place the Upaghānas in all directions." Sālīki says, "One should place Gāyatrī verses in the directions." The Sūtra of Sālīki (says), "The Upaghānanas are placed in the limbs." The Sūtara of Baudhāyanas (says), "Having known the limbs, one should place the limbs." Sālki says, "Having known the parts, one should place them." The Sûtra of Sālîki (says),
22.7.21	Herein Baudhayana says that one should place the head of the animal a little away from the fire, as the bull stands to urinate.
22.7.22	One should place the bricks of the past layers, says Baudhayana.
22.7.23	One should offer the Adhi-bricks, says Baudhayaṇa.
22.7.24	One should perform the Citya-rites, says Śālīki.
22.7.25	One should give the Vrata-gift.
22.7.26	One should bestow the Vrata-gifts at midday, says Baudhāyana.
22.7.27	Śālīki says that it should be done at the end of the fire-altar.
22.8.1	Baudhāyana says that one should do it at the end of a heap of excrement.
22.8.2	The sūtra is of Baudhāyana.
22.8.3	Śālīki says, one should complete the heap of excrement on the previous day.
22.8.4	The black one should stand to the north and the white one to the south.
22.8.5	Baudhāyan says that the two standing here should feed on grass.
22.8.6	Śālīki says that one should offer them at the time of Kāla and Kāla.
22.8.7	It is the foundation of the Vālakhilyas.
22.8.8	Baudhāyana says that one should lay it above the Vālakhilas.
22.8.9	Śālīki says one should lay it on the side.
22.8.10	It is for the foundation of the Sṛṣṭis.
22.8.11	One should lay it towards the north in front of the naturally perforated stone, from the junction of the northern wing, on all sides.
22.8.12-17	The former is Baudhayana's view, the latter is Salīki's view. The Vyushtis are to be placed in the middle. Sālīki says that the sūtra is to be placed in this way. Baudhāyana says that one should place them facing east and west. Because the night moves towards the east and west. The Vyushtis are placed in the middle with the middle one having soil.
22.8.18	Baudhayana says that one should place the pot with the cake together with the excreta. The excreta is indeed the pot, says Śālīki.
22.8.19	It should be the pot of mantras, says Śālki.
22.8.20	The placing of the pot is according to the Vairājas.
22.8.21	Baudhayana's view is the former, Śālīki's the latter.
22.8.22	The placing is according to the Yajñasenīs.
22.8.23	Śālīki' s view is the former; Baudhāyana's the latter.
22.8.24	The bricks are to be placed in ghee.
22.8.25	Baudhāyana says that one should place them together with ghee or anoint them with ghee.
22.8.26	Śālīki says that they should be mantras and ghee.
22.8.27	Aupamanyava says that one should just place lumps of ghee here.
22.8.28	The placing of the bricks.
22.8.29	Between the Jyotishmati bricks and the Bhutishtaka bricks, this is the placing of the bricks.
22.8.30	Baudhayana said, one should place the bricks of entering, waking up, going, returning, Samidheni verses, Apirya verses and the groups of bricks that have passed.
22.8.31	Here Śālīki says that one should not place the mantra for the unoffered bricks in the same way as the offered bricks.
22.8.32	One should place the past group of bricks here.
22.8.33	At the full moon, one should place the bricks.
22.8.34	Baudhāyana says in the sūtra:
22.8.35	One should place a full moon brick only on the northern side, says Śālīki.
22.8.36	At the asterism, one should place bricks.
22.8.37	Śālīki says in the sūtras:
22.8.38	Herein Baudhayana says that one should place bricks in the form of stars and should make them shine here and there.
22.8.39	One should place the bricks of the Sarvatomukha in all directions.
22.8.40	This is the Sutra of Saliki.
22.8.41	Herein Baudhayāna says that this is indeed a scattered (act) due to touching the black (bricks).
22.8.42	One who is going to place the Sarvatomukhā bricks should touch the white horse.
22.8.43	In the case of the Varṣaṇī-sacrifices.
22.8.44	The Sūtra of Śālīki.
22.8.45	Baudhāyana says that if the Varṣaṇa-sacrifices are performed on the same day, then one should perform the Sūda-Doha-s of all of them at the end.
22.9.1	Then he places gold-plates in the Prokṣaṇī water, more than three but not unlimited in number. It is said to be a thousand.
22.9.2	The former is Baudhayana's view, the latter is Śāliki's view.
22.9.3	The Homa is to be performed with the Śatarudriya.
22.9.4	The sutra of the two teachers.
22.9.5	One should offer in the former army alone, says Gautama.
22.9.6	One should attend with salutations.
22.9.7	Baudhayana says that one should approach with the bow. One should approach turning towards the north. Having returned by the same route, one should stand facing east and approach the vertical direction.
22.9.8	Here Śālīki says that one should stand with the bow having given it, turning towards this direction and returning by the same route, standing towards the east and facing upwards.
22.9.9	One should recite the Yajamāna while sprinkling.
22.9.10	This is the Sutra of Śālīki.
22.9.11	Herein Baudhayana says that one should place the pot on the stone after sprinkling it again and again.
22.9.12	One should point out the stone saying, "May hunger come to you, may ill-will come to you." One should point out the one whom he hates.
22.9.13	It is the drawing out.
22.9.14	Baudhayana says that it should be drawn out in half verses.
22.9.15	Saliki says that it should drawn out in verses.
22.9.16-21	The recitation is for the one who has himself spread. Baudhayana says that one should spread it in the form of a fire altar. Saliki says that one should recite the mantras of Agni and Maruts. Baudhayāna says that they should be with mantras. Śālīki says that they should not be with mantras.
22.9.22-27	The mantra should be recited only in the case of Vaiśvānara, the Maruts should be silent, says Aupamañava. The offering to Ānīkavata is to be made, says Baudhāyana. The Sūtra says: One should offer to Ānīka-vata at the Āhavanīya fire, says Śālīki. One should sprinkle the piled up fire with ghee, says Śālki. The Sûtra says:
22.9.28	Herein Baudhayana says that one should sprinkle the fire with the recitation of mantras and also with the looking at the mantras.
22.9.29	At the place of the kindling wood.
22.9.30	Baudhayana says that the kindling wood should be placed with both the Adhvarika and the Agnicaka mantras.
22.9.31	Shaliki says that it should be placed with the Agnicaka mantra alone.
22.10.1	The placing of the kindling woods.
22.10.2	Baudhayāna says that one should place the kindling wood of the Āhavanīya.
22.10.3-10	Salīki says that one should offer the Puccha-oblation. Baudhāyana says that one should perform the Sruva-oblations. Śālīki says that they should not be performed. Baudhāyan says that one should make the Pūrṇāhuti-oblation. Translation: Salīki says one should offer the tail-oblation. Here is the corrected and aligned text: Baudhāyana and Śālīki say that one should perform Sruva-offerings. Śālīmali says that one should not perform them. Baudhāyāna says that one should do the Pūrṇāhuți-oblation. 
22.10.11	"One should collect the fire from the directions, saying, 'I collect the fire from all directions.' Or silently."
22.10.12	The former option is of Baudhāyana, the latter of Śālīki.
22.10.13	"One should say, 'This is the place for the spreading of the Prasīka (fire).'
22.10.14	The former option belongs to Śālīki, the latter to Baudhāyana."
22.10.15	"One should spread the four (kinds of) grass, saying, 'This is for the spreading of (the fire).'
22.10.16	The sūtra of Baudhāyanas is that one should spread."
22.10.17	Śālīki says that one should not spread.
22.10.18	The sprinkling of the Prasaka is the Anupraharaṇa.
22.10.19	Baudhāyana says that one should sprinkle.
22.10.20	Śālīki says that one should not sprinkle.
22.10.21	The cooking of the Brahmauḍana.
22.10.22	Baudhāyan says that one should cook it like the Agnihotra.
22.10.23	Śālki says that one does it in the same way.
22.10.24	The eating of the Brahmauṇḍana.
22.10.25	Baudhayana says that they should eat at the end of the buttocks.
22.10.26	Saliki says that they should do so at the end of tail.
22.10.27	One should offer oblations to the wind-gods.
22.10.28	This is the Sutra of Baudhayana.
22.10.29	Saliki further says that one should offer oblations with a handful of wind-gods. The
22.10.30	Upamaṇyavas say that one should offer with a black antelope skin.
22.10.31	One should perform the Shakalas.
22.10.32	Baudhāyana says that one should strike.
22.10.33	Śālīki says that one should not strike.
22.11.1	The placing of the Agni and Dhishnya fires.
22.11.2	This is a sūtra of Baudhāyana.
22.11.3	Śālīmali says that one should place all the sacrificial grasses.
22.11.4	The offering of seeds of different kinds.
22.11.5	Baudhāyana says that one having offered should touch them together.
22.11.6	Śālīki says that the oblation should be offered in the same form.
22.11.7	They take up barley after having offered the oblation in rice.
22.11.8	This is the Sutra of Śālīki.
22.11.9	Baudhāyana says here that one should perform the rites with mantras and rites beginning with the pouring of water on the barley. The oblation should be performed in the barley.
22.11.10	The pouring of water on barley.
22.11.11	Baudhayana says that one should take the oblations to the east of the Garhapatya.
22.11.12	Saliki says that one should do so to the front of the Atithya.
22.11.13	Aupamanyava says that one should either do so to the east or to the rear.
22.11.14	One should offer the Iḍā of the other oblations along with the animal and Purorasa, either from the half or from the entire oblations.
22.11.15	One should do so from the oblations along with animal and Purorāsa.
22.11.16	The former is Baudhayana's view, the latter is Śāliki's view.
22.11.17	One should not transgress the prescribed order.
22.11.18	This is the view of Baudhayana.
22.11.19	One should transgress with the Sviṣṭakṛt offering, says Śāliki.
22.11.20	Consecration.
22.11.21	This is a view of both the teachers.
22.11.22	Herein, Oupamanyava says, one should sprinkle (the sacrificer) with the recitation of the entire text before the Svistakrt offering. Herein, there is no Krsna-hide, no gold, no Partha-cloth. Having spread Kusas, one should sprinkle him on them.
22.11.23	In Yoga, release.
22.11.24	Baudhayana says, one should yoke and release everyday.
22.11.25-31	Śālīki says that one should yoke at the beginning and unyoke at the end. Aupamanyava says that one should first yoke and then unyoke at the end. This is the rule regarding the performance of rites. This is Baudhayana's Sutra. Śālīki says, one should perform the rites in accordance with the rites. This is the rule regarding the consecration of animals for the Ekādaśina rite. This is Bāudhayana's Sūtra.
22.12.7	The obtaining of animals.
22.12.8	One should obtain each animal with the Pañcahotra mantra, says Baudhayana.
22.12.9	Only the principal one, says Saliki.
22.12.10	The removal of the heart-sharpened stakes.
22.12.11	One should remove them one by one, says Baudāyana.
22.12.12	All together, says Saliki
22.12.13	The use of mantras in the offering of milk.
22.12.14	It should be accompanied by a mantra and should be addressed, says Baudhayana.
22.12.15	It should be silent and should be addressed. So says Saliki.
22.12.16	It should have a mantra and should have the recitation of the Tantrahara-hymn. So says Aupamanyava.
22.12.17	The offering of the oblations to the goddesses.
22.12.18	One should do it, says Baudhayaṇa.
22.12.19	One should not do it, says Śālīki.
22.13.1	Now, we shall explain the Vājapeya.
22.13.2	Baudhāyana says that one should make the fire for the Vājapeye.
22.13.3	Śālīki says that one should not make it.
22.13.4	The wooden wheel of the chariot should have seventeen spokes and be made of Udumbara wood.
22.13.5	This is as per Baudhāyana's sūtra.
22.13.6	Śālini says that one should use a wood that is strong.
22.13.7	Make a sacrificial grass mat of Khadira wood, free from grass and weeds, and spread it out.
22.13.8	This is the Sutra of Baudhayana.
22.13.9	One should also prepare a woolen blanket and a hundred-manna gold coin, says Saliki.
22.13.10	One should consecrate oneself on the last days of summer, before the full moon of Ashadha.
22.13.11	This is Baudhayana's Sutra.
22.13.12	Śālīki says that one should perform the Vājapeya sacrifice in autumn.
22.13.13	There should be a Homa offering to Savitrā.
22.13.14	Baudhāyana says that the former option is to be followed. Śālīki opines that the latter option is to be adopted.
22.13.15	The Vājapeya-like Soma should be mixed with water.
22.13.16	This is the sutra of both the teachers.
22.13.17	In this context, Oupamanyava said that one should mix the Soma from the place where it is available.
22.13.18	He spreads them at the distance of a span or a span and a half. Or he puts them in the form of a bow-string.
22.13.19	Baudhayana says that one should do so. Salīki says that one should not do so.
22.13.20	The ladle should be made of wheat.
22.13.21	Baudhayāna says that it should be made of thread.
22.13.22	Śālīki says that it should also be made of wheat flour.
22.13.23	The sprinkling of drums.
22.13.24	This is the two-fold Sūtra.
22.13.25	It is the rite of Kratu.
22.13.26	This is the Sūtra of Śālīki.
22.13.27	Here Bāudhāyana says, one should perform the Atiratra sacrifice here and should conclude it in the same fortnight.
22.14.1	One takes up the five Indra-grahyas.
22.14.2	This is Bāudhāyanas's Sūtra.
22.14.3-8	All these are to be taken with the Soma-cup, says Śālīki. This is the taking of the Soma-cups. Baudhāyana says that one should take them after wiping them. One should extend them in two or three rows from east to west. Baudhāyanas view is that the first option is to be followed.
22.14.9	Baudhayana says that one should take six ropes and go to the sacrificial post.
22.14.10	Saliki says that one should go to the sacrificialpost taking five ropes.
22.14.11	Aupamanyava says that one shouldtake four ropes and go to sacrificial post.
22.14.12	Aupamanavaputra says that one shouldgo to the sacrificial post taking only one rope.
22.14.13	One should use the Agnisomiya animal-halter, says Angirasa.
22.14.14	The animals of the Vajapeya sacrifice are to be selected, says Baudhayana.
22.14.15	Having selected the animals of the Ekadasin sacrifice, one should select the animals of the Vājapeya sacrifice, says Baudhayaṇa.
22.14.16	One should select only the animals of the Vajapcya sacrifice and not the animals of the Ekádasin sacrifice, says Saliki.
22.14.17	The animals for Prajapati are to be selected,
22.14.18	Baudhayana says that one should offer them one by one.
22.14.19	Shaliki says that one should make all the offerings together.
22.14.20	The offering of the Vapa oblations.
22.14.21	Baudhayana says that they should be offered one by one. 
22.14.22	Shaliki says they should be offered at the beginning and at the end.
22.14.23	The offering for the removal of the heart-disease.
22.14.24	Baudhayāna says that one should remove them one by one
22.14.25	Shaliki says one should remove them all together.
22.14.26	The yoking of the chariots is done with the formula.
22.14.27	This is the text of Śālīki.
22.14.28	Here Baudhāyana says that one should first do the yoking with the formula which is used for the general sprinkling.
22.14.29	Then one should sprinkle the horses silently.
22.14.30	The going to the wood is done with the formulas.
22.14.31	Baudhayana says that they should go around the wood clockwise and then return counterclockwise.
22.14.32	Shaliki says that they should return counterclockwise and then go around the wood in a clockwise manner.
22.15.1	One should make the sacrificer wear the Tarpya garment.
22.15.2	Baudhayana says that one should make both the sacrificer and the sacrificer's wife wear the garment.
22.15.3	Saliki says that one should wear the garment after having taken it up.
22.15.4	Baudhayana says that the garment should be worn in the manner of a garment. Saliki says that it should be worn in a manner of a garment and a covering.
22.15.5	The former option is of Baudhayana, the latter of Saliki.
22.15.6	It grows by ten kinds of rites.
22.15.7	Baudhayāna says that one should do so with these mantras.
22.15.8	Salīki says that one should descend with these same mantras.
22.15.9	Here, he places the seat for him to descend on.
22.15.10	Baudhāyana says that one should place the seat for him.
22.15.11	Śālīki says that one should also give him a woolen blanket and a hundred pieces of gold.
22.15.12	Then one brings him to the seat with this verse: "He goes to the village."
22.15.13	The former option is of Baudhāyana, the latter of Śālīki.
22.15.14	Regarding the eating of the leftovers.
22.15.15	The former is the view of Śālīki, the latter is the view of Baudhāyana.
22.15.16	The eating of the Prajapati oblations.
22.15.17	The former is the view Śālīki and the latter is the views of Baudhāyanas.
22.15.18	At the third from the anus.
22.15.19	Here one should offer two oblations each, says Baudhāyana;
22.15.20	One should cut off, says Śālīki.
22.15.21	All these are to be offered together, and then all the mantras are to be recited together, says Aupamaṇyava.
22.16.1	Now we shall explain the Rājasūya.
22.16.2	One should make the fire for the Rājasuya, says Baudhāyana.
22.16.3	One should not make it, says Śālīki.
22.16.4	Having again collected the ashes and making them into paste, one should offer it, says Baudhāyaṇa.
22.16.5	These should be taken up as they are, says Śālīki.
22.16.6	The mantra for the fire of the south-east direction is to be recited.
22.16.7	It should be with mantra, says Baudhāyana.
22.16.8	It should not be with mantra, say Śālīki and Aupamanyava.
22.16.9	The carrying of the single-stick.
22.16.10	It should come from the Anvāhāryapachana fire, says Baudhāyaṇa.
22.16.11	From the village fire, says Śālini.
22.16.12	The offering to Nairrta.
22.16.13	Baudhayana says that one should offer it after having taken it around the fire with the Visraṁsikā and Kāṇḍa verses.
22.16.14	Śālīki says that one should take it around the fire.
22.16.15	The giving of Dakṣiṇās.
22.16.16	Baudhāyana says that one should give them everyday.
22.16.17	Śālini says that one should do so at the beginning and at the end.
22.16.18	The placing of the water pot.
22.16.19	Baudhayana says that one should offer the oblations after circumambulating.
22.16.20	Saliki says that one should do as per the availability.
22.16.21	"Svāhā, salutations to him who did this."
22.16.22	This is the Sutra of Baudhayana.
22.16.23	Saliki further says that one should conclude with Svāhā here.
22.16.24	The continuous recitation is the application.
22.16.25	Baudhayana said, one should use the Sāntani-rite on the day on which one performs an Iṣṭi or an animal-sacrifice.
22.16.26	Here Śālīki said, these are seen to be used for the purpose of calling out every day.
22.16.27	One should not use the Sātantni-rite on the same day on which one offers an Iṣṭī or an animal-sacrifiice.
22.16.28	The application of the Cāturmāsya rites.
22.16.29-31	Baudhayana said, One should perform the Caturmāsyas on the same day on which one performs the Sāntani. Here Śālīki said, These are seen to be for the purpose of calling out every day.
22.16.32	The five kinds of recitation are mentioned.
22.17.1	Now, with the Upavesha, one collects the coals.
22.17.2	The Sutra of Saliki:
22.17.3	Here, Baudhayana says that one should collect the coals silently and then offer them with five oblations with the formula, "To Agni, the destroyer of Rakshas, svāhā."
22.17.4	Here one should give a chariot to the one who is leading the horses.
22.17.5	Homa of Apamarga seeds is mentioned.
22.17.6	The Sutra of Saliki.
22.17.7	Here Baudhayana says that one should offer Apamarga seeds with the entire mantra.
22.17.8	One should strike the spoon silently.
22.17.9	One should rise silently.
22.17.10	The preparation of the oblation for the goddess is mentioned.
22.17.11-17	Baudhayana says that one should follow the Soma-rite. Saliki says that one should perform the Soma-rite following the Soma-rite itself. Angirasa says that one should not perform the Devikā-rite. Baudhayana says that the Agni-rites should be performed at the end. Baudhayna says that one should offer the Agni-rites continuously. Saliki says that one should offer them after having placed them on the kindling woods. Angiras says that one should sprinkle the milk.
22.17.18	Baudhayana says that one should sprinkle the Dṛta or the Vinada.
22.17.19	Salīki says that one should do so in a new pot.
22.17.20	One should do so in those made by oneself.
22.17.21	This is the sūtra of Salīki.
22.17.22	In this context, Baudhāyana says that one should spread the sacrificial grass which has been trampled by cows and the sacrificial wood which has fallen by itself.
22.17.23	The Veda is that which is to be known.
22.17.24	One should carry the chariot with a shield or a banner.
22.17.25	Whatever ghee would be left there, that would be the ghee.
22.17.26	It is the offering of Mitra-Varuna.
22.17.27	The four fists should be equal, says Baudhayana.
22.17.28	The four bunches should be different, says Saliki.
22.18.1	On a red hide.
22.18.2	Baudhayana says that the Somas are to be bought in the manner of a gift.
22.18.3	Salīki says that they should be bought in the way of a gift. The buying of Soma should be done in the manner of buying.
22.18.4	Baudhayana says that they should number a hundred.
22.18.5	Salīka says that they should not be less than a hundred.
22.18.6	The taking of the Vasatīvarī waters is to be done in the way of taking.
22.18.7	Baudhayāna says that the taking of the Vasativarī waters is in the way of buying.
22.18.8	Śālīki says that one should take the Sārasvatī and Vasantīvarī here.
22.18.9	The Indra-Agni animal is offered in place of the Agni animal, says Baudhāyana.
22.18.10	Baudhāyana says that one should offer the Indra-Agni animals.
22.18.11	Śālīki says one should offer the Savanīya animal to Indra-Agni.
22.18.12	One should make the vessels, says Baudhāyaṇa.
22.18.13	Baudhāyāna says that one should make the vessels as per their respective sizes.
22.18.14	These are natural (to the sacrifice). So says Śālīki.
22.18.15	The offering to Sarasvatī is to be made.
22.18.16	This is the sūtra of Śālīki:
22.18.17	Here Baudhāyana says: One should offer the Vahantīrs with these two verses. One should offer them at each Graha.
22.18.18	One should offer the Sarasvatīrs silently.
22.18.19	The Grahas of the consecration are taken.
22.18.20	The Sutra of the two teachers.
22.18.21	Here Aupamañjavy said, "One should take the Grahas of consecration before the Sadas."
22.18.22	The offering of the bow.
22.18.23	Baudhayana's view is that the offering should be made before the Sadas.
22.18.24	For the Marutvat, a twenty-one-vessel Soma, the vessel should be placed on the ground.
22.18.25	Baudhayana says that one should place the bricks of the same kind in the same group.
22.18.26	Saliki says that one should do so in the same group only.
22.18.27	One should recite the mantra for the offering of milk.
22.18.28	Baudhayana says that it should be with the recitation of the mantra.
22.18.29	Saliki recommends silence.
22.19.1	The place of the impotent.
22.19.2	Baudhayāna says that he should stand within the altar.
22.19.3	Śālīki says that he should be outside the altar.
22.19.4	The making of the stones.
22.19.5	Baudhāyana says that the wooden post should be covered with iron.
22.19.6	Śāliki says that it should be made of wood only.
22.19.7	One should place the chariot on the chariot-cart along with the collector.
22.19.8	This is the text of Baudhāyana.
22.19.9	Śāṭki says that only one collector should be there among the placers.
22.19.10	The giving of the grass.
22.19.11	The Sutra of Saliki.
22.19.12	Herein Baudhayana says that one should offer to the sacrificer alone with a mantra, and the others should offer silently.
22.19.13	The making of dice.
22.19.14	They should be made of gold, says Baudhayana.
22.19.15	They should of silver, says Saliki.
22.19.16	They should have snake-like ends, says Aupamanyava.
22.19.17	The Vaivahitikas are the sons of Upanamya.
22.19.18	Then he gives him the five-syllabled mantra.
22.19.19	The sutra of Saliki.
22.19.20	Here Baudhayana says, one should offer that which is not proper there, saying, "This king was in the directions."
22.19.21	Then at the equinox, one offers on a darbha stalk.
22.19.22	The sutras of Baudhayana.
22.20.7	Then having brought him from the sacred place, having purified him, one should bring the lotus garland.
22.20.8	Baudhayana said that one should make both kinds of lotus garlands, golden and silver.
22.20.9	Shaliki says that they should be silver only.
22.20.10	While placing, one should say, "This oblation is for him, the vessel of the vow."
22.20.11	The Sūtra of Baudhāyana.
22.20.12	Here one should not place the leftover oblation in the vessel for the vow, says Śālīki.
22.20.13	These should be performed regularly at the Soma-purchasing rites, says Baudhāyana.
22.20.14	They should be performed, says Śālki.
22.20.15	The oblations of the Upaṣṭambha rites should be with or without mantras?
22.20.16	They should be with mantras, says Baudhāyaṇa.
22.20.17	They should not be with mantras.
22.20.18	The Prajapati-rite is the concluding rite of the Agni-rite.
22.20.19	Baudhayana says that the Prajapati- rite should be the concluding rite of all rites.
22.20.20	Saliki says that the Savaniya-rite should be the concluding one.
22.20.21	The Hotri-priest should be from the Bharadvaja gotra.
22.20.22	Baudhayayana says that one should choose the Hotri-priest from the Bharad-vaja gotra at the very outset.
22.20.23	Saliki, however, says that the Hotri- priest should be from the Dashapayin gotra.
22.20.24-29	The hundred Brahmins drink. Baudhayana says that the sacrificer should be the hundred and first. Saliki says that the sacrificers alone should be the hundredth and first. The giving of Dakṣiṇās. Baudhayāna says that one should give these very Dakṣiṇā prescribed for Brahmins. Saliki says that this is the face of a thousand.
22.21.1	They should be performed at the rising of the sun.
22.21.2	One should go to the Avabhṛtha rite, says Baudhāyana.
22.21.3	One should perform the rites ending with the Soma-offering, says Śālīki.
22.21.4	One should offer the Dhruva oblation, says Āupamanyava.
22.21.5	Having offered the oblations, one should pour the Barhaspatya oblation, says Baudhāyaṇa.
22.21.6	Having offered Barhaspatya, one should pour Barhaspatya offering, says Baudhâyana.
22.21.7-10	The other oblations are to be offered loudly, except the one to Brhaspati, says Śālīki. One should call out loudly for the Āditya oblation and softly for the Marutīya oblation, says Baudhāyana. One should offer the Āditya and Marutīya offerings softly and the others loudly, says Śālki.
22.21.11	All of them are loudly addressed to Aditi, all of them are softly addressed to Maruts, so says Aupamañava.
22.21.12	In the Satyadūtas.
22.21.13	The Sūtra of Baudhāyana.
22.21.14	One should say, "This one has been given to you by him." So says Śālīki.
22.21.15	Two-day rite.
22.21.16	The Sûtra of Baudhâyana.
22.21.17	On the day of sacrifice, the former day becomes the later day, says Śālīki.
22.21.18	The offering of the Devikā oblation is to be done.
22.21.19	Baudhāyana says that one should do it.
22.21.20	Śālīki says that one should not do it.
23.1.1	Now we shall explain the rules for bricks.
23.1.2	Baudhayana said that there should be fifteen kindling verses, the two Ajyabhāga offerings should be in the Vartrāghna Sāman and the deities should be invoked loudly.
23.1.3	Here Śālīki said that there should fifteen kindling verses and the two Ajyabhagas should be in the Vṛdhanvant Sāman and deities should be invoked in a low voice.
23.1.4	It is for the sacrificer himself.
23.1.5	Baudhayana says that one should perform the Yājamāna rite in the prescribed manner.
23.1.6	Śālīki says that one should do the Yājamana rite as per the space available.
23.1.7	One should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Pathikṛt if one who is performing the Darśa-Pūrṇamāsa sacrifices misses the New Moon or Full Moon day.
23.1.8	Baudhayana said that having offered the Paithikrita oblation, one should offer the Vaishvānara oblation on twelve potsherds. One should offer the Atipanna oblation.
23.1.9	Shaliki said that having offered Paithikrita, one should offer Vaishvānaran on twelve potsherads with the same procedure. One should not offer the Atipannam oblation.
23.1.10	The Upamaṇyava school says that one should avoid the sacrifice at which the Soma has been consumed by another sacrificer.
23.1.11	Here, Āñjīgavi says, "The sacrifice of one whose thread is stretched is cut off if another thread is stretched in it."
23.1.12	He who is the same Agni, the eight-vessel Agni, should perform the Pathicaraṇa rite on the full moon or new moon day. One should not offer a sacrifice on a day that has passed.
23.1.13	One who has established the sacred fire should offer an eight-vessel cake to Agni, the lord of vows, if he has acted contrary to the vow.
23.1.14	Baudhayana says that this is mentioned in the context of the setting up of the fires.
23.1.15	Shaliki says that this is to be done in the fires that have been brought in and settled down.
23.1.16	One should offer a cake on eight potshards to Agni Rakshaghna if the Rakshas afflict him.
23.1.17	Baudhayana says that one should conclude the Iṣṭi after having offered the Agnihotra.
23.1.18	Śālīki says that one should offer the Agnihotra when the Iṣṭi is over.
23.1.19	One should offer a cake on eight potshards to Agni Rudravat when practising sorcery.
23.1.20	Baudhāyana says that the officiating priests should wear red turbans and red garments.
23.1.21	Śālīki says this is indicated by the Yajya and Puronuvākyās.
23.1.22	If one's cows or men die, or if one is afraid, one should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Surbhimata.
23.1.23	Baudhayana said that one should sprinkle scents on the sprinkling water and the priests should move around with scents.
23.1.24	Shaliki said that this is stated by the Yajya and Anuvakya mantras.
23.1.25	One should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Kama for one who is not approached by desire.
23.1.26	Baudhayana said, "If the one mentioned there is not fulfilled, then one should do this."
23.1.27	Shaliki said, "This should be the one for all desires."
23.1.28	Aupamanyava said, "This is for one desire."
23.1.29	If the fire is taken out and the Agnihotra is offered without fire, one should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Jyotishmat.
23.1.30	This is the Sutra of Shalihka.
23.1.31	Here Baudhayana says that one should recite these mantras: "Mathanam, Adhimanthanam, Upa-samindhanam".
23.1.32	One should offer a cake on twelve potshards to Vaiśvānara when a son is born.
23.1.33	Baudhāyana said that one should offer a cake to Vaiśvānaara on twelve potshers when the tenth day has passed and one should also smear the child with the remnants of the oblation.
23.1.34	Śālīki said that one should do so only after knowing that the child is born and one should not smear the child with remnants of the oblations.
23.1.35	The Upamaṇyavas say that the Parvanī is the next one.
23.2.1	The Viparyasthaviṣī is the next.
23.2.2	Baudhāyana says that the Marut is the first one to receive the mantra-rite.
23.2.3	Śālīki says that it is the one that is given away.
23.2.4	The Upamaṇavas say that it is the offering.
23.2.5	The son of Upamaṇavīputra says that it is from the one who has four meals.
23.2.6	One should offer a cake on twelve potsherds to Vaiśvānara when going to one's own house.
23.2.7	The place where he is going to perform the sacrifice is the place of sacrifice.
23.2.8	One should offer a cake on twelve potshards to Vaiśvānara Agni, says Baudhāyana.
23.2.9	One should do so at the places where the fires are kept, says Śālīki.
23.2.10	One should lead the best cow with a rope, says Baudhāyaṇa.
23.2.11	This is the Sutra of Baudhayana.
23.2.12-16	One should say, "He has given this to you." So says Śālīki. One should also bind the Valbjas (to the post). So says Baudhāyana. The Valbjas should also be bound here. So says Śālini. One should offer an Ekādaśakapāla oblation to Agni-Viṣṇu while practising sorcery.
23.2.17	Baudhayana says that one should offer the Sviṣṭakṛt oblation after having offered the oblations to the Maruts.
23.2.18	Śālīki says that one should know that the oblation is being offered to the Maruts and then offer the Svișṭakṛt.
23.2.19	The butter is Sarasvati.
23.2.20	Baudhayana says that the butter should be offered with the mantra.
23.2.21	Śālki says that it should be offered silently.
23.2.22	Aupamanyava says that one should take it from the Dhruva vessel at the proper time.
23.2.23-27	The sacrifice is of the nature of a sacrifice. Baudhāyana says that one should perform the first procedure upto the Iḍā. One should perform the second procedure in the same way. One should perform what remains with the third. Śālīki says that one should complete the first procedure upto Prāṇīta. One should perform the second and the third in the same way.
23.2.28	The Upamaṇyavas say that it is with full vessel and Viṣṇukrama.
23.2.29	If one desires Brahmic glory, one should offer this Soma-Rudra oblation on the full moon day of the month of Tisya.
23.2.30	Baudhāyana says that one should offer it on the day of fasting.
23.2.31	Śālīki says that one should do it on the day when the sacrifice is performed.
23.2.32	One should sprinkle with ghee and cleanse with ghee.
23.2.33	Baudhayana says that one should place the water pot and the ladle for pouring clarified butter.
23.2.34	Shaliki says that one should sprinkle and wipe with clarified butter and do the rest with water.
23.2.35	Aupamanyava says that whatever is to be done with water, one should do it with clarified butter.
23.2.36-40	If one fears, 'I shall become a bad skin', one should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Soma-Pūṣan. If the signs are known, one should offer (the cake) to Soma-Pārvati. One should offer (the cakes) to Soma-Skanda and Soma-Pāśupati. One should do so before the signs appear. One should perform the rites for the attainment of Soma-Skanda. One should make offerings to Soma-Skandāvati. One should not make offerings to Soma. One should know that the signs are known. One should be afraid of the signs. One should fear the signs. If one fears, 'My skin will become bad', one should offer Soma-Pūşan. If one is afraid, 'My skin may become bad', one may offer Soma-Pāuşna. If one knows the signs, one should offer Soma. If one does not know the signs, one may offer Soma. One may offer Soma-Skanda, Soma-Pāsupati, and Soma-Skandavati. One may perform the rites for attaining Soma-Skanda.
23.2.41	Here only the Parishiyis are to be performed, says Saliki.
23.3.1	The Havishis are to be reversed, says Baudhayana.
23.3.2	The first Mantra-rites are to be performed by Maruts, says Baudhayaṇa.
23.3.3	The first rites are to be performed with Avadanas, says Saliki
23.3.4	The first rites should be performed with Pradas, says Aupamanyava.
23.3.5	The first rite should be performed with Catu-prasha, says Aupamanavaputra.
23.3.6	The Hotr should perform the first rites with Marutī verses,
23.3.7	Baudhayana says that the Adhvaryu should invoke the Maruts at the very outset and the Hotr should invoke them in the subsequent manner.
23.3.8	Salīki says that this is indicated by the Yajya and Anuvākyā.
23.3.9	One should offer cooked rice to the Adityas and Bhuvad Maruts for prosperity.
23.3.10	This is the Sutra of Salīki.
23.3.11-15	Herein Baudhayana says that all the verses should be with Padas, all with Savitr, all with Samayukh. The removal of the Padas and the Pāmsu is the Sūtra of Śālīki. Herein Baudhāyana says that one should remove the Padas and Pāmsu with the entire mantra and then sow the northernmost row. One should then move the Uras silently.
23.3.16	One hundred gold coins make a kṛṣṇala.
23.3.17	Baudhāyana says that it should be one hundred and fifty.
23.3.18	Śālīki says that they should be one hundred only and one should avoid them.
23.3.19	One should offer four times four kṛṣṇalas.
23.3.20	Baudhāyan says that one should offer those which are to be offered.
23.3.21	Now those which are meant for eating, they should be taken up.
23.3.22	Now those which are meant to be shared, they should be divided.
23.3.23	Here Śālīki said: Those which are meant to have been offered, one should offer them.
23.3.24	Now those meant for eating, those should be taken up.
23.3.25	Then one should offer the other oblations, and offer the Brahmana's share.
23.3.26	If someone is afflicted by a sinful disease, one should offer this oblation to the sun on the new moon day.
23.3.27	One should offer it on the day of fasting, says Baudhayana.
23.3.28	On the day of the sacrifice, says Saliki.
23.3.29	With the oblations to be offered with the Paridhi offerings.
23.3.30-34	Baudhayana says that one should offer the oblations with the Iṣṭika-bricks. Śālīki says that one should do so with the Pauroḍāśika-bricks. The oblations are to be offered. This is the Sutra of Śālīki. Herein Baudhāyana says that one should make these offerings with the Udumbara-cups and then offer the cups here itself.
23.3.35	The sprinkling of clarified butter is done with the verse, "O Agni, do thou sprinkle us with thy rays."
23.3.36	Baudhāyana says that one should sprinkle clarified butter with the verses, "Whatever is new, that has become new."
23.3.37	Śālīki says that one should remove the clarified butter with the same verses.
23.4.1	One should offer oblations of Varuna to as many horses as one receives, with four potsherds each, with one extra.
23.4.2	Baudhayana says, one should accept the Vaiśvānara.
23.4.3	So two.
23.4.4	Having accepted the group, one should perform for many. The Vāruṇas are one more than the number of persons.
23.4.5	Here Śālīki says, one should not accept the Vaiśvānaras for two.
23.4.6	Having accepted the group, one should perform for one or two or many, but not for more than one. The Varuṇa rites are performed for one more than the number of persons.
23.4.7	For the offering of cooked rice, with or without mantras?
23.4.8	It should be with mantras, says Baudhāyana.
23.4.9	Without mantras, says Śālīki.
23.4.10	One should again collect and offer the oblation.
23.4.11	This is the view of Baudhāyana.
23.4.12	Śālīki says that one should offer the oblation with these very mantras.
23.4.13	Baudhāyana says that one should pour out a cake on thirty-three potsherds.
23.4.14	This is the sutra of Baudhayana.
23.4.15	Śālīki says, "It should be a cake with doubt."
23.4.16	This is the offering of the rain-invoking Stambha.
23.4.17	This is Baudhayana's sutra.
23.4.18-24	Śālīki says that one should go to the place where there is a tree bearing fruits. One should shake the skin of black antelope, says Baudhāyana. Outside the altar, says Śālīki. One should perform the Anjasavakāra rites, says Baudhāyaṇa. One should do so, says Baudhâyana. One should not do so, says Śālini.
23.4.25	The expiation is to be performed in case of contact with a fire.
23.4.26	The sutra of the two teachers.
23.4.27	Here, Oupamanyava said, "The Ahavaniya is indeed the one from which this fire is taken out."
23.4.28	The Anvähäryapacana is the fire of the village.
23.4.29	There is no expiation there.
23.4.30	Because contact with a fire is praised.
23.4.31	Thus, indeed, these Iṣṭis have been explained.
23.5.1	One should offer while advancing.
23.5.2	How much is this said?
23.5.3	Five Prayājas, says Baudhāyana.
23.5.4	Whatever is before the hall, says Śālīki.
23.5.5	If the offering of the animal is lost, one should offer the clarified butter after rejecting it,
23.5.6	Baudhayana said that if the portion of the animal is lost, if one or two portions of clarified butter are lost, one should offer the oblation after discarding them and then perform the sacrifice again.
23.5.7	Shaliki said that if the portions of the animal are lost, if one portion or two portions of the clarified butter are lost one should offer the olation after discarding them, and then think that it has been done.
23.5.8	If he does it again, then he should do it thus.
23.5.9	This is the Sansa (ritual).
23.5.10	Baudhayana says that where there is a river or a stream, or a place between two rivers, that is the Sansa.
23.5.11	Saliki says that where there are no sounds, that is the Asansa.
23.5.12	Aupamanyava says that where there may be a place between two, that is the Asaṃsa.
23.5.13	The two regions are Prāstya and Prāstya. There is no conflict between them. This is the opinion of Aupamaṇyavīputra.
23.5.14	There is no conflict between those who do not hate each other. This is the view of the Chāgaleya Brahmana. This is the statement of Āñjīgavi.
23.5.15	There is a Homa for the Abhibhūtis.
23.5.16	Having performed the Adhvara, one should offer the Sāttrayāṇika offerings. This is the viewpoint of Baudhāyana.
23.5.17	Śālīki says that it should be done only by the Sāttra- performers.
23.5.18	When the flow of Soma has been started.
23.5.19	This is the Sutra of Śālīki.
23.5.20	Here Baudhayana says that one should offer the two verses at the Pūtabhṛt and Adhavanīya cups and then at each cup.
23.5.21	Then one should pour down the dripping Soma silently.
23.5.22	The recitation of the verse to Vaisnawi is to be done at the eternal Grahanas.
23.5.23	This is the Sutra of Baudhayana.
23.5.24	One should recite the verse to Prishadagya only, says Saliki.
23.5.25	He says, "One should recite the Ukthamuktha after reciting the Ukthasha." One should recite the Savanamuktha after reciting Savanas."
23.5.26	The former view is of Baudhayayana, the latter of Saliki.
23.5.27	The taking of the Grahas of the Prsthya days is thus.
23.5.28	This is the Sutra of Saliki.
23.5.29	Here Baudhayana says that wherever these days may be found, one should take the Grahas of Prsthya.
23.5.30	They are seen in the year itself.
23.5.31	One should take them in the year itself, says Aupamanyava.
23.5.32	The consuming of the Grahas of the Prsthya sacrifice.
23.5.33	Baudhayana says that one should consume them with the Anusavana and also with the Nitya.
23.5.34	Saliki says that one should do so with the Nitya alone.
23.5.35	The spreading of the grass.
23.5.36	Baudhayāna says that one should spread them one by one.
23.5.37	Śālīki says that one should put them all together.
23.6.1	The kindling of the fire.
23.6.2	Baudhayana says that one should perform the Vyatiṣaṅga rite.
23.6.3	Śālīki says that one should do as per the Adhvaryu.
23.6.4	Aupamanyava says that one should sprinkle.
23.6.5	This is the Homa of the Anśu.
23.6.6	This is Śālīki's Sutra.
23.6.7	Herein, Baudhāyana says that one should offer the Anśu with the two verses with which one sprinkles.
23.6.8	Then one should touch silently.
23.6.9	This is the seizing of the Prisnigraha grahas.
23.6.10	Baudhayana's view is that the former option is to be followed. Saliki's view is the latter.
23.6.11	One should fast with the Kshama.
23.6.12	The sutra of Baudhayana is:
23.6.13	One should fast here with the Apupas. This is the view of Saliki.
23.6.14	The bull is aging among the cows.
23.6.15	The sutras of Saliki are:
23.6.16	Herein Baudhayana says that even if one were to offer a sacrifice to an animal outside the prescribed procedure, one should perform these rites, namely, the rites pertaining to the tying of the animal and the offering of the omentum.
23.6.17	The offering of the omenta of the animals is the eighth rite.
23.6.18	This is the Sutra of Baudhayana.
23.6.19	One should not offer the omenta of animals, says Saliki.
23.7.4	Herein, indeed, the elder Kâtyâyana says, "Just as the Upâkaraṇa (rite) is performed after the Upâkaraṇâ (rite), so also the subsequent Mantras should be performed."
23.7.5	"When the sky becomes overcast with clouds."
23.7.6	Baudhayana says that if the clouds are dark and not yet fallen, one should wait.
23.7.7	If they are black, then one should do thus.
23.7.8	Here Shaalikii said, "If the sun does not set, one should establish it."
23.7.9	If the sun sets, then one should perform thus."
23.7.10	Gautama said, "There is no establishment for an uncaptured (sun)."
23.7.11	"Victory!"
23.7.12	The former is Baudhayana's view, the latter is Salīki's view.
23.7.13	In the case of the Ātānāta rites.
23.7.14	The former is Salīki’s view, the later is Baudhāyana’s view.
23.7.15	Here Aupamaṇyava said, “One should offer the Ātānātā rites, the Jāyas, and the Rāṣṭrabhṛt rites. One should offer the Sruvāhutis. One should perform the Darsa-Pūrṇamāsa rites. One should perform Ātānāṭā rites, Jāyas, Rāṣṭrabṛt rites.”
23.7.16	On the boundary lines of the sacrificial grass.
23.7.17	Baudhayana says that one should make the boundary lines of sacrificial grass with the sacrificial grass itself.
23.7.18	Saliki says that they should be natural.
23.7.19	One should offer the oblations to the Rāṣṭrabhṛt deities twice with the Svāhā-utterance.
23.7.20	Baudhāyana says that one should offer the oblation in a scattered manner.
23.7.21	Śālīki says that one should perform two oblations with the ladle.
23.7.22	He offers in the Adhidevana, in the Rathamukha, in the Ratha-nadi.
23.7.23	Baudhayana says that these are the fires.
23.7.24	Shaliki says that these should be the fires.
23.7.25	The wood is of Ficus Indica, Ficus glomerata, Ficus religiosa and Ficus Venosa.
23.7.26	Baudhayāna says that this should be the wood.
23.7.27	Śālīki says that one should anoint the embers separately and then separately put them on the fire.
23.7.28	One should offer the Vasat-call with the harsh words of speech.
23.7.29	This is the Sutra of Śālīki.
23.7.30	Baudhāyana says that one should offer the oblation of milk mixed with salt along with the Arka leaf.
23.7.31	One should make the Vasat-offering with the words "Jhi" or "Kad".
23.7.32	One should make it with the words "Prasava".
23.7.33	Baudhayana says that one should offer with both, the Vasatthiya and the Savitrī verses.
23.7.34	Shaliki says that one should do so with the Savitrī verse alone.
23.8.1	One should do so in the Atikrama.
23.8.2	Baudhayana's view is the former, Shaliki's the latter.
23.8.3	One should offer in the Atimoksa.
23.8.4	Shaliki's view is former, Baudhayana's the latter.
23.8.5	The taking of the Pranagrahas is the taking of the Pranas.
23.8.6	The Sutra of Baudhayana.
23.8.7	They are seen to be in the year itself.
23.8.8	One should take them in the year itself, says Saliki.
23.8.9	Having milked it, one should give it to a Brahmana who does not eat food.
23.8.10	The Sutra is of Saliki.
23.8.11-13	Herein Baudhayana says that if one sits down for the purpose of knowing, then one should do thus. If the Garhapatya is blown out before the Ahavaniya is blown out, one should do thus.
23.8.14	Herein Baudhayana says that having placed the entire Agni in the Sadas, having taken it around the southern side of the shed, having deposited the ashes from the Garhapatya place, having smeared it with a lump of cowdung, having deposited it, having kindled the blazing Ahavaniya, having deposited the ash from the Ahavaniya place, having plastered it with a lump cowdung, having placed it, having deposited it and having kindled it, one should offer six spoonfuls in the Ahavaniya with the Samidhvati verses, "Do thou awaken, O Agni, thou art Agni, thou art Pravasi, thou art Pravasta. The mind is light, the one who enjoys the thread, the one who weaves. The bright one is rising."
23.8.15	In the case of additional Soma sacrifices.
23.8.16	Baudhayana's view is that the option is to be exercised before the Avabhrtha rite.
23.8.17	If the Dhruva is lost, one should perform the expiatory rite.
23.8.18	Baudhayāna says that if they obtain the chanting of the Sāmans before the Avabṛtha rite, they should return and chant the Stomas and Sastras. Having done that, they should again perform the rite.
23.8.19	Here Śālīki said, if they obtain the Sāman-chanting of the Bahvṛcas before the Avabhrtha, they should return and perform the Stut and Sastra. Having done that, they should think that it is done.
23.8.20	The taking of the days.
23.8.21	Baudhāyana says that the Sutra should be recited.
23.8.22	If the next day is the one on which the Maitrāvaruṇa and other Grahas are to be taken, then they should be taken on that day, says Śālīki.
23.8.23	If the sacrificial post has grown, then one should perform the expiatory rite.
23.8.24	Baudhāyana says that one should perform the rite within the framework of the sacrifice.
23.8.25	If the post has grown, one should perform the requisite expiatory rite within the framework, says Śālki.
23.8.26	If Soma is to be offered to him, he should divide the gold and silver into two parts and offer one part and pour the other.
23.8.27	Baudhāyana says that the principal vessels should be offered and poured with gold.
23.8.28	Śālīki says that they should be offered and then poured.
23.8.29	In the case of the Ādāra Soma.
23.8.30	Baudhāyanasūtra
23.9.3-6	Śālīki says that one should not cut. This is the form of the Atigrahya. Baudhāyana says that one should deposit the Atigrahya on the house-holder's fire.
23.9.7	Here Śālīki says that the fire should be separately kindled in the fire-places and then the fire should be transferred to the fire-places of the householder. The fire should be transferred from the burning fire to the burning fire.
23.9.8	This is the form of the most acceptable.
23.9.9	The name of the rite is Sannivāpa.
23.9.10	Baudhayana said that one should offer a cake on eight potshards to Agni Brahmavatt, a cake on eight potsheds to Agni Ksatravart and a cake on eight pothshards to Agni Ksatrabhrt.
23.9.11	Shaliki said that this is indeed an offering to be connected with Agni.
23.9.12-16	Where he is about to offer the Agnihotra, there he should offer this oblation. The animal-oblation of Prajapati should be offered in succession, says Aupamañava. Pavan. Having purified them one by one, they should be offered one by one, says Baudhayana. Having purified all of them together, they should be brought in one by one, says Saliki.
23.9.17	Having purified them once, they should be brought together at one time, says Aupamaṇyava.
23.9.18	This is the opinion of Baudhayana.
23.9.19	Baudhayana says that all those who belong to the same gotra and are not separated from each other, even though they belong to different families, should be brought together for the selection of one person as the officiating priest.
23.9.20	Here Śālīki says that if they are of the same Gotra, whether they are separated or not, then their selection should be done at one Ārṣeya-varaṇa.
23.9.21	One should churn for the Vrata.
23.9.22	Baudhāyana says that they should be divided after the Samavartana.
23.9.23	Śālīki says they should have separate churning for the Vrata.
23.9.24-27	The sutra of the Acharya says that the Uttaravedi should be placed on the sixth day. But the sutra of Baudhayana says that it should be placed on eleventh day. The sutra of Saliki says that the Vasatavari should be taken. Herein Baudhayana said, if the pot is left over, then one should lower it silently.
23.9.28	If the entire paste is applied, then one should do it in this way, says Śālīki.
23.9.29	He recites the Yajñāyajñiya or the Śamyuvāka Stotra.
23.9.30	Baudhāyana says that the former alternative is to be followed. Śālīki says that the latter alternative is to be adopted.
23.9.31	One should remove the enclosing sticks and strike the Prastara, says Śālūki.
23.9.32	This is the sutra of Baudhayana.
23.9.33	Śālīki says that one should strike the Prastara and Paridhi.
23.10.1	Baudhāyana says that the Adhvaryu should offer silently.
23.10.2	The Sūtra says,
23.10.3	Śālīki says one should offer without looking.
23.10.4	Regarding the consecration with rites,
23.10.5	Baudhāyana said, One should consecrate with both, with the two kinds of sacrificial grass and with rites.
23.10.6	Śālīki says that it should be done by means of the crafts.
23.10.7	Nyuṅkhaṇa is the name of a rite.
23.10.8	One performs the Nyuṅkhaṇa rite on the Pratipat day for Viśva or for the weapon.
23.10.9	Baudhāyana says that the former alternative is to be adopted. Śālīki prescribes the latter.
23.10.10	Whether the Nirmanthya rite should be performed with or without mantras?
23.10.11	Baudhāyana prescribes that it should be performed with mantras.
23.10.12	Śālīki prescribes that it should not be performed with mantrasa.
23.10.13	Whether the Dakṣiṇā rite should be performed or not?
23.10.14	Baudhayana said, one should offer oblations and recite the mantras of affirmation.
23.10.15	Shaliki said, one should only offer oblations, but not recite the mantras.
23.10.16	Oupamanyava said, one should not pay attention to any mantras that are associated with dakshina.
23.11.1	It is not a matter of debate.
23.11.2	Baudhayana says that this is not to be spoken.
23.11.3	Shaliki says that one should speak.
23.11.4	It is the recitation of the verses.
23.11.5	This is the sutra of Baudhayana.
23.11.6	The Adhvaryu should do as per the original.
23.11.7	Shaliki suggests that the Chandogas and Bahvricas should do as per their own tradition.
23.11.8	It is crawling.
23.11.9	Baudhayana says that they should touch the northern Havirdhāna-shed with the ends of their black antelope skins.
23.11.10	Śālīki says that they should not touch.
23.11.11	At the beginning of Āgrayana rites.
23.11.12	Baudhāyana says that the Adhvaryu should take up the cups of Soma in silence.
23.11.13	Śālki says that he should take them up after having spoken.
23.11.14-19	He takes up the Soma and holds it till the other two Grahas are taken up. Baudhayana says that one should take up the Grahas one by one and then place them after rubbing them. In the case of the Grahas, one should move along with the Anusavanī verses. Baudhayāna says that one should move along. Śālīki says that one should not move along.
23.11.20	In the case of the animal sacrifices, says Baudhāyana.
23.11.21	All the sacrifices are to be performed by Baudhāyana, says Śālīki.
23.11.22	The sacrifices of Indra-Agni are to be performed with the animal sacrifice, says Śālki.
23.11.23	Those sacrifices which have the Mahāvrata rite are to be performed after the fire has been kindled.
23.11.24	The other sacrifices are to be done according to the Uttara Veda, says Baudhāyaṇa.
23.11.25	The fire is to be kindled only for the one-day sacrifice, says Śāliki.
23.11.26	The Ākṣīya sacrifices are those beginning with the Abhijit and ending with the Dasama.
23.11.27	Baudhāyana says that these are the Ākṣīyas because they are performed in the reverse order.
23.11.28	Śālīki says that these are other than the Prāṣṭhyābhīplava sacrifices.
23.11.29	Aupamanyava says that these are those other than the Prṣṭhyāabhīplava sacrifices and the Dasama Ahina.
23.11.30	The Prāyaniya, Ārambhaniya, Avabhijit, Viśvajit, Daśama, Mahāvrata, Udayaniya and Atiratra are the eight rites that are performed in the reverse order. This is said by Gautama.
23.11.31	In the case of animal sacrifices, says Śālīki.
23.11.32	All the rites are performed by Baudhāyana.
23.11.33	The animal sacrifices are performed in the Ekādaśina rite. The rites of the year are performed in the animal sacrifices, says Sālīki.
23.11.34	The bow-string is made of a hundred threads.
23.11.35	Baudhayana says that the string should be made of a hundred strands.
23.11.36	Saliki says that it should be made of one hundred strings.
23.11.37	On the day of the lunar eclipse, the Mahavratikas should perform the arts.
23.11.38	Baudhayanasa y s one should perform.
23.11.39	Saliki sa y s one should not perform.
23.11.40	On the lunar eclipse day, the hair should be cut.
23.11.41	Baudhāyana says that one should sow.
23.11.42	Śāliki says that one should not sow.
23.12.1	It is for two nights.
23.12.2	This is the text of Baudhāyana.
23.12.3	On the day of sacrifice, the previous day is the first and the subsequent day is the second, says Śāliki.
23.12.4	On that day, there is a mound, a ditch, and a dwarf.
23.12.5	These should be offered together with the thousand oblations, says Baudhāyana.
23.12.6	These should be offered together as the thousandth oblation, says Śālīki.
23.12.7	The offering of the pot of Drona.
23.12.8	One should offer it within the enclosing sticks, says Baudhāyaṇa.
23.12.9	Outside the enclosing sticks, say Śālīki and Aupamanyava.
23.12.10	The offering to the forms.
23.12.11	The Sūtra of Baudhāyana is
23.12.12	Here one should offer the forms of the horse sacrifice, says Śālīki.
23.12.13	In the Udyat stomas, says Baudhāyana.
23.12.14	Baudhāyana says that the first alternative is to be followed. Śālīki says that the second alternative is to be adopted.
23.12.15	The cakes offered to the Upavasatha deities should be with or without mantras, says Baudhāyaṇa.
23.12.16	They should be with mantras, says Śālini.
23.12.17	They should not be with mantras,
23.12.18-23	The Agniya oblations are to be offered once together with the Sruva-oblation, says Aupamañava. They should prepare two cows. Baudhayana says that they should be yoked. Shaliki says that they should also be yoked. The post should be the pestle and mortar. Baudhayāna says that all the rites should be performed.
23.12.24-28	Śālīki says that one should sprinkle and then erect it. Aupamanyava says that one should erect the Yūpa-wood after sprinkling and worshipping it. Baudhāyana says that one should collect the soil from the sacrificial grass, from the Dhishnyas, from the Audumbara-wood, from the Uparava-wood, from a heap of soil, and from the northern part of the Vedi. Śālīki says one should not collect it.
23.12.29	If they were to announce the initiation and the Upasads, they should rise after performing the concluding Iṣṭis with the Sāṁnāyya offerings, says Baudhāyana.
23.12.30	They should rise after a single day, says Śālīki.
23.12.31	They should not rise after having performed the Pañcadaśa sacrifice, says Āupamanyava.
23.13.1	This is the procedure for rising.
23.13.2	They should go to the Avabhṛtha rite, says Baudhāyana.
23.13.3	They should go to the Soma-rite at the end of the water-rite, says Śālīki.
23.13.4	They should conclude with the Dhruva rite, says Āupamanyava.
23.13.5	The Janaka-saptarātra is the Atiratra, the Pañcadaśa is the Prāgvargīya, the Pañcahotr is the Madhyamavargīya and the Pañcadaṃṣṭra is the Uparivargīya, says Baudhāyaṇa.
23.13.6	The Pañcadaśā is the Prāgvargīya, the Madhyamavrgīya and Uparivargiya, says Śālki.
23.13.7	One who is about to perform the consecration for ten nights, having offered the Dashahotar oblation, consecrates for ten nights.
23.13.8	Baudhayana's Sutra.
23.13.9	Having offered the Saptahotar oblation one should offer the Dashahotara oblation, says Saliki.
23.13.10	Thus is the Brahmanavani.
23.13.11	Then the Go-bala-dasa-nights, the Atiratra, the Pañcadaśa-nights, and the Vājapeya, the Mahavrata and the Atiratra on the eighth day, the Vājapeyas.
23.13.12	Therein, the offering of the Devsuva is to be done.
23.13.13	Baudhayana says that one should do it.
23.13.14	Saliki says that one should not do it.
23.13.15	The Traiṣṭubha Sāman should be chanted in the Traiṣṭuṃbhasāman sacrifice.
23.13.16	If the Pañcadaśahoma is omitted, one should perform the rites of the Silpas.
23.13.17	Baudhāyana says that one should perform.
23.13.18	Śālīki says that one should not perform.
23.13.19	In the Ekṣaṣṭirātra, one should perform Grahas of Vaiśvakarmaṇa and Aditya.
23.13.20	Baudhayana says that one should take up the Soma in the thirty-first night.
23.13.21	They are seen as lasting for a year.
23.13.22	One should take them up for a year, says Saliki.
23.13.23	The sixteen-spoked vessel is made of Udumbara wood.
23.13.24	This is the view of Baudhayana.
23.13.25	Saliki says that it should be made of Khadira wood.
23.13.26	The consecration of the animals of the Atiratra sacrifice.
23.13.27	Baudhayana says that one should offer the Sārasvata oblation.
23.13.28	Salīki says that one should perform the Sārasvatī rite.
23.13.29	One should consume the sixteen cups of Soma, says Śālīki.
23.13.30	Baudhāyana says that one should consume the cups in a visible manner.
23.13.31	Śālīki says that they should be consumed in an Indra-like manner.
23.13.32	One should touch the principal cups during the night-long rites, says Śālki.
23.13.33	The sūtra of Śālīki.
23.13.34	Herein Baudhayana says that one should touch the principal and the principal-cum-minor cups with the verse "Indra to thee, O Apisharvara".
23.13.35	As to whether the verses are to be recited in the Asvinamantra.
23.13.36	Baudhayana says that they should be recited.
23.13.37	Shaliki says that they should not be recited.
23.13.38	As to the performance of the Asvinamantras.
23.13.39	The sutra of Shaliki.
23.13.40	Herein Baudhayana says that one should perform the rite of the cups of the Tirahna sacrifice with the Asvina rite.
23.13.41	One should consume the cups of the Tirahna sacrifice.
23.13.42	Baudhayana says that it should be consumed with the Anushtup metre.
23.13.43	Shaliki says that it should with the Jagati metre.
23.13.44	At the third stage of the anus.
23.13.45	Having divided them into eleven parts, one should offer them, says Baudhāyana.
23.13.46	One should offer them without cutting them, says Śālīki.
23.13.47	Having struck them all together, one should recite all the mantras, says Āupamanyava.
23.14.1	The offering is made to Ekādaśinī, says Śālki.
23.14.2	This is the Sutra of Śālīki.
23.14.3	Herein Baudhayana says that there are eleven Agniṣṭoma, eleven Savanīya and eleven Anubandhya.
23.14.4	One should or should not recite the mantra at the Upasad.
23.14.5	Baudhāyana says that one should take it in a village, not in a forest.
23.14.6	Śālīki says that one should get it in a forest, not in a village.
23.14.7	Āśvalāyana says that one neither should get it in the village nor in the forest.
23.14.8	One should perform the Upasad.
23.14.9	Baudhayana says that one should perform the Upasad rite here itself.
23.14.10	Saliki says that one should draw the line of the Patnivata rite here itself. The Patnivata rite is to be drawn.
23.14.11	Baudhayana says that the stake of the Salamukha rite should be drawn around.
23.14.12	Saliki
23.14.13	says that one should draw a line for the Patnivata stake eleven times to the north.
23.14.14	The mantra of Tvashtra is to be recited.
23.14.15	One should do so with the mantra, says Baudhāyana.
23.14.16	One should do so silently, says Śālīki.
23.14.17	This is the offering to Tvaṣṭra, says Aupamanyava.
23.14.18	This is a sūtra of Śālīki
23.14.19	Herein, Baudhāyana says that one should take it out towards the north between the Cātvāla and the mound, sprinkle it with water, and offer it on the sheep of the sacrificer.
23.14.20	The rite of Tvashtra is to be performed.
23.14.21	Baudhayana says that one should perform it in a low voice.
23.14.22	Shaliki says that one should do it loudly.
23.14.23	One should perform it again.
23.14.24	The sutra of Shaliki.
23.14.25	Herein Baudhayana says that if one were to know that the fire-altar is being destroyed, one should build it again on the same spot and erect the sacrificial post to the north of the previous one.
23.14.26	In the Khandapāyinīya rites.
23.14.27	Baudhayana says that the rites ending with Iḍā should be concluded in the case of the rites of Agnihotra.
23.14.28	Salīki says that the offerings are made at the beginning of the Ajyabhāga and end with the Idā.
23.14.29	Aupamanyava says that the offerings should be made with full vessels and in the order of Viṣṇu.
23.14.30	The offering is made to the Pitṛs in the form of balls.
23.14.31	Baudhāyana says that one should make the offering everyday.
23.14.32	Salīki says that one should offer at the beginning and at the end of the month.
23.15.1	The explanation of the Hotr priests.
23.15.2	One should offer with the Grahas, except for the Svāhākāras.
23.15.3-7	The Grahas, except for the Antasvâhâkâras, are one. All of them are one. The former option is of Baudhâyana, the latter of Shâliki. One should offer twelve times in a year at the full moon and new moon offerings, says Baudhâyana. This is one view. At the new moon and full moon offerings, says Shâliki. This is one view.
23.15.8	All these are one.
23.15.9	The first option is of Baudhayana, the second of Saliki.
23.15.10	Thirty-three are the number of oblations.
23.15.11	The sutra of Saliki.
23.15.12	Herein Baudhayana says that all these rites beginning with the taking of fire and ending with the sprinkling of water on the white and black (cows) should be performed in the case of a cremation ground.
23.15.13	On each day of the cremation.
23.15.14	This is the Sutra of Saliki.
23.15.15	Herein Baudhayana says that all these rites beginning with the taking of fire and ending with the sprinkling of the white and black (cows) should be performed in the case of a Karmāvarta sacrifice.
23.15.16	One should place the dung at the place where the chariot wheel has touched.
23.15.17	Baudhayana says that one should place the dung on the edges.
23.15.18	Śālīki says that one should go to the end of the cowdung on the bricks.
23.16.1	Baudhāyana says that one should use a red hide.
23.16.2	Baudhāyanasūtra says that one should do it with both the formulas.
23.16.3	Śālīki says it may be done without the formulas.
23.16.4	It should be done with both the formulas, says Baudhāyana.
23.16.5	Baudhāyāna says that one should recite both the verses twice.
23.16.6	Śālīmki says that one who recites once should recite twice.
23.16.7	Soma is in the east, Soma is in the west.
23.16.8	Soma is in the west, Soma is in east.
23.16.9	The former view is of Baudhayana, the latter of Saliki.
23.16.10	The Sauramaṇika is the offering to the Soma.
23.16.11	This is the sutra of both the teachers.
23.16.12	Here Upamaṇyavya said, "One should offer from wherever there is Soma."
23.16.13	This is the offering of the Soma-grahas.
23.16.14-19	Baudhayana says that one should also take up the implements of offering. One should stretch the ladle and the handle towards the east or the north, with the rear end. Baudhayana says that the former is the rule and the latter is the option. One should offer the Soma-wine. Baudhayāna says that one should take it from the south and pour it from the north.
23.16.20	Śālīki says that one should take it from the north and then offer it to the south.
23.16.21	Aupamanyava says that one should offer it from the same place from where one takes it.
23.16.22	Baudhayana says that one should perform the Upasthāna with Pāvamānī verses.
23.16.23	One should perform the Upāsthāna with Pāvamanī verses and then perform the Upastha with the Yājyā and Anuvākyā verses of the Pitṛs, says Baudhāyana.
23.16.24	The Sālīki says that the offerings to the Pitrs should be made with the Yajya and Anuvākyā mantras and not with the Pāvamānī mantras.
23.16.25	The Avabhrtha is the name of the rite.
23.16.26	This is the sutra of the two teachers.
23.16.27	Here, Oupamanyava says that one should perform the Avabhrtha with the Sūla and Māsaras.
23.16.28	The Avabhṛtha is mentioned as the rite to be performed at the end of the water.
23.16.29	The Avamardana is mentioned as the sprinkling of water.
23.16.30	The Samidhāni is mentioned as the kindling of the fire.
23.17.3	Śālīki says that one should perform a sacrifice in the form of any kind of offering on the new moon day.
23.17.4	Aupamanyava says that one should offer the Piṇḍapitṛyajña.
23.17.5	One should perform the Sākamprathasthāyīya sacrifice if one desires cattle.
23.17.6	The sūtra of Śālīki.
23.17.7	Here Bāudhāyana says that one should make an offering of the Puronuvākyā with two ladles, and the Sāmnāyya with a bowl.
23.17.8	One who has not yet attained prosperity should offer to Mahendra.
23.17.9	There are three who have attained prosperity: the listener, the village chief, and the king.
23.17.10	Their deity is Mahendra.
23.17.11	Baudhayana says that one who offers to Mahendra other than these should offer to Indra for a year and then offer to Mahendra.
23.17.12-16	Therefore, Śālīki says that one should perform the Mahendrajyā sacrifice after performing the Indra sacrifice for a year. One should perform the Indra sacrifice for one year. Because the vow is not transgressed for one year. This is the Sutra of Śālīki. Here Baudhayana says that if one starts performing the Indra sacrifice on a new moon day and completes it in a year, one should perform the Maheśvara sacrifice on that new moon day.
23.17.17	Now, he should be the priest of Mahendra from that time onwards.
23.17.18	Here, Oupamanyava said, "The year is indeed ascended by him in whose new-moon day he starts to sacrifice to Indra. When the year is completed, he should sacrifice to Mahendra in the new-moon day that comes before that."
23.17.19	He should be the priest of the great Indra from then on.
23.17.20	One desiring heaven should perform the Dakshayana sacrifice.
23.17.21	One should perform the Maitravaruni offering at the full moon and the Amavasya offering.
23.17.22	Baudhayana's Sutra.
23.17.23	Here one should also perform the Vaimṛdha sacrifice, says Saliki.
23.17.24	The eating of the Sannayya oblation.
23.17.25	Saliki's Sutra.
23.17.26	Herein Baudhayana says that the sacrificer should consume the Saṁnāyya after having dedicated it to this half-month.
23.17.27	Whether the offering to Ida is with or without a formula?
23.17.28	It should be with a formula, says Baudhayana.
23.17.29	It should be silent, says Salīki.
23.17.30	One should offer the Ida with four wheels and silently perform the Upāṁśuyāja.
23.17.31	One should do so, says Baudhayaṇa.
23.17.32	Śālīki says that one should not do so.
23.18.1	There is an offering of Dakṣiṇā at the Savana of Brhaspati.
23.18.2	Baudhāyana says that one should offer Dakṣiṇās at the Anusavana. Śālīki, however, says that one should make the offering of Dakṣina at the Madhyandina Savana only, and should say "I am giving" at the other two Savanas.
23.18.3	One should pour clarified butter with gold.
23.18.4	This ghee is to be offered with the mantra. So says Baudhayana.
23.18.5	Shaliki says that it should be offered silently.
23.18.6	One should sprinkle the Brihat Stotra on the southern side of the Ahavaniya fire without any disturbance.
23.18.7	This is the view of Baudhayana in the sutra.
23.18.8	Shaliki also says that one should sprinkle the person with the skin of a black antelope spread here.
23.18.9	The pot should be filled with black gram.
23.18.10	Baudhayana says that it should be filled with gold coins.
23.18.11	Shaliki says that it should contain barley grains.
23.18.12	He offered seventeen cows of the Marut constellation.
23.18.13	Baudhayayana says that the oblations should be separate and the Pasupurodasi should be separate.
23.18.14-18	The Manotā offerings should be separate, and the Pasupuroḍāśa should be one, says Śālīki. The Manotā offerings would be one, and the Pasu-puroḍāśas should be one, say the followers of Aupamanyava. The Agniṣṭoma and the Indraṣṭoma. Baudhāyana says that the Adhvaryu should perform as per the original procedure, and the Chandogas and Bahvṛcas should perform the counter-procedure. Śālīki says that the Advaryu should perform according to the original procedure, while the Chandogas should perform the counter procedure.
23.18.19	In the additional Stotras.
23.18.20	The former view is of Baudhayana, the latter of Saliki.
23.18.21	The offering of the bow.
23.18.22	The former is the view of Saliki, the latter of Baudhayāna.
23.18.23	The end of the single-day rites.
23.18.24	The Sutra of Baudhayāyana.
23.18.25	The end is the Mṛtyusava rite, says Saliki.
23.18.26-30	While placing this oblation, the leftover of the vow-food, he should say, "This is for him." Baudhayana says that one should not place the leftover of the oblation as the vow-food. Here, regarding the performance of the Sadya, Anukriya, Parikriya, and Atikriya of the Pravargya rite, Baudhayana prescribes it.
23.18.31	Śālīki says that one should not do so.
23.18.32	Baudhāyana says that one should place the testicles of a human bone on the sacrificial grass.
23.18.33	The Sūtra says,
23.18.34	Śālīki says, one should also make the fire-stirring stick here.
23.18.35	One should take any deity in this way.
23.18.36-42	Whatever vessel he places, he places it in the same way. Baudhāyana says that one should place it after rubbing each cup. One should give a white horse. One should offer a white mare. One should present a black horse. One gives a pregnant mare with a white spot on the forehead.
23.18.43	He gives a bull.
23.18.44	He gives thirty-three gold coins.
23.18.45	He gives a Soma vessel.
23.18.46	He gives an earthen vessel made of gold.
23.18.47	He gives grain in the form of a heap.
23.18.48	He gives grains in the form of Marayaka.
23.18.49	Baudhayana says that one should give these and also the regular ones.
23.18.50	Shaliki says that one should only give these.
23.19.1	Now, we shall explain the Sarvatomukha.
23.19.2	Baudhayana says that one should collect the Sarvatomukhāgni.
23.19.3	Śālīki says that one should not collect.
23.19.4	Here Maudgalyāyana says that the Savitrī mantras should be used in the other fires after collecting the fire in the eastern fire.
23.19.5	Āñjīgavi says that one should do this.
23.19.6	The placing of the kindling woods.
23.19.7	The Sutra is of the two teachers.
23.19.8	Herein Gautama, the householder, says that one should first place the fire on the two kindling woods, then the other fires.
23.19.9	In the hall.
23.19.10	One should measure with the natural procedure.
23.19.11	The Gārhapatya in the middle.
23.19.12	Baudhayana's Sutra.
23.19.13	Herein Saliki says that one should measure with the three-footed procedure everywhere.
23.19.14-19	The Trivṛt (Stoma) is in the eastern direction, the Pañcadaśa in the south, the Saptadaśa in the west, and the Ekavimśa in the north. The Jyotiṣṭoma is in all directions, and the Jyotiṣṭomadakṣiṇā is in all directions. The performance of the Pravargya. Baudhāyana says that one should not perform the Pravargya at the Ukthya. Śālīki says that it should be performed at the Yañman.
23.19.20	Baudhayana says that one should perform the Yājamāna rite for the present ones.
23.19.21	Śālīki says that one should do the Yājamana rite as per the space available.
23.19.22	If there are rites for Agni, then one may do the other rites according to the text, say the followers of Aupamanyava.
23.19.23	This is the Agni Anvādhāna.
23.19.24	This is Baudhayana's Sutra.
23.19.25	Here Śālīki says that the Garhapatya should be offered once, the Anvāhārya-pācana should be offered once after having offered the Gramayoni, and then one should go as per the prescribed order.
23.19.26	Regarding the eating of the oblation.
23.19.27	Baudhāyana says that one should eat all the oblations together.
23.19.28	Śālīki says one should eat all together.
23.19.29	Regarding the wiping of the hands.
23.19.30	Baudhāyanas says that one should wipe the hands with the right hand.
23.19.31	Śālīki says that it should be done only once.
23.19.32	It is the taking away of the local fires.
23.19.33	This is the sutra of Ācārya.
23.19.34	Here, Dirghavatsa says that the sacrifice should be performed on the previous day.
23.19.35	It is making the animals for the Kratu.
23.19.36	This is Baudhayana's sutra.
23.19.37	Śālīki says, "The animals for the Kratus and the Ekādaśina animals are optional."
23.19.38	It is the mixing.
23.19.39-46	The Sutra of Aupamanyavaputras. One should consecrate the Pracarana with as many Stomas as there are, says Baudhayana. The taking of curd, says Maudgalya. The Sutra of Maudgalya. One should take curd mixed with milk and ghee. Baudhayana says that one should take curd mixed only with milk. The taking up of the Anvadabhya cups, says Baudhayaṇa. The Sutra says: One should take up the Anvadabhyas cups.
23.19.47-52	Herein Shaṭaliṅka says, "In the Vājapeya sacrifice, in the twelve-day Sattra, in the Tandins' way, the Udbhid and Valabhid are to be performed." Similarly, with the Pṛṣnigrahas and Prāṇagrahas. The taking of the Sodashigrahas. Baudhāyana says that one should take the Anusavana. The Homa of the Atigrahyas.
23.19.53-60	Baudhayana says that one should offer the Anuvṣṭakāra of the Mahendra. Śālīki says that one should perform the Stotra of the Ṣoḍaśin. Baudhayana says that the Stotra of Ṣoḍasi should be performed. Śālini says that it should be performed with any Stotra. Baudhāyana says that one should consign the Hṛdayasūla to fire. Baudhāyan says that one should consecrate each one separately. Śālīsūka says that one should do all together.
23.19.61	Avabhrtha.
23.19.62	Baudhayana says that one should take the Avabhrtha facing east.
23.19.63	Saliki says that one should go to the Avabhrta facing east.
23.19.64	Placing of the kindling woods.
23.19.65	The sutra of the two teachers.
23.19.66	Here Gautama, the householder, says that one should place the kindling woods on the fire and then the other.
24.1.1	The fivefold method of interpretation is to be applied to the Veda, namely, by the method of Chanda, Brahmana, Pratyaya, Nyaya, and Sthavira.
24.1.2	By the method of Chandas, we mean that the Veda is to be recited according to the rules of recitation, knowing which is the earlier and which is the later.
24.1.3	Even if the mantra itself declares the action,
24.1.4	it becomes a statement of the action.
24.1.5	As it is said, "The mind has gone to the sacrificial grass, to the pure heaven, following the sky. In the impulse of the divine Savitar, with the arms of the Ashvins, with the hands of Pusan, I pour out what is dear to Agni."
24.1.6	If one is unable to perform it according to the Vedic text, one should perform it according to this Brāhmaṇa.
24.1.7	The Brahman indeed teaches them the unknown mantras, saying, "This is done by this, that is done by that."
24.1.8	"For this, for that," he says when cutting the branch; "For Vayu, for Vayu," he says when driving away the calves.
24.1.9	But if he performs rites without mantras,
24.1.10	As this is so, the Brāhmaṇa should perform the rite of Agnihotra in eight stages, the Rājanya in eleven stages, and the Vaiśya in twelve stages. Thus, it is due to the combination of the stages and the castes.
24.1.11	As this is so, it is due the approval of the Chandogas, Bahvṛcas, and Adhvaryus.
24.1.12	As this is the case, if one does not understand the natural law in the natural treatise, one should follow the village law. This is the beginning of the Arhatas.
24.1.13	As this is the case due to the nature of the arrangement, one should sprinkle the Soma and Phalguna grains that have been stolen.
24.1.14	The four kinds of mantras are those that are used in praise, in instruction, in benediction, and those that are not used in praise, instruction, or benediction.
24.1.15	There are five kinds of offerings: medicine, milk, animal, Soma, and ghee.
24.2.1	Each of these has its own separate rules and separate occasions.
24.2.2	Mantras are seen according to their occasions.
24.2.3	One should not mix them together unless instructed to do so.
24.2.4-12	Whatever oblation is accomplished by whatever means, one should do it by that means. That is its authority. The authorities have been stated. What is the sacrifice? Is it a sacrifice of knowledge or a sacrifice of faith or a sacrifice of auspiciousness? Where is the sacrifice? It is in the person. What is indeed the deity of initiation? It is speech. What is auspiciousness? It is the path.
24.2.13-18	Speech alone is the one-syllabled Gāyatrī. What is the beginning of the sacrifice and what is its foundation? It is known that the sacrifice is begun with the mind, with the sky, with the earth, with the wind, and with the sacrifice. The wind is the beginning of sacrifice and the wind is its foundation.
24.3.1	How does one know which is the ritual and which is the offering?
24.3.2	The ritual begins with the kindling of the fire and ends with the two portions of clarified butter, except for the herbs.
24.3.3	In that text, there are the places of sowing, such as milking the cows, placing the potsherds, carrying the sacrificial grass, and taking up the clarified butter. Whatever one sows.
24.3.4	The pouring of the oblations into the vessel which is to be placed above the two portions of clarified butter is the pouring of the oblation. The vessels which are to be placed in the vessel which is placed above the two parts of clarified butter, occupy the place of the pouring of the vessel. The vessel which is to contain the oblations is placed in the vessel above the two parts. The vessels which contain the oblations are placed in the vessel. The vessels which have the oblations are to be placed above. The vessels which will contain the oblations will be placed above.
24.3.5	The pouring of the oblications is from the vessel which is cut out. The vessels which hold the oblations are from the vessel which has been cut out.
24.3.6	Where does the ritual become the offering, or the offering the ritual?
24.3.7	In the Maitrāvaruṇa and Brhaspatisava, the ritual becomes the offering through pouring, and the offering becomes the ritual through giving.
24.3.8	In the Vāruṇī and Sañjñānīṣṭi, the offering becomes the offering through the pouring, and the ritual becomes the ritual through the giving.
24.3.9	The ritual beginning with the Anuyājas and ending with the Samīṣṭayajus offerings.
24.3.10	Which deity are the Anuyāja offerings?
24.3.11	One should say that they are dedicated to Agni.
24.3.12	It is known that the gods found Agni through the Anuyājak offerings. When one offers the Anuyājasa offerings, one kindles Agni.
24.3.13	The Prajapas are the deities of the seasons.
24.4.1	How many are the rites of the Pakayajnas, how many are the rites for the offering of oblations, and how many are the Soma rites?
24.4.2	Huta, Prahuta, Ahauta, Shulaga, Baliharana, Pratyavaroha, Ashtakahoma - these are the seven rites of the Pakyajnas.
24.4.3	Some say that there are unlimited rites.
24.4.4	And whatever else is thrown out of the house, all that is to be placed in the Pakayajna.
24.4.5	Now the Haviryajna-institutions: the Agnihotra, the Darsa-Paurnamasa, the Agrayana, the Catu-r-masya, the Dakshayanya, the Kaundapayana.
24.4.6	Some say that the Sautrāmaṇi is also included.
24.4.7	Now the Soma-institutions:
24.4.8	The Agniṣṭoma, the Ati-Agniṣṭoma, Ukthya, Ṣoḍaśī, Vājapeya, Ati-rātra and Aptoryāma are the seven Soma-sacrifices.
24.4.9	What is the Agniṣṭoma sacrifice, that is the Ati-Agnaṣṭoma.
24.4.10	What is Ukthya, that is the Ṣoḍasī and Vājapeya.
24.4.11	What is Ati-rātra, that is Aptoryāma.
24.4.12	Of the seven Soma-sacrifices, two do not go to the Sattras, viz. Vājasaneya and Āptyāma.
24.5.1	How does one know which is the earlier and which is the later rite?
24.5.2	The natural rite is the earlier rite.
24.5.3	What is added to it is the later rite.
24.5.4	The rite of Agni-installation is the earlier rite, and the rite of re-installation is the later rite.
24.5.5	The Darsha-Pūrnamāsa are the first of the Iṣṭis. All the Iṣṭi-s are the second.
24.5.6	The Aindra-Agni is the first of the animal-sacrifices. All the animal-sacrificial rites are the second. The Jyotiṣṭoma is the first of Soma-sacrifices.
24.5.7	All the Soma-sacrifices are the second.
24.5.8	The Sviṣṭakṛt is the first of the Agni rites, all the Agni rites are the second.
24.5.9	The two-day rite is the first of all the rites without a Soma, all the rites without Soma are the second. The twelve-day rite is
24.5.10	the first of all the Soma rites, all the Soma rites are the second.
24.5.11	The Gavamayana is the first of the annual sacrifices. All the annual sacrifices are the second.
24.5.12	How many Gavamayana sacrifices are there?
24.5.13	It is known that in the last month, the Prstha is performed once, and in the tenth month, the third Prstha is offered.
24.5.14	There are seven kinds of plants in the village and seven kinds of plants outside the village.
24.5.15	There are seven domestic animals and seven wild animals.
24.5.16	There are seven metres, with four extra.
24.5.17	There are the seven domestic plants: sesamum, beans, barley, rice, priyangu, aṇu, and wheat.
24.5.18	Some say that the seventh is the kulattha bean.
24.5.19	The seven wild grains are: śyāmāka, nīvara, jartila, gāvidhuka, gārmuta, vaṣṭa, and veṇuyaṣṭi.
24.5.20	Some say that the seven wild grains are kुरुविन्द.
24.5.21	The seven domestic animals are: cow, horse, sheep, goat, man, donkey, and camel.
24.5.22	Some say the seven domestic animals are aśvatarī.
24.5.23	The seven wild animals, the two-hoofed animals, the carnivorous animals, the birds, the reptiles, the elephant, and the monkey are the seventh.
24.5.24	The seven metres are the Gāyatrī, the Uṣṇīṣa, the Anuṣṭubh, the Bṛhatī, the Paṅkti, the Tristubh, and the Jagatī.
24.6.1	Now this triad is said to be the turning of action, the turning of deities, and the turning of numbers.
24.6.2	This is indeed the rite of Savitri, which is to be repeated.
24.6.3	Then the rite of the deities, the Dhruva-oblation, the Droṇa-pot, and all the offerings.
24.6.4	Then the repetition of the number, he asks three times, "Are the oblations cooked, O Soma-presser?"
24.6.5	And now also the king's measure.
24.6.6	Where indeed should the mantra be inserted?
24.6.7	Or he should know from one place to another, by means of the form or by means of the verse.
24.6.8	As for the statement "from one place to another," if the next mantra is mentioned, then he should perform it together with that, either before or after the time.
24.6.9	"As it is so, with the desire for prosperity." "As it is said, 'May I be established for the sacrificer by Brihaspati, the lord of wealth, with the desire to obtain excellent strength, prosperity, and good fortune.'
24.6.10	" "As it is, with the desire of prosperity." "This is indeed a description of the Agni-kalpa, which is mentioned in the context of the bricks.
24.6.11	If a mantra is omitted, then one should add more bricks.
24.7.1	Here, the horse sacrifice is mentioned as being made of oblations.
24.7.2	If a mantra is omitted there, then one should make more oblations.
24.7.3	One should not start what has not been started, and one should not complete a started rite silently. One should complete the rite with the mantra.
24.7.4	We said that the mantra is not to be recited if it has not been commenced. The mantra for the Barhirlāvana rite is recited in a short form, though the rite is long.
24.7.5	The mantra should not be recited for the sake of the rite.
24.7.6	The mantra for the Pashuvishaśana rite is recited in short form, though it is long.
24.7.7	A mantra should not be used for the sake of a rite.
24.7.8	Now in this self-sprout, a long mantra is recited, but the action is short.
24.7.9	The mantra should not be stopped for the sake of action.
24.7.10	As it is said, "Three times with the Yajus, once silently."
24.7.11	Having heard about the world fires and the Stambayajus.
24.7.12	As it is said, "Five times with the Yajus, five times silently," having heard the measure of those kings.
24.7.13	As it is said, “Once with the Yajas, once silently,” having heard the measure only of that king.
24.7.14	As to this they say, "He pours out four handfuls of grains." Two for the deity Svishtakrit, the third for Ida, the fourth for Agni. All these have Brahmanas.
24.8.1	Now we shall explain the duties of the Adhvaryu.
24.8.2	The Agni is not mentioned.
24.8.3	But it is as follows: One offers at the altar, one offers at the mouth of the chariot, one offers at a chariot axle, one offers at an intersection of roads, one offers at two roads, one offers in a ditch, one offers at (the place of) a foot, one offers at goat, one offers at right ear of the goat, one offers on the right horn of the goat, offers at the right hand of the Brahman, one offers at darbha-stalks, one offers in water, one offers in the udumbara-vessel, one offers in an anthill, one offers in (the place of the) Upavasatha, one offers in Uttanapani, one offers in Shamitri, one offers in Agnidhra, one offers in Anvähäryapacani, one offers at Garhapatya.
24.8.4	If the Adhvaryu is not directed, he should offer on the Ahavaniya fire.
24.8.5	If the Pratiprasthātṛ is not directed,
24.8.6	then it is as it is stated, 'the Unnetr offers, the Pratiprasthatṛ offers.'
24.8.7	If the Adhvaryus are not directed, then the Adhvaryū alone should offer.
24.8.8	If the vessel is not directed,
24.8.9	But it is as if one were to offer with a handful, with a winnowing basket, with a black antelope skin, with a middle leaf, with a last leaf, with an Arka leaf, with a leaf-made ladle, with a ladle made of Udumbara wood, with the thumbs, with the stalks of the Visraṃsīka grass, with the throat of a cow, with the skin of a horse, with a ladle of iron.
24.8.10-15	If not directed, one should offer with the ladle. If not directed, one may offer with the Samit. One should know the Samit only if directed. It is known that one should not offer without the Samit. If one offers without the Samit, it would be like giving food to a tongue. Therefore, one should offer only with the Samit.
24.9.1	Now, then, the section on Avadānas.
24.9.2	One should offer four times, and it becomes four times.
24.9.3	If not specified, one should offer by cutting.
24.9.4	The oblation is not specified.
24.9.5	One should know that something other than rice and barley is specified.
24.9.6	But indeed, they say that ghee is the most quickly prepared.
24.9.7	The animal is not specified.
24.9.8	One should know another (animal) from the Indra-Agni (animal) only by the command.
24.9.9	If the procedure is for the Abhihara (animal), one should perform the Abhihara.
24.9.10	The Agni-Abhihara and the Indra-Agna-Abhihara are the New and Full Moon sacrifices.
24.9.11	Soma is the Indra-Abhihara.
24.9.12	The offering of the Savitar animal is seen to be the offering of the medicinal animal.
24.9.13	What is the offering of the Snannayya animal, the king?
24.9.14	The milking is the offering of Snannayya.
24.9.15	The Upakarana is for the animal.
24.9.16	What is offered in the Upaṃśusavana is for the king.
24.9.17	The other oblations are known to be offered in the fire.
24.9.18	What is for the king?
24.9.19	What is offered to the king is the Vasatīvarī waters.
24.10.1	Now we shall explain the Puronuvākyās.
24.10.2	All are dedicated to Agni and have eight potsherds, except those that are repeated.
24.10.3	All the Indra-Agni offerings are of eleven potfuls, except the Agrayana and the Shunashīriya.
24.10.4	All the Indra offerings are of eleven pots, except the Shunashīrya.
24.10.5	All the Soma-Agni offerings have eleven potfuls, excep the Shyamaka.
24.10.6	All the animal offerings have eleven potful, except the Vāyavya.
24.10.7	The Pasupurodāsa is of the same deity as the animal sacrificed. It is different only in the case of the offering to Vāyu.
24.10.8	All the offerings to Agni-Viṣṇu are of eleven potsherds, except those prescribed in the Adhvara-kalpa.
24.10.9	There are offerings of eight and twelve potsherds.
24.10.10	All the Savitrī offerings are of twelve potsherds, with the exception of those prescribed in the Asvamedha.
24.10.11	There are two kinds of offerings, one with eight potsherds and the other with eleven potsherds. The one with eight potshers is called Savitra.
24.10.12	All the Maruts have seven potsherds, except for the animals of the Cāturmāsya sacrifice and the Pasupurodāśa of the horse sacrifice. The Maruts have twenty-one potsherds, with the exception of the Pasupuroḍāśa of animals of the Rajasuya sacrifice and the five autumnal animals.
24.10.13	What are the potsherds that are to be inscribed?
24.10.14-17	It is known that one should offer a cake on twelve potsherds to Vaiśvānara Agni, a cake on a potsherd of a deer skin, and a cake on a piece of ground. This is what is known. Now the former rites. The rites of the five-prajās, the nine-prajās and the eleven-prajās are the former rites. The rites of the five, nine and eleven-prajäs are the former rites.
24.10.18	Those are known to be three hundred and sixty in number.
24.10.19	So many are the nights of a year.
24.11.1	Now about the royal sacrifices.
24.11.2	They are the Rajasuya, Asvamedha, Purushamedha, Sarvamedha, Soma-sava, Prithivisa-va, Mrityu-sava, Kanan-dha-yajna, and Shunaskarna-yajna.
24.11.3	Now about Aditi-deities.
24.11.4	In the Agni-adhyaya, the first oblation.
24.11.5	In the Catu-r-masya, the second.
24.11.6	In the Prayaniya and Udayaniya, in the Agni-diksaniya.
24.11.7	Three in the Rajasuya, in the Ratnima, in the Prayuja, and in the Adityamalha.
24.11.8	One in the Ikstika-kalpa.
24.11.9	One in Vratyasstoma.
24.11.10	Four oblations to Aditi, the wife of Vishnu, at the horse sacrifice. Aditi with the swan, Aditi with the three red ones, the three female goats, the three Adityas.
24.11.11	Two at the Sautrāmaṇī.
24.11.12	Aditi and Viṣṇu are the oblations.
24.11.13	The Graha is eighteen.
24.11.14	The three kinds of sacrifice are connected with the Yajna, namely, the Pañca-prajâ, Nava-prajâ and Ekâdaśa-prajâ.
24.11.15	The Pañca-prayâja is connected with the Darsha-Pûnamasa, the Iṣṭis and the Kâmyas.
24.11.16	The Nava-prayâja with the Caturmâsyas.
24.11.17	The Ekâdaśâ-prayâja, with the Pûshas and the Soma.
24.11.18	These six are connected with all the rites and are meant for all purposes.
24.11.19	As for this Agni-installation, the Agnihotra, the Darsa-Pūrṇamāsa sacrifices, the Cāturmāsya sacrifices, the animal sacrifice and the Soma sacrifice.
24.11.20	It is also known that when he takes out the Agni, he obtains the thousandfold wish-yielding cow.
24.11.21	When he offers the Agnihotra, he obtains the thousands. This is the measure of the Vaishvadev sacrifice.
24.11.22	This is the least of them.
24.11.23	Therefore, the later ones are better than the earlier ones.
24.11.24	One conquers all worlds by sacrificing animals.
24.11.25	Other sacrificial rites are performed for one desire.
24.11.26	The animal sacrifice is for all desires.
24.12.1	One who is about to establish the sacred fires should make himself auspicious.
24.12.2	One should do what is auspicious with what is inauspicious.
24.12.3	Those debts which have arisen at the time of birth, one should discharge them or seek permission.
24.12.4	Now, if we cite the selection of priests at the time of the fire installation as the first,
24.12.5	If they have been selected by his ancestors, he should not select them again. If they are not separated by caste, study, human (i.e. non-human) conduct, and character, then they should be.
24.12.6	Which of them is the first to be chosen?
24.12.7	Stealing, not doing what one should do, not doing what is enjoined, and doing what is prohibited - these are the faults.
24.12.8	If one chooses them, one should choose those whose faults are not serious.
24.12.9	Which of them is the most important to choose first?
24.12.10	He should first choose the one who is most devoted to him.
24.12.11	He should then seek others with that adviser.
24.12.12	If he chooses the Brahman priest first, then the Hotri, then the Udgâtri, then the Adhvaryu,
24.12.13	then the Adhvaryus after the Brahman,
24.12.14	then the one who is either before or after according to the rite.
24.12.15	The priest should be paid with the money earned by him.
24.12.16	There are three grounds for the priests to be paid even without performing the sacrifice, namely, if the sacrifice is not performed, if the sacrifice does not yield any benefit, and if the wife is not made to perform the sacrifice.
24.12.17	What is the duty of the priests?
24.12.18	The one who teaches.
24.12.19	How is he to be honoured?
24.13.1	One says that it is by following the scriptures.
24.13.2	Another says that it is through the mouth of the seasons.
24.13.3	The end of the year is one.
24.13.4	The attainment of the sacrifice is another.
24.13.5	What is the duty of the priests?
24.13.6	One should not perform the priestly duties without being appointed.
24.13.7	One should not do it without being instructed.
24.13.8	One should perform the sacrifice for one who has not been bought.
24.13.9	One should sacrifice for one who is not covered.
24.13.10	One should offer sacrifice for one who does not have excess.
24.13.11	One should make an offering without specifying.
24.13.12	One should not perform a sacrifice for one who has not paid the fees.
24.13.13	One should not perform a rite in the dark fortnight.
24.13.14	One should perform a rite for one who is not sick.
24.13.15	One should perforin a rite for one whose father is not dead.
24.13.16	One should perfom a rite for one without three kinds of diseases.
24.13.17	One should perfoim a rite for one not having crossed a ditch.
24.13.18	One should peform a rite for one having no boundary.
24.13.19	One should peiorm a rite for one with no boundary.
24.13.20	Oue should perform a rite without reciting the mantra.
24.13.21	But if one were to sacrifice to them, then one should sacrifice to him who would break the skull, if he were to be seen as a means of livelihood.
24.13.22	This is also known as the Dasataya (verse). The intestines are not to be eaten by dogs. I did not find the destroyer among the gods. I saw the wife not being honoured. The hawk brought honey for me.
24.13.23	There is no one who is not worthy of being sacrificed to them. The fee is a thousand."
24.14.1	And the sand.
24.14.2	One should collect those which are like ashes.
24.14.3	One should gather from the carcass of a wild boar.
24.14.4	One should take from the mound of a wild hare.
24.14.5	If there is a cook who is not a slave, one should collect from him.
24.14.6	If there are no cooks, one should collect at the hole of a tortoise.
24.14.7	If the horse is killed by lightning, one should offer a horse killed by cold or wind.
24.14.8	"The horse of the Citra tree."
24.14.9	One should offer from where a village, town, river, or sacred place is known.
24.14.10	"The former-drawn horse."
24.14.11	This means "the young one."
24.14.12	"Three golden scales."
24.14.13	One should make six of these:
24.14.14	The golden ones are for worship, the silver ones for giving away.
24.14.15	They are adorned with human ornaments, and wear new clothes.
24.14.16	All other human ornaments are used, except for nala grass.
24.14.17	This is said only for those who are afflicted.
24.14.18	Some people forbid garlands.
24.15.1	One should put them on before a year has passed.
24.15.2	If it is not completed in three days, six days, or twelve days,
24.15.3	what should be done in that case?
24.15.4	One should again start the Brahma-rice offering until the kindling of the fire.
24.15.5	One should not shave the hair or beard.
24.15.6	One should mention this year in front.
24.15.7	This is said for the purpose of expiation.
24.15.8	If he has to go away for some time, he should do as follows.
24.15.9	If he has to go back after having gone away, he should do so as follows.
24.15.10	When the Upavasatha-rite is performed, the rites beginning with the Upavasathagavi are performed.
24.15.11	Some say that the two Brahmasaudana oblations are offered. The first one is the remnant of the oblation and the second one is the offering of appeasement.
24.15.12	Then, while sowing the seeds in the heaps, he should mentally contemplate the dark (lunar) disc in the moon, thinking, "That too is here."
24.15.13	If he does not know the Sama hymns, he should recite the Yoni verses or the Vyahrtis or with the sound "Hiṃ."
24.15.14	He should move the chariot wheel with a lamp.
24.15.15	If while setting it up, the moon is seen in front of him, what should he do there?
24.15.16	If the rite that has been begun is completed, then one should conclude with the rite.
24.15.17	One should conclude the next day.
24.15.18	If the fire is seen to have been extinguished, what should one do there?
24.15.19	Having performed the rite up to the full oblation, one should conclude with a rite.
24.15.20	One concludes the next day.
24.16.1	Now, the investigation of the seasons and stars.
24.16.2	We shall first explain the seasons and then the metres.
24.16.3	A Brahmin should kindle the fire in spring, a Kshatriya in summer, a Vaishya in autumn, and a Rathkar in the rainy season.
24.16.4	But the kindling of all is in spring, and for all it is in Rohini.
24.16.5	But the metres are according to the caste.
24.16.6-13	But, indeed, the rites of Agni-installation are connected with the desires. As it is said: One should install Agni in Krittika. One should install in Rohini. One should instal in Punarvasu. In the two eastern Phalguni. In the northern Phalguni. In Citra.
24.16.14-19	These are the rites to be performed immediately. In summer, the rite is performed by a king. In autumn, by a vaishya. These rites are not to be performed immediately.
24.16.20	On the full moon day, the Sadyaskala rite is performed.
24.16.21	In the waning half, when the moon is waning, one should perform the rite of the waning half. There is no scope for hesitation here.
24.16.22	One should perform all this as the Sadyaskāla rite, the Caturhotra rite, and the Homa offerings to Sarasvati, and the Anvarambhești rite.
24.17.1	Then, having performed the rites of the full moon and the new moon, one should perform only the new moon rite.
24.17.2	If the new moon falls on the same day as the full moon, then the new moon should be performed at the time of the full moon.
24.17.3	Then, for the two Homa offerings to Sarasvati, one should offer the verse with the verse.
24.17.4	Similarly, for the full Darbha grass.
24.17.5	Similarly, in the case of Vastosapati.
24.17.6	How should one offer the full oblation?
24.17.7	He should offer oblations to Agni, Earth, Vayu, Space, Sun, Heaven, Varuna, Water and Svaha.
24.17.8	Now this silent Agnihotra is seen to be for the sanctification of fire.
24.17.9	He should offer oblations with ghee.
24.17.10	He should wipe it downwards and upward.
24.17.11	Both of them, offering the Agnihotra in the evening and morning, think that the Soma is offered at the Upavasatha night.
24.17.12	One who is going to recite the Samidheni verses, having explained the Dashotr and having uttered the Vyahrtis, should then utter the Hink sound and then recite. This is the order here.
24.17.13	How is the Soma offered in the Agnihotra?
24.17.14	Having performed the rites up to the full oblation, one should enter the hall.
24.17.15	The offering to Agni is to be performed with eight potfuls of cooked rice. The offering to Indra and Agni is to be made with cooked rice. The Atithya offering is to be made to Agni Pavamana with cooked rice in eight potfuls. The Pasupurodasi offering of the Agni-Soma sacrifice is to be made. The Anvarambheshti offering is to be performed at the morning pressing.
24.17.16	Or, having completed all the oblations to be offered in the fire, one may enter the hall.
24.17.17	The concluding oblation is offered at the beginning.
24.18.1	Now this is the re-installation.
24.18.2	How much is the re-establishment?
24.18.3	Having kindled the fires, he becomes worse. "My son died." This is seen in this very year.
24.18.4	In which season should one revive it?
24.18.5	If the full moon of Āṣāḍha is followed by a new moon, then it will be the first time in a year that the new moon coincides with the Pūrvāṣāḍha constellation. One should perform the rite on that day.
24.18.6	On the Upavasatha day, having deposited the fires in the kindling woods, having churned out fire, having performed the rites of the fires, having performed the Udvāsanī rite, having performed the Iṣṭi, having deposited the fire, he should go back. He should again prepare this fire-chamber or make a new one. He should again repair these sacrificial vessels or make new ones.
24.18.7	The chariot is again made ready, on the right side. This is said to be the same as the one made ready before.
24.18.8	The garment is again spread out. This is said as the same as the garment spread out before.
24.18.9	The bull is again let loose. This is said of the bull that has been let loose.
24.18.10	Now these are the rites of Upāṁśu: the Agni-installation, the re-installation, the Pitryajña, the Diksaniyā, the Prāyaniyā, the Atithi, the Upasads, the Prātaranuvāka, the Patnīsaṁyājas, the Avabhrtha, the Udayaniya, the Udasanīyā, the Cittiprāṇayaniya, the Tvasṭra, the Yūpavirodhaniya, the Astāpadī, and the pregnant cow.
24.18.11	They are the rites of co-operation.
24.18.12	As Baudhayana says in this connection.
24.19.1	One should offer the Garhapatya with the Serpent-king verses.
24.19.2	Having removed the Gharma-head, one should offer the Serpent-king (verses) in its place.
24.19.3	Having attended with the regular (verses), one should attend with the additional (verses).
24.19.4	What follows is well established.
24.19.5	When one is offering again, should one join the two ends together or not?
24.19.6	Some say one should join them.
24.19.7	Others say one should not join them.
24.19.8	The sacrifice touches the body. When one offers again, then one should join them together.
24.19.9	They are said to be of a hundred syllables.
24.19.10	These four rows of syllables each have twenty-five syllables.
24.19.11	That is a hundred.
24.19.12	Now this is the third addition.
24.19.13	Which of these is the basis, the Agni-addition or the Puna-addition?
24.19.14	One should say only the Agni-addition.
24.19.15	If the Agni is stolen or lost, one obtains it back with the Brahmo-dana.
24.19.16	The Agni-addition is accomplished.
24.20.1	Now these two sacrifices, the Darśa and the Pūrṇamāsa, are performed in the order of the full moon and the new moon, and the teachers say that they are established in the new moon.
24.20.2	There they quote: "The moon waxes beyond midnight to the full moon."
24.20.3	He becomes full of this other half of the night and the whole day, and beyond midnight of the northern half of the night.
24.20.4	Then on the day of fasting for the New Moon, after midday, the moon is eclipsed by the sun.
24.20.5	He is eclipsed in the afternoon and throughout the night, and until midday on the following day.
24.20.6	One should offer a sacrifice at this juncture."
24.20.7	The night is to be offered at the Full Moon, and the day at the New Moon.
24.20.8	There are two full-moon days and two new-moon days.
24.20.9	The former full-moon day is Anu-mati and the latter is Ra-ka. The former new-moon day is Si-ni-va-li and the latter is Ku-hu.
24.20.10	The former new-moon is Si-niva-li and latter is Ku-ha.
24.20.11	Gāyatrī, Anumati, Triṣṭubh, Rāketi, Jagatī, Sinīvālī, Anuṣṭup, Kuhuḥ, these are the names of the full moon.
24.21.1	Now this moon is sixteen-rayed.
24.21.2	Of that, the fortnight is formed by fifteen.
24.21.3	This is the sixteenth part, which has been distributed in many ways among the Brahmanas, the waters, the herbs, the trees, and the animals.
24.21.4	When these are performed in the sacrifice, it is thereby collected.
24.21.5	Then the fourteenth, fifteenth, and sixteenth days of the fast.
24.21.6	But the thirteenth and seventeenth days do not exist.
24.21.7	Now this householder who has kindled the sacred fires, on the day before the morning Agnihotra, should place the sacrificial grass for sprinkling near the fire for the purpose of sprinkling.
24.21.8	He should cook the food for the vow-breaking rite.
24.21.9	There are two kinds of food for it.
24.21.10	It is mixed with ghee and curds, without salt and without meat.
24.21.11	On this day one should avoid all grains except sesame.
24.21.12	One should eat after offering to a brahmin.
24.21.13	On this day one should not give leftovers to a shudra.
24.21.14	On this new moon day one should give leftovers only to one's wife.
24.21.15	One should not sleep on the ground or approach a woman.
24.21.16	He may lie down on the ground, but he should not approach a woman. He should be a follower of vows.
24.21.17	If he is going to shave his hair and beard, he should shave his hair and shave his beard, and then cut his nails.
24.21.18	He should bathe and anoint himself.
24.21.19	He should make himself fit for the consecration.
24.22.2	If the Āhavaniya is blown out, one should remove the ashes, smear it with a lump of cow-dung, take out the blazing Āhavaniya, place it, perform the Upasampadana, and again perform the Anvadhāna with the Vyāhṛtis.
24.22.3	If the Anvāhāryapacana is blown out, he should remove it in the same way.
24.22.4	Because the Anvāhārya-pācana is a deity without distress.
24.22.5-6	Then, having again taken up the Vyāhṛtis, one should worship. If the sun sets or rises while the fire is not yet removed, one should perform according to the rules, or offer a continuous oblation. Having offered the oblations of the Vyāhṛti mantras, one should worship with the Vyāhṛți mantras. "The mind is light, may the thirty-three threads be enjoyed. Having offered the ladle oblations, one should worship."
24.22.7-9	Then, when the sun has set, having offered a spoonful of oblation to Varuna, one should stand with the Vyahrtis. Then, when the sun rises, having offered a spoon of oblation to Mitra, one should stand by the Vyahrtis.
24.22.10	Now, when the fires have been raised on the kindling woods, or when the Ātman has gone on a journey, the teachers do not prescribe any expiation.
24.22.11	In this connection they cite an example: When the fires have been brought down on the kindling wood, one should churn out fire.
24.22.12	Or, having spent the night with his wife, one should offer oblations after bringing them down.
24.23.4	He should perform the Agnihotra rites, observe the vow, and cut a branch of the sacrificial tree for one who has observed the vow. This is the proper sequence here.
24.23.5	There are three kinds of Palasha trees: smooth, hairy, and brittle.
24.23.6	The cutting should be done only from the hairy Palasha tree.
24.23.7	As long as the cow would be able to pull, one should not cut off (the rope) beyond that.
24.23.8	Beyond that, it would be a cow belonging to others.
24.23.9	If one were to neglect the Agnihotra leftovers, one should again offer the Agnihotra.
24.23.10	Now these six milking cows are mentioned in the Sāmnāyya.
24.23.11	If there are three, one should take four from the first or the last.
24.23.12	If there are only two, one should take three from each.
24.23.13	If there is only one, one should take it six times.
24.23.14	The words of the Sruva are not to be repeated. The words of the Doha are not to be uttered again. Thus it is said that the words of the Dohada are not to be spoken again.
24.24.1	There are twelve pairs in the Darsha-Paurnamasa sacrifices.
24.24.2	They are to be accomplished.
24.24.3	The Sphayo and the potsherds are five.
24.24.4	The calf is let loose and the Ukhā is placed. Thus it is seven.
24.24.5	These are twelve.
24.24.6	It is indeed at the New Moon that they are joined together. It is not joined together.
24.24.7	This is the altar for the Darsha-Paurnamasa sacrifices. It is of the size of the sacrificer or unlimited.
24.24.8	It should be inclined so that the oblations may be placed as they are.
24.24.9	He places the two ends of the altar towards the east, for the purpose of enclosing the Ahavaniya.
24.24.10	The Pratichi (brick) is the one which is held around the Garhapatya.
24.24.11	It is lower in front, higher behind, and most sloping in the middle. Thus it is like a woman.
24.24.12	She digs it with the mouth of the sacrificer, measured by Prajapati, up to the foundation.
24.24.13	Some say that it should be dug two fingers deep.
24.24.14	Some say it should be three fingers.
24.24.15	Some say it should be four fingers.
24.24.16	Some others say it should be the size of a seat.
24.24.17	Some others that it should be the width of a chariot-path.
24.24.18	Some others, that it should be as much as the white of the heel.
24.24.19	This is the right thing to do.
24.24.20	One should not dig too deep.
24.24.21	He makes it sloping towards the south.
24.24.22	He makes it sloping towards excrement.
24.24.23	He takes the ladle standing on the eastern side, sloping towards the north. This is said of the wooden ladle.
24.25.1	Some say it should be taken as big as a finger-nail.
24.25.2	Some say, it should be taken like a bamboo-shoot.
24.25.3	Some say: It should be taken as long as a ladle-stick.
24.25.4	Some say that it should be the size of a ladle.
24.25.5	Some say that it should the size of a thigh bone.
24.25.6	Some say it should be the same size as the thumb.
24.25.7	Some say there is no limit to its size.
24.25.8	This is the extent of them.
24.25.9	He says about the kindling wood.
24.25.10	It is said that they are the size of a span.
24.25.11	They say that they should be made according to this (measure).
24.25.12	For it is by this that Prajapati created the creatures in the beginning.
24.25.13	What deity is the filter and what is the purifier?
24.25.14	One should say, 'Belonging to Vishnu and purified by Vayu.'
24.25.15	They should be without nails.
24.25.16	"He should think in his mind, 'I am offering water with affection, I am offering the earth with affection.'
24.25.17	He should do all this equally. The Praṇītā, the Āhavanīya, the Brahman, the kindling wood, and the sacrificial grass are called the head of the sacrifice.
24.25.18	What is sprinkled with what?'
24.25.19	The Brahmanas say, "You offered the oblations with water, by whom?"
24.25.20	"By Brahma."
24.25.21	They are indeed sprinkled by Brahma.
24.25.22	He says to the Brahman, "Come, O oblation-maker." To the Rajanya, "Come, oblation-maker, O giver." To the Vaishya, "Come, obeisance-maker, O runner."
24.25.23	"Come, O oblator" is indeed said to be Parjanya.
24.25.24	But they say that this is a sanctification of the oblation.
24.25.25	"He strikes with the Vrsarava (verse) on the stone-slab, loudly."
24.25.26	It is known that he says loudly to strike with the Vrsara (verse).
24.25.27	"Those who are his enemies, who hear the sound of the weapons of sacrifice, they are defeated."
24.26.5	"He carries the offering to the gods" - this is said to be the Ahavaniya.
24.26.6	"Who is the carrier of the offerings?" - one should say "the Anvähäryapacana".
24.26.7	"O Agni, carrier of the offerings, you will worship the ancestors, the increasers of truth."
24.26.8	"From where should one spread the ground with flour?" - one should only say "from the black antelope skin".
24.26.9	When he pours the flour, he restrains speech.
24.26.10	When he cooks it without burning, he releases speech.
24.26.11	He who is burnt is Yama, he who is not cooked is Rudra, he who is cooked is the gods.
24.26.12	He cooks well, he cooks well, he releases speech, this is said.
24.26.13	"Do you ask well with Brahma."
24.26.14	Speech is indeed Brahman. It is with speech that he unites him.
24.26.15	Where is the oblation offered?
24.26.16	When he takes it from the fire and offers it to the one, to the two, to the three, saying "Svāhā to the one, Svāhā to the two, Svāhā!"
24.26.17	Who are the one, the two, and the three?
24.26.18	Some say: Father, grandfather, great-grandfather.
24.26.19	Some say that the earth, the atmosphere, and the sky are one.
24.26.20	Some say that Agni, the sun, and lightning are one.
24.27.1	 Some say that Agni had three elder brothers.
24.27.2	Some say these were the names of the sages.
24.27.3	These gods are called the Apyas because they are purified by the Apyas.
24.27.4	Where is the offering to the ancestors made on the full moon day?
24.27.5	"It is said, "He offers it to the two thighs."
24.27.6	"Is the ghee offered with a sprinkling?"
24.27.7	"One should say, "It is offered with truth."
24.27.8	"One sprinkles with truth, saying, "I sprinkle you with truth. You are to be eaten by that."
24.27.9	"I take thee for the five winds, for the contrivance, for the support." Thus in the directions.
24.27.10	The all-pervading wind is the fifth of them.
24.27.11	"I take thee for five seasons, for the contrivanc, for the support," thus the winter and the spring go together.
24.27.12	"I take thee for the five directions, for the support, for the support." The fifth direction is above.
24.27.13	"I take thee for five kinds of people, for the support and for the support." Gods, men, Asuras, Rakshasas.
24.27.14	Gandharvas are the fifth among them.
24.27.15	"I take thee, O Charu, of five holes, for the contrivance and support." This very space is the Charu of five holes.
24.27.16	Its five holes are the directions, and the wind is the stalk.
24.27.17	Here they also quote: "The Charu of five-holes is indeed the year itself.
24.27.18	The seasons are his holes, the wind his tail.
24.28.1	Now the approach of the Adhvaryu and the Hotṛ.
24.28.2	The Adhvaryu approaches with his face turned towards the east, the Hotṛ with his face turned away.
24.28.3	The Adhvaryu should be close to the fire.
24.28.4	If one does not know the lineage, one should say, "Tell me the best lineage." One should say, "According to Manu, according to Bharata, according to Manu."
24.28.5	It is known that the offspring are according to Manu. This is the Brahmanical text.
24.28.6	Or the best lineage of the royal priest.
24.28.7	Then if one does not know one's relatives, one should ask the teacher, "Tell me about the best teacher." One should choose the best teacher. Then one should choose the Hotṛ.
24.28.8	With milk one should increase the deity. With curds one should offer the Svishtakrit. One should offer the Avadana with the fingers.
24.28.9	The Avadana offerings to the deities are the size of the knuckle of the thumb. The Svishtakrit offerings are larger. The offerings to the Idas are also larger.
24.28.10	The offerings are divided into four parts. "For the establishment of the Brahman."
24.28.11	Having offered the Svishtakrit oblation, he should fill the ladle with water and place it within the enclosing sticks, saying, "I offer this oblation to Vaisvānara."
24.28.12	What is not mentioned in the ritual? One should say, "It is mentioned before the invitation for the Anuyāja offerings."
24.29.1	What are the offerings to Agni and Homa, the New and Full Moon sacrifices, the optional sacrifices, and the animal sacrifice?
24.29.2-6	Some say that the Agnihotra is to be offered with the milk of a cow that has been milked by another. Some say that the Agnihotras are to be offered with milk from a pot. When one offers in the evening, one makes the night auspicious by that. When one makes an offering in the morning, one makes the day auspicious by that. When one gives something after that, that is the Dakṣiṇā.
24.29.7	It is said that one gives at the time of day and night.
24.29.8	Now, at the Darśa-Pūrṇamāsa sacrifices, the Anvāhārya rice and the Puronuvākyā verses are divided into four parts.
24.29.9	It is known that this is only for the sake of the Dakṣiṇā.
24.29.10	It is also said that one fills up the gaps in the sacrifice.
24.29.11	Just as at the Soma sacrifice, the Dakṣiṇās are taken to the priests, so also the Dakṣiṇa Purorāśa is divided into four parts and is placed on the sacrificial grass.
24.29.12	The Iṣṭis which are desired to be performed with garments as Dakṣiṇā and which are not prescribed with Dakṣiṇas,
24.29.13	The animal sacrifice is performed with cows as Dakṣiṇa.
24.29.14	The Anvāhārya is always performed.
24.29.15	As Śālīki has prescribed, so they perform the rite of the Patnīsaṃyājas. All should go around the Garhapatya from the north. The Homas are to be performed without returning.
24.29.16	Then indeed some offer the oblations to Raka, Sinivāli, Kuhu, Anumati, the wife-oblation, the two final oblations before the householder. May the wife and husband go together with good deeds. May they be yoked to the sacrifice, may they be the most worthy. May they know each other, may they abandon enmity. May they attain the eternal light in heaven. Svāhā.
24.29.17	May the sacrificer gratify your ten forms, O Agni, which are fit for sacrifice, with ghee. The sacrificer, being worshipped, at the end of the two Nariṣṭhas, became immortal among the gods. Svāhā.
24.29.18	The gods have assigned you a share of strength, O Agni, and Indra. With that I gratify you. May you be satisfied with it. Svāhā.
24.30.1	Now the teachers say that the Agnihotra is to be commenced in the evening and concluded in the morning.
24.30.2	Here they quote: "These two lights have come together, the sun and the fire."
24.30.3	They should not be separated.
24.30.4	When taking out the fire from the Āhavanīya in the evening, one should pour it down facing west. When taking it out in the morning, one should pour down facing east.
24.30.5	One who is going to offer the evening Agnihotra should go around in front and offer. One who is going offer the morning Agnihotra should go round behind and offer.
24.30.6	Thus these two lights of his do not become interrupted.
24.30.7	Now this is the mantra for lifting up: "With your speech, I lift you up with the Hotr, with your breath, with the Udgâtri, with your eye, with the Adhvaryu, with your mind, with the Brahman, with your ear, with the Agnidh, with these five divine priests, I lift you. Bhūr Bhuvah Suvar. Being lifted up, lift me from sin. Whatever sin I have done unknowingly or knowingly, whatever evil has been done during the day, may I be freed from all that." This is in the evening.
24.30.8	Whatever sin has been committed during the night, may I be freed from all of it. May I be released from it.
24.30.9	He places the fire, saying, "I offer the immortal oblation in the immortal (fire). I offer the fire on the earth for the conquest of immortality. By that we may conquer the endless desire here. Prajapati, who first conquered him, offered the fire in the fire, Agni Vaisvānara, saying, 'Svāhā!' in the evening.
24.30.10	He offers the sun in Agni Vaisvânara, saying, "Svâhâ!" in the morning.
24.30.11	This is the Agnihotra of Agni, the other is the Payo-hotra.
24.30.12	One who is about to offer should sprinkle the fires as arranged. Having offered, he should sprinkle only the Ahavaniya.
24.30.13	One who has offered and is about to offer, should sprinkle only the Ahvaniya.
24.30.14	He should not sprinkle at all. This is another view.
24.30.15	Then this is the invocation of the unseen: "Here am I, there am I, O Agni, I bear you with breath, speech, and mind. Do not let me be hidden. Do not let my life be lost. I stand with you, O Agni, with the light of the all-pervading."
24.30.16	Then he should silently place this kindling wood for one who is departing.
24.30.17	The departing one makes the offering to the one who is departing.
24.31.1	Now the teachers, who are well-versed in the entire sacrifice, say that it is to be performed according to the rules of the Yāyāvaras.
24.31.2	Here they quote: The sages named Yāyāvarā were there.
24.31.3	They did not tire on the path.
24.31.4	They offered the entire sacrifice.
24.31.5	Therefore, the entire sacrifice should be offered on the path according to the rules for Yāyāvarīs.
24.31.6	The sacrifice is without any reason.
24.31.7	Or he may close his eyes or concentrate his mind.
24.31.8	One should not offer Agnihotra with the milk of a Śūdra cow, or of a cow that has not been milked, or of a dead calf, or of a barren cow, or of one that is pregnant, or of a wild cow, or of another cow, or of the calf of another cow, of a cow whose calf has been given away, or of a calf that has been given away.
24.31.9	One person should not offer the milk of one cow to many people, nor should one person offer the milk of many cows to one person.
24.31.10	When one obtains milk, one should offer it with the Upasadana-mantra and the Skanna-mantra.
24.31.11	If the fires are burning and are being offered to, one should offer the Agnihotra offerings that have been missed, counting them.
24.31.12	If he offers when the sun has not set, he should offer again when the sun has set.
24.31.13	If he offers at midnight, he should offer at dawn again.
24.32.1	How is the offering of food to the departed father done?
24.32.2	The son gives to those same ones to whom the father gave.
24.32.3	The son of the departed father gives to two.
24.32.4	The son's son of the departed grandfather gives to one.
24.32.5	Some say: One should not give to a living person.
24.32.6	If one accepts the inheritance of one's maternal uncle or a person of the same gotra, how does one offer the ball of rice there?
24.32.7	When one offers the ball of rice to one's father, at that time one should offer the ball of his rice.
24.32.8	But if one accepts the inheritance from a person of a different gotra, how is the offering of the ball of rice done there?
24.32.9-11	Having given to his own, he should give the ball of rice beginning with the sacrificial grass. Or, having cooked the rice in a pot in the house, he should give a ball of rice beginning only with the sacrificial grass.
24.32.12	This is for your father, O Grandfather, and for those who follow you. This is for your grandfather, O Grandfather, for my great-grandfather, and for those following you. This is your great-great-grandfather, O Grandfather, this is for my great-great-great-grandfather and for those following him.
24.32.13	Or he may give with the formula, "To the Fathers seated on the earth, to the Fathers seated in the sky, to the Fathers sitting in heaven, I give this oblation."
24.32.14	If one does not know the names of one's father, grandfather and great-grandfather, how is the offering of the balls to be made?
24.32.15	Or he may give with this formula.
24.32.16	"This is yours, O Agni, and those who follow you; this is yours, O Yama, and those who are following you; this is your grandfather's, O Yama, who are following you."
24.32.17	"One should cut the hair when one is about to die."
24.32.18	"At what time should it be cut?"
24.32.19	The time for this is when the sun is in the sign of Virgo, six months after the winter solstice, and six months before the summer solstice, that is, six months after six months.
24.32.20	How does one perform the offering to the ancestors without a fire?
24.32.21	Having cooked the Anirupta-Sthalipaka, having set fire, having strewn around, having offered oblations, having strewn the sacrificial grass with its tip towards the south, one should offer the ball of rice beginning with the sacrificial grass.
24.32.22	Or one may cook the Sthalipaka in the house itself and offer the ball of cooked rice beginning with the grass.
24.32.23	One should worship this Agni with the Prajapati-mantra, wearing the sacrificial thread.
24.33.1	As Baudhayana's ritual is known, one should release speech after offering the oblations and offer the clarified butter. At what time should one offer them?
24.33.2	One should offer them at the time when the ritual is completed up to the sprinkling.
24.33.3	How does one perform the Āgrayaṇa rite for one who has not set up the sacred fires?
24.33.4	One should cook a pot of rice without offering it, then kindle the fire, spread the grass, offer the two Āghāra libations, offer the two portions of clarified butter, and offer to the Āgrayaṇī deities and the Svishtakṛt as the fourth.
24.33.5	One may optionally offer the Anīya libations of clarified butter before the Svishtakrit.
24.33.6	He should eat with this very mantra, saying, "May the gods have chosen what is good and auspicious for us."
24.33.7	Or one should desire to eat from the remnants of a brahmin who has heard (the Vedas).
24.33.8	The mantra for eating is the same.
24.33.9	How does one know what is within Viraj, what is outside Viraj, what within the sacrificial grass is Viraj?
24.33.10	Having attended with the eternal (mantra), one should attend with the Viśva-krama, having gone away and returned, one should attend with eternal (mantra) and attend with the Viṣṇu-krama.
24.33.11	By this alone, the external Viśva is said, and the internal and external Viśva.
24.33.12	Having placed it below, without flesh, without a woman, one departs with a means.
24.33.13	This becomes the opposite name.
24.33.14	If it falls in the middle, then he should perform the Aśvina sacrifice with two pots and then conclude the sacrifice.
24.33.15	If it is lost during the Diksaniya sacrifice, then one should follow the Prayaniya sacrifice.
24.33.16	If lost during the Prayaniya, then one should proceed to the Atithya sacrifice.
24.33.17	If it is lost at the Atithya sacrifice, then the animal-oblation of the Agniṣṭoma should be the subsequent rite.
24.33.18	If it is lost at Agni-Diksaniyā, then at what time should it be offered?
24.33.19	Having offered the oblations to the Diksha, it should be offered at this time.
24.33.20	Or before the Udgṛhṇā.
24.33.21	As Baudhayana says, when one is absent, one should offer the share of the sacrificer along with the Prastara. Having placed the clarified butter around the Dhruva, having placed it on the Juhu, one should offer. The share of the sacrificers becomes the Prastara, therefore, when one is away, one should offer his share along with the Prastra.
24.34.1	Now this animal is with the fasting.
24.34.2	What is the beginning of his rite?
24.34.3	Having gone away with the uninterrupted fires, having offered the Hotr, having offered the Yūpāhuti, having made the sacrificial post with the Yajus, having measured out the altar, having eaten the Vratopāyanīya, one should deposit the fires.
24.34.4	One should undertake the vow.
24.34.5	One should perform the Upvasa rite with the sacrificial grass and kindling wood.
24.34.6	Now, in the morning, one should offer a sacrifice with the Agniyeष्टाकपाल (Agniyeष्टाकपाला) rite. This is Baudhayana's view.
24.34.7	One should not place the fires in the new house, nor should one undertake the Vrata rite.
24.34.8	One should rub the hands together.
24.34.9	One should spread the grass.
24.34.10	Having cleaned the vessels, one should arrange them.
24.34.11	One should make the Brahman sit silently to the south.
24.34.12	One should sit down with the mantra from the northern Veda.
24.34.13	Having purified the sprinkling water, one should sprinkle the vessels.
24.34.14	Having offered the clarified butter and placed it, having heated it, holding the wooden sword in hand, having gone forward, one should take the Stambayajus.
24.34.15	From here onwards it is accomplished.
24.34.16	Now about Śālīki's view:
24.34.17	Having placed the fires on the kindling woods, having churned out the fires, having performed the rites, having offered the Hotr-oblations six times, having offered the oblation to the sacrificial post, having made the sacrificial post with the Yajus-formula, having spread the altar, one should place the fires on it.
24.34.18	One should undertake the vow.
24.34.19	One should arrange the kindling woods and sacrificial grass.
24.34.20	One should rub the hands together.
24.34.21	One should spread the altar.
24.34.22	Having washed the vessels, he should place them together.
24.34.23	He should make Brahma sit silently to the right.
24.34.24	He should sit in the northern part of the altar with the mantra.
24.34.25	Having sanctified the sprinkling water, he should sprinkle the vessels.
24.34.26	Having poured clarified butter, having placed it, having encircled it with fire, having melted the clarified butter in the Garhapatya fire, having purified it, having taken four spoonfuls in the ladle, having offered a full oblation in the Ahavaniya fire with the Samidvatī verse, having taken the wooden sword in hand, having gone forward, one should offer the Stambayajus.
24.34.27	From here onwards it is accomplished.
24.35.1	The wooden sword becomes the sacrificial post.
24.35.2	How is it that his own voice is heard in the striking of the sacrificial post?
24.35.3	One should cut it from this very tree.
24.35.4	Or one should make it from another tree of the same kind.
24.35.5	This is without a cup.
24.35.6	One should perform the rites beginning with sprinkling up to the third time of offering.
24.35.7	In this way, in the case of the Uparasa-offering.
24.35.8-11	The sacrificial posts for the animal sacrifice are of five cubits in length and so on, up to twenty cubits. The sacrificial posts for the Agniṣṭoma sacrifice are of twenty-one cubits in length, up to twenty-one cubit. The sacrificial post for the animal sacrifice is of three or four cubits in length. It is made of Palāśa wood. Whether the animal sacrifice is performed by one who is absent or not.
24.35.12	Some say that it succeeds.
24.35.13	Some say that it does not succeed.
24.35.14	They say that the second Agnihotra is the two fires of the world.
24.35.15	But they say that the animal sacrifice does not succeed for one who is absent.
24.36.1	How much is the sacrificial fee for the animal sacrifice?
24.36.2	The resumption of the sacrifice at the end of the vow and the dismissal of the vow.
24.36.3	Some say that the Ājyāvaśaṃsā is to be recited at the Upamantras.
24.36.4	What deity is this?
24.36.5	One should say that it is the deity of death.
24.36.6	These six sprinklings are at the animal sacrifice, three with mantras and three without mantras.
24.36.7	The sprinkling of the animals, the sprinkling of the vessels, and the sprinkling of the kindling wood and the sacrificial grass are done silently.
24.36.8	The sprinkling of the animal oblations, the sprinkling of vessels, and the kindling wood, and the sacrificial grass, are done with mantras.
24.36.9	If one wishes to offer the two portions of clarified butter at the animal sacrifice, at what time should one offer them?
24.36.10	Having performed the offering with the form of svāhā, one should offer to Vapa.
24.36.11	The offerings made before are different from those made after.
24.36.12	These are the rays of the sun, which are in the east and west.
24.36.13	Now this is the Pasupurodāśa.
24.36.14	What is the beginning of its rite?
24.36.15	The wooden sword should be placed behind the Garhapatya.
24.36.16	The vessel should be placed on the wooden sword.
24.36.17	The rice should be spread in the vessel.
24.36.18	From the taking of the ladle to the end of the rite, the rice should be taken to the end of pouring.
24.36.19	The rice-grains should be taken behind the Garha-patya.
24.36.20	Having sprinkled with the Prokṣaṇī, the roasted grains should be mixed with the flour of the sacrificial cakes.
24.36.21	The same should be done with the Savanīya cakes.
24.36.22	As Baudhayana says in this regard.
24.37.1	One should offer the Iḍa of Svishtakrit without reciting any mantra. How does it become four-cornered here?
24.37.2	One should place the cake on the ground, cut it into two parts and then offer it.
24.37.3	Thus it becomes four-cornered.
24.37.4	Now, some teachers say that eleven rites are omitted in the animal sacrifice: the kindling of the fire, the offering of the vow-milk, the Prastara, the offering to the Yajamana, the Ajyabhaga, the Prasitra, the offering to Yajamana and Brahma, the division into four parts, and the Visnu-steps.
24.37.5	How many Darvi-offerings are seen to be performed in the animal sacrifice?
24.37.6	The Hotr, the Yūpa-offering, the Stokyā, the Pratijya, the Upāyana, and the Upāṃśu are the six.
24.37.7	Which deity is the Manotā?
24.37.8	One should say, "Agni."
24.37.9	Which deity is Vanaṣpati?
24.37.10	One should reply, "Viṣṇu."
24.37.11	It is known that Vanaṣpati is Viṣṇu.
24.37.12	Now they also quote, "Yajna is indeed Vishnu."
24.37.13	Now this animal sacrifice is performed in the Sarvatraistubha manner. There are eleven Prayajas, eleven Anu-yajas, eleven pot-shaped offerings, eleven Avadanas, and eleven Up-yajas.
24.37.14	As Śālīki has stated the procedure, so it is stated here. One should ascend the fires on the Āraṇis and then go to sleep. If the sun sets while he is performing there, how is the atonement accomplished? Does it succeed or not?
24.37.15	Some say it succeeds.
24.37.16	Others say it does not succeed.
24.37.17	This space is surrounded by sacrifices.
24.37.18	It does not succeed.
24.37.19	Thus this animal sacrifice is explained in all three ways.
24.38.1	Now we shall explain the animals to be sacrificed for specific purposes.
24.38.2	Which of these are performed in a low voice?
24.38.3	Those who are connected with the horse sacrifice, those who are connected with Prajapati, those who are related to Savitar, those who are associated with Sarasvati, those who are dedicated to Pusha, those who are devoted to Yama, those who are deities of the ancestors, those who are of heaven and earth, those who are Vayu, those who are Surya, those who are Vishvakarman.
24.38.4	How is the expiation for those who are pregnant? Is it successful or not?
24.38.5	One says that it is successful.
24.38.6	But some say that it is not successful.
24.38.7	These are the prosperous ones.
24.38.8	It does not succeed.
24.38.9	It is the name of a sage, indeed.
24.38.10	It means that she does not lose her calf.
24.38.11	This is the ten-calf cow, prescribed for a year.
24.38.12	The tenth is Kadru, belonging to Prajapati.
24.38.13	How is celibacy accomplished here?
24.38.14	One says it is accomplished.
24.38.15	Some say it is not accomplished.
24.38.16	It is accomplished.
24.38.17	It does not succeed.
24.38.18	It becomes a boundary.
24.38.19	Some say the boundary is the sun.
24.38.20	Now, indeed, some say that this is said to be the younger brother.
24.38.21	They call this the "Vehad."
24.39.1	They offer a Soma-Pusan and a Tritiya animal.
24.39.2	This is said to be for three.
24.39.3	And they also say, "He who suckles three."
24.39.4	They offer an animal to Tvashtra and a Vada.
24.39.5	The animal which he mounts is the bull.
24.39.6	"One should offer the animal in a place where there is uneven ground."
24.39.7	"The place where there is an uneven ground is the place of sacrifice, or where one should offer the animal."
24.39.8	"One should make the offering at the junction of water and plants."
24.39.9	Some say that it should be near water.
24.39.10	Some say that one should offer in the rainy season or autumn.
24.39.11	If the sun does not rise when the Aśvina is being offered, one should offer the Bahurūpa sacrifice to the sun.
24.39.12	If it is not seen at the Prāyaniya Atiratra, one should perform the Upaplambhya of the Savanīya of the Ārambhaṇīya day.
24.39.13	If, however, it is not seen on the Udayaniya Atiratra or on the Ekāhika, they should perform the Upakalambha for the Anubandhya, or they should sacrifice with this animal only for the sake of prosperity.
24.39.14	Thus indeed, these animals are explained as desirable.
25.1.1	How is the application of the Cāturmāsya sacrifices performed throughout one's life?
25.1.2	On the full moon day of Phalguna or Chaitra, one should perform the Shunashīrīya and Paruṣa sacrifices.
25.1.3	Then one should observe a fast for the Vaishvadeva sacrifice.
25.1.4	Having performed the Vaishvadev sacrifice, one should perform sacrifices with the Pūrnamāsa and Vaimṛdha offerings.
25.1.5	If one were to perform a sacrifice with an Isti, an animal sacrifice, or a Soma sacrifice, how should one proceed there?
25.1.6	One should perform the Shunashiriya and Parusha sacrifices of this lunar fortnight by postponing.
25.1.7	Now, one should perform with one of these.
25.1.8	Now, one should observe a fast for the Vaishvadeva (rite).
25.1.9	Having performed the Vaishvadev rite, one should perform the Full Moon and New Moon sacrifices.
25.1.10	As Baudhayana's procedure is known, the Caturmasyas should be performed throughout one's life, and the pairs should be included.
25.1.11	In the first year itself, one should perform the vow. How are the Iṣṭi and Paśubandha here?
25.1.12	One may perform the Iṣṭis and Paśubandhas as one wishes.
25.1.13	Where do the Cāturmāsya sacrifices come together?
25.1.14	One should say that they come together in the Rājasūya and the Cāturmāsyasomas.
25.1.15	Now they also quote: "One should perform the Catu-māsyas even in the twelve-day sacrifice."
25.1.16	Having performed the Vaisva-deva sacrifice, on the fourth day, the Varuna-prastha sacrifices, on the eighth and ninth days, the Sākamedha sacrifices, and on the twelfth day, the Suna-sīrīya and Parusha sacrifices."
25.1.17	It is known that the twelve nights are like a year.
25.1.18	The sacrificial grass is three-layered.
25.1.19	The intervening spaces are silent. Thus, the mantra is external.
25.1.20	This is the same, but in the case of the Iṣṭi-Samnipāta, it is reversed.
25.1.21	Where do the Karambha vessels first receive the mantra?
25.1.22	One should say "Prokṣaṇa".
25.1.23	One should offer the Karambha-vessels along with the oblations.
25.1.24	Which deities are the vessels of Karambha?
25.1.25	One should say, "They belong to Varuna."
25.1.26	It is known that he worshipped another Varuna.
25.1.27	"Go to the house of the deceased, O Su-dana!" This is what is meant.
25.1.28	The two of them should go to the Stambayajus, moving from this side and that. The Pratiprasthātṛ should take hold of the Adhvaryu.
25.1.29	When the Sahani is placed, the Pratiprasthātr should sprinkle water and recite the Adhvaryus's portion of the oblation.
25.1.30	Then, after the two bundles of wood have been placed, the Adhvaryū takes his own bundle of wood and stands aside.
25.2.1	Then the Pratiprasthātṛ, having gone between the sacrificial grass and the Havirdhāna, takes up his own grass.
25.2.2	Having turned around towards the left, they should carry the grass.
25.2.3	Then, having turned around towards the right, and having placed the grass, having come back by the same way, the Pratiprasthatṛ, having gone around towards the left and having placed the sacrificial grass towards the east, takes up the Upayasthi.
25.2.4	Then the Adhvaryu, having taken the Prokṣaṇī waters, should approach the Pratiprasthātṛ from the right side.
25.2.5	Thus he is not excluded from these (waters).
25.2.6	Then this Marutī (water) goes to the southern altar. It is the seventh oblation that is placed on the fire.
25.2.7	How are they not excluded from this (water)?
25.2.8	Having drawn it forward, he should offer the oblations without pouring over it.
25.2.9	Then having again placed it and poured over it, he should offer it. Having offered it, he should place it within the altar.
25.2.10	Thus these (oblations) become unmixed.
25.2.11	Now this Pratiprasthātṛ should recite the Marutīya deity only once and should call out only once.
25.2.12	Now, if the Adhvaryu performs the rites elsewhere, then the Pratiprasthātṛ should perform the rites in accordance with the Adhvaryus.
25.2.13	When the Adhvaryū says here, "Let it be heard! Let it be offered!" then the Pratiṣṭhātṛ should perform in accordance with the rites of the Adhvaryūs.
25.2.14	Then, having taken the ladle for the Marutīya offering towards the north of the fire, one should strike it.
25.2.15	As for the Upavasatha rite, they say that one should perform it with the Tuṣa and Niṣkāsa rites. Having offered the oblation to the deity, one should offer the Svishtakṛt oblation, scatter the Tuṣa grains, and sit facing the water.
25.2.16	From here onwards, it is accomplished.
25.2.17	Now this Gṛhamedhi (rite) ends with the offering of clarified butter and the Keḍānta rite.
25.2.18	Here there is no Praśitra (oblation).
25.2.19	If the Śākalas are silent, one should strike the enclosing sticks into the fire.
25.2.20	If the cow is not available, one should milk the cow of the village.
25.3.1	Now this is the great Paitṛyajña.
25.3.2	What is the beginning of its rite?
25.3.3	He should perform the Barhi-rite with the Yajus-mantra. "He should say, "You are the sacrificial grass of the gods and ancestors. You are the sacrificial grass for the gods and ancestors." May I be able to offer you in the east or west. The fallen Arahus are for the worship of the gods and the ancestors on earth." "He should say this at all these occasions where the gods and ancestors may assemble. "
25.3.4	He should rub his hands.
25.3.5	He should spread (the grass).
25.3.6	Having washed the vessels, he should place them together.
25.3.7	Having seated the Brahman to the south, having placed the water-pot to the north, having placed the wooden sword to the rear of the Garhapatya,
25.3.8	on the wooden sword, the vessel.
25.3.9	On the vessel, he should scatter the rice-grains.
25.3.10	From the taking of the wooden sword onwards, the rites are performed till the end.
25.3.11	Having approached the Garhapatya with his buttocks, he should take it to the Apas.
25.3.12	The priests move around in this way.
25.3.13	The Adhvaryu should be closest to the fire, then the sacrificer, then the Brahman, then the Agnidhra.
25.3.14	Or the Agnidhra should be closest to fire, then the Adhvaryu, then the Brahman and then the sacrificer.
25.3.15	The oblations are transferred with the Puronuvākyās, the Dhānās are transferred before the Puronuvākya, the Karambha is transferred after the Dhānās.
25.3.16	Thus having transferred the oblations, one should offer each of them separately.
25.3.17	Where are the oblations of Tryambaka offered?
25.3.18	Having transferred the oblations and offering to Rudra and Ambikā, one should say, "This is offered to him who has mantras."
25.3.19	"One should offer to the body."
25.3.20	One should say, "Tell me about the body."
25.3.21	"One should worship whom?" One should worship.
25.3.22	"Where is the Sauviṣṭakṛt of the Triyambaka?"
25.3.23	"Whatever is here, it is the same."
25.3.24	"One gives a bull that is not mentioned."
25.3.25	This should be given to those who have not mentioned the great oblations.
25.4.2	Whatever is not good for him, he should do what is good.
25.4.3	He should settle the debts that have come due, or he should ask for permission.
25.4.4	He prepares in advance a large supply of debts, a pot of ghee, a vessel without a measure, a pot, and a strainer.
25.4.5	The pot is made of wood, and the strainer is made of grass.
25.4.6	The fee is one hundred and twelve.
25.4.7	It is known that the Chandogas know that the Soma-drinker is the hero of the gods.
25.4.8	He makes amends with a hundred.
25.4.9	With ten, the ten breaths.
25.4.10	With eleven, the self.
25.4.11	With twelve, the fee.
25.4.12	Now some perform the sacrifice with twenty-one Dakṣiṇās, saying, "The Ekavimśa Yajñāyajñiya."
25.4.13	Now some perform the sacrifice seven times, with the Soma purchase, guest-milk, and four Anūbandhya offerings in the middle.
25.4.14	That is also known as the Dasataya, as it is said, "The one who knows the truth, the wise one, the sevenfold."
25.5.1	Now then, the arrangement of the divine sacrifice.
25.5.2	He prepares this place for the sacrifice of the gods, which is not too near the water, not too far from it, not too near the grass, not too far, not too near a tree, not too far; not too near a hole, not too far. It is not too near a ditch, not too far away. It is not near a mound, not too far off. It is not in a place where many plants are mixed up. It is not on a slope towards the east, so that the water may flow towards the sacrificial ground. It is not very steep, so that the people may not find a place for the sacrifice too near.
25.5.3	They build the house of the eastern direction, following the ancient tradition.
25.5.4	The Krittikā stars never leave the eastern direction.
25.5.5	One should build following their appearance. This is one way.
25.5.6	One should also build following the appearance of the Śroṇā star. This is another way.
25.5.7	Between the Citrā and Svātī stars. This is another.
25.5.8	The directions are not visible.
25.5.9-14	It is indeed said, "One should make the beams of the pillars shine forth." But they also say, "One should only make the beams of pillars shine forth." The Stotras of the morning pressing are carried by two Stotras. The morning pressing is carried by the Trivrt and Pañcadaśa Stotras. Pañcadaśa and Saptadaśa Stotras carry the midday pressing. Saptadaśa and Ekavimśa Stotrascarry the third pressing.
25.5.15	This is the same as the four-stoma.
25.5.16	For there are four stomas.
25.5.17	This is the same as twelve-stoma.
25.5.18	There are twelve stomas.
25.5.19	As they know the rite of Upamañjyu, one should know that the divine worship is performed before the three-fold rites. It is known that this entire altar is.
25.6.1	Now some recite this Agni-Visņu (hymn) before the initiation for the Apasava rite, or afterwards.
25.6.2	"Where should one perform the initiation for the Barhis-rite? Having placed the materials, before touching the hands, one should perform the initiation for Barhis-rite."
25.6.3	"One does not lead the sacrificer to the vow, nor does the wife bind herself. One postpones the vow for the Adhvara initiation."
25.6.4	All this is the Vratopāyanīya Iṣṭi. The first is the Pātnisannāha.
25.6.5	He does not offer the Yajamāna share or the Brahman share. These two are mentioned as being connected with the Āśīrvāda.
25.6.6	What should one say when beginning the sacrifice?
25.6.7	It is said that the Vratopāyaṇīya is performed when there is plenty of food.
25.6.8	To whom and what is to be given for prosperity?
25.6.9	When the share of the sacrificer is cut off, the share of the Brahman also is cut off.
25.6.10	For these two, the share of sacrificer and the share of Brahman, are connected.
25.6.11	One does not offer a cake to the Barhisad-deity nor does one request for the Anvāhārya-food.
25.6.12	These two are mentioned in the context of Dakṣiṇā.
25.6.13	But here other offerings are well known.
25.6.14	"He does not offer in the Homa of the fruits, he does not offer the Samitsya" - these two are mentioned in the last round.
25.6.15	"What is the purpose of beginning the sacrifice and bringing it to an end?"
25.6.16	The sacrificer does not recite over the full vessel, nor does he walk in the steps of Vishnu. The full vessel is indeed prescribed in the Avabhrtha.
25.6.17	But here another Avabhrtha is well-known.
25.6.18	The steps of Vishnu are those which are taken around the end.
25.6.19	What is the purpose of taking the steps of Vishnu?
25.7.1	One who is taking the steps of Vatsa should take twelve steps.
25.7.2	What are these Vatsa-bands?
25.7.3	These are the same as the Sruva-offerings, except for the word 'svāhā'.
25.7.4	But they also quote: Agni has the same number as the verses, and the three deities are twelve.
25.7.5	Now this black antelope skin is not mentioned.
25.7.6	One should approach the fire from the side of the knee, towards the right, as if one were approaching a boat.
25.7.7	If one sees impurity at night, one should stand by the Āhavanīya fire with this verse.
25.7.8	Now these are the vows of consecration, to be undertaken in the evening and to be abandoned in the morning.
25.7.9	Now the vows of consecration are to be undertaken in morning and to be abandoned at evening.
25.7.10	Then, having performed the Daikṣa vow, one should perform the vow.
25.7.11	This is offered before the Agnihotra in the Ahavanīya fire, thinking that it will be offered later.
25.8.1	Now this is the Prāyaṇīya (rite).
25.8.2	What is the beginning of its rite?
25.8.3	If there is no chanting before, one should do it with the Yajus of the sacrificial grass.
25.8.4	One should rub the hands together.
25.8.5	One should spread (the grass).
25.8.6	Having cleansed the vessels, he should place them together.
25.8.7	Having seated Brahma on the right side, having placed the water pot on the left side, having placed a wooden sword behind the Garhapatya fire,
25.8.8	on the wooden sword, a vessel.
25.8.9	On the vessel, he should scatter the rice.
25.8.10	From the taking of the wooden sword onwards, the rites are performed until the pouring out (of the oblations).
25.8.11	Having performed the Prāskandana rite, having offered a spoonful of oblation into the Ahavaniya fire, having come out, having given the instruction, having approached, having brought water beyond the Pavitra, having placed it, having scattered rice grains beyond the Pavitra.
25.8.12	Then he should pour out clarified butter.
25.8.13	Then he places clarified butter.
25.8.14	Having encircled both (the fire and the Soma) with fire, taking a wooden sword in his hand, he should go forward and take the Stambayajus.
25.8.15	What remains is accomplished.
25.8.16	The Pravargya rite ends with the Samyuva.
25.8.17	What remains of this rite?
25.8.18	Up to the releasing of the ladles.
25.8.19	There is no pouring of the oblations of cooked rice.
25.8.20	If one is to offer cooked rice in a pot, one should offer it in a pot. This is Baudhayana's view.
25.8.21	Which deity is the offering of the foot?
25.8.22	Some say it is Agni.
25.8.23	Some say it belongs to Vishnu.
25.8.24	Some say to Prajapati.
25.8.25	One should say it belongs to speech.
25.8.26	One should pierce the forehead of the seller of Soma with a black antelope hair between the eyebrows.
25.8.27	The sacrificer pours out the Soma for the king.
25.9.1	With the verse, "The Suparnas have approached Indra."
25.9.2	If there is no buyer of Soma, then having cut a Palasha branch in front of the Soma-shed, and having tied it, he should place the king on the Palasha branch and worship it.
25.9.3	Now if someone were to speak with a pregnant woman, or say quickly or hurry up or do it, then he should be taken to the king.
25.9.4	There should be no turning back on the agreement.
25.9.5	He would be the seller of Soma.
25.9.6	This is the first Subrahmaṇya hymn, ending with Om. It is said thus:
25.9.7	Now this is the Atithya hymn.
25.9.8	What is the beginning of its rite?
25.9.9	If the sacrificial grass is laid down with the Yajus formula, then it should be done with the Yajush formula.
25.9.10	One should rub the hands together.
25.9.11	One should spread (the grass).
25.9.12	Having cleansed the vessels, one should arrange them.
25.9.13	Having seated the Brahman priest to the south, having released the southern bull, having placed the water pot to the north here itself, having placed the wooden sword behind the Gārhapatya, having placed the ladle in the water pot,
25.9.14	The vessel on the skin.
25.9.15	One should scatter the rice grains in the vessel.
25.9.16	From the taking of the Soma-vessel onwards, the rites are performed till the Praskandana (sprinkling of Soma).
25.9.17	Having performed the rites till the Praskandaṇa, one should release the northern animal and lead the king (to the altar).
25.9.18	One should know that the Agniṣṭoma rites are completed till the Samprāśa (invitation).
25.9.19	One obtains hospitality with the black antelope skin.
25.9.20	The rest is well known.
25.10.1	He takes out the Darbha-grass and the Puñjīla.
25.10.2	Which of these is the Darbha-puñjīla?
25.10.3	That which is placed between the two sacrificial posts.
25.10.4	Having pierced the seven mountains.
25.10.5	Which are these mountains?
25.10.6	The Prāyaṇīya, Ātithya, and Agnīṣomīya are mentioned as the ones to be performed.
25.10.7	Some also quote: "The Dīkṣaṇīya, Prāyaṇīy, Ātithye, Upasads, and Agnīsomīya are the seventh."
25.10.8	"The sacrifice is being performed for the gods."
25.10.9	"Which one is this sacrifice?"
25.10.10	The Iḍānt Ātithyā is the one that is concluded.
25.10.11	The gods, having grasped him by the hands, desired him.
25.10.12	They performed the Tānūnaptrā rite.
25.10.13	Indra went over him again and again.
25.10.14	They performed it with the Upasads.
25.10.15	He brought the sacrifice to the sacrifice.
25.10.16	Which sacrifice is this that brings the sacrifice?
25.10.17	The Diksaniya, Prayaniya and Atithya.
25.10.18	This very sacrifice brings the sacrifice.
25.10.19	This is the boar, the one who steals the left.
25.10.20	The best of days for Soma.
25.10.21	It steals the left, the wealth of the sacrificer.
25.10.22	Which are the Anuyajas of the Atithya?
25.10.23	One should say, "Upasads."
25.10.24	"What deity are the Upasads?"
25.10.25	One should say, "Dedicated to Agni."
25.10.26	"How does the beginning of the Upasads take place?"
25.10.27	If there is no recitation before, one should perform with the Barhi-yajus.
25.10.28	One should rub the hands together.
25.10.29	One should spread out.
25.10.30	Having cleansed the vessels, one should arrange them.
25.10.31	Having arranged the vessels for drinking, he should sprinkle them.
25.10.32	Having offered the clarified butter and placed it, having encircled it with fire, taking a wooden sword in hand, having gone forward, he should take the sacrificial grass.
25.10.33	From here onwards it is accomplished.
25.10.34	As per the prescribed procedure, he should place the ladles in the first Upasad.
25.10.35	In the second Upasad, they should be placed higher, and in the third Upasad, even higher.
25.10.36	They should proceed as if they were in a hurry. They should not be concerned about what has not been done.
25.10.37	Taking the spoon with all fingers, one should offer the Upasad oblation as if one is going to eat.
25.11.1	Where should one perform the Barhis of the Agniṣomīya?
25.11.2	Having removed the Pravargya, one should place it in front of the Āhavanīya.
25.11.3	He should also tie the calves to the sacrificial stakes.
25.11.4	He should place the third step on the Āhavaniya fire, separated from the Garhapatya fire, and similarly on the Upayamanī stakes.
25.11.5	Then this post of Udumbara wood should be made equal to the height of the sacrificer.
25.11.6	Then this sacrificial post should be measured by the height of the worshipper.
25.11.7	Some say that it should be together with the upper part.
25.11.8	Here he should do all this, except that he should draw the line around the sacrificial pit and touch the hands.
25.11.9	He should spread the grass.
25.11.10	Having cleansed the vessels, he should place them together.
25.11.11	Having prepared the sprinkling water, he should sprinkle the vessels.
25.11.12	Having poured the clarified butter, having placed it on the fire, having encircled it with fire, he should wipe the ladles.
25.11.13	They carry the northern altar and the sprinkling water.
25.11.14	Then the Pratiprasthātṛ should bind the wife with the Pāuroḍāśika (cake).
25.11.15	Then he should look at her towards the Garhapatya.
25.11.16	Then having looked at her with ghee, he should sprinkle her with ghee.
25.11.17	The wife should take up what has been looked at with the formula, "Thou art brilliance."
25.11.18	Then taking her with a piece of wood, he should take her away with the formula, “Do thou go along with brilliance.”
25.11.19	Then he should place it on the Āhavanīya fire with the verse, "May Agni not diminish your brilliance."
25.11.20	Then, having taken it, he should place it to the north of the Prokṣaṇī water and gaze at it. He should sprinkle it with the Prokṣani water mixed with ghee.
25.11.21	The clarified butter should be taken near the Āhavanīye fire.
25.11.22	From here onwards, the procedure is well-known.
25.11.23	As Śālīki says, one should take the clarified butter for Agni-Soma from the wife's hall and place it in the chaff.
25.11.24	Having brought the fire from the old Gārhapatya, one should rub the hands together.
25.11.25	One should spread out (the fire).
25.11.26	Having cleaned the utensils, one should arrange them.
25.11.27	Having prepared the sprinkling water, one should sprinkle the utensils.
25.11.28	Having poured out clarified butter and placed it, having encircled it with fire, he cleans the ladles.
25.11.29	They place them together here only, and the sprinkling water.
25.11.30	The Pratiprasthātṛ should not tie the wife with the Pāuroḍāśika (cake).
25.11.31	He should not look at the Garhapatya.
25.11.32	Having looked at the clarified butter, he should sprinkle it with clarified butter.
25.11.33	He should take it with his wife looking on, saying, "You are brilliance."
25.11.34	Then, taking it with a piece of wood, he should take it, saying, "May brilliance follow you."
25.11.35	Then he should place it on the Garhapatya fire, saying, "Let Agni not deprive you of your brilliance."
25.12.3	They should go to the sacrificial post, covering themselves.
25.12.4	The king should be in the southern half, then the fire, then the ladle, then the wind-fans, and the clarified butter in the northern half.
25.12.5	Or the fire may be in the southern part, then the king, then the ladle and the wind-fans in the northern half, and the clarified butters.
25.12.6	Having gone out by the eastern door, having gone around along the north of the Sadas, having deposited the fire in the Agni-dhri-house, having offered oblations, having sprinkled, he proceeds towards the northern Dhishnya of the Agni-dhriya house with the Prokṣaṇī vessel in his hand.
25.12.7	With the Anvāñjyas.
25.12.8	Having offered the kindling wood in the Āhavaniya fire, having sprinkled the altar, having sprinkled the sacrificial grass, having sprinkled the grass near the altar, having placed it, having taken up the wooden sword towards the east, having spread the sacrificial grass in five rows, having taken up a wooden sword in his hand, having gone forward, having placed the enclosing sticks made of Kārṣmarya wood, having placed two upright pieces of wood, having taken up in his hand the bundle of sacrificial grass, having turned around to the right, having entered the Havirdhāna shed by the eastern door, he should spread the bundle of sacrificial grasses on the northern half of the Khara.
25.12.9	On the sacrificial grass, the supports.
25.12.10	On the supports, the wooden sword.
25.12.11	On the wooden sword, the ladle.
25.12.12	On the ladle, the sacrificial grass.
25.12.13	Having touched them together with the formula, "They have sat down," having touched water, having taken the king of Brahman, one should enter the Havirdhāna hall through the eastern door, as if protecting oneself.
25.12.14	From here onwards, it is accomplished.
25.13.1	Where does the fire-wood and grass, which are like a craft, go to?
25.13.2	One should say, "It is the Agniṣṭoma."
25.13.3	Where does the Agniṣṭomīya go to?
25.13.4	"One should say, "It is the Sadyas-kriyā."
25.13.5	Where does the Pravargya go to?
25.13.6	He should say, "Let it be done immediately."
25.13.7	Which deity is the most venerable one to be invoked first?
25.13.8	Speech invokes speech.
25.13.9	Where is the most venerable father-daughter relationship to be invoked first ?
25.13.10	When the omentum of the Agniṣṭoma has been offered and the Vasatīvarī waters have been taken around, the second (is invoked).
25.13.11	In the morning recitation, the third.
25.13.12	"The time for the Dakṣiṇās is called 'one calling out'."
25.13.13	"And he asks for the pot that has been damaged, saying, 'It is firm.' This is what is meant."
25.13.14	"He makes milk and barley, saying, 'For the sake of taking.' These are meant for taking."
25.13.15	There are four straps, four ladles for the Vapa, two kinds of sacrificial grass and wood. These are for the Savaniya and Anubandhya offerings.
25.13.16	Which are the four pots? The Soma-grahana pots dedicated to Vayu.
25.13.17	The pot for the Aditya, the pot for the Uktha, the pot for Agrayaṇa, and the pot for Dhruva.
25.13.18	Then there are these twelve upper vessels: a vessel for holding curds, a vessel for the Upāṁśuyāja and Antaryāma offerings, two vessels for the two-deity offerings, two vessels of clarified butter and flour, a vessel for Ritu offerings, a vessel for Āditya, a vessel for Ukthya, a vessel for Aupasya, a vessel of clarified butter and honey, a vessel for Soma, a vessel for Pāvamāna, a vessel for Sāman, and a vessel for the Soma-pressing.
25.13.19	Then there are eleven cups, for the sacrificer, the Brahman, the Hotṛ, the Udgātṛ, the Maitrāvaruṇa, the Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin, the Ācchāvāka, the Sadasya, the Agnīdhra, the Potṛ, and the Neṣṭṛ.
25.13.20	They should be made of wood of the Nyagrodha tree, similar to each other.
25.13.21	It is known that in the north they eat with Atarukasa and Nyagrodha cups.
25.13.22	From this they are called Nyagrodhas.
25.13.23	"And my rays" means he is indeed said to be Adabhya.
25.13.24	"And may I be the lord" means this is the Dadhigraha of Prajapati.
25.13.25	And the Sārasvata and the Pauṣṇika are mine. This is what some say.
25.13.26	Now some say that this is a Rājasūya-like great Graha.
25.13.27	Because of nourishing, it becomes Pauṣṇika; because of grasping, it becomes Sārasvata.
25.14.1	Now this is the Mahārātrika rite.
25.14.2	What is the beginning of its rite?
25.14.3	Having washed their hands and feet, they approach the sacrificial enclosure.
25.14.4	Their rites are performed as prescribed.
25.14.5	Then the Adhvaryu touches the Agnidhra with the Agniya verse and the Havirdhana with the Visnuya verse.
25.14.6	Then he goes to sleep.
25.14.7	Then the Agnidhra, having hastened to the Patnîsala, having placed the fires, having strewn (the ground), having cleansed and arranged the vessels, having melted the clarified butter, attends to it.
25.14.8	The other Pratiprasthâtar, having prepared the Prokşanî water, sprinkles the vessels.
25.14.9	Having poured the clarified butter, having placed it, having encircled it with fire, he cleanses the ladles.
25.14.10	They carry the Uttaravedi and the Prokṣaṇī water.
25.14.11	Then the Adhvaryu touches the ladles with the Agniya verse.
25.14.12	The vessels are touched in two ways.
25.14.13	The Vāyavyā for the Vāyavya, the Aiṇḍrya for the Sadas.
25.14.14	Then the Unnetr, having washed the Gravas in the north-west direction, having filled the Drona-pot with ten purifications, places it in front of the southern Havirdhana.
25.14.15	The Pratiprasthātṛ prepares curds for the Pṛṣadājya.
25.14.16	The Agnīdhra places the kindling wood and sacrificial grass.
25.14.17	Then the Pratiprasthātr binds the wife with the Puroḍāśika (cake).
25.14.18	Then he should look at the Garhapatya.
25.14.19	Then, having looked at the ghee, he should sprinkle it with ghee.
25.14.20	The wife should take up what has been looked at, saying, "You are brilliance."
25.14.21	Then, taking it with a ladle, he should take it away, saying, "Go along with brilliance."
25.14.22	Then he should place it on the Ahavaniya, saying, "May Agni not deprive you of your brilliance."
25.14.23	Then, having taken it, having placed it north of the Prokṣaṇī, he should look at it.
25.14.24	He should sprinkle with the Prokṣani containing clarified butter. The clarified butter should be taken near the Āhavanīya fire. The rites from here onwards are well-known.
25.15.1	Now about Śālīki's view.
25.15.2	Thus the rites prescribed for them are performed as per their respective instructions.
25.15.3	Then the Adhvaryu touches the Agnidhra with the Agniyesti verse and the Havirdhana with the Visnu-verse.
25.15.4	Then he goes away.
25.15.5	Then this Agnidhra, having gone to the Patnisāla first, having placed the fire, having strewn around, having cleansed the vessels, having arranged them, having melted the clarified butter, attends.
25.15.6	Another Pratiprasthātṛ, having purified the Prokṣaṇī water, sprinkles the vessels.
25.15.7	Having placed the clarified butter in the fire-pan and having encircled it with fire, he cleanses the ladles.
25.15.8	They carry the ladles and the Prokṣani water to the Agnidhra.
25.15.9	Then the Adhvaryu touches the ladles with the Agniya verse:
25.15.10	"The vessels have been cleansed and are being sprinkled twice."
25.15.11	The Vāyavyas are placed in the Vāyavya direction, the Sadas in the Indra direction.
25.15.12	Then the Unnetr, having washed the Grava in the Vāyuvy direction, having filled the Drona-pot with the ten purifying (grasses), places it in front of the southern Havirdhāna-shed.
25.15.13	The Pratiprasthātṛ prepares curds for the Pṛṣadājya.
25.15.14	The Agnīdhra places the sacrificial grass and wood.
25.15.15	The Pratiprasthātṛ should not tie the wife with the Pāuroḍāśika (cake).
25.15.16	He should not look at the Garhapatya.
25.15.17	Having looked at the wife, he should sprinkle her with ghee.
25.15.18	The wife should take up what has been looked at with the words, "Thou art brilliance."
25.15.19	Having taken it up with a piece of wood, he should take it away with the words, “Go along with brilliance.”
25.15.20	Then he should place it on the Āgnīdhra (fire). "He should say, "May Agni not deprive you of your brilliance."
25.15.21	Then, having taken it, he should place it north of the Prokṣaṇī water and look at it. He should sprinkle the Prokṣani water with ghee.
25.15.22	Having taken the clarified butter-containing oblations near the Āgnīdhra, and having given them to the assistants, he proceeds towards the northern Dhishṇiya with the Prokṣaṇī in hand.
25.15.23	The oblations are placed in a row.
25.15.24	Then having sprinkled the sacrificial grass, having sprinkled the sacrificial post, having sprinkled the grass for spreading, having sprinkled the near grass, having spread it, having taken the Prastara in front, having spread the grass in one layer, having taken the Uddhāra Prastara in his hand, having gone forward, having placed the enclosing sticks of Udumbara wood, having placed the two Samidhas, having taken the handful of grass, having turned around to the right, having entered the Havirdhana shed by the eastern door, having spread the handful of grass in the northern half of the Khara.
25.15.25	On the sacrificial grass, the supports.
25.15.26	On the supports, the sacrificial grass.
25.15.27	On the sacrificial grass, Juhu.
25.15.28	On the grass, the supports, the supports. These have been placed.
25.15.29	Having touched together with the formula, he yokes with Yoga.
25.15.30	What is accomplished thereafter?
25.16.1	What is the Agnihotra of one who is initiated, what is the Upasad, what is the Prasut?
25.16.2	It is known that the Agnihotra is the vow of one who is being initiated.
25.16.3	The remnant of the Agnihotra-oblation is for the Upavasatha-rite.
25.16.4	The Upāṁśu and Antaryāma are for the Prasūta-rite.
25.16.5	That which is offered after sunset is the Agnihotra-offering in the evening.
25.16.6	That which offered before sunrise is the Agnihotra offering in the morning.
25.16.7	What is the Darśa-Pūrṇamāsa rite?
25.16.8	It is known that the Darśa rite is the Agniṣṭoma sacrifice and the Pūrṇamāasa rite is the animal sacrifice.
25.16.9	As for the view of Upamaṇyava, they say that one should offer the Savanīya oblations at the morning pressing itself, and the potsherds should be used only once.
25.16.10	The rite becomes mixed up till the time of the final offering.
25.16.11	One should remove each of them at the time of the subsequent pressing, whichever one he is going to use.
25.16.12	Or, if the balls are smeared, then he should place them in the two Savanas.
25.16.13	If one desires to perform with one potsherd, then one should proceed with the Savaniya potsherds. After the end of the Prātahsavana, one should take up the Pāuroḍāśika rite. In the other two Savanas, one should proceed with kindling the embers in the potsherds.
25.16.14	What is to be done hereafter is accomplished.
25.17.1	As Baudhayana says, one should take the Vasatīvari waters with the Sukra-waters on both sides. One should nourish them with the Sukra waters and sprinkle them with the Sukrā waters.
25.17.2	Having placed the Hotr's vessel on the top, one should proceed with the third one.
25.17.3	At this time, the Maitrāvaruṇa-vessel should be placed in the middle of the Hotr-vessel and the Vasativari-vessel. Having encircled the Hotr from the right, he should place the vessels in a line from the south.
25.17.4	At this time, all the Maitrāvaruṇachamasiya vessels should be placed in a line. The third Vasativari vessel should be placed in front of the Hotr, and the third Ekadhana vessel should be placed behind the Hotr.
25.17.5	Thus his Soma becomes pure before.
25.17.6	One should take the Soma-graha for one desiring Brahmic glory.
25.17.7	This Soma-graha should be taken by the king who has not yet offered the Soma-sacrifice.
25.17.8	Which deity first consumes the Soma?
25.17.9	One should say, "The waters."
25.17.10	It is known that they are invited, and that the Soma is drunk by them. The Soma is drunk by you.
25.17.11	Where is the drinking of Soma?
25.17.12	It is known that it is for the one named Ābhya, who is awake, and that the soma is drunk by him.
25.17.13	This is the drinking of the Soma.
25.17.14	When they have assembled, it is in order.
25.17.15	Having recited the Nigrañjyas, one should perform with the Ādābhya.
25.17.16	Then one should perform the Upāṃśusavana.
25.17.17	Then one could offer the king.
25.17.18	Here one should know the Agniṣṭoma rite as accomplished, from touching the wooden chips.
25.17.19	Having touched the wooden chips, one should perform the Pṛṣṇis.
25.17.20	Then one performs with the Prāṇagrahas.
25.17.21	Then one collects the strands.
25.17.22	Then with a low voice.
25.17.23	Then with a very low voice.
25.17.24	At the time of the Antaryama.
25.17.25	From here onwards it is accomplished.
25.18.1	As Baudhayana knows the rite, one should take up two pitchers at the morning pressing, three at the midday pressing and four at the third pressing at the time of taking up the Āgrayana pitcher.
25.18.2-4	The two Soma-pressings of Upāṃśu and Antaryāma are the two Soma-press- ings in the morning pressing. The two Soma-press ings of Santata and Sukra are the two Soma pressings in the midday pressing. The Soma-pressing of Āgrayaṇa and the Soma-pressing of Udicana are the two Somapressings in the third pressing. The remaining Soma-pressing of the Āditya-graha and the Soma- pressing of Āgrayaṇā are the two Soma -pressings in the evening pressing.
25.18.5	The king should be worshipped with three things: milk, barley-meal and gold.
25.18.6	Whichever deity he may be taking up, he makes it a receptacle of gold on both sides.
25.18.7	The Grahas should be taken up while standing, except the Prajapati and the Manthisamsrava.
25.18.8	As Śālīki has prescribed the offering of the Dṛpas, one should offer the oblations of the Sruva at that time. At what time should one offer them?
25.18.9	One should offer them at the time of the continuous offering.
25.19.2	From the pouring of the Dhishnyas, this is the description.
25.19.3	How is the pouring of the Dhisnyas as they are placed?
25.19.4	Having poured with "To Vibhu, the carrier, svāhā," and with the Raudra array, "Protect me, O Agni, nourish me, do not harm me."
25.19.5	One should choose seven times.
25.19.6	The Hotṛ alone is the seventh.
25.19.7	How should the morning Soma-pressing be performed in the remaining days of the Ahina sacrifice?
25.19.8	One should say that the Ahina sacrifice begins with the placing of the Ahavaniya fire. The placing of the wooden sword is done once.
25.19.9	How should their movement be in a proper order?
25.19.10	Between the Hotr and the Adhvaryu, between the Adhvaryu and the Brahmanacchamsin, between the Brahmanacchamin and the Udgatar, between the Udgatar and the Pratihartr, between the Pratiharta and the Subrahmanya, between the Subrahmanya and the Acchāvāka, between the Acchāvaaka and the Prastotṛ, between the Prastottr and the Pratiprasthātṛ, between the Pratihāra and the Agnidhra, between the Agnidhra and the Dhishniya of the Brahmanacchamsa.
25.19.11	Then those who have Dhishniyas should go around their own Dhishniyas from the north.
25.19.12	Then these two Adhvaryus become without cups.
25.19.13	Where is the share of these two?
25.19.14	One should say, "In the cup of the Hotr."
25.19.15	Who among the priests does not drink Soma on the one-day (rite)?
25.19.16	The Unnetr should say, "The Gravastut, the Subrahmanya."
25.19.17	Where do those initiated for the Sattra drink?
25.19.18	The Unneta drinks from the Nestr's goblet, the Gravastut from the Acchāvāka's goblet, and the Subrahmanya from the Udgātṛ's goblet.
25.19.19	Or all of them may consume from the Agni-dhra's cup.
25.19.20	It is known that in the northern section, the Agni-dhras, the Gravastuts, the Subrahmaṇyas, and the Unnetṛs are present.
25.20.1	As Baudhāyana knows this rite, one should pour out the Savanīya oblations into the same vessel. This is seen as an ornament to the Purorāśa.
25.20.2	He should place the cake in the middle, sprinkled and poured over, the cooked rice in front, the gruel on the right, the broth at the back, and the milk-rice on the left.
25.20.3	How should they be arranged?
25.20.4	The path of oblations is well-known.
25.20.5	Now, something else.
25.20.6	Having taken the door with the former (verse), having gone to the Sadas with the latter, having taken the performers with the front, the Dhishnyas with the rear, having taken the Dhishnya of the Acchavaka with the northern (verse), having given it to another, having returned by the same way, having gone around the Sadas with northern (verse), and having taken the door with former (verse), and taken the Agnidhra with the northern (verses), one should place it within the altar.
25.20.7	If the Adhvaryu should enter the Havirdhāna, he should say, "Come out, do not strike me."
25.20.8	As Baudhayana says, in the case of the two-deity sacrifices, one should stand to the north and hand over the sacrificial items to the Pratiprasthātṛ. When the Adhvaryu takes the sacrificial dishes towards the west, one should take hold of the Pratiprasthatṛ who is approaching the Havirdhāna.
25.20.9	Having taken the cups, one goes out.
25.20.10	The Adhvaryu takes up the Grahas as soon as he has gone out.
25.20.11	He stands to the north of the one who has gone around from the west, and hands over the Pratiprasthâtrâgraha to the Pratiprasthatr.
25.20.12	Having offered and having turned around towards the right, the Pratiprasthațr should take hold of the Adhvaryu.
25.20.13	Then the Adhvaryus runs towards the Pratiprashatr with the vessel.
25.20.14	From here onwards it is accomplished.
25.20.15	Then these two deities are offered without the Vasat call.
25.20.16	Where is the Vasat call for them?
25.20.17	It is known that the two deities are offered in the Rtuyaza rites and the Patnivata cup, and the Aditya and Savitr cups. We should offer them with the Vasat call.
25.20.18	As Upamaṇyava's rite is known, one should eat them with the long-eating at the two-deity offerings. "One should say, "Come and eat me!" and then, "For the sake of the sacrifice, for the sake of skill, for the sake prosperity, for the sake supremacy."
25.20.19	One should touch them and say, "O king, do not be angry with me. Do not harm my heart. For the sake of virility, for the sake longevity, for the sake radiance."
25.20.20	Now, whether one should consume the oblations of the Stomas with the oblation of the Anusavana or not.
25.21.1	Where is the Stotra and Sastra offering of the Vasatīvarī?
25.21.2	In the Visvarupa Stomas there is the Stotra offering, and in the Prātaranuvāka there is the Sastra offering.
25.21.3	Where is there the Stotra and Shastra offering of the Upamshuyamas and Dvidevatyas?
25.21.4	What is chanted in a low voice, that is chanted in the Upāṁśu and Antar-yāma.
25.21.5	The Prauga is chanted in the Uktha of the two-deity hymns.
25.21.6	Now the Pratiprasthātṛ stands to the north of the Adhvaryu at the Tṛtīya-graha.
25.21.7	The Pratiprasthātr should receive the Adhvaryus as he moves from here and there.
25.21.8	Then the Adhvaryū runs towards the Pratiprasthatṛ with a vessel.
25.21.9	The rest is well known.
25.21.10	Which deities are the Rtuyājas?
25.21.11	One says that they are the deities of the seasons.
25.21.12	Now another.
25.21.13	The Hotri priest offers to Indra.
25.21.14	The Potri priest offers to the Maruts.
25.21.15	The Neṣṭri priest offers to Gnaus.
25.21.16	The Agnidhra priest offers to Agni.
25.21.17	The Brahmacchāṁsi priest offers to Indra,
25.21.18	The Maitrāvaruṇa priest offers to Mitra-Varuna.
25.21.19	The four gods are Dravinoḍā.
25.21.20	The two Asvins are the Adhvaryus.
25.21.21	Agni is the householder.
25.21.22	Where is the praise of Indra-Agni?
25.21.23	One should say, "In the Bahispavamāna."
25.21.24	All the Grahas that do not have praise, their praises are in the Pavamāna.
25.21.25	Where are the offerings of the Madhyandina Savaniya to be offered?
25.21.26	One should say, "The praise of the small Vaishvadeva."
25.21.27	Where are the offerings of Savaniya of the third pressing?
25.21.28	One should only say, "The praises of the Maheendra."
25.22.1	One should take the Nārāśaṃsa from the Hotṛ vessel after the offering has been made.
25.22.2	The morning pressing has two Nārāśamsa cups, the midday pressing has one Nārāśaṃsa cup, and the third pressing has one Nārasamsa cup.
25.22.3	There are four verses to be recited while pouring out the Soma.
25.22.4	They are to be recited at the beginning of the pressings and in the cup of the Acchāvāka.
25.22.5	Three are long-sipping.
25.22.6	Where does the Pravargya rite come to an end?
25.22.7	One should say that it comes to an end with the offering of curds and ghee.
25.22.8	What is the Upaḍa?
25.22.9	"The Sūrya (graha) is to be taken with the verse, "O Sūrya, do thou look upon us with favour."
25.22.10	" "The Gravas are to be removed from the skin of an animal with the verse,
25.22.11	"May the Gravas be removed from the dry skin."
25.22.12	" How is the Maheendra graha to be taken at the Rathantara-sāman?
25.22.13	"One should take the Maheendra with the Gayatri verse, "Mahā Indra, who is powerful,"
25.22.14	Then at the Great Back (Sutra), with the Tristubh verse, "Indra, like a man, among the men who conquer," he offers the Mahadendra.
25.22.15	Then at the two-backed (Sutra), one should take the animal with the verse, "The animal which is the back," and the other with the verse, "Puroruchi' is the other."
25.23.1	How does the procedure of the animal to be offered at the Savaniya commence?
25.23.2-4	Having spread the Iḍasūnas, having cut off the fresh butter, having brought it into the ladle, having gone out towards the north between the Cātvāla and the Utkara, having exchanged (the ladle with the Utkara), having poured (the butter), having placed (the ladle) near the animal, having strewn the five Hotrās, one should perform from the Manotā onwards up to the Neda. What is accomplished from here onwards.
25.23.5	Now, in the Utkhya-sutra, the same mantra which is used for the Grahanas at the morning pressing is used for the midday pressing and the third pressing.
25.23.6	One should only indicate the deity.
25.23.7	One should offer three pieces of the cake from the cup for the cup, and then the Hotr's cup.
25.23.8	This is said to be for three.
25.23.9	Now this is the Aggrayan, which is taken from the thirty-three deities.
25.23.10	Where are these known to be given?
25.23.11	In the Patnīvata.
25.23.12	It is known that the Patnīvata is the thirty-three and three deities.
25.23.13	How does one partake of the Patnīvata?
25.23.14	"O Soma, the god, your mind-knowing group is like the sun. At the third pressing, in the Jagati metre, with Agni Vaisvānara, with the wife-possessing Tvashtra, of the drunk Soma, with the honey-possessing, of the invited, I eat the invited."
25.24.1	How does one become a Utkhya?
25.24.2	One should take the Utkhya after taking the Agrayan at the well-known third pressing.
25.24.3	Then having placed it on the Dhruva, he should take it in three upward vessels, saying, "Thou art taken with a support. For the gods thee, for the divine life, for the Utkhyas, for the life of the Utkhyan sacrifice, I take thee agreeable to Indra and Varuna."
25.24.4	"Thou art the offering again," he touches the Utkhya vessel.
25.24.5	Having wiped it, he places it, saying, "This is your place. For you by Indra and Varuna."
25.24.6	At that very moment he takes another, saying, "You are taken with a support. For the gods, for the life of the gods, for praise, for the life for praise, for Indra and Brihaspati, I take what is dear."
25.24.7	"Again, thou art the oblation." He touches the Utkhya vessel.
25.24.8	Having wiped it, he places it with the formula, "This is thy place; for thee by Indra and Brhaspati."
25.24.9	At that very moment he takes another (cup) with the formula, "Thou art taken with a support. For the gods thee, for the Uthyas thee, for the long life of the sacrifice I take thee dear to Indra-Viṣṇu."
25.24.10	Here he touches the Uthyasthali with the formula, “Here is no more oblation.”
25.24.11	Having scraped it ten times, he turns it upside down.
25.24.12	Having wiped it, he places it down with the formula, "This is your place; for Indra-Vishnu."
25.24.13	Then he should pour them into the Dhruva vessel and then into the Hotr's vessel.
25.24.14	He should pour the praises into the praises and the hymns into the hymns.
25.24.15	The offering of that which has been given is to Indra and Varuna, to Indra and Brihaspati, to Indra and Vishnu, to Agni Vaisvānara and the Maruts. Having been invited to the sweet drink that has been offered, I eat the offering. One may eat with this alone.
25.24.16	Or, as in the case of the sun, with the eternal formula, "O Soma, thy mind-knowing friends, the Jagati metre, the third pressing, Indra-Varuna, Indra-Brhaspati, Indra-Vishnu, Agni-Vaisvānara, the Maruts, the Soma that has been drunk and is sweet, the Soma that is invoked, I partake of it, having been invoked."
25.24.17	As Upamaṇyava's rite is known, so one should offer the Mindāhutis first.
25.24.18	Having offered the Mindāhuți, one should take up the Graha for Hariyajana.
25.24.19	Now some, having placed the Avabhṛtha in the Cātvāla region, offer the Rīṣiṣa with curds, milk and honey mixed together, with the verse, "O Soma, king, what thy thunderbolt has cut off."
25.24.20	One offers the Avabhṛta verses.
25.24.21	Which are these Avabhṛta-verses?
25.24.22	When they offer on the Āhavanīya with Śākalas, they say, "You are the expiation for the sin committed by gods, you are the expiation of the sin committed by men, you are the exiation of the sin commited by ancestors."
25.24.23	"The oblation is offered in the Avabhṛtha."
25.24.24	Which is this Avabhṛtha oblation?
25.24.25	Having taken it up, he offers with the verse, "We worship thee, O sacrifice, O lord of sacrifice, with oblations, with the verse of praise and with the verse of salutation. Svāhā!"
25.24.26	They should proceed with the Avabhṛtha rite while standing.
25.24.27	Having turned away from the water, he should go back to the water with the Prapada rite. The rite is accomplished from here onwards.
25.25.1	Now this is the Udayanīya rite.
25.25.2	What is the beginning of its rite?
25.25.3	One should perform it with the Barhiṣya verse.
25.25.4	He should rub his hands.
25.25.5	He should spread (the grass).
25.25.6	Having washed the vessels, he should place them together.
25.25.7	Having seated the Brahman to the south, having placed the water-pot to the north, having placed the wooden sword to the rear of the Garhapatya,
25.25.8	on the wooden sword, the vessel.
25.25.9	He should scatter the rice in the vessel, beginning with the ladle, until the end of the rite, until the sprinkling.
25.25.10	Having performed the Prāskandana rite, having brought the Pavitra-water and having deposited it, he should scatter the rice grains beyond the Pavitra.
25.25.11	Then he should pour out clarified butter.
25.25.12	Then he places clarified butter.
25.25.13	Having encircled both with fire, he should offer the Stambayajus on the Upavasatha altar, facing the Gārhapatya.
25.25.14	From here onwards it is accomplished.
25.25.15	The procuring of the cooked (rice) is (done) thus.
25.25.16	Having released the southern joint of the enclosing sticks, one should procure the Prāyaniya (rice) with the southern enclosing stick towards the east, and the Udayaniya (rice) towards the west.
25.25.17	Here the deities are worshipped with Agni as the chief.
25.25.18	The Udayaniya (sacrifice) ends with the Sāṁyuva (rite).
25.26.1	Now if an animal is to be offered, one should rub the hands.
25.26.2	He should spread (the grass).
25.26.3	Having washed the vessels, he should arrange them.
25.26.4	Having purified the sprinkling water, he should sprinkle the vessels.
25.26.5	Having poured the clarified butter, having placed it, having encircled it with fire, he should take up the wooden sword.
25.26.6	The rite connected with the animal sacrifice, beginning with the announcement, is performed.
25.26.7	The rite is accomplished from here onwards.
25.26.8	As Śālīki prescribes, one should offer the oblation of milk to Mitra-Varuṇa. The calves are to be taken away along with the Savanīya oblations and the evening milking.
25.26.9	Having performed the Udayanīya rite, one should rub the hands together.
25.26.10	One should spread out the grass.
25.26.11	Having cleansed the vessels, one should arrange them.
25.26.12	Having purified the sprinkling water, one should sprinkle the vessels.
25.26.13	Then in the morning, he should milk the cows.
25.26.14	Then having cooked her over the Garhapatya without pouring clarified butter over her, he should take her out.
25.26.15	Then he should pour out clarified butter.
25.26.16	Then he places clarified butter.
25.26.17	Having encircled both with fire, having placed the sacrificial grass around the Āhavanīya, then having again placed her and poured clarified butter over her and taken her out, he should place her within the altar.
25.26.18	Having performed the rites upto the Ajyabhāga, he shaves off the hair on the head and beard and cuts the nails at the end of the southern altar.
25.26.19	Then the rites ending with the Keḍanīya of the Ajyabhāra are concluded.
25.26.20	Then this Upavasatha rite is performed silently, because it is a rite of the Punaḥādheya.
25.26.21	The taking of the Stambayajus is done once for the Mahavedi.
25.26.22	The wife, not being dressed, follows the Yajñapuccha.
25.27.1	Now they build this Agni-pile with three, six, and twelve layers.
25.27.2	If one is going to build a thousand-layered pile with three layers, one should perform the Pravargya and Upasads in the forenoon, place the first layer with soil, and offer oblations to the layers that have been built.
25.27.3-5	Having placed the second layer of bricks along with the earth, he offers the oblations of the accumulated fire. Having performed the Pravargya and Upasads on the next day, he places the third layer of bricks alongwith the earth, the fourth layer of bricks, the fifth layer of bricks, and the sixth layer of bricks along wth the earth, and offers the oblations from the accumulated fire. The third day is like the Upavasatha day.
25.27.6	Now if he is going to perform the Sahasra-homa with six Upasads, then having performed the Pravargya and the Upasads in the morning, having deposited the first layer of bricks along with the earth, he offers the oblations of the layers.
25.27.7	On the next day, having performed the Pravaryga and the Upasad, having deposited the second layer of bricks alongwith the earth, he makes the oblations of layers.
25.27.8	He does it in the same way for five days.
25.27.9	The sixth day is the fasting day.
25.27.10	If one is going to perform the Sahasra and the Dvādaśopasat, then it is done according to the Sutra.
25.27.11	Now if he is going to perform the two-thousand-year-old sacrifice with three Upasads, having performed the Pravargya and the Upasads in the forenoon, having deposited the first layer with soil, having offered the oblations of the accumulated fire, he deposits the second layer with soil.
25.27.12	Having deposited the second layer with earth, having offered the accumulated oblations, he deposits the third layer with earth.
25.27.13-14	Having performed the Pravargya and Upasad rites on the next day, having deposited the third layer, the fourth layer, the fifth layer, the sixth layer along with the earth, having offered oblations to the layers, he deposits the seventh layer along with the soil.
25.27.15	Now if he is going to perform the two-thousand-year-old sacrifice with six Upasads, having performed the Pravargya and the Upasads in the forenoon, having deposited the first layer with soil, having offered the oblations of the layers, he deposits the second layer with soil.
25.27.16	Having performed the Pravargya and Upasad rites on the next day, having deposited the second layer along with the earth, having offered the oblations of the layers, he deposits the layer along with the soil.
25.27.17	In this way he does it for five days.
25.27.18	The sixth day is like the Upavasatha.
25.27.19	Now if he is going to perform the Dvīṣa-sahasra sacrifice with twelve Upasads, having performed the Pravargya and the Upasads in the forenoon, having deposited the first layer of bricks with the mortar, he spends the night.
25.27.20	Having performed the Pravarg ya and the Upasad in the morning, having deposited the mortar, having offered the oblations of the layers, he deposits the first layer with the mortar.
25.27.21	Thus acting as per the Sutra, he puts down the excreta and excreta and offers the oblations of the accumulated fire. He puts down the oblation with excreta.
25.27.22	The twelfth day is the same as the Upavasatha.
25.28.1	Now if he is going to perform the Triṣaṃtra-sāman with three Upasads, having performed the Pravargya and the Upasads in the forenoon, having deposited the first layer with the earth, having offered the oblations of the layers, he should deposit two layers with earth.
25.28.2	Having placed the second layer of bricks along with the ashes, having offered oblations in the fire, he places two bricks along with the ash, having taken them out.
25.28.3	Having performed the Pravargya and Upasad rites on the next day, having deposited the third layer, the fourth layer, the fifth layer, the sixth layer along with the soil, having offered the oblations of the layers, having taken two layers along with the soil and deposited them, he deposits two layers along with soil.
25.28.4	The third day is like the Upavasatha.
25.28.5	Now if he is going to perform the Triṣaṃhuṣa-Ṣaḍupasat, then having performed the Pravargya and the Upasads in the forenoon, having deposited the first layer with the earth, having offered the oblations of the layers, he should deposit two layers with the earth.
25.28.6	Having performed the Pravargya and Upasad rites on the next day, having deposited the second layer along with the earth, having offered the oblations of the layers, he deposits two layers along with the earth.
25.28.7	In this way he performs for five days.
25.28.8	The sixth day is like the Upavasatha.
25.28.9	Now if he is going to perform the Triṣāhasra-dvādaśopasat, having performed the Pravargya and the Upasads in the forenoon, having deposited the first layer of bricks, he spends the night with the bricks deposited.
25.28.10	Having performed the Pravarg ya and the Upas ads in the morning, having deposited the bricks, having offered the oblations of the layers, he deposits two bricks with the bricks deposited.
25.28.11	Thus acting as per the Sutra, having placed the excrement and excrement, having offered the accumulated oblations, he places two excrement-containing oblations.
25.28.12	The twelfth day is like the Upavasatha day.
25.28.13	How should one know the inner Upasads, the outer Upasads, and the inner-outer Upasads?
25.28.14	If the king is bought when there are twelve months left of the sacrificial year, then the Upavasatha rites are performed within.
25.28.15	If the king is bought after the sacrificial year is over, then the Upavathas are performed outside.
25.28.16	If the Upavastha rites are performed when there are six months left of the Daitasa year, then the rites are performed within and outside, and there are six nights left.
25.29.1	He makes this clay equal to the pit.
25.29.2	This means that he places it on the ground at an equal level.
25.29.3	He places these two, the horse and the donkey, either to the north or in front, facing each other.
25.29.4	If they are in front, facing east, then the horse is on the right and the donkey on the north.
25.29.5	If they were to the north, then the horse would be in front and the donkey behind.
25.29.6	The Agni-s obtained the animals.
25.29.7	Of the five animals, the Brahman is.
25.29.8	If one were to offer these animals, after performing the animal-binding rite on the grass, the heads should be cut off and the bodies should be carried away in water.
25.29.9	It is known that the bodies are carried away in water.
25.29.10	He observes celibacy for this month.
25.29.11	He lies down on the ground, without meat, without a woman, and without means. This is called the first initiation.
25.29.12	One who is being initiated thinks of this as the thirteenth month.
25.29.13	Here, he makes the sacrificer recite on the black antelope skin, "I do not make a fist and do not restrain speech."
25.29.14	The Krsnajina and other things are the last rites, because they are mentioned.
25.29.15	In the first Upasad, one measures out the Vedi and carries the Stambayajus.
25.29.16	This is done according to the injunction of the rite.
25.29.17	When one is sowing the seeds in the collection of materials, one should mentally contemplate the dark colour in the moon, thinking that it is here too.
25.30.1-3	The ploughman should go on ploughing the field, sowing the seeds of all kinds of herbs, and not leave the space which has been ploughed by himself. Now some people sing the Sama Veda in the man and the space ploughed by himself.
25.30.4	He should say, "The golden bricks, the bricks of the mandala, the seed."
25.30.5	He should not let the pile of bricks fall apart, putting the southern ones on the south and the northern ones on the north.
25.30.6	If he were to put the bricks on the south and east, he should turn around in a counter-clockwise direction.
25.30.7	If he were to place the bricks facing the north or the west, then he should place them facing the self-spreaders.
25.30.8	One should place the Krittikas.
25.30.9	Which are these Krittikas?
25.30.10	One should say: Lightning.
25.30.11	Baudhayana says that the fire-installation is for the purpose of non-dripping.
25.30.12	The fire-altar is built with the sixth layer of bricks.
25.30.13	Śālīki says, it is built with the seventh layer of bricks.  
25.30.14	When one is taking the sixth layer of covering bricks, at what time should he take them?
25.30.15	One should say, "Having placed the bricks of the stars."
25.30.16	He proceeds with three rites: the covering of the excreta, the sprinkling of the thousandfold, and the making of the cow.
25.30.17	He proceeds with eight rites: the offering of the highest accumulated oblations, the hundred-verse hymn, salutations, sprinkling, stretching, the serpent oblations, the attendance with the Sāman hymns, and the concluding praise.
25.31.1	Now, what is the procedure in sowing different seeds?
25.31.2	The procedure of taking up the ladle, the procedure of taking up (the Soma) from the pressing stone, all the procedures of the cart and other things, up to the Savitrī verse, are the procedures.
25.31.3	The Savitrī verse is repeated with each seed.
25.31.4	The procedure is the advance of the priest with ten verses, the offering. This is the procedure.
25.31.5	The ritual of the black antelope skin, the ritual of the mortar, the ritual of pouring the rice for the oblations, the ritual of placing the pestle, the ritual of putting the winnowing basket, the ritual of offering the oblations.
25.31.6	The mantra beginning with "pouring" and ending with "sprinkling" is repeated with the seed syllable.
25.31.7	As Śālīki has prescribed, they perform the rite of the eleven Prayājas. It is proper for the eleven Prayāja rite, not for the five Prayāja rite.
25.31.8	As to this they declare the view of Upamaṇyava: "One should sprinkle him with the water of the Svishtakrit offering, as far as the text goes. Here there is no black antelope skin, no gold, no Partha-cloths. Having spread Kuśa grass, one should sprinkle him on them."
25.31.9	How does the consecration of the sacrificers proceed?
25.31.10	The consecration is the offering of the horse on the first day. The Bahispavamāna is to be chanted at the beginning and end of the Stotra. One should recite the Yajñāyajñiya Stotra twice.
25.32.1	How does the practice of the Ekādaśina animals begin?
25.32.2	Having spread the Iḍasūnas, having cut off the fresh butter, having brought it to the ladle, having gone out towards the north between the Cātvāla and the Utkara, having exchanged (the ladle with the Utkara), having poured (the butter), having placed (the ladle), having brought the animal, having spread on the four Hotrās, having placed the animal, having taken the ladle, having taken the animal, having placed the ladle, having placed the animals, having taken the ladles, having taken the animals, having placed the ladles, one should pour the butter over the animal.
25.32.3	Having placed the animal of the chief, having placed the broth of the Vṛki fat, one should sprinkle the ladle with it.
25.32.4	He should sprinkle it with hot (water).
25.32.5	Then, in the Upabṛt for the Svishtakṛt, having mixed together all the three parts of the oblations, he should put the fat of the Vṛka and cook it. Then he should sprinkle the UpabṚt with it.
25.32.6	He should sprinkle it with warm (water).
25.32.7	Then having placed the heart, tongue, breast, fat, and marrow in a vessel, having sprinkled it with hot water, one should pour clarified butter over it.
25.32.8	Then having taken the Vasahom in a pot or a bowl, having sprinkled it, then pour clarified butter over.
25.32.9	One should rub the animal.
25.32.10	One should go to the Vasahom with the side, from the pot.
25.32.11	Having gone around the northern altar, he should announce the half-verse of the Yajya. The Pratiprasthātṛ should offer the Vasahomas.
25.32.12	Having sprinkled in all directions.
25.32.13	Then he should mix the remaining Vasahomas with the Vasahomas already offered.
25.32.14	He offers the oblation at the Vasat-utterance.
25.32.15	Having not offered the Svishtakrit, he should step forward towards the north and spread the Juhu and the Vasahomāhavanī.
25.32.16	Having placed the deity of the second animal, and having prepared a broth with the fat of a wolf, he should sprinkle the Juhu with it.
25.32.17	Having sprinkled the broth, he should offer it.
25.32.18	Then, having mixed together the fat of the Vṛka and the flesh of the animals of the three classes, and having put it in the Upabhṛt vessel, one should pour it over the Upabhara vessel.
25.32.19	One should pour the fat over the Upabṛt vessel, having poured it over the fat.
25.32.20	Then one should take the Vasāhoma in a pot or a vessel, and pour it over the fat, and then pour it over the pot.
25.32.21	He should touch the animal.
25.32.22	He should go to the Vasahomā with the side, from the shoulder, from the pot.
25.32.23	Having gone around the Uttaravedi from the rear, he should call out. The Pratiprasthātṛ should offer the Vasahomâ with half of the Yajyâ.
25.32.24	Having sprinkled, he should offer to the directions.
25.32.25	At the Vasat-utterance, he offers the oblation.
25.32.26	In this way, for all animals.
25.32.27	If he were to pour the oblation into the Varuna-vessel at the Sviṣṭakṛt offering, he should pour it twice.
25.32.28	He should pour it over the heated ladle.
25.32.29	Similarly, he should take the Vasahom in a pot or a vessel and pour it over the hot ladle.
25.32.30	He should touch the animal.
25.32.31	He should go to the Vasahom with the side, from the pot.
25.32.32	Having gone around the northern altar from the south, he should announce the half-verse of the Yajya. The Pratiprasthātṛ should offer the Vasahomas.
25.32.33	Having sprinkled in the directions.
25.32.34	Then he should offer the other Vasahomas in the Vasahomas fire.
25.32.35	He offers the oblation at the Vasat-utterance.
25.32.36	Then he offers the oblations in the eastern direction of the Vanaspati.
25.32.37	Then he performs with the Vanaspati.
25.32.38-41	Then the Svishtakrit. From here onwards it is accomplished. As to how they know the rite of Upamaṇyava, that one should offer the oblation of the Maitrāvaruṇa with the cooked flesh of the animal that has been sacrificed, it is accomplished. Here one should know the Upavasatha rite as it is done at the new moon, except for the Pindapitryajña.
25.32.42	He should not eat the flesh of any animal for a year, nor the flesh of a young animal, nor flesh from the head. He should not approach a woman while the fire is being kindled. He should not run in the rain while the fire is kindled. If he runs, he should turn back.
25.32.43	He should turn back to food. This is the Brahmanical text.
25.33.1	Now at this Vājapeya, there are seventeen chariots, with three horses each.
25.33.2	They are one hundred and fifty.
25.33.3	One should employ the Prishti (animal) on the northern side.
25.33.4	The animals are twenty-four. The Agni-Soma and the Anubandhya are twenty-four each.
25.33.5	It is indeed said:
25.33.6	One offers the Savitr offering before each rite.
25.33.7	One who is going to offer the Diksaniya oblation offers the Savitr oblation.
25.33.8	From Savitr alone one should offer to Savitr.
25.33.9	One should offer to Savitri when one is going to offer the oblations for initiation.
25.33.10	Having offered to Savitri, one should offer the oblations of initiation.
25.33.11	One should make an offering to Savitri when going to perform the Pravargya rite.
25.33.12	From Savitri alone one should offer Savitri.
25.33.13	One should perform the Antahhiranya rite. One should offer to Savitari.
25.33.14	Having offered to Savitr, one should offer to Antariks.
25.33.15	Having performed with the foot, having bought the king, one who is going to perform the Atithya offering offers to Savitr.
25.33.16	It becomes Savitr from Savitr.
25.33.17	One who is going to commence the first two Pravargya and Upasad offerings offers to Savitr.
25.33.18	Having offered to Savitr, one should proceed with the first two Pravargya and Upasad rites.
25.33.19	One who is about to perform the Parigraha rite of the Mahavedi first offers to Savitr.
25.33.20	Having offered to Savitr one should take up the wooden spade.
25.33.21	One who intends to carry the Ahavaniya fire offers to Savitr first.
25.33.22	Having offered Savitri, one should take up kindling wood.
25.33.23	When one is about to offer the Soma-juice in the Rathantara and Uddhatana cups, one should offer the Savitr-oblation.
25.33.24	Having offered the Savitr- oblation, one should offer in the Rathantara cup and Uddhatanacup.
25.33.25	When one is about to lead the Agni-Soma (deities), one should offer the Sāvitra oblation.
25.33.26	Having led the Agni-Soma deities, one should offer.
25.33.27	When one intends to erect the sacrificial post, one should offer a Savitr oblation.
25.33.28	Having offered to Savitr, one should take up the sprinkling water.
25.33.29	Having released the sacrificial post reaching up to heaven, one who is about to offer the animal to Agni-Soma offers to Savitr.
25.33.30	Having offered to Savitr one should take up two darbha grass blades.
25.33.31	Having performed the offering with the oblation, one who is going to take up the Vasatīvari water offers to Savitr
25.33.32	Having offered to savitr, one should pick up the pot.
25.33.33	One who is going to offer the Pasupurodāsa oblation offers the Savitrā oblation.
25.33.34	It becomes Savitrā from Savitrā.
25.34.1	The altar is square.
25.34.2	Having placed the altars in the directions, one should mix the Agniṣṭhāna and Sūryasthāna.
25.34.3	One takes five Indra-grahas.
25.34.4	All these are to be taken with the Sopyāma formula.
25.34.5	Having performed the Marutīya rite, one should announce them thus:
25.34.6	The rite of taking the torch, the rite of the Adhrigu-offering, one should turn back.
25.34.7	The Homa of announcement, one should break the two sacrificial grass-blades above, the offering with the Svāhā-form, one should divide the clarified butter into two parts, the Stokyas are to be shared in both parts.
25.34.8	Then this wheel of the chariot is raised to the height of a span above the ground.
25.34.9	Having gone around on the other side, he touches the axle. Thus he touches the wheel of the chariot.
25.34.10	Then he says, "Having gone along the southern path, one comes back." The Sūta and the Rājanya are mentioned here.
25.34.11	The Maruts having gone round the fire in front, (the Adhvaryu) says, "The Kshatriyas have been praised."
25.34.12	Then he makes the sacrificer put on the Tarpa garment.
25.34.13	The garment becomes satisfied with clarified butter.
25.34.14	They also say, "The trees are called Tarpa."
25.34.15	It is indeed of them.
25.34.16	Now some say that this Vājapeya is to be performed with all seventeen (Sāmans).
25.34.17	But it should be performed in the Brhat-sāman with twenty-one (Sāmans) in the Śipiviṣṭa-sāmans of Viṣṇu.
26.1.1	Now this Rājasūya is completed in seventeen and a half months or in sixteen and a half months.
26.1.2	In it there are five one-day Soma sacrifices, one less than the two-day Soma sacrifice.
26.1.3	There are six kinds of sacrificial posts.
26.1.4	There are eight sacrificial posts, six for the Agniṣṭoma, two for the animal sacrifice, and one for the Sautrāmaṇī.
26.1.5	There are as many as the number of sacrificial posts. There are as many as eight.
26.1.6	Where is the oblation of oblations offered?
26.1.7	One should say, "In the Anuṣṭubh metre."
26.1.8	The garment should be black, the garment should be black-dyed, the fee should be a black cow.
26.1.9	This is what is meant by the statement, "Krishna-dasha."
26.1.10	"One should offer the Iṣṭi with Pāśubandha."
26.1.11	One should perform the Santani-Iṣṭi, or the Āgrayana, or the Pārvana.
26.1.12	How is the Sakamedha-parusha?
26.1.13	The Santani is performed in the early morning, the Uttara in the next day, and the Pradosha in the evening.
26.1.14	What is not mentioned here?
26.1.15	He should say only, "Before the Anūyājika offering."
26.1.16	He offers a cake on eight potsherds to Brhaspati in the house of the Brahman.
26.1.17	He who is a Brahman not associated with the Yajamāna.
26.1.18	He offers a rice-pap to Bhaga in the house of Vāvatā.
26.1.19	She who is the most fortunate among the wives.
26.1.20	He offers an oblation to Nirṛti in the house of Parivṛkta.
26.1.21	This is said to be for one who is unlucky.
26.1.22	The oblation to Pūṣan is at the house of one who milks for a share.
26.1.23	This is said to be at the house of the chief cook.
26.1.24	But they also say, "He who milks for shares, he is this." This is said to him.
26.1.25	The offerings to the Ratnis are made in the twelfth day.
26.1.26	In the thirteenth day, the Mitra-Brhaspati (oblation).
26.1.27	The two days are left over for the same former view.
26.1.28	One should offer on the two days.
26.1.29	If one were to build a fire-altar for the Utkhya and consecration on this very two-day rite, having offered the Agni and Savitr oblations, having collected the omenta and the animal heads, one should offer with the Vayu animal.
26.2.1	"One is the lord of waters" - these are the Apampatya verses.
26.2.2	These are said to be of the ocean-born ones.
26.2.3	"Ojasthē" is said to be of those who are to be worshipped.
26.2.4	These are said to be the ones of the whirlwinds.
26.2.5	"Sūryavarchasthē" is of those who are visible.
26.2.6	These are of the ones who are pleased.
26.2.7	"Shakvarī sthē" is said of the ones who have the form of a cow.
26.2.8-12	If the Soma-pressing is to be concluded on the same day, then this is the rule: If it should increase beyond the prescribed limit, then on that very day one should offer an oblation to Agni with eight potfuls of cooked rice. On the next day, one should offer to Sarasvati. One should know that there are ten each in the Hotr's vessel and the Udgātṛ's vessel. Seven each in the Hotrs vessel and the Udagatrs vessel.
26.2.13	Now the others are nine and nine.
26.2.14	These are the ones beginning with Prāsarpaṇa, ending with Apasusumanta.
26.2.15	Now this is the Pratichinastoma, the Keśavapaniya Atiratra, which is sixteenfold.
26.2.16-17	His Agniṣṭoma sacrifices have the same number of Stotras as the original Agniṣṭoma, the Bahispavamāna has twenty-one Stotras, the Ajyas have seventeen Stotras, the Madhyandina Pavamāna has fifteen Stotras, the Prsthas have fifteen Stotras, and the Ārbhava Pavamāna has three Stotras. The Yajñāyajñiya has three Stotras.
26.2.18	He has six consecrations, six preparatory rites, the Prasuta rite on the thirteenth day, and the Udavasani rite on the fourteenth day.
26.2.19	Then, in the remaining part of that very fortnight, he consecrates himself for the two-day Vyuṣṭi rite.
26.2.20	He is consecrated for one night of the bright fortnight and two nights of the dark fortnight.
26.2.21	There are twelve preparatory rites for them.
26.2.22	Then he observes the Upavasa.
26.2.23	Then on the day of the Upavasatha, when the New Moon is in the east, the first day is the previous day and the second day is the subsequent day.
26.2.24	The Vyuṣṭi sacrifice of two days comes to an end.
26.2.25	Then one should enter the northern hall.
26.2.26	Then having churned out the fires and having moved away, one initiates for the Agniṣṭoma to be performed on the next day.
26.2.27	There are three consecrations, three Upasads, and the Soma is pressed on the seventh day.
26.2.28	This Udayaniya Agniṣṭoma comes to an end with a thousand Dakṣiṇās.
26.2.29	Then in this very remaining fortnight, he performs the Devikā-Havis and the Sautrāmaṇī of Traidhātavīya, for the stability of the Kṣatriya.
26.2.30	The Rajasuya sacrifice is completed in seventeen and a half months.
26.2.31	Now the Keshavapaniya of Saliki.
26.2.32	They are sixteen and a half.
26.3.1	Now the Anjasavas.
26.3.2	The first half-month is well known.
26.3.3	The Caturmāsyas are performed in five days, the Santani in two days, the Indraturiya in the eighth day, the Devīka-Havis in the ninth day, the Uttara in the tenth day, the Ekādaśa, Dvādaśa and Trayodaśa in the eleventh, twelfth and thirteenth days, the Vaivasvata in the fourteenth day, the Vaishvānara in the fifteenth day, the Varuna in the sixteenth day, the Yavamaya Caru in the seventeenth day, the Prāṇāgni in the eighteenth day, the Prāyaṇīya in the nineteenth day, the Āgrayaṇa in the twentieth day, the Āgrayana in the twenty-first day, the Āgrya in the twenty-second day, the Āgrīya in the twenty-third day, the Āgneya in the twentyfourth day, the Āgneya in the twentyfifth day, the Āgnādhriya in the twenty-sixth day, the Āghārya in the twenty-seventh day, the Ādhārya in the twentyeighth day, the Ādārya in the thirtieth day, the Ādha-rādhi in the thirty-first day, and the Ādhāri in the thirty-second day. Thus the month is completed.
26.3.4	The Havis of the Ratni-s is offered in twelve days, the Maitra-Bārhaspatya in thirteen days, the Santani in two days, the Abhisecaniya Ukthya in half a month. Thus two months.
26.3.5	The Saptadasa is offered in half a month, the Dasapeya in half a moon, the Diksita and the Diksitavratin in three months.
26.3.6	The Prati-stoma sacrifice with the Keshava-paniya Atiratra in half a month, the Vyushti sacrifice in two days, and the four months.
26.3.7	The Ksatra-dhrti sacrifice in half a month.
26.3.8	They are half of five.
26.3.9	Now about Shalikya.
26.3.10	The Agniṣṭoma sacrifice is purified in seven days. The remaining days of the fortnight are completed in this way. The Ratnin offerings are made in the twelfth day. The Maitrāvaruṇa and Bṛhaspati offerings are made in two days. This is the month.
26.3.11	The Abhiṣeka and Ukthya sacrifices are performed in half a month. The Saptadaśa and Daśapeya sacrifices are performed for two months.
26.3.12	The Prati-stoma sacrifice with the Keshava-paniya Atiratra in half a month, the Vyushti sacrifice in two nights and the Rajasuya in three months.
26.3.13	The Ksatra-dhrti sacrifice in half a month.
26.3.14	They are half of the fourth.
26.3.15	Now the Patantuka.
26.3.16	Twelve days of consecration and twelve days of approaching.
26.3.17	The Rajasuya is deficient by seven days.
26.3.18	He performs the Rajasuya-sacrifices in accordance with the space available.
26.3.19	Then he performs the Devaki-sacrifices.
26.3.20	Then he offers the Tridahtviya-sacrifice.
26.3.21	Then he makes the Sautrāmaṇī-sacrifice.
26.3.22	The Rajasuya is concluded.
26.4.1	Now they describe the Iṣṭikalpa, the one with fifteen Samidhenī verses and the one with seventeen Samidhenīverses.
26.4.2	There, the sacrifice and the offering are accomplished. Baudhayana's is the view.
26.4.3	As in the case of Saliki.
26.4.4	One should recite three verses.
26.4.5	Having recited the first verse thrice, one should recite the next three verses, and then the last verse thrice.
26.4.6	They are fifteen.
26.4.7	One should repeat fifteen times.
26.4.8	These eleven Samidhenis are named Samamnamas.
26.4.9	He recites the first three times, the last three times.
26.4.10	They are fifteen.
26.4.11	One should recite seventeen, one should recite twenty-one, one should recite fourty-two, one should recite thirty, one should recite sixty-two, one shoud recite forty, one should recite eighty-four. These are the Dhayyas (verses).
26.4.12	All the verses are in the Gāyatrī metre.
26.4.13	One should recite all the metres, one should recite an unlimited number of verses. Thus these verses become Dhāyās.
26.4.14	These are not all Gāyatrī verses.
26.4.15	The Puronuvākyā is in the Gāyatra metre, the Yājyā is in the Tristubh metre.
26.4.16	The Puronovākyā is before the Lakṣma, the Yāgyā is above the Lakṣma.
26.4.17	The Mūrdhanvatī is the introductory formula. One should offer the Upāṁśuyāja between the Niyutvatī and the Yajati.
26.4.18	This is applicable only to the Darśa-Pūrṇamāsa sacrifices and not to others.
26.5.1	Now these are the optional sacrifices which should be performed without any residue.
26.5.2	One should observe the diet of milk for a year or twelve days or as long as one desires.
26.5.3	If one were to offer to those who have the same yokes, then all of them should be offered. Just as when one has not properly taken up the fire-tending, one takes up a little and then again takes up more.
26.5.4	How is atonement accomplished here?
26.5.5	Some say it is accomplished.
26.5.6	But some say it is not accomplished.
26.5.7	Or one of them may be the designated part, and the other the undesignated part.
26.5.8	Both of them are indeed the undesignated parts.
26.5.9	It does not succeed at all.
26.5.10	The taking of Dhṛṣṭi is the ritual.
26.5.11	One should take Dhṛṣṭī from the Garhapatya.
26.5.12	With that, one should place the skull of Vaiśvānara on the Āhavanīya.
26.5.13	Having circumambulated the Garhapatya, having baked the Marut-cakes of flour, having mixed them together, having made two balls, having taken the ball of Marut in front, one should sprinkle the ball of Vaisvânara on the Âhavanîya.
26.5.14	Having circumambulated, having taken the skin of Marut at the Garhapaty, one should take this skin.
26.5.15	Having performed the Agnihotra rite, one should perform the Agnihotra rite.
26.5.16	Having cooked this (oblation), one should cook that (oblation).
26.5.17	Or one should do both in both places.
26.5.18	Having cooked the oblation, one should release the southern end of the enclosing sticks, or the southern enclosing stick, from the front.
26.5.19	From here onwards it is accomplished.
26.5.20	These two are the ones who are smeared with this (sin), he who eats the food of those who hate each other.
26.5.21	It is said that the other is the other.
26.5.22	If the kingdoms would be shaken by the enemies, or if they would be united.
26.5.23	The kings are the enemies.
26.5.24	One's own people, the kingdoms, the clans.
26.5.25	He who is depressed, as if he were a sinner himself.
26.5.26	If he has power, he may be like a self-offender.
26.5.27	In the form of a good person, he is a self-offending person.
26.5.28	What is given to him, he does not give back.
26.5.29	What is offered, not accepted, is being obstructed.
26.5.30	Then in this ritual-like sacrifice, one should perform the first ritual with the Ida-ending.
26.5.31	One should perform the remaining with the third.
26.5.32	How is it to be eaten here?
26.5.33	One should eat it here and there.
26.5.34	Or else, having offered all together, one should eat at the end.
26.5.35	A bull should be given to the Hotr.
26.5.36	This should be given to him from the cowpen of the sacrificer.
26.5.37	Having encircled the altar, one should raise half and leave half.
26.5.38	Or the right half of the altar, or the left half?
26.5.39	Having taken up the portion for Indra, one should take up the portion for Visve Devāḥ. Then above the portion for Indra.
26.5.40	These two portions are mentioned.
26.5.41	The garment should be worn with the left side in front.
26.5.42	The threads are attached from the edge or from the end, either copper or blue.
26.5.43	Or the thread for attaching is mentioned.
26.5.44	Then, in this sacrifice with a name, he should recite it only once and call out only once.
26.5.45	For there are two Yajus and Anuvakya verses for it.
26.6.1	Now, indeed, it is said:
26.6.2	"If one does not understand, one should offer this portion to the Adityas, from this world to the world of the departed." One should offer thus, and then stop.
26.6.3	Having performed the rites up to the giving away, he should place these grains in a black antelope skin and keep them in the eastern half of the fire-chamber.
26.6.4	Then, when the time is known, he should mix them together.
26.6.5	He should perform the rites beginning with sprinkling.
26.6.6	From here onwards it is accomplished.
26.6.7	As in the case of a nail-pierced one, so in the case of one hundred black-antelope skins.
26.6.8	Before the rice is cooked, he should place gold. The rice should be cooked well. He should place it in a golden or silver vessel and keep it inside the altar.
26.6.9	One should mix the Agniya and Saumya offerings with the Indra offering.
26.6.10	The balls of rice should be mixed before they are sprinkled with water.
26.6.11	He is the one who makes everything known to all, and he is the one who is always worshipped by all. This is what is meant by saying that he is the one to whom all are devoted.
26.6.12	Moreover, it is said that one should make the length of the recitation equal to the number of years one expects to live.
26.6.13	If one is thirty years old, one should recite for seventy years.
26.6.14	If one has forty years, one should recite sixty years.
26.6.15	This is the rite for its increase.
26.6.16	In the Varuna rites and in the Sañjñā-Iṣṭi, one should recite the Sāman once, call out once, and offer the oblations once, all having the same deity.
26.6.17	One should offer a cake to Apānaptiya again after returning.
26.6.18	Who is the son of the waters?
26.6.19	One should say, "The lightning."
26.6.20	And black honey.
26.6.21	This is said to be the Pouttika.
26.6.22	This is said to be Anastigadha.
26.6.23	This is meant to be Trivali.
26.6.24	Or they say, this is meant to be Tricchashdika.
26.6.25	As in the case of Trihata, so also in the case of the doubtful Purorasha, the method of taking is to be known.
26.7.1	He created serpents.
26.7.2	These are the months.
26.7.3	"He created the Vyasas."
26.7.4	These are the metres.
26.7.5	"He should be like this."
26.7.6	They instruct about the ancient Gārhapatya.
26.7.7	At the time of the animal-sacrifice, having taken up the torch, having taken it out through the southern door, having gone around the Sadas by the right, having taken it around the Marjalyana Dhishniya, having taken it between the sacrificial post and the Havaniya, having taken it within the Catvala and the Utkara, having taken it towards the north, they should cook the animal.
26.7.8	If the fire-brand is to be taken from the Ahavaniya fire, then it should be taken along with the oblation.
26.7.9	Which deities are the Apāvya oblations?
26.7.10	Two are dedicated to Prajapati, one to Agni, one to Vayu and one to the Visve Devas.
26.7.11	The Adhvaryu is the sacrificer's own sacrificer.
26.7.12	It is said to be the Uṣṇīṣa.
26.7.13	Now, they also quote: "The Adhvaryu alone is mentioned."
26.7.14	"Protect me from the near ones, from the curse of anyone."
26.7.15	The near ones are the mantra.
26.7.16	Therefore, it is said here: "Protect me."
26.7.17	Therefore, one should not cross the sacrificial ground.
26.7.18	One day and night is one.
26.7.19	"The fire will become cold" is one.
26.7.20	"The rain will fall on him" is another.
26.7.21	"The two oceans are vast and imperishable" is another. Here it is said:
26.7.22	The day and night are mentioned as such.
26.7.23	"The feet turn around in the belly" is another. It is said here:
26.7.24	"The feet are in the belly".
26.7.25	Those who see them go by day, and those who do not see them go by night, go by a bridge.
26.7.26	Those who see them go during the day, and those do not see them, go by night by a bridge. Thus it is said.
26.7.27	Two rivers flow together, but there is one bank.
26.7.28	This means that the sun is the day and night.
26.7.29	Wearing the dark (robe), he takes the bright (robe), saying, "The night is wearing the dark (robe)."
26.7.30	Wearing the night, he takes the bright, saying, "The day." This is what is meant.
26.7.31	"Of one who has fallen on an insect."
26.7.32	What is this insect?
26.7.33	"He who makes the lumps."
26.7.34	The recitation of the verse to Visnu is to be done at the eternal Grahanas.
26.7.35	The recitation should be done with only Prsadajya.
26.8.1	Now we shall explain the Atigrahyas.
26.8.2	These are the Atigrahyaprstas, the five Indra-Vajapes,
26.8.3	the Parahsamas, the Charvasamas, and the Suryavayusavas.
26.8.4	The Adityas are the lords of the universe.
26.8.5	Prajapati is the lord of the great vow.
26.8.6	Brihaspati is the lord of Brihaspati's Soma-pressing.
26.8.7	The lord of the Vimadha and Udbhid and Tvisimati and Vrsha and Angiras is the lord of Soma-pressing. There are two lordships at the horse sacrifice.
26.8.8	One should offer the horse sacrifice with the two lordships.
26.8.9	One should make the offering of the horse sacrifice with two lordships.
26.8.10	How does one consume the Soma that belongs to another?
26.8.11	"O Soma, the god, the knower of the mind, the one who is drunk by the plants and the offspring, the one who belongs to the midday pressing, the one who has the Tristubh meter, the one who was drunk by Prajapati, the one who possesses sweetness, the one who invites, I consume the one who has been invited."
26.8.12	This is the only way of eating the food of the Arvācīnas.
26.8.13	The Dakṣiṇās are eight-pronged gold.
26.8.14	This means that they are eight-prong.
26.8.15	If there are two embryos, there should be twelve prongs.
26.8.16	If there is one large sheath and two intermediate sheaths,
26.8.17	Then, having smeared the bones with ghee, he should place them inside the middle leaf of the palāśa leaf, reciting "Bhūr Bhuvah Suvar" (Earth, Heaven, and Space).
26.9.1	If there is a cloud when the bones are obtained, it is said.
26.9.2	If there is cloud when the bones have been obtained, he should establish them.
26.9.3	If, however, there is a cloud over the place where the sacrifice is to be performed, then one should perform the sacrifice in another place where there is no cloud.
26.9.4	These are the Jāyas (verses) for the Āhitāgni and Anāhitāgni (i.e., those who have established the sacred fire and those who have not), except when they are seen in a different place.
26.9.5	But the teachers offer them before the Svishtakrit, because of the beginning of the sacrifice.
26.9.6	"The eight Vasus."
26.9.7	"Which are these eight Vasus?"
26.9.8	Earth, sky, heaven, Agni, Vayu, Aditya, Moon, and Water - these are the eight Vasus.
26.9.9	All this is established in these, whatever this is.
26.9.10	He who knows this stands firm.
26.9.11	The eleven Rudras.
26.9.12	These are said to be the vital airs.
26.9.13	The twelve Adityas.
26.9.14	These are the months.
26.9.15	Five are taken, nine are taken, five are divided.
26.9.16	The parts are nine and nine.
26.9.17	Now, the tenth mantra is indeed the one that is seen to be for the purpose of taking possession of these.
26.9.18	Having milked it, one should give it to a brahmin who does not eat food.
26.9.19	It should be given only to one who has taken up alms.
26.9.20	Which deity is the Soma that is left over?
26.9.21	Whatever deity a particular Graha may be, that deity will be the deity of the sacrifice. This is the only exception.
26.9.22	Now, another point.
26.9.23	It is known that the Brahmanical text says, "Why is the sacrifice not established in Indra?" Therefore, they should be dedicated to Indra and Vishnu.
26.9.24	They should desire the six-day establishment with that cooling.
26.9.25	This is the six-day Brahmanical formula.
26.9.26	If the day-connection occurs in this way, then when the middle six months of the year come together, they should immediately cool it down and collect it.
26.9.27	If it is the Udayaniya Atiratra, then it is the same.
26.9.28	The creatures, while performing austerities, were sitting in the sacrificial session without offering oblations.
26.9.29	They asked, "What is that sacrificial session?"
26.9.30	They said, "Those who are without fire and perform austerities in vain, that is the sacrificial session."
26.10.1	"Before the Ashvina, after the Ashvina."
26.10.2	"How much is the Ashvina?"
26.10.3	The distance that a horse can cover in a day, or two yojanas.
26.10.4	The altar should be twice that size.
26.10.5	One should take the length of the altar as the length of the fire-pit, which is square in shape.
26.10.6	That would be the length.
26.10.7	One should measure the altar with that.
26.10.8	Or one should take twenty chariot axles, twenty-one steps, and one-fourth of an eight-angula measure.
26.10.9	That is the procedure.
26.10.10	With that he measures out the altar.
26.10.11	"It is said, "The Agni is three times twenty-one."
26.10.12	There are three kinds of twenty-one.
26.10.13	That is twenty-one kinds.
26.10.14	"It says, "They place the two lakes in the middle of the sacrificial ground."
26.10.15	For what purpose are these two lakes?
26.10.16	The one on the right is for washing horses, the one on the left is for bathing.
26.10.17	Two slaves, one to the younger sister and one to the daughter of the younger sister.
26.10.18	The son of his father's younger sister goes first, then the son of his mother's younger sister.
26.10.19	Having wrapped the left knee with the old one.
26.10.20	This is said to be the rope for tying.
26.10.21	The hundred sons of Rajaputra are the Talyas.
26.10.22	They are mentioned as being excluded.
26.10.23	The hundred kings are fierce.
26.10.24	They are not fit to be consecrated.
26.10.25	In the morning, one should offer the Savitri oblation on eight potsherds.
26.10.26	This is the first Savitri.
26.10.27	The second is in the Visvedeva Parusha.
26.10.28	The third is in the afternoon.
26.10.29	One should know that this is the one-day rite.
26.10.30	One should offer the oblation to the north of the place of worship for the animals of the four months. Thus, the animals belong to Vayu and then to Tupara.
26.10.31	One performs the sacrifice for seven days.
26.10.32	How are the offerings here?
26.10.33	One should offer them here and there, or one should offer them in front of him for those seven days.
26.10.34	The sacrificial post is mentioned as the Rajjudala, which is to be placed near the fire.
26.10.35	This means that it is a kind of fig tree.
26.10.36	Some say that the Rajjudala is to be placed by the fire for the removal of the sin of abortion.
26.10.37	The Pautidrava is placed on both sides for the purpose of enclosing the fragrant offering.
26.10.38	One gives the third part of the Dakshina.
26.10.39	The Agnikas have the third (Anuvaka) with the third (Anuvaaka) of the Kamapreya, and the third (Anu-vaka) of the Atiratra.
26.10.40	This is the Catuṣṭoma.
26.10.41	This is Catuṣṭomam.
26.11.1	"One to one, svāhā; to two, svāhā."
26.11.2	How should one offer these Anuvākas?
26.11.3	They should be offered as they are in the original text, without any interruption.
26.11.4	Having taken twenty-four ropes, they approach the sacrificial posts, four each. The other performers (of the sacrifice) are also four each.
26.11.5	How should one employ them in these (sacrifices)?
26.11.6	The horse, the sacrificial post, and the deer are the three with equal ropes.
26.11.7	In the Raraṭi sacrifices, there are three.
26.11.8	In the Parāṅgya sacrifices, there are five.
26.11.9	To Agni, the leader of the army, a red bull. These are eight.
26.11.10	To Soma, the lord of the voice, two bulls. These are seven.
26.11.11	Now these three have the same yoke.
26.11.12	The fourth is only for the chief.
26.11.13	The same rite up to the kindling of the fire.
26.11.14	Of these animals which have been burnt, twenty-one are let loose and forty-four remain over.
26.11.15	Of these, forty-two are the shares, two of them go to the horse.
26.11.16	Then the others are distributed among the animals, to Indra and Agni, to the Uṣṭara bulls.
26.11.17	These two are mentioned only incidentally.
26.11.18	Now, in this Śalmali-sleshma-sacrifice, the barley-grains are ground quickly and mixed together.
26.11.19	These are the barley-grains of the Ashukas, ground quickly and mixed with Śalmali-sleśhma.
26.11.20	The Pratiprasthātrs offer separately.
26.11.21	The Maitrāvaruṇa should recite for them.
26.11.22	These four are the offerings.
26.11.23	"To Ilūvarda, svāhā! To Bali-varda, svāhêti."
26.11.24	The sun and the moon are mentioned here.
26.11.25	But they also quote: "The year is Ilūvarda; the twelve months are Bali-varda."
26.11.26	He offers on its head, saying, "To Jumbaka, svāhā!"
26.11.27	Which deity is this oblation offered to?
26.11.28	One should say, "To Varuna."
26.11.29	"Kikidivi, Vidi diga!"
26.11.30	"Kikidiva becomes Vidi diga."
26.11.31	The spotted one is the flying one.
26.11.32	Then he offers these animals: to Agni, to Indra-Agni, to the Asvins.
26.11.33	These are the same as the sheep, having the same origin.
26.11.34	Their feet have been mentioned as they are of the eleven animals.
26.11.35	Which deities are the seasonal animals?
26.11.36	The deities of the seasons, this is one view.
26.11.37	Now another.
26.11.38	The first are dedicated to Agni, the second to Indra, the third to the All-gods, the fourth to Mitra-Varuna, the fifth to Brhaspati, the sixth to Savitr, the seventh to the year. They are dedicated to Prajapati.
26.12.1	Now this twelve-day sacrifice is of two kinds, either with a deficiency or as a sattra.
26.12.2	If one consecrates himself, it becomes deficient.
26.12.3	Now if there are many (priests), then (the sacrifice) is a Sattra.
26.12.4	If there is a Sattra, then there is an Atiratra on both sides.
26.12.5	The Atiratras are on one side, the Sattras are on both sides.
26.12.6	By the order of the king, the Atiratra sacrifice is performed on both sides, and the Sattra sacrifice is performed without the Atiratra. Thus, the Agnistomas, the Sarasvatas, and the Visvasrjams are performed.
26.12.7	How should these be combined?
26.12.8	They should be combined in the following order: Savitris, Agnistomas, Sarasvatas, Visvasrjams.
26.12.9-12	Having offered the Savitrī oblations, they should offer the Agnihotra oblations in the reverse order. Then they should offer the animal to Vāyu. Having performed the Vāyu offering, they should offer Agnihotra oblations again in the reverse order.
26.12.13	The Prativeshas should be performed by the Yajnapuccha-s after having decided upon them.
26.12.14	How should the disciples perform the steps of Vishnu?
26.12.15	They should perform them while being bound by the great noose.
26.12.16	Or, having tied the nooses, the step should be taken, saying "Step now, step now."
26.12.17	Such a rule would be too heavy.
26.12.18	As this is the text: "On the sixth day they lay down the Uttaravedi; but on the eleventh day also."
26.12.19	This is possible only in the absence of the Agni-pile, not in its presence.
26.12.20	How is it that these (sacrifices) have an uninterrupted continuity?
26.12.21	The Adhvaryu by the taking of the Vasatīvarī waters, the Brahman by the restraining of speech, the Hotṛ by the repetition, the Subrahmaṇya by the Udgātṛ's singing, the sacrificer by the repetition of the sacrifice.
26.12.22	They take up the firm butter while they are proceeding.
26.12.23	Then they should collect the sacrificial grass for the pressing sheds.
26.12.24	They should light the fires at the end of the great night, while taking the clarified butter.
26.13.1	How is the morning pressing related to the day?
26.13.2	Having performed the rites upto the offering to the wife or upto the piercing of the heart, having dressed the king, having taken up the Vasatīvari waters at the proper time, having performed the rites of the uninterrupted continuity, having washed the Grava at the Vāyavya corner, having placed it in the Drona-pot along with the ten purifying substances, having hastened to the Agnidhra-shed, they proceed with the kindling of the fires.
26.13.3	Having brought the kindling woods, they place them near the Āhavaniya.
26.13.4	When the Vasatīvarī verses have been recited, when the Subrahmaṇyā has been invoked, having placed the Samidhs on the fire, having tied the sacrificial grass and wood, having set aside the milk, having hastened to the Agnidhra, having made the forms of entering (the fire-chamber), he proceeds with the morning rites.
26.13.5	With the well-known Mahāra-traika.
26.13.6	What follows is well-known.
26.13.7	The Atigrahyas are the support of the sacrifice.
26.13.8	He made the Trivrt and Ekavimsa as the support of the Agniya.
26.13.9	He made Pañcadaśa and Trinava as the support of Indra, and Saptadaśa and Trayastrimsa as the support of Surya.
26.13.10	As Baudhayana says, the churning should be done with mantras.
26.13.11	Here the mantras are to be recited by the Adhvaryu and not by the one who is churning the fire.
26.13.12	This is the self-sacrifice of the Rtu-yajus. This day is not for the self-sacrifice for each other.
26.14.1	Having called out, the Adhvaryu, having given the cup to another, having returned by the same route, having sat down behind the Havirdhāna cart, having uttered the call to the Rtu, having risen, having offered and having covered, having turned by the right, he should sit facing east and consume the Hotr's share, while the Adhvaryus sits facing west and consumes the Adhvaryupurohita's share.
26.14.2	The Hotṛ recites the Paruṣa verses, the Maitrāvaruṇa recites the Valakhilyas, the Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin recites the Vṛṣākapi verses, and the Acchāvāka recites the Evyāmarut verses.
26.14.3	What is the function of the Adhvaryu? He should say, "He recites in response."
26.14.4	The four Gāyatrī verses which the Adhvaryu recites after having taken them up, and the three Anushtubh verses.
26.14.5	"O king Soma, come down." With the measure of a foot of this Gāyatrī verse, he should bring down the king.
26.14.6	How is it that the tenth day becomes both the twenty-four and the Trishtūma, except for the silent Stoma?
26.14.7	The twenty-four is the Bahiṣpavamāna, the fifteen is the Brahma-sāman, the thirty-three is the Agnistoma-sāman.
26.14.8	They reach nine of them.
26.14.9	They become twenty-four.
26.14.10	This is the tenth day. It is also the twenty-fourth day. It is the Trishtūma day. Elsewhere it is the day of silent Stoma.
26.14.11	"He says, "I am approaching my mother, holding the calf, and drinking the milk."
26.14.12	"Which deity is this offering dedicated to?"
26.14.13	He should say, "Dedicated to Prajapati."
26.15.1	Now we shall arrange this twelve-day sacrifice with the Grahas and Agrais.
26.15.2	Then they go to arrange the nine days of that (twelve-day sacrifice), which are other than the Prayaniya and Udayaniya and the tenth day.
26.15.3	Now the Chandomas.
26.15.4	That is six only.
26.15.5	The first Trirātra is in its own place.
26.15.6	At the morning pressing of the first three-day period, one should strain the Soma eight times through the strainer held low.
26.15.7	Eleven times for the second.
26.15.8	Twelve times for the third.
26.15.9	One should take up the Mahad Indra cup with the Tristubh verse, "Indra, the great, like a man, the leader of men,"
26.15.10	With the Savitri verse, "O Savitar, with your unfailing, protecting powers," one should offer the morning oblations.
26.15.11	One should offer oblations to Agni with eight potsherds at the morning pressing.
26.15.12	One should make oblations to Indra with eleven potsherds at midday.
26.15.13	One should perform the third pressing with twelve potsherds.
26.15.14	One should consume the oblations at the morning pressing with the Vasumat group and the Gayatri metre.
26.15.15	With the Rudra group and the Tristubh metre, the midday pressing.
26.15.16	With the Aditya group and the Jagati metre, the third pressing.
26.15.17	Then at the second three-day ritual, at the morning pressing, one should sprinkle the first sprinkling twelve times in a low voice.
26.15.18	Eight times the second.
26.15.19	Eleven times the third.
26.15.20	One should take the Mahad Indra graha with the Gayatri verse "O Indra, who is mighty in strength."
26.15.21	One should take the Savitar graha with the Tristubh verse "O Savitar, today."
26.15.22	One should offer oblations on twelve potsherds at the morning pressing.
26.15.23	On eight potsherds at midday.
26.15.24	On eleven potsherds at third pressing.
26.15.25	He should eat the Prātaḥsavaniya oblations with the Āditya group and the Jagatī metre.
26.15.26	He should eat the Mādyandiniya oblations with the Vasu group and the Gāyatrī metre.
26.15.27	He eats the Tṛtīyasavaniya oblations with Rudra group and the Tristubh metre.
26.15.28	Then at the morning pressing, in the third Tri-day, one should sprinkle the first sprinkling three times, eleven times, in a low voice.
26.15.29	Twelve times the second, eight times the third.
26.15.30	One should recite this Gayatri three times, "O Indra, who is great in strength," as an Anusvara.
26.15.31	It becomes a Jagati metre.
26.15.32	With that (verse) he should take the Maheendra cup.
26.15.33	With the Gayatri verse "Hiranyapani mootay" he should take the Savitra cup.
26.15.34	He should make eleven-spoonfuls for the morning pressing,
26.15.35	twelve-spoonfuls for midday pressing,
26.15.36	eight-spoonfuls for third pressing.
26.15.37	He should consume the morning pressing with the Rudravat gana and the Tristubh metre.
26.15.38	With the Aditya group and the Jagati metre, the Madhyandiniya (Stotras).
26.15.39	With the Vasumat group and the Gayatri metre, the Trityasavaniya (Stotras). Thus it is said.
26.16.1	Now some say that one should obtain the months' groups at the Visuva (equinox). The initiation is seventeen, the Upasads are twelve, and the Visuva is the thirtieth.
26.16.2	How do the Stotras become with the Go and Ayus (Stotras)?
26.16.3	The Bahispavamāna is of fifteen verses, the Ajyas are of five verses, the Madhyandinasavana is of seventeen verses, the Tṛtīyasavana is of twenty-one verses, and it is with Stotras.
26.16.4	Now, the Bahispavamana is of three verses, the Ajya is of fifteen verses; the Madhyandina Savana is of seventeen verses; the Tṛt.yasavana is of twentyoe verses, and it has Stotras.
26.16.5	Then these two, the Viśvajit and the Abhijit, become the Agniṣṭoma sacrifices in the Sattra.
26.16.6	What are the Stotras of these two?
26.16.7	The Abhijit is indeed the three-rising and four-turning.
26.16.8	Then the Viśvaji is the four-rising and three-turning.
26.16.9	How does it become the twenty-one-womb?
26.16.10	Having approached the Abhijit, they should approach the six-day Prastara.
26.16.11	Then three Parastara, then the Visuva, then three Pratyastara, then a reversed six-day Prastar, then the Vishvajit.
26.16.12	How does one know when the Goayushi has been completed?
26.16.13	One should approach the cow before the Abhijit. One's life becomes stable.
26.16.14-15	How many Agniṣṭomas are there in the Gavāmayana? The Jyotiṣṭoma, the Trivṛt Agniṣṭoma, and the Viśvajit and Abhijit Agniṣṭomas, the tenth day of the Vaisuvarta, and the Mahāvrata - thus there are seven. Indeed, they say that this Gavāmayana is known as the Prajñātastoma.
26.16.16	Then the subsequent half-month is completed, except for the ten days after the Go and Ayus rites.
26.16.17	One should take the planets in three rows, which are completed here.
26.17.1	Now these thirty-two Ekadashin rites are in the Goam Ayana.
26.17.2	Of these, in the former case, sixteen are completed, seventeen in the case of the Ekadashini, and the Savaniya of the Visuva is completed in the case of Brihaspati.
26.17.3	It is said that nine days are left over as the Apashuka days.
26.17.4	Which are these days?
26.17.5	The three latter days of the six-day Prstha sacrifice, the three Chandomas, the tenth day, the Mahavrata, the Udayaniya and the Atiratra are the days of the Savanasa.
26.17.6	The Abhiplvas and the Aksiyani are the days of Angiras.
26.17.7	Here in the place of the Prsthas, he places the Abhiplvas.
26.17.8	The Prsthas and the Aksiyana are the days of Aditya.
26.17.9	Here, in the place of the Prishthya and Abhiplva, he places the Agni-stoma.
26.17.10	"The Agni-stoma sacrifices are performed, and they are the course of Prajapati."
26.17.11	Here, in the place for the Prishthyas and Abhiplvas, he places the Agnistoma.
26.17.12	With the Aghatis, the Pincholas, and the Karkarikas.
26.17.13	The Aghatis are the Kolosthas.
26.17.14	The Pinścholas and the Vīṇākaṇabhrasas.
26.17.15	The Vīṇās and the Karkarīkas.
26.17.16	At that very time, he cuts off with a weapon.
26.17.17	It is said that he cuts off with an Atriṇḍa.
26.18.1	Now, there is also this:
26.18.2	Brahmin scholars say, "One should perform this sacrifice if one is a sacrificer at the Agniṣṭoma, and then perform it at the Sarvas toma."
26.18.3	Four are the fifteen oblations.
26.18.4	Those two are the thirty classes.
26.18.5	In that other thirty class, there are three Upasya-s.
26.18.6	Those two, the thirty-nine and the thirty-three.
26.18.7	The Hotr's butter on the eastern day is in the Gāyatrī metre, and on the western day in the Tristubh metre. He should prepare these (verses) in this way. In the same way, on the western day, in the Hotr's ghee.
26.18.8	It is said that this is the thousandth verse, which is scratched and cut off.
26.18.9	This means that it is used.
26.18.10	At what time should one give the Varātrāghni cow to Lakṣmaṇa?
26.18.11	One should give it after winning a battle.
26.18.12	How should one perform the sacrifice with the Garga-three-night rite, having enjoyed the seasons?
26.18.13	One should perform the Agniṣṭoma sacrifice in the month of Āṣāḍha or Śrāvaṇa.
26.18.14	Having performed the rites upto the offering to the wife or upto the piercing of the heart, having dressed the king, having taken up the Vasatīvari waters at the proper time, having performed the rites of the uninterrupted continuity, having washed the Grava at the Vāyavya corner, having placed it in the Drona-pot along with the ten purifying substances, having hastened to the Agnidhra-shed, they proceed with the kindling of the fires.
26.18.15	Having brought the kindling woods, they place them near the Āhavaniya.
26.18.16	When the Vasatīvarī waters have been carried around, when the Sautrāmaṇī has been invoked, when the kindling woods have been placed, when the sacrificial grass and the sacrificial post have been tied up, they spend the night with milk.
26.18.17	Then on the next day, one should perform the Savanesti.
26.18.18	Then the Stambayajus is taken.
26.18.19	Thus he dwells for a year, performing the Savanesti sacrifice for four months, while discarding the Vasatīvarī offerings.
26.18.20	He does not offer Agnihotra, nor does he perform the Darsha-Pūrnamāsa sacrifices.
26.19.2	Having performed the rites upto the Patnisaṃyājas or upto the Hṛdayaśūla, having dressed the king, having taken the Vasatīvarī waters at the proper time, having performed the Ahīna-sāman, having washed the Gravas in the north-east direction, having placed them in the Dronakalaśa along with the Dasāpavitra, having hastened to the Agnīdhra, they proceed with the Samidhs.
26.19.3	Having brought the Samidhs, they place them near the Āhavanīya.
26.19.4	When the garments have been removed, when the Subrahmaṇyā has been invited, when the kindling woods have been placed, when the sacrificial grass and the sacrificial post have been fixed, they spend the night with milk, except for those who are excluded.
26.19.5	Then on the next day, he performs the Savanesti.
26.19.6	There, as before, he does not take the Stambayajus.
26.19.7	Thus, he, offering the Vasi-varī offerings every day, performs the Savanesti for four months.
26.19.8	He does not offer Agnihotra nor does he perform the Darsa-Pūrṇamāsa sacrifices.
26.19.9	Then, when four months have elapsed, when the Vasatīvarī verses have been recited, when the Subrahmaṇyā has been invoked, having placed the kindling woods for each day, having tied the sacrificial grass and the sacrificial post, they observe the fast with special rites.
26.19.10	Then on the next day he performs the Atiratra sacrifice with the Yajñapuccha (the last of the twenty-one Soma sacrifices).
26.19.11	Then they turned this thousandth towards the east and west, so that he might not neglect his own self and his guests.
26.20.1	What is the fee for the Ahina sacrifices?
26.20.2	One should give a thousand as the fee for each day. This is one view.
26.20.3	One should give one thousand as the fee to each day. This also is one view.
26.20.4	This is one (kind of) gift.
26.20.5	The other is as much as one can afford.
26.20.6	In this Atiratra, one gives a thousand (cows).
26.20.7	The two-day and other sacrifices are performed without any deficiency, except the eleven-day sacrifice.
26.20.8	Then there are these sacrifices surrounded by the Ahirbudhnya (sacrifices). They are the eleven-night sacrifice containing the year.
26.20.9	The Bharata-dvadasaha is of two kinds.
26.20.10	The twelve Agniṣṭoma sacrifices have Rathantara as the Sāman.
26.20.11	That is the Bharata-dvādaśāha.
26.20.12	Then in the Udyats toma, the first day should be of three stomas, the second of fifteen, the third of seventeen, the fourth of twenty-one. Thus one.
26.20.13	Then the other, the first day of the morning pressing should be of three, the midday pressing of fifteen, the evening pressing of seventeen.
26.20.14	Then the fifteen-fold morning pressing, the seventeen-fold midday pressing and the twenty-one-fold third pressing of the second day.
26.20.15	Then the seventeen-fold morning pressing of the third day, the twenty-one fold midday pressing and the thirty-fold third pressing.
26.20.16	Then the fourth day has twenty-one Soma-pressings in the morning pressing, twenty-three in the midday pressing and thirty-three in the third pressing.
26.21.1	Then these are the Upasad cakes, beginning with the one on the Sruva and ending with the one on Apa.
26.21.2	One should offer them together with the Sruva-offering, according to the method of Upanamya, the Agniya ones with one potsherd.
26.21.3	The Prañc-s go along the Anusarasvati.
26.21.4	One should throw it near the Samyu from the Ahavaniya.
26.21.5	Where it falls, that would be the place of the Garhapatya. The Ahavaniya would be in front of it.
26.21.6	If the Prañc- s do not reach the Samyu, they should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Apamnapty at the end of the third pressing.
26.21.7	Then on the next day, having completed the rites, he should throw the dice.
26.21.8	They are three days or five days.
26.21.9	These are the exceptions to the regular course of the rites.
26.21.10	On the eighth day there is the Vājapeya.
26.21.11	There one should perform the rites connected with the Vājapeva, which are included in the Soma sacrifice.
26.21.12	Now this is the Sāṁsādam Ayana, which is without a metre.
26.21.13	It is known that its portions of metres are twenty-four, forty-four, and eighty-four.
26.22.1	Now this Atiratra is of two kinds, either deficient or one day.
26.22.2	But indeed it is only of the deficient kind.
26.22.3	He performs the twelve Upasads for many days.
26.22.4	Now the form of the one-day (Upasad).
26.22.5	He takes the Vasatīvari-milk once, and offers the animals once.
26.22.6	One is the rite of sacrifice.
26.22.7	When the sun has set, he offers the Stoma of sixteen with gold.
26.22.8	It is said that when the sun has set half way.
26.22.9	If the sun sets before he has finished his oblations, he should offer three oblations on the Garhapatya fire, saying, "Bhūr Bhuvah Suvar."
26.22.10	If the Ukthya rite is completed with a surplus, one should perform an Atiratra rite.
26.22.11	The consecration and the preparatory rites have been transgressed, the performance of the rite has been transgressed, and the taking of the Sodashin cup has been transgressed.
26.22.12	Then, at that very time, having prepared a sixteen-fold vessel, one should take it with three verses.
26.22.13	Then one should perform this ritual before the night-long sessions.
26.22.14	The Adhvaryu gives the instructions in the same way as before. The Pratiprasthātṛ should offer the third portion of the Āgrayana, the third portion of Guḍa, the Jaghanī portions, the Pṛṣadājya, the Gopat, the Āgnīdhra, the cooked Āṣāḍha in two pots. It should be kept till the latter part of the night.
26.22.15	At what time is the cooked Āṣṭāḍha in the two pots offered?
26.22.16	Or with the third pressing, or with the cakes, or before the last night of the Soma-pressing.
26.22.17	The Trivṛt is the lowest of the Stotras, the Trivṛt the highest. This is indeed the Brāhmaṇa of the Atiratra.
26.22.18	Now this is the Sautrāmaṇī Soma. It may be made of the first pressing, or of the second pressing, or of all the pressings.
26.22.19	It may be made of grass and of the first pressing.
26.22.20	The barley grains have husks, the rice grains have husks and the beans have no husks.
26.22.21	Now this is the Karotaraka, made of wood, or of stone, or of clay, but it should be covered with leather.
26.22.22	"This is the one who makes the son prosper."
26.22.23	He indeed prospers in the other world, and he indeed prospers here.
26.22.24	Now at this Dakshayana sacrifice, one should perform the Upamshuyaha offering.
26.23.1	Now at this Ekadashini sacrifice, the Yupahutisamchara is performed in the Agni.
26.23.2	Now the Avrachanaja Samcharini.
26.23.3	That is the touching rite.
26.23.4	He should strike the first layer of the fire altar once, the second twice, and the third three times. In this way, he should cut the other layers in sequence, knowing the order.
26.23.5	Now, the measurement of the altar:
26.23.6	He should take one-twenty-fourth of the ten chariot axles, eleven foot lengths, and eight inches.
26.23.7	That would be the measurement.
26.23.8	He should measure the altar with that.
26.23.9	Now, if these two (altars) were to be extended by four fingers,
26.23.10	then the others would be just the distance between the wheels of a chariot.
26.23.11	Now, indeed, it is said:
26.23.12	One should measure the altar according to the distance from the fire for one who desires the world of the fathers.
26.23.13	The others are of the same size as the one near the fire.
26.23.14	The one for Indra is the size of a cup. The others are the size of the one for Agni.
26.23.15	All equal for one desiring stability. He makes all equal for one desiring prosperity.
26.23.16	The three middle ones equal for one desiring cattle. He makes them equal for one desiring animals.
26.23.17	He should separate the others. He thus separates eight sacrificial posts, the southern ones from the northern ones.
26.23.18	Now indeed it is said:
26.23.19	"If one desires (to do) a person who is to die, one should dig a pit for him, the northernmost one being the largest and the southernmost one being the smallest." Here he digs the northernmost one as the largest and the southermost one as the smallest.
26.23.20	This is the pit-making. He who makes it thus, is not destroyed. So says the Brahmaṇa.
26.23.21	One should make the southern post the highest, for one desiring heaven. Then the lower one.
26.24.1	One should gradually make the northern posts lower, by the size of a thumb-joint.
26.24.2	Or one should dig the holes for the posts to the size of the posts.
26.24.3	Or they may be placed in a separate place.
26.24.4	One should accomplish it with those measures.
26.24.5	How is it that when one is drawing the Yūpa pits, erecting the Yūpas, and preparing the animals, there is a transgression?
26.24.6	Having gone around the southern half of the Uttaravedi, having gone around the southern side of the Uttaravedī, having gone around between the Agniṣṭoma and the Upavyūha, having gone around to the north of the Uttaravedy, having gone around in between the Agniṣțoma and the Upavūha, one should draw or raise or make one by one.
26.24.7	Or whichever one he draws or raises or makes, that one should not be separated from the southern side by the southern and from the northern side by the northern.
26.24.8	Or else, having gone around all the sacrificial posts, one should draw a line, or raise it, or make it, one by one.
26.24.9	By that, the earlier ones become connected.
26.24.10	Having thus connected them, they should install the five animals of the southern half, beginning with the animals.
26.24.11	They should first take the Varuna-animal, and then the others in order.
26.24.12	Having gone out between the two mounds of the Catvala, they should either strike the stakes or make them round.
26.24.13	They should take out the omentum of those animals and carry it, so that they do not lose the omentum and themselves.
26.24.14	Now this Pātnīvata (animal) should be of the size of the thumb joint from the northern half of the sacrificial post, or as prescribed in the Brāhmaṇa, without navel, without a pot, and without being spread.
26.24.15	Now this is the ritual for the serpents, which is modified from the Stoma.
26.24.16	Now this ritual for the creator of the universe, how can it be in the present age?
26.24.17	One hundred consecrations, one hundred Upasads, a thousand offerings.
26.25.1	Now this is the Kuṇḍapāyinamāyana, some say it is before Agnihotra, others say it is before Soma.
26.25.2	Having performed the rites upto the offering to the wife or upto the piercing of the heart, having dressed the king, having taken up the Vasatīvari waters at the proper time, having performed the rites of the uninterrupted continuity, having washed the Grava at the Vāyavya corner, having placed it in the Drona-pot along with the ten purifying substances, having hastened to the Agnidhra-shed, they proceed with the kindling of the fires.
26.25.3	Having brought the kindling woods, they place them near the Āhavaniya.
26.25.4	When the Vasatīvarī waters have been carried around, when the Subrahmaṇyā has been invoked, when the kindling woods have been placed, when the sacrificial grass and the sacrificial grass have been spread, when the milk has been brought separately, they spend the night.
26.25.5	Then on the next day, he offers the New-Moon sacrifice.
26.25.6	Here the Stambayajus is not taken.
26.25.7	Thus they spend the days, removing the Vasantīvarī (grass) and offering oblations at the New Moon for twenty-eight days.
26.25.8	They do not offer Agnihotra or perform the Full Moon sacrifice.
26.25.9	When he spreads the Dhishnya grass at the third pressing, he makes the Marjālīya (grass) permanent.
26.25.10	Having placed the oblations near, having heated the Karambha vessels over the Garhapatya fire and having taken them around, he moves with them towards the Marjalyan.
26.25.11	Having cooked the Pindapitryajna over the Garhaptya fire, he moves with it towards the Marjalian.
26.25.12	He chooses the best for each of them.
26.25.13	For each of them there are three balls.
26.25.14	Those are fifteen.
26.25.15	At the Great Father-Sacrifice, the sacrificial grass is spread out, but he does not draw a line for the altar, nor does he take away the sacrificial grass, nor does he collect the clarified butter.
26.25.16	Where he arranges the sacrificial posts at the third pressing, there he makes the continuous sprinkling of water.
26.25.17	Having cooked the oblations for the great Pitryajna on the Garhapatya fire, when the oblations are near, one should offer them on the Marjalyan fire.
26.25.18	One should offer on the Ahavanīya fire for the Maruts.
26.25.19	One should go to the end of the Avabhṛtha rite.
26.25.20	The altar is one-third less in size. The ninth part of the ground is the share of the Maruts.
26.26.1-3	If one or two oblations are left out, then the year is completed. How should one proceed there? One should perform the five-oblation sacrifice of this month by subtracting it.
26.26.4	Then on the day of the Samvatsaratam, there should be the five oblations.
26.26.5	It is said, "One should perform the Agnihotra on the first twelve-day period."
26.26.6	One who performs the Agnihotra on a twelve-day period should go to the first four days with the Upavasa, to the middle four days, and to the last eight days with the Samvatsara.
26.26.7	Then he should take the four days of the other (rites) one by one, and the four months of the four (rites).
26.26.8	He should go to the first four days with the Upavasa rite, to the middle four days, and to the last four days.
26.26.9	Or he should go to the four months of each rite one by one.
26.26.10	It is said, "One should perform the Agnihotra on the twelfth day of the last (rite)."
26.26.11-13	When one is performing the Agnihotra rite during the last twelve days, one should go to the Upasads for four days with the first Upasads, four days with the middle Upasads, and four days with the last Upasads. Then one should take up the other four days, each with one of the four Upasads. One should go to the first Upasad for four days, to the middle Upasad for another four days, and to the last Upasad for the remaining four days.
26.26.14	Or, he may go for four months each with one Upasad.
26.27.1	Then, having placed the bricks of the Lokamprana, he goes for a month.
26.27.2	Having gone for a month, he should cover the entire ground on the thirtieth day.
26.27.3	Or, having made space for thirty, he goes for the month, placing the bricks of the Locmaprana.
26.27.4	How does one go through this month?
26.27.5	The first is the Iṣṭi, then the morning Pravargya and Upasads, then the bricks, then the afternoon Pravargya and the Upasads, and in the month of Vasordhara.
26.27.6	They go through the month with excrement.
26.27.7	How does one go through that month?
26.27.8-12	The Iṣṭi is the first, then the morning Pravargya and Upasads, then the excrement, then the afternoon Pravargya and the Upasads. One goes to the Upasads for four months. What one does in a month there, one does here in ten nights. One goes for four months. Which are these four months?
26.27.13-16	The first and the last months of the Gavāmayana, and those which are on either side of the equinox, are together with the equinox.
26.27.17	If the pot is broken, then he should take the lump of clay and bring it to another pot.
26.27.18	Having performed the rites upto the offering to the wife or upto the piercing of the heart, having dressed the king, having taken up the Vasatīvari waters at the proper time, having performed the rites of the uninterrupted continuity, having washed the Grava at the Vāyavya corner, having placed it in the Drona-pot along with the ten purifying substances, having hastened to the Agnidhra-shed, they proceed with the kindling of the fires.
26.27.19	Having brought the kindling woods, they place them near the Āhavaniya.
26.27.20	When the Vasatīvarī waters have been taken away, when the Subrahmaṇyā has been invited, when the kindling woods have been placed, when the sacrificial grass and the sacrificial post have been fixed, when the milk has been brought, they spend the night.
26.27.21	The next day they perform the Savanesti sacrifice.
26.27.22	Here the Stambayajus is not carried.
26.27.23	Thus they, while performing the Vasantīvarī rites, offer sacrifices to Savitr for a year.
26.27.24	They do not offer Agnihotra oblations, nor do they perform the Darśa-Pūrṇamāsa sacrifices.
26.27.25	Then, when the year has been completed, when the Vasatīvarī waters have been removed, when the Subrahmaṇyā has been invoked, having placed the Samidhāniya kindling woods for each day, having tied the sacrificial grass and the sacrificial post, having deposited the milk, they observe the fast.
26.27.26	Then, on the next day, having performed the Abhijit rite, they rise.
26.28.1	Then indeed it is said:
26.28.2	One desiring cattle should recite the Chandaścit.
26.28.3	One should accomplish the mantras beginning with the Abhrīdāna, up to the Vāyavyā.
26.28.4	One should worship with the Vāyavya animal directly, and with the Dīkṣaṇīya directly.
26.28.5	One should perform the mantras beginning from the Ukhapravarjjan, up to the Vatsprapraviṣṇukrama.
26.28.6	Having recited the mantras of Vatsa and Pravisnu, he should recite the other mantras.
26.28.7	He should attend to the fire.
26.28.8	He should show the forms.
26.28.9	He should go to the forest.
26.28.10	There he should recite the mantras of the Nirriti.
26.28.11	He should directly attend to the Garhapatya.
26.28.12	Directly with the Prayaniya.
26.28.13	Direct with the Atithya.
26.28.14	He should accomplish the mantras beginning with Kārṣṇājinī up to the sowing and ploughing.
26.28.15	The sowing and ploughing are directly visible.
26.28.16	He should recite the first layer with excrement.
26.28.17	Similarly the second, similarly the third.
26.28.18	He should recite the entire text of the Agnihotra, including the verses on the Agnihotra fire, the Agnihotra oblations, and the Agnihotra oblation. If there are verses on the Agnihotras performed at the end of the day, he should offer them.
26.28.19	If there are verses on what is beyond the altar, he should recite them.
26.29.1	Some say that the Agnihotra is the basis of the Dashahotri, and the Darsha-Paurnamasa is the basis of what is beyond the Dashahotra.
26.29.2	Now they also quote the Agni-adhyaya, which says that the eleven Prayajas are performed together in the eastern direction.
26.29.3	The seasons are six, the Hotr is six.
26.29.4	This animal sacrifice is said to be performed in six months.
26.29.5	Now they also quote that in six months, the animal sacrifice should be performed by one who has established the fire.
26.29.6	One should offer both kinds of wood.
26.29.7	In the month of Māgha, the sun moves northward by the stars of Dhanisthā. It turns back southward by the stars of the latter half of Śravaṇa and Āśleṣa. These are the two points of the solstice.
26.29.8	From that point, the year should not be exceeded by the non-performing.
26.29.9	Then, in the four Soma sacrifices, the Pañcahotṛ priest returns to the place of the Saptahotṛ.
26.29.10	Now, that which is the four-month-long offering, which is to be churned, and which sinks down, that becomes the animal offering.
26.29.11	"One should employ animals in the enclosing sticks," so says the Brahmana. They become our sacrificial posts.
26.29.12	Now, at the great Pitryajna, the sacrificial grass is spread out. He does not draw the altar, does not take the Stambayajus, does not take up the clarified butter.
26.29.13	When he moves to the Dhishnya fires at the third pressing, he should perform the Marjalyana rite continuously.
26.29.14	Having performed with the great oblations, when the oblations are near, having cooked the oblations for the great Pitryajna in the Garhapatya, he should perform with them in the Marjalyan.
26.29.15	He should perform in the Ahavanīya with the Marutya.
26.29.16	One should reach the end of the Avabhrtha.
26.29.17	His first layer of bricks is with clay and with mantras.
26.29.18	His first layer of bricks alone is with clay and mantras.
26.29.19	The others are silent.
26.29.20	The layer of bricks which is with clay, that layer of bricks alone of him is with clay and mantra.
26.29.21	The others remain silent.
26.30.1	Now the one-day (rites).
26.30.2	Those days which are not mentioned in the Agniṣṭoma should be known as Agniṣṭoma.
26.30.3	Now in the Sattra of the Iḍa-nights, those days which are not specified should be known as Ukthya.
26.30.4	They go to him with the Madhyandina cups being cleansed.
26.30.5	The members sit down, and the Madhyandina priests, while offering libations, approach him for the purpose of eating.
26.30.6	It consists of twenty-four verses.
26.30.7	He sprinkles him with the mixture of clarified butter and honey.
26.30.8	While the sacrificer is seated in his own place, he sprinkles him with the clarified butter and honey mixture.
26.30.9	It consists four Stotras.
26.30.10	The seven oblations follow the oblations at the morning pressing.
26.30.11	The Agniya oblation of eight potfuls, the Pūṣan oblation of rice, the Savitr oblation of twelve potfuls, the Tvashtri oblation of eight, the Varuna oblation of ten, the Visve Dev oblation of rice and the Marut oblation of seven potfuls.
26.30.12	The eight oblations follow the morning pressing. 
26.30.13	The Agniya is with eight potsherds, the Soma is with rice, the Savitra is with twelve potsherds, and the Barhaspatya is with rice, and the Agnisomiya is with eleven potsherds, then the Sarasvata is with rice, then the Varuna is with ten potsherds, Then the Dyavaparthiva is with one potsherd.
26.30.14	Whatever is the Rajasuya except the Soma, all that is done.
26.30.15	Here he performs the Marut-vrata with twenty-one potsherds and the Upavasatha rites.
26.30.16	He completes it in one and a half months.
26.30.17	Whatever is the Rajasuya, all that is here.
26.30.18	Here he performs the animal-sacrifice with two animals and the Catu-rmasyas.
26.30.19	He completes them in one and a quarter months.
26.30.20	"The lion and the tiger, and the leopard."
26.30.21	"What deity is this offering to?"
26.31.1	"One should say, 'Indrani is the deity.'"
26.31.2	Having performed the animal sacrifice with seventeen animals, having collected the heads of the animals, one should offer with the animal dedicated to Vayu.
26.31.3	Or else, having first collected the silent (bricks), having collected the clay with mantras, having smeared it with that,
26.31.4	he consecrates (the bricks) with the formula, "Thou art taken with a portion for Agni, for the great, for the one who is to be praised, for the one to be praised. For thy great Agni, for Vishnu, I take thee, for the one dear."
26.31.5	Having wiped it, he places it, saying, "This is your place; for thee, O Agni, the place of praise."
26.31.6	He binds the head of Dhruva, the desire of heaven, the bountiful one, the born one for truth, the wise Agni, the sovereign, the guest of men, the gods have placed the vessel near.
26.31.7	"Thou art taken with the Upayāma formula. For Indra, for thee, for Maghavan, I take thee, the agreeable."
26.31.8	Having wiped (the vessel), he places it (on the altar) with, "This is thy birth-place. For Indra, thee, for Maghavant."
26.31.9	He yokes (the vessel) with, "Thou art taken, with the Upayāmā formula, for the son of Brhaspati, for thee, O Indra, for the one possessing power, I take the Patnīvata cup, for Indra and Patnīvat."
26.31.10	"He yokes the Soma-pressing. Taken with the formula, "Thou art taken with the formula, thou art Rohita, thou art Rohitayoga, thou art Rohitasthata, thou art the holder of the thunderbolt, thou art the lord of the earth, thou art the eater of the earth, for thee, O god, there is the Soma-pressing, the praising of the praised, the singing of the sung, I take the cup with the Rohita-ending. Rohita, the Rohita-grains, together with Soma, to Agni svāhā."
26.31.11-16	He who touches Agni and Indra should be expelled. He who touches Indra and Agni should be expelled. The other gods are permanent. Which gods are the additional hymns? One should say, 'The Asvins.' Whatever is done at night, all that is Asvin. Thus it is one.
26.31.17	Now, another (kind of) sacrifice.
26.31.18	The first is Agni's, the second Indra's, the third is for all gods, the fourth is for Vishnu.
26.32.1	When the barley has been sown in the last days of summer.
26.32.2	It means when they have been crushed.
26.32.3	It means by the authority.
26.32.4	The priests are called by the name of their respective posts. Therefore, it is said to be before.
26.32.5	Having anointed and purified him, he should bring him in.
26.32.6	Here one should know the Agniṣṭoma rite as accomplished, because of the exclusion of the Upaghāta.
26.32.7	At this time, one should perform three kinds of grass with the Yajus - for the Dīkṣaṇīyā, Prāyaṇīyā, and Ātithya rites.
26.32.8	Then he should offer the Diksaniya (oblation). He should offer the Prayaniya (oblations). He should offer oblations of ghee at the Atithya (oblation) until the chariots arrive. The ghee offered together should be taken in three pots.
26.32.9	He should complete the Diksaniyia (oblation) with the same procedure as the Diksaniyya (oblation).
26.32.10	He should begin the Prayaniya with the offerings of the Prathita (oblations).
26.32.11	This is the beginning of the Atithya offering.
26.32.12	Having bought the king with a three-year-old bull, a bullock, and a calf, one should perform hospitality.
26.32.13	This is said to be with a three-month-old bull.
26.32.14	How should one recite the mantras for him?
26.32.15	Thou art the intellect, thou art the mind, thou art the understanding, thou art the right, thou art the sacrificial, thou art the Kshatriya, thou art Aditi, thou art the head on both sides. May it be well for us, may it be well for our cattle.
26.32.16	The Upakrama rites are performed by a single group.
26.32.17	They are mentioned as being performed in the forenoon.
26.32.18	The sacrificial post is made of Khadira wood.
26.32.19	They make this the only offering to them.
26.32.20	The sacrificial post is like a wall.
26.32.21	For it, the vessel for libations is like a basket.
26.32.22	It is said to be like a basket. But it is said to be a basket.
26.32.23	Then he offers these animals: the Agniṣomīya, the Āgneya, and the Anūbandhya.
26.32.24	These animals are like the offspring of Yama.
26.32.25	Their procedure has been stated.
26.32.26	Now, the Sadyaskriya, Anukriya, Parakriya, Atikriya, Avabhrtha and the Yajnapuccha after sunset.
26.32.27	Of these, the first is Saratha, the first is the Soma-purchasing, the first is Agnihotra-leftover-observance.
26.32.28	Then they perform the rites of the Sadyaskriya, Anukriya, Parakriya, Atikriya, and the Vrata of one, two, or three breasts.
26.32.29	Where is the one-day ritual seen?
26.32.30	One should say, "The Kulaya of Indra and Agni in the Vratya Stoma."
26.32.31	In this Vratya Stome, many people are initiated for one person.
26.32.32	They perform the rites for them without having initiated them.
26.32.33	The staff, the sandals, the antelope skin and the blanket.
26.32.34	The blankets are mixed with wool. The blanket is white and the antelope skin is black.
26.33.1	This is the Agniṣṭoma of the eldest.
26.33.2	This is also the Ukthya of the younger.
26.33.3	The former day is of four stomas, the latter of five.
26.33.4	The chariot is the Havirdhana.
26.33.5	One should make the Havirdhana of the same form.
26.33.6	The carts should be placed in the middle.
26.33.7	The two Stotras of thirty-three are in the middle. Thus it is said.
26.33.8	These two Stotras are in the reverse order from here and there, being the Pratistoma Stotras.
26.33.9	Then, having completed the new-moon sacrifice, he should offer the lunar ball-offering to the Pitrs.
26.33.10	Having sat around him, they eat him, thinking that he is truth. By that, they eat the Brahman.
26.33.11	The Brahman is the best of the castes, Agni is the best of gods. One should eat with this, or with the Vyahrtis.
26.33.12	This is the four-fold Stoma. This is the fourfold Stoma of the directions.
26.33.13	Now in this sacrifice of the Kaniṣṭhas, after the Avabhrtha, when the sun has set, the Yajna-puccha.
26.33.14	He recites the Dasah-stoma, Sahasra-stoma, Ayuta-stoma, Niyuta-stoma, Prayuta-stoma, Arbud-stoma, Nyarbud-stoma, Samudra-stoma, Madhyama-stoma, Anta-stoma, Parardha-stoma, Padva-stoma, Palva-stoma, and Nitya-stoma. Having recited these, he praises mentally, thinking, "I have praised this much."
26.33.15	Then there is the single Pravargya and the single Agnihotra.
26.33.16	Now in this Shunaskarna sacrifice.
26.33.17	Having eaten sesame-mixed food, one should drink a measure of salt.
26.33.18	Then one should lie down on the path of the Sama Veda.
26.33.19	One goes from sleep to sleep.
26.33.20	One gives grain that is measured, one gives grain that is weighed.
26.33.21	This is said to be given by measure.
26.33.22	Those who go east, those who go west.
26.33.23	This is the rite of the southern direction.
26.33.24	This is also explained as the rite for all directions.
26.33.25	This is the rite for the thousand-hall.
26.33.26	Here, having purified him, they purify him there.
26.33.27	One should know that the Agniṣṭoma rite is accomplished here for the northern hall alone.
26.33.28	He performs two three-day rites and one two-day rite.
26.33.29-32	These days are prescribed for him by the Diksā and Upasads. If one were to perform a sacrifice without the Ahyana rites, This is what has been said in the sutra. Baudhayana says that the sacrifice is indicated by the sacrifice itself. Baudhayāna says that the sacrifice indicates the sacrifice itself.
27.1.1	Now we shall explain the expiations mentioned in the names of the groups of mantras.
27.1.2	If anything made with a mantra falls above, one should establish it with the mantra "Brahma is established in the mind" and offer a spoonful of oblation with the same mantra.
27.1.3	Having offered, one should establish, or perform the rite after offering.
27.1.4	The same applies to other cases.
27.1.5	If the rite is omitted, it should not be performed again, if the purpose is lost.
27.1.6	In all cases, when the call, response, and Vasat-utterance are heard, if they are excessive, not uttered, or deficient, one should offer a ladleful oblation with the formula, "What has been called, what has been responded, what has been uttered Vasat."
27.1.7	In all the utterances of the gods, one should omit the utterance of the goddess and offer a libation with the formula, "Whatever the gods have transgressed," with this.
27.1.8	In all the invocations of deities, one should not invoke the deity without invoking the deity who is the consort. One should invoke the consort with this (verse). One should offer a spoonful of oblation with this. Wherever one remembers, one should rise up and invoke her mentally. Then one should offer the remaining oblation with clarified butter as per the prescribed quantity.
27.1.9	If drops of the Soma juice offered, being offered, or offered fall everywhere, or if the cup leaks, then having filled it with three kinds of water, he should offer a spoonful with the verse, "The waters are firm, the waters are bountiful."
27.1.10	If the sun does not rise in any of the extended sacrificial rites, except for a specific reason, one should offer oblations with the verses, "May we rise above the darkness, may we rise above the gloom."
27.1.11	If there is an eclipse of the sun or moon, one should do the same.
27.1.12	If the semen of the sacrificer or the priests is emitted in a dream, one should offer two spoonfuls with the verses, "O Varuna, this is mine. I come to you."
27.1.13	In the case of omission or inversion of the oblations, the oblations to the deity of the oblation, the Yajya and Anuvakya verses, one should offer the oblations with the verses "You are Agni" and "You are Agni".
27.1.14	In the case of the cutting, burning or destruction of the sacrificial grass, the sacrificial grass, sacrificial grass, sacrificial wood, sacrificial grass, the sacred thread, the sacrificial grass and the sacrificial grass, one should offer two oblations with the verses, "O Agni, you have gone to Prajapati" and "O Agni, may you go to Prajapati".
27.1.15	In all the sacrifices that are spread out.
27.2.1	If the embers have fallen outside the sacrificial enclosure before the offspring of Praja have been offered, one should offer a spoonful of oblation with the verse, "Having performed the expiation prescribed by the Brahmanas, I offer this sacrificial enclosure to the living beings."
27.2.2	If there is a mistake in the sacrifice performed everywhere, one should offer eight oblations with the ladle, saying "Svāhā to the desired ones, svāhā to the undesired ones."
27.2.3	If there is fear in any of the sacrifices that are being performed, one should offer two oblations with the verses, "O Indra, we are afraid of what we fear. May the lord of the shining ones, the bestower of well-being, protect us." Or one should offer again when there is no fear.
27.2.4	In all cases, when there is a mistake in the place of recitation, the melody, the syllables, the words, or the metre, one should offer a libation with the verse, "May it not be deficient in any way."
27.2.5	In all cases where the expiation is unknown, one should offer two libations with the verses, "The unknown is equal to a man" and "The unknown is the same as a man".
27.2.6	In all the rites of the Prajās and Anuyājas, where there is the offering of the Paktrā, one should offer a spoonful of oblation with the mantra "O Paktrā, O Paktrā, do thou be pleased with me."
27.2.7	If there is any loss, breakage, cutting, burning, or destruction of the fire, or if there is any mistake or excess, one should offer two oblations with the verses, "May Agni give me back my sight." If there is any damage to the fire, one should offer a kindling wood with the verse, "May the Adityas, Rudras, and Vasus kindle you again." One should offer an oblation with the same verse. In all sacrificial rites, having offered the oblations to the wives, having returned to the east, having nourished the Dhruva, one offers all the expiations from the Dhruva with the verses, "Brahma is the support of the mind." With this Anuvaka, one by one.
27.2.8	Now, indeed, it is said:
27.2.9	One offers the Samitsya-formulas for the completion of the sacrifice.
27.2.10	Whatever is cruel in the sacrifice, whatever is violated, whatever exceeds, whatever does not exceed, whatever is done in excess, whatever is not done in excess, one pleases that very thing with them. Such is the Brahmaṇa.
27.2.11	These are the same as those prescribed by the Brāhmaṇas, and they are accompanied by mantras, says Baudhāyana.
27.2.12	Those prescribed by the mantras are occasional, says Śālīki.
27.3.1	In the making of the pot, a place the size of a horse's hoof is marked with a chariot wheel.
27.3.2	The authority to perform the rite, the increase or decrease of the potsherds, the non-appearance of the potsherded, the offering of oblations with the Vyāhṛtis in the Āhavanīya fire, saying "Bhūr Bhuvah Suvar" - this much is enough for the non-appearance and excessive appearance of the potshereds.
27.3.3	Now, the expiation for the burning, flowing, overflowing, and dripping of the oblations.
27.3.4	"He should offer a spoonful of oblation to Rudra in the fire, saying, 'To the unburnt Vayu, to the burnt Nirriti.'
27.3.5	If it is burnt, he should proceed with what has been cooked there.
27.3.6	If everything is burnt, he may proceed with water and offer oblations to the gods.
27.3.7	Or he may offer another oblation with ghee.
27.3.8	That is the expiation.
27.3.9	If it is spilled in any direction, one should offer a spoonful of oblation to that deity. If in front, to Agni; if to the right, to Yama; if behind, to Varuna; if to the left, to Soma.
27.3.10	If it were to leak out from all sides, one should offer oblations to all these deities with the ladle.
27.3.11	One should nourish it with the nourishing verses, "May you be nourished, may you be nourished."
27.3.12	Then, at the time of removing the oblations, one should offer oblations with the Vyāhṛtis in the Āhavanīya fire while dropping, spreading, breaking, scattering, and reversing the oblations.
27.3.13	Then, having gone out towards the north between the two fires, and having approached from the north, having recited the Vyāhṛtis, he proceeds with the Vyāhṛti.
27.4.1	The Vyāhṛtis are four-footed, nine-parts, and six-syllables, and are the beginning, middle, and end of all the four Vedas.
27.4.2	If there is a mantra that is too long or too short, or if there is an error in the recitation, the Vyāhrtis are known to remove that sin. Thus it is said.
27.4.3	If there is a mistake in the Rk during the sacrifice, one should offer on the Garhapatya with the words "Bhūr."
27.4.4	If there is mistake in the Yajus, one should offer in the Anvāhāryapacani with the words "Bhuvah."
27.4.5	If there are mistakes in the Sāman, one should offer into the Āhavanīya with the words, "Suvar."
27.4.6	If one were to offer oblations from all directions,
27.4.7	If the sacrificial cake is lifted up, shaken, or spilled,
27.4.8	Or if it is broken or crawling, what would be the atonement?
27.4.9	It is known thus:
27.4.10	If the sacrificial rice is lifted up, the family is destroyed; if shaken, the offspring perish;
27.4.11	If broken or crawling, the sacrificer perishes.
27.4.12	Then having placed the Barhis-sitter in the well-known places of falling, spreading, cutting, turning and moving, and having anointed it with plenty of ghee, he recites: "Why do you fall? Why do you spread? Peace! Come here for peace.
27.4.13	Becoming silent and fit for sacrifice, you have come to your own abode. You have come to your abode."
27.4.14	Having given a boon to Brahma, one should approach the inner altar.
27.4.15	When it is established, one should offer the Surbhimatī.
27.4.16	When it has been established, one should perform the Tantumatī.
27.4.17	The rites of the northern Chanda are to be performed for the long-lived ones.
27.4.18	This is the method prescribed by the seers of truth for the loss of oblations.
27.4.19	When the Grahaṇanirvāpa is finished and the substances are blessed,
27.4.20	One should know at what time and perform the arrangement of the rites.
27.4.21	The Pranava and the Vyāhrī are indeed the supreme and inferior Yajña.
27.4.22	Therefore, whatever is spilled or inverted in the Yajña,
27.4.23	One should do it all with the Vyāhrīs, except for the Vasat-offering.
27.4.24	What is done by those who do not know, and what is done by those in a hurry,
27.4.25	What is done by the use of the Vyāhrtis, that is done properly.
27.4.26	The Adhvaryu should mention the sizes of the skulls in the ritual.
27.4.27	They should be square, two inches in size, and even all around.
27.4.28	Baudhāyana says that they should be increased in size according to the size of the offerings.
27.5.1	Now the expiation for the fires of the kindling woods, of the self, of the constant, of the invoked, of the oblations, and of the wind.
27.5.2	Having churned the fire-wood, having made the fire, having melted the clarified butter in the Gārhapatya fire, having taken four spoonfuls in the ladle, he offers it in the Āhavanīya fire with the verse, "May the mind and light enjoy the clarified butter. May they unite this interrupted sacrifice. Those auspicious dawns and the bright ones, I unite them with oblation and ghee. Svāhā."
27.5.3-10	This is the expiation for the Soma-drainer who has drunk Soma when it has been taken away, when it has not been offered, when it has risen, and when it has been poured down. This is for the Soma-drinker. This is (for the Soma-drīner) who has drunk Soma. This is the Soma-drāiner who has drunk the Soma. This for the Soma-dāiner who has stolen Soma and has been excluded from the Soma-drinking. This is of one who has been excluded from drinking Soma. This (is for the Soma-driuer) who has stolen the Soma.
27.5.11	This is the case when a man, a chariot, a horse, a cow, a buffalo, a boar, a snake, a deer, a dog or any other animal goes between the fires.
27.5.12	This is the case when someone takes away a part of this fire.
27.5.13	This is what is done as an atonement in all cases of distress in the Agnihotra with the mantra "O Agni, do not be angry with me."
27.5.14	Having worshipped, one becomes more prosperous. Thus is the Brahmanical text.
27.6.1	Now, at the Darsha-Pūrnamāsa sacrifices, there are four officiating priests.
27.6.2	If one of them is absent, the remaining three or two may proceed.
27.6.3-5	If there is only one, then before the Prayāja offerings, he offers the Upasampanā oblations with the ladle from the vessel of clarified butter. "May I be acceptable to speech, acceptable to Vācaspati, the divine speech. "Whatever is sweet in speech, in that do thou place me. To Sarasvatī, svāhā. "This very speech of the Asvins, whatever is ill-spoken in speech,
27.6.6	May the Ashvins heal me with their healing power, svāhā.
27.6.7	Indra, the protector, the saviour, the giver of good gifts, the heroic Indra,
27.6.8	I invoke Indra, the wielder of the thunderbolt, the invoked, the one with many invocations, Indra, the one who bestows good fortune. May Indra, the generous one, grant us well-being, svāhā!
27.6.9	Whatever fault there is in my mind, whatever fault there is in speech, and whatever fault there is from my heart,
27.6.10	May the gods pacify all that, Soma and Brihaspati, svāhā.
27.6.11	Whatever the learned and the ignorant priests do,
27.6.12	May Agni and the goddess Sraddha release me from that sin, svāhā!
27.6.13	Whatever harm I have done to the sky, earth, or heaven, or to my mother or father,
27.6.14	May Agni, the domestic fire, release me from that sin. May he remove the evil that I have done. May he make me free from sin. Svāhā.
27.6.15	In the office of Brahman, in the office of Hotṛ, Adhvaryu, Agnīdhra, and Yajamāna, there is only one sacrifice. May the gods protect me from the various duties. May they not injure my life. Svāhā.
27.6.16	"I am Brahman, I am the Hotri, I am the Adhvaryu, I am the Agnidhra, I am the Yajamana; one alone is the sacrifice. May the gods protect me in this. May they not injure my life. Svāhā."
27.6.17	Having offered the expiations for the Adhvaryus, sitting on the unbent altar, one should know that one worships all the deities.
27.6.18	When the Homa-offerings have been passed over, and the Parvan-days and the Agrayanes, and when the kindling woods are being held, how is the ritual not lost?
27.6.19	The Iṣṭis called Śuci, Pāvamānī, Tantuman, and Pāthakṛt should be performed, then the ritual is not lost.
27.6.20-21	The one who is pure purifies the sin, the thread does not destroy the thread. The one who makes the path should ascend the path. The one who purifies should purify. This is Baudhayana's view. Śāliki says that if the new moon day has passed, the Pathīkṛti rite should be performed. If the full moon day has passed the Vaiśvānara rite should be performed, if both have passed both rites should be performed. If many days have passed, the Anvarambhaṇīya rite should be performed.
27.7.1	Now if the kindling-sticks have become old, or have been destroyed by insects, or have been consumed by churning, one should bring new kindling-sticks and, having fasted on the new-moon day, perform the Darsha sacrifice the next day. Having made the old kindling-sticks into powder and thrown them into the Garhapatya fire, one should light it. Holding the southern kindling-stick in the left hand and the northern kindling-stick above the fire, one should recite: "Awaken, O Agni! Enter the womb for another divine sacrifice. O Jātavedas! Follow the kindling-stick. Cast away the old body with the new one."
27.7.2	"This is your natural place of sacrifice." Having placed the fires on the kindling woods, having churned the Garhapatya fire from the Avrita fire, having arranged the resting place, having melted the clarified butter over the Garhapaty fire, having taken four spoonfuls in the ladle, he offers a continuous oblation on the Ahavaniya fire with the verse, "May the mind and light enjoy the clarified butter. May they unite this interrupted sacrifice. Those auspicious dawns and the shining ones, I unite them with oblation and ghee. Svāhā!"
27.7.3	Then he offers a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Tantumata.
27.7.4	He gives a horn as Dakṣiṇā.
27.7.5	The Iṣṭi comes to an end in the prescribed manner.
27.8.1	Now we shall explain the destruction of the Āraṇya.
27.8.2	The Āraṇya is destroyed by eight causes: contact with impurity, a dog, a Cāṇḍāla, a Śūdra, a crow, a fallen one, a donkey, and a horse.
27.8.3	Having discarded the two, one should take up other new ones, and having taken up the fire-kindling wood along with the fire, one should again kindle the fire. If the kindling wood is lost, one should immerse it in water and say, "May our minds be united."
27.8.4	Then, having cut and split the northern one, and having made it into small pieces, one should make the capacity of churning, the capacity of placing, and the remaining of churning, or the churning of the remaining, except for all the thorns.
27.8.5	The calamity of the two sacrificial posts is concluded.
27.9.1	Now we shall explain the defects of the oblation. If it is defiled by a blue fly, a mosquito, a leech, a worm on the head or in the hair, or a moth, or if it is mixed with a small insect, a fly, an ant, or if it has been touched by the excrement, urine, hair, dead nails, nails, putrid drops, sweat, blood, fat, tears, phlegm, vomit, wet nose, or by other things, or if it was touched by a menstruating woman, or seen by a person who has committed abortion, or by one who is not qualified, or in an unclean place.
27.9.2	The spilled and defiled oblation is taken away in water.
27.9.3	One places it in cold ashes.
27.9.4	Having offered the oblation to Indra, one should offer another oblation with ghee or proceed with ghee.
27.9.5	But if the ghee is quickly prepared, one should say so.
27.9.6	Having offered an oblation to Indra and having offered an oblation for the mind, one offers to the mind.
27.9.7	That itself is the atonement.
27.10.1	Now, therefore, the expiation for the Agni-fires that have been blown out.
27.10.2	The oblations are seen to be for the purpose of sanctification.
27.10.3	Some say, "The four Hotr priests."
27.10.4	Some say, "The Vyāhṛtis."
27.10.5	Some say "The oblations to Indra."
27.10.6	Some say "The Manasa (oblations)."
27.10.7	Some say "the great Vyāhṛtis."
27.10.8	Now if all should go away, having placed the fires in the Āraṇis, he should kindle the Gārhapatya fire from the Avrita (kindling wood) and say, "Agni, the first-born, was generated from his own womb, the knower of beings. May he carry oblations to the gods with the Gāyatrī, Triṣṭubh and Jagatī metres, knowing."
27.10.9	He generates him from his own sweet womb by means of the churning sticks. So says the Brāhmaṇa.
27.10.10	If the fire does not blaze while being churned, then one should take it from where one sees another fire and offer it.
27.10.11	If one sees another fire, one should churn again without haste.
27.10.12	If the generated fire goes out, one should recite the Samāropaṇa mantra and churn again.
27.10.13	Then he addresses him, saying, "Be pleased with the food, with wealth, with strength, with splendour, with offspring."
27.10.14	Then he kindles him, saying, "The two Sarasvatis kindle thee; thou art the lord of the sacrifice, thou art the lord."
27.10.15	Then having placed it (in the fire), having brought the Anvāhāryapacana, having taken out the blazing Āhavanīya, having placed it, having placed it (again), having melted the clarified butter in the Garhapatya, having purified it, having taken four spoonfuls in the ladle, having followed the Dashotr mentally, he offers in the Āhavanīya when the sacrificer has begun, with Svāhā.
27.10.16	Then, having circumambulated clockwise and hastening towards the west, he offers ten oblations of the ladle at the Garhapatya, reciting the Anuvaka beginning with "Brahmana one-hotr".
27.10.17	If the Anvähäryapacani fire goes out, he takes it from the Garhapaty and offers the four-hotr at the Anväharyapacani, and the ten-hotr at Garhapatya.
27.10.18	If the Āhavanīya fire goes out, one should take it from the Garhapatya fire and offer the five-hotr offering in the Āhavanīyī fire and the ten-hotr offering into the Garhapaty fire.
27.10.19	If the Agnīdhriya fire goes out, which is located in the Sāman area, one should take the fire from the Śālāmukhyīya fire and offer six-hotr offering to the Agnīdhri fire and the ten hotr offering into the Śālāmukhīya fire.
27.10.20	If the Āhavanīya of the northern Veda is extinguished, then having taken it from the Āgnidhriya, he offers the Saptahotar in the Āhavanīyā of the northern Veda and the Dasaatma in the Āgnidhriyā.
27.11.1	If the Hotr priests are separated in one place, or in two places, he should offer oblations to them separately. If the Vyahrtis are separated or combined, he should offer them separately or combined. If the oblations are deficient, he should offer the oblations of the mind. If the oblation is offered in the Ahavaniya fire, this is the expiation for the oblations that are continuous, offered at the Savanas, and offered in the Udvatas. This is the same as the offering at the time of Homa, except for the Anvadhana.
27.11.2	If the fire of one who has not offered the Agnihotra is extinguished, one should do as prescribed in the Sutra, or else one should light a fire from the Garhapatya and recite these mantras: "Mathanam, Adhimanthanam, Upasaminthanam." Or one should perform the Jyotishmati sacrifice, or offer a full oblation with the two Jyotishmati verses, or offer a ladleful oblation with the Jyotishmatī verse, "Svāhā to Agni Jyotishmati." The teachers say that the earlier method is stronger than the later ones.
27.11.3	Here is an example:
27.11.4	One should not, in an emergency, perform the duties of a lower caste, even if one has been designated as such.
27.11.5	One should diligently learn the distinctions between all the Vedas for the purpose of examining duties and to attain them in emergencies.
27.11.6	If the fire has been offered by mistake or by the ignorant or by children, or if it has been offered by the wife, one should offer the fire on the kindling woods, and having churned the fires and offered the full oblation, one should perform the Tantumatī rite.
27.11.7	Now if, without any reason, the oblation is offered by the worldly people or by the ignorant children, and if it is offered by the wife, then one should offer the oblation with the Vyāhṛtis and the Pūrṇāhuti and the Tantumatī.
27.12.1	Now indeed it is said:
27.12.2	Nirriti takes away the sacrifice of him at whose oblation-pouring the oblations are spilled. If the oblations are found to be spilled, one need not perform expiation.
27.12.3	The Adhvaryu indeed burns the oblations.
27.12.4	He satisfies them with the oblations.
27.12.5-7	The one who burns the oblations before offering the Ājyā, burns them. He offers the Ājyā after offering the Ājyās. He pours the Ājyā over the Ājyās.
27.12.8	When they are satisfied, the gods are satisfied, and the sacrificer is satisfied.
27.12.9	If one were to offer to Agni and Soma from the Agniya cake, or to Agni from the Agnisomiya cake, this would not be a proper offering.
27.12.10	One should offer a spoonful on the Ahavaniya with the verse, "Whatever the gods have transgressed..."
27.12.11	The Agniya, the Iandriya, the Prajapatya, and the Vyahrtis are the divine purifiers.
27.12.12	If the Hotri is confused in the Yajya and Puronuvakya, then he should offer with all the Agniya mantras.
27.12.13	It is known that Agni is all the deities.
27.12.14	With the Iandriya mantras.
27.12.15	It is known that Indra is all the deities.
27.12.16	By the Prajapati-hymns.
27.12.17	It is known that Prajapati is all the deities
27.12.18	By the Vyahrtis.
27.12.19	It is said that all the verses, all the Sāmans, and all the Yajuses are the Vyahrtis.
27.12.20	Now if the sacrificer is confused among the officiating priests, then he should go between the Veda and the Utkara with the Vyāhṛtis, and come out with the Vyāhritis, and be addressed with the Vyāhृtis.
27.12.21	It is known that all the verses, all the Sāmans, and all the Yajuses are the Vyāhṛti.
27.12.22	The gods, indeed, worship the sacrifice, saying, "This our oblation is not offered; it will be offered."
27.12.23	Some say, "To the Svishtakrit."
27.12.24	Some say "To the Ida."
27.12.25	Some say: "To the Anuyajas."
27.12.26	Some say : "To the Samyuvakas."
27.12.27	Some say :"To the Samishtayajus.
27.12.28	If it is above, one should remember the Samishtayajus. Having established this Iṣṭi, one should perform another Iṣṭi without weakening.
27.12.29	It is known that the sacrifice is the expiation for the sacrifice.
27.13.1	If they are to be milked for the Sannāyya, if the calves are to be milched, one should offer barley-gruel to Vayu in the evening.
27.13.2	One should not milk a cow that has not given birth.
27.13.3	Having placed the milk in the vessels, having removed the calves of the milch cows, one should offer the Saṁnāyya oblation tomorrow.
27.13.4	If the evening milking is affected by calamity, one should offer rice to Indra and observe fast as prescribed.
27.13.5	Or, having divided the morning milking into two parts, having discarded one part, one should perform the evening milking at the place of the evening milking, and the other part at the place of boiling.
27.13.6	If the morning milking is affected by calamity, then having offered a cake to Indra or to Mahendra, he should proceed with that curd.
27.13.7	If both are affected by calamity, he should offer a cake to Indra in five potsherds.
27.13.8	Having proceeded with the Agniya rite, one should proceed with the Indriya rite.
27.13.9	If all the oblations were to be spoilt, lost or stolen, one should perform this Iṣṭi after having performed the Iṣṭi for the deities in order and then perform another Iṣṭi without any deficiency.
27.13.10	It is known that the sacrifice is the expiation for the sacrifice.
27.14.1	Now we shall explain the oblations and praises not mentioned in the Chhandas.
27.14.2	"He who is to be worshipped, he should be worshipped with the formula, "For the sake of Indra, the worshipper, may I be free from enemies, powerful, and prosperous." Or, "May I be free from enmity and powerful."
27.14.3	"For the sake of the other, may I be prosperous."
27.14.4	"By the sacrifice to Soma, may I beget offspring and cattle. May I beget seed with good seed."
27.14.5	"By the sacrifice to Savitar, may I be prosperous and have cattle."
27.14.6	"By sacrifice to Sarasvati, may I increase speech and food."
27.14.7	"By sacrificing to Sarasvata, may I be one of faith."
27.14.8	By the worship of Pūṣan, may I be prosperous and have cattle.
27.14.9	By the worship of the Maruts, may I prosper with life.
27.14.10	By the worshipping of all the gods, may I attain union with life.
27.14.11	"May I prosper in the two worlds of heaven and earth, may I attain the firm ground."
27.14.12	"May I be fertile through the sacrifice to Vājin, may I be a sharer of righteousness through the sacrifice to Varuna."
27.14.13	"Through whose sacrifice may I be the most powerful?"
27.14.14	By the sacrifice to the gods, I obtain all works of Viśvakarman.
27.14.15	By the sacrifice to the god Aditi, may I be freed from sin.
27.14.16	By the offering to the god Vayu, may I be a sharer of treasures.
27.14.17	By the worship of the god Surya, may I be well-seen.
27.14.18	By the offerings to the gods Agni and Viṣṇu, may I be powerful.
27.14.19	"By the sacrifice to Vishnu, may I be like Sipivishta."
27.14.20	"By the sacrifice to Aryaman, may I go to the heavenly world."
27.14.21	One should recite the mantras as per the deity.
27.14.22	They call the eight-spoonfuls offerings, the modifications of Agni, the eleven-spoonfuls offerings the modifications of Agni-Soma, the twelve-spoonfuls offerings modifications of Visve Dev, the one-spoonful offering the modification of the earth, the modification of heaven and earth, and other modifications of Agni.
27.14.23	The offerings of gruel are modifications of Soma.
27.14.24	The offerings of curds, milk, and meat, the offerings of the Saṁnāyya, the offerings of wood, and the offerings of the Sviṣṭakṛt are the modifications of the offerings.
27.14.25	They say that the Upāṁśuyājas and their modifications are mentioned.
27.14.26	They also say that the offerings, the deities, and the potsherds are common. The offerings and the deities are common, and the potshers are common. The common offerings are stronger.
27.14.27	Or, "May his sacrifice be successful, may he be successful in reciting the verses." This is applicable to all.
28.1.1	Now, it is said:
28.1.2	"If one is afflicted by a sinful disease or is obstructed from the gods, sages, ancestors, cattle, and Brahmins, then one who is cursed or being cursed should perform a secret Iṣṭi."
28.1.3	For this Iṣṭi, one who is about to perform it procures gold.
28.1.4	Its Prājāpatya is the Upavasatha.
28.1.5	Then, having offered the Agnihotra in the morning before the offering of water, having melted the clarified butter over the Garhapatya fire, having taken four spoonfuls into the ladle, he offers on the Ahavaniya fire while the sacrificer is engaged, with the verse, "May the Pavamana hymns purify me with the stream of a thousand, with that purifying stream by which the gods purify themselves always. Svāhā!"
28.1.6	Taking another four handfuls, he offers on the Āhavanīya fire, saying, "The Prajapati-purifying filter, a hundred cubits long, made of gold, with that we, knowing Brahman, purify the pure Brahman. Svāhā!"
28.1.7	Taking another four handfuls, he offers on the Āhavanīya fire with the verse, "Indra, with good counsel, may Soma purify me. May Varuna with good conduct, Yama the king with the purifying rites, purify me. May Jātavedas purify me with the purifying rites. Svāhā!"
28.1.8	Then having spread out the Prsthya grass and having offered water, he offers the Iṣṭi of ten oblations to Agni Anha-mocin with eight potsherds. Having cooked, he places (the oblations).
28.1.9	For it there are seventeen kindling verses.
28.1.10	He places the two Dhayyas between the kindling and the kindled fire, namely, "This is the path of the waters, salutations to him."
28.1.11	The two portions of clarified butter are like the fire.
28.1.12	The Agni, the immortal one, with bright lustre, repels the Rakshas.
28.1.13	Having recited the Puronuvakya, "The pure Agni, the shining one, is to be praised," he offers with the verse, "Whatever is your pure fire, O Agni, spread between,
28.1.14	I purify with that Brahman."
28.1.15	The one who flows forth from the purifying fire, like a horse in a race, is the Moon. Having recited the Puronuvākyā, he runs to the pots, saying, "Purified by the Pavitra, he is praised at the sacrifices." This is the Yajati.
28.1.16	Now in this Anuvaka, the Yajya and Puronuvakya are together with the Sahasraya, in the Havis of Agni, the first Prachetas.
28.1.17	Then before the Sviṣṭakṛt, he offers the Sruva-oblations with this Anuvaka: "Pavamāna, the giver of gold."
28.1.18	The Prastara is well-known.
28.1.19	Then having approached the Anvāhārya, he gives gold.
28.1.20	The rite is similar to the Patnīsaṃyājas.
28.1.21	Then before the householder, he offers the Sruva-oblations with this Anuvāka, reciting each verse separately: "Whatever the gods do to harm the gods..."
28.1.22	This Iṣṭi comes to an end with the full vessel and Viṣṇukramakas.
28.1.23	He releases the vow.
28.1.24	If one has intercourse with a woman at the wrong time, or with a woman who is not one's wife, or if one has emitted semen in an improper place,
28.1.25	One who is afflicted with a sin or a minor sin should perform this sacrifice for twelve days, one who is afflicted with the major sins should perform it for a month, one who desires merit should perform it for one year or one season. This is called the great purifying sacrifice, or the sacrifice of the hunter, or the secret sacrifice, says Baudhāyana.
28.2.1	As for this, he goes away for an unlimited time: it is said that he does not go away for more than a year. If he goes away for more than that, he should offer the Pavitresti sacrifice.
28.2.2	One who is going to perform this sacrifice procures gold.
28.2.3	Its Prājāpatya rite is known.
28.2.4	Then, having offered the Agnihotra in the morning before the offering of water, having melted the clarified butter over the Garhapatya fire, having taken four spoonfuls into the ladle, he offers on the Ahavaniya fire while the sacrificer is engaged, with the verse, "May the Pavamana hymns purify me with the stream of a thousand, with that purifying stream by which the gods purify themselves always. Svāhā!"
28.2.5	Taking another four handfuls, he offers on the Āhavanīya fire, saying, "The Prajapati-purifying filter, a hundred cubits long, made of gold, with that we, knowing Brahman, purify the pure Brahman. Svāhā!"
28.2.6	Taking another four handfuls, he offers on the Āhavanīya fire with the verse, "Indra, with good counsel, may Soma purify me. May Varuna with good conduct, Yama the king with the purifying rites, purify me. May Jātavedas purify me with the purifying rites. Svāhā!"
28.2.7	Then having strewn the Prsthya grass and having taken the water, he offers a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Pavamana, and Upāṃśu-oblation to Sarasvati Priyā.
28.2.8	He offers a cake on 8 potsherds to Agnı Pavaka and Upāṃshu-oblation to Savitr Satyaprasava.
28.2.9	He offers a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Succhi, and Upāṃśu-Ajya to Vāyu Niyutvat.
28.2.10	He offers a cake on 8 potsherds to Agnī Vratapati, and Upāmshu-Ajya to Vishnu Sipivista.
28.2.11	He offers cake on eight potshers to Agni Vaisvānara, and Upāśu-Ajy to Dadhikrauṇa.
28.2.12	Having cooked, he takes it.
28.2.13	It has seventeen Sāmidhenī verses.
28.2.14	He places the two Dhāyyas between the verses addressed to Samidhnā and Samiddha, with the verses, "This is the descent of waters, salutations to it" and "This is the path of waters, salutatioṃs to it".
28.2.15	The two Ajyabhāgas are indeed addressed to Pāvakavān.
28.2.16	Agni, the immortal, the pure, the shining, the pure, worthy of praise, the remover of the Raksases, the one who has spread his pure and sacred light between the heaven and the earth.
28.2.17	He offers with the verse, "I purify myself with that Brahman."
28.2.18	He who flows forth from the purifying fire, the pure one, like a horse, the steed, having performed (his duty), having recited the Puronuvākyā, he runs to the pots. He is sprinkled with the Pavitra. He grows with praises at the sacrifices. This is the Yajati.
28.2.19	Then of the oblations, O Agni, thou purifyest the life-breaths. O Agni, do thou purify. This is of Agni Pavamāna.
28.2.20-23	O Agni, O Pavaka, O Pavaka for us, O Pavaka! (O Agni) Pavaka, for us, O Agni, O pavaka! O Agni, O Pavak, O Pavaka to us, O Pavak! O Agni of the true birth, O Agni of the true origin, O Agni of true origin! O Agni with the purest vow, O Agni, your pure ones, O Agni, the pure ones! O Agni the purest, O Agni, you are the purest, O pure one!
28.2.24	Vayu is the leader, Vayu is the bright one, I go to him, the controller of Vayu.
28.2.25	You are the guardian of vows, O Agni, if we have transgressed the vows.
28.2.26	What is that of you today? What is to be known about you, O Vishnu?
28.2.27	Vaisvānara, with your help, asked on earth.
28.2.28	I have performed for Dadhikra, for Dadhikra. Dadhikra is the name of a sage.
28.2.29	Then the invocation of Agni after the oblation: "By the divine worship, I am pure, purified, worthy of sacrifice, free from sin, endowed with brahmic lustre, and a giver of food, of Agni Pavamāna. By the divine worship, of Agni Pāvaka, of Agni Śuci, of Agni Vratapati, of Agni Vaiśvānara, I am pure..."
28.2.30	At the Upāṁśuyāja, one should offer in the manner of the Upāṁshuyāja.
28.2.31	Then before the Sviṣṭakṛt, he offers the Sruva-offerings with this Anuvāka: "Pavamāna, the giver of gold..."
28.2.32	"Damūna, the guest, is praised, the one who is praised, the guest, the one who knows, come to this our sacrifice."
28.2.33	O Agni, may all the enemies be destroyed by you. Bring us food.
28.2.34	The guest, the purifier, is purified in his own abode, praised by the wise, the auspicious one for us.
28.2.35	The thousand-horned bull, with that strength, O Agni, may you send all others at once.
28.2.36	The Prastara is well-known.
28.2.37	Then, having approached the Anvāhārya rice, he gives gold.
28.2.38	The rite is the same as that of the Patnisamājas.
28.2.39	Then before the householder, he offers the oblations with the ladle, reciting the Anuvaka beginning with "If the gods are the tormentors of the gods".
28.2.40	The Iṣṭi comes to an end with the full vessel and the Viṣṇukrama steps. He releases the vow.
28.2.41	One who is accused or being accused should offer this sacrifice.
28.2.42	One should offer this sacrifice when there is a transgression of the seasons, a transgression of the duties of a householder, or when one has emitted semen in an improper place.
28.2.43	One should offer this sacrifice for a year, or for half a year, or twenty-one nights.
28.2.44	He purifies the twenty-one generations of his own family, including himself, and the ten generations before and after him, who are in the animal world, and who are afflicted by evil deeds. And he does not return again.
28.2.45	And they also quote:
28.2.46	The Vaisvānara, the Vratapati, the Pavitra, and the Iṣṭi.
28.2.47	He who uses it during the two Rtu seasons purifies ten Purushas.
28.3.1	Now we shall explain the Nakshatrești.
28.3.2	Agni desired, "May I be the food of the gods." They are explained in the Brahmana.
28.3.3	"The new moon that comes before the full moon in the month of Vaiśākha, that coincides with the Aprambanī constellation once in a year. One should begin on that day."
28.3.4	On the day of fasting, having placed the fires on the kindling woods, having performed the Udasvayam, having churned out the fires, having performed the Vihrita, one should fast on the full moon or new moon day when that sign occurs.
28.3.5	Here is the extreme limit.
28.3.6	It is also known that the sacrificer becomes one who observes the vow of eating the remnants of the oblation. One should perform on the birth star for one who desires longevity, or for as long as one lives, or the offering may be made three times.
28.3.7	One offers the two portions of clarified butter with the verses, "O Agni, with your auspicious sign, O Soma, for great prosperity."
28.3.8	Then one offers the oblation, saying, "I offer the oblation pleasing to Agni and the Krittikas."
28.3.9	"He instructs, 'Worship Agni with the Krittikā constellation.'
28.3.10	He instructs everywhere in the middle of the oblations for the constellations, 'An eight-pot offering to Agni and a rice-gruel offering to Anumati.'
28.3.11	Having cooked, he places it.
28.3.12	It has seventeen kindling verses.
28.3.13	He places the two verses, 'The shining one, the shining one, the one who shines, the one who is shining, the one who will shine,' between the verses, 'The one who is shining' and 'The one who will shine.'
28.3.14	The two who are rich in wealth and prosperity, the two who are rich with ghee, are offered as oblations. "One should recite, "May Agni, the bestower of wealth, the protector from grief, the remover of evil, bestow wealth upon us."
28.3.15	Then, the oblations are offered with the verses, "Agni is the head of the earth, may Anu and Anumati follow us today. May you follow us, O Anumati." The verses for the Samcharya (oblation) are the Yajya and Puronuvakya."
28.3.16	Agni, the lord of the stars, protect us from the Krittikas.
28.3.17	Then he offers the oblations of the ladle in front of the Svishtakrit, saying "To Agni svāhā, to the Krittikās svāhā."
28.3.18	The Svishtakrit is offered to the carrier of oblations.
28.3.19	This Iṣṭi comes to an end with the full vessel and the Viṣṇukrama.
28.3.20	He releases the vow.
28.4.1	Thus, on each subsequent day, one should offer the sacrifice according to the respective text.
28.4.2	We shall explain the special features.
28.4.3	"O Prajapati, O Savita," in a low voice.
28.4.4	"To the serpents, to the Ashreshas, the barley-gruel in ghee."
28.4.5	All are barley grains.
28.4.6	At the time of placing (the oblations) on the fire, having brought the clarified butter across the Pavitra, having placed it, he pours the Karambha across the Pavitra.
28.4.7	"A cake on six potsherds to the Pitrs, to Magha."
28.4.8	The offering, sprinkling, covering, and pouring down, etc. of the Paiyarya-sacrifices have been explained.
28.4.9	The procedure of the Soma-sacrifice of the third pressing has been explained.
28.4.10	Then, for Vayu, for Niṣṭyā, for Gṛṣṭī, milk is offered.
28.4.11	The morning milking of the cow is performed in the same way.
28.4.12	Having performed the Visākhā sacrifice, one should offer the full-moon sacrifice with ghee at that very time.
28.4.13	Then, on the next day, he should offer a cake to Mitra-Varuna and Anuradha. Having performed the rites of the asterisms Uttara Ashadha, he should perform the Abhijit rite on that very day.
28.4.14	Then, on the next morning, he should offer three pot-shaped oblations to Vishnu-Sronayai.
28.4.15	In the asterism Uttara Prishthapada, he should offer pot-shaped oblation.
28.4.16	Having drawn a skull-measure on the ground, he should offer charcoal.
28.4.17	Its consecration is like that of one skull-measure.
28.4.18	Having performed the offering with the Apābharaṇī verses, one should offer clarified butter on the same day as the new moon.
28.4.19	Then on the next day, when the moon is visible, one should offer a cake on fifteen potsherds.
28.4.20	One should perform the offering on the day when the moon is not visible, and proceed when the moon has risen.
28.4.21	They offered this oblation of rice, both white and black, taken from the milk of a white and a black cow, on the two days of the day and night.
28.4.22	One should offer it at sunset, after sunset.
28.4.23	Or one should offer it at dawn, at dawn.
28.4.24	One should proceed according to the method of offering.
28.4.25	Then he offers the oblation to Uṣas.
28.4.26	He should offer it at night and distribute it at dawn.
28.4.27	Then he offers the oblations to the stars.
28.4.28	While offering, the sacrificer, seated in the sacrificer's place, mutters: "Just as you are among the gods, so may I be among men."
28.4.29	He should offer it on the day when the stars are visible, and should proceed when the stars have risen.
28.4.30	"Then he offers this oblation to Surya and the stars."
28.4.31	He should offer it at night when the stars are seen, and should proceed at sunrise.
28.4.32	Then he offers this to Aditi, then this to Vishnu.
28.4.33	The sacrifice is Vishnu. One stands at the end of the sacrifice. This is the Brahmanical text.
28.4.34	It is known that the gift is the Dakshina.
28.4.35	Or, it is the Apaghāva.
28.4.36	The animal is well-known.
28.4.37	Having performed the Paithikritti-Iști, one should offer sacrifices with the Darsha-Pūrnamāsa, with the Naksatra Sattatra, for the sake of splendor and immortality.
28.4.38	Having performed the Jyotiṣām Ayana sacrifice, one removes sin and attains the nature of light. One conquers death again, says Baudhāyana.
28.5.1	One should perform the Navayajus sacrifice either on the new moon or full moon day, or offer Agnihotra with the Navayajuses.
28.5.2	Or one should offer oblations with the milk of a cow that has calved for the first time, or one should offer the Agnihotra oblation in the evening and morning with barley-gruel prepared from new barley.
28.5.3	Or one should cook rice in four pots in the Garhapatya fire and offer oblations to the deities of the Agnyayana sacrifice, with the Svishtakrit as the fourth.
28.5.4	Or he may feed nine Brahmanas.
28.5.5	This is the procedure of the Iṣṭi. The grains, herbs, trees, roots and fruits, vegetables, etc., are to be offered without performing the Agnyanayana. The procedure may be varied according to the availability of the ingredients.
28.5.6	Having performed with grains, one should offer with grains. Having performed with barley, one should offer barley. Having performed with grains.
28.5.7	Or one should offer with either grains or barley.
28.5.8	The Āgrayana rites are concluded.
28.6.1	Now we shall explain the expiations for animal sacrifices.
28.6.2	If a sacrificial animal is killed, one should offer this oblation after reciting the verse "What is beyond the dust" and then offer a second oblation as prescribed. "From whom you are afraid, O Vasishtha, make us free from fear.
28.6.3	Be gracious to all creatures. Om, salutations to Rudra, the nourisher, Svāhā."
28.6.4	"For, when the most fearful, the most fleeing, the most knowing, the most stable, the most powerful, the most wise, the most intelligent, the most intelligent of all, the most intelligent among all, the most powerful among all, the one who is the most powerful among the most powerful, he who is the most intelligent among the most intelligent, he who is most intelligent among the intelligent, he who knows the most intelligent, and he who knows the intelligent, they all know him, and he knows them, and he knows all of them, and he is known by all of them, he who is known by all, he who is all-knowing, he who is omniscient, he who is supreme, he who is highest, he who is foremost, he who is chief, he who is principal, he who is greatest, he who is superior, he who is excellent, he who is best, he who is preeminent, he who is paramount, he who is incomparable, he who is matchless, he who is unequalled, he who is unsurpassed, he who is unopposed, he who is unrivaled
28.6.5	If he should sit down, then having offered this oblation, one should make him rise with the Maitrāvaruṇa staff or with another Udumbara staff, saying, "He who sat down out of fear."
28.6.6	The Udumbara is energy, and cattle are energy. He has indeed won energy and cattle for himself." So says the Brahmana.
28.6.7	"Rise, O bull!" to the bull.
28.6.8	"Rise O horse!" to the horse.
28.6.9	"Uccaga" means a goat.
28.6.10	"Unmesa" means a sheep.
28.6.11	"Udvasa" means a cow.
28.6.12	If it dies before the fire-offering, then having performed the expiation prescribed for the horse sacrifice, one should offer another animal of the same caste, age, form and species.
28.6.13	All the rites beginning with the Upakarana are performed in the same manner, except the Sāmidhenī verses, the Ghāra, the Samprāśa, the Sammārga, the Pravara and the Prayāja.
28.6.14	If one cannot find an animal of that kind, then a goat, a sheep, a camel, a horse or an ox may be substituted for it.
28.6.15	Among these, a goat and a sheep are to be used for the Upakarṇa rite.
28.6.16	If one is unable to obtain a goat or a sheep, one should offer another animal.
28.6.17	The rite of Pracaraṇa has been explained by Tvaṣṭra.
28.6.18	Then he introduces his body into the water with the two verses, "Do not die, O thou who art dear to us; may all thy wishes be fulfilled."
28.7.1	If the animal is deficient in any limb, then having offered the Agniyī, Agnāvaiṣṇavī, Aindrī, Vāyavyā, and Pājāpatyā oblations, he should offer it again.
28.7.2	If a hawk should steal the oblation being carried, or if it should be lost, having placed gold in a vessel, and taking four spoonfuls, he offers on the Āhavanīya fire, while the sacrificer is reciting the Anvārambha verse. The rising Suparna shines forth, the entire one with golden belly, having seven heads, in front.
28.7.3	Having entered all the worlds, he is omnipresent. May he find (the oblation) in this sacrifice for the sake of the sacrificer. Svāhā!
28.7.4	Then, at the place of this offering, whatever fat-like substance remains, one should cut it out and proceed with it.
28.7.5	If one finds it again, one should not be attached to it.
28.7.6	If the oblation of the Vapa or the Avadana spills, he takes it and offers with the verse, "I give thee to thee for fame and strength. May ye bestow on us the power of Indra and the strength. The drop that is thine, the dew that is thine, O divine banner, has entered the whole world.
28.7.7	Do thou protect us for non-injury, svāhā."
28.7.8	Now if a hawk should alight on the animal while it is not yet fixed, having washed the cup, sprinkled the sacrificial post, and offered clarified butter as before, he should offer with the verse, "O Soma, give, speak, or sing for the drinking of Soma. May the sacrificer obtain you in this sacrifice. Svāhā!"
28.8.1	Now we shall explain the vows of the Cāturmāsya (rites) in between.
28.8.2	This is his vow.
28.8.3	He does not speak untruth.
28.8.4	He does not eat meat.
28.8.5	He does no approach a woman.
28.8.6	His clothes are not washed by others.
28.8.7	He drinks water from a vessel made of gold, and does not drink after a Śūdra.
28.8.8	He himself washes his feet.
28.8.9	He does eat salt.
28.8.10	He does eats grains other than sesame.
28.8.11	He does sleep on a couch.
28.8.12	He does approach a woman.
28.8.13	If a man has no son, he may approach his wife during the season.
28.8.14	During both seasons, he should observe the vow of eating honey first.
28.8.15	This is what is said in the Brāhmaṇa.
28.8.16	It is said that one should eat ghee.
28.8.17	It is known as divine honey.
28.8.18-26	The divine plants anoint thee with honey at the sacrifice, O divine plant, with divine honey. One should not eat the leftovers of another. One should perform the rites for another. One does not anoint oneself. One does anoint oneself. One does not eat at a śrāddha. One does shave the hair. One does brush the teeth. One does cut the nails.
28.8.27	One may shave the hair, beard, body-hair and nails on the Parva days.
28.8.28	One should desist from this after four months. This is what the Brahmanas say.
28.8.29	After a year, they teach the vow of the Darśa-Pūrṇamāsa alone. If the time for the Vaishvadeva sacrifice is not exceeded,
28.8.30	If he exceeds (the time), he should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni, the lord of vows.
28.8.31	The Iṣṭi is concluded as prescribed.
28.8.32	The time for the New Moon sacrifice has been explained.
28.8.33	In case of transgression of time, one should perform the sacrifice.
28.9.1	Now we shall explain the expiations for the consecration of the Adhvara.
28.9.2	If a consecrated person speaks untruth, he should recite these four verses to Varuna: "O Varuna, this is your truth. I seek refuge in you. O Agni, you are the truth. You are the truth, O Agni."
28.9.3	If one has been separated from the black antelope skin or the staff, one should recite this verse: "The sacrifice went to the people. May the blessing of the sacrifice protect me. May prosperity increase. May the sacrifice release the sacrificer from sin."
28.9.4	It has been said that one should recite the mantra when seeing something unclean or undesirable.
28.9.5	It has been said that when it is raining or about to rain, one should recite the following mantra:
28.9.6	Having performed the vow and sipped water, one recites the mantra: "May these waters be auspicious for us, flowing in our womb and belly, flowing with abundance, free from disease and injury, may they be for our well-being and life."
28.9.7	Having vomited and spat, he recites: "Whatever poison is here, may it be destroyed. Agni has spread it out. Soma again places it in the self."
28.9.8	If semen is spilled, he recites the following: "Whatever semen of mine has been spilled due to excitement, may it be offered like Agnihotra with Soma. I now take it back."
28.9.9-12	When he is about to urinate or defecate, he takes a clod of earth, saying, "This is your sacrificial body." He releases the water, saying, "I release the offspring from sin. Svāhā! They enter the earth." He puts the clod back, saying, "May it be united with the earth." "The tears are called 'disgusting.' Svāhā! They enter the earth."
28.9.13	The name of the earth is established by the utterance of svāhā. It enters the earth. This is the name of the earth.
28.9.14	The name of the earth established by the utterance svāhā enters the earth. It is the name of perspiration.
28.9.15	Having seen a bad dream, one recites and turns away from it. The bad dream is for misfortune. I, Brahma, will make a difference. I do not follow the dream.
28.9.16	He who eats food in a dream, and recites the verse, "Whatever food is eaten at night, that does not satisfy hunger in the morning. May it not harm us. For it was not seen by the sun."
28.9.17	Seeing blood fallen or itching, he recites the verse "Salutations to the Rudriyas, to the waters, svāhā."
28.9.18	One should not run when it is not raining.
28.9.19	If he runs, he should recite this verse: "Obeisance to Rudra, the lord of the house."
28.9.20	One should not associate with one who has been initiated by another.
28.9.21	If one does associate, one should recite this verse:
28.9.22	The sun, rising or setting, is the deity. The sun, rising from the other side of the gods, should be recited as "May the sun, the deity, protect me from the gods." Thus, these are the expiations for all the rites of consecration. This is according to Baudhayana.
28.9.23	According to Saliki, the sun is the deity for the intermediate consecration, because of the release.
28.10.1	Now, therefore, we shall explain the expiations for all sacrifices.
28.10.2	In all cases of spilling, cutting, breaking, cracking, or burning of the oblation, or of its flowing, dripping, falling, or bursting, or in the case of cows, dogs, cats, crows, pigs, deer, goats, birds, reptiles, and other insects, or of the priests or fires entering the sacrificial area, one should fill the ladle with twelve spoonfuls of oblation and offer the three great formulas to Durga, the goddess of wisdom, saying, "We pour the Soma for Agni, the knower of beings, to burn away our enemies. The Veda is our assembly. May it protect us from all difficulties. Like a boat crossing the ocean, may Agni protect us from evil. Svāhā!"
28.10.3	If there is any mistake in the performance, one should offer oblations with the mantra "Om, to Prajapati, svāhā. To Hiranyagarbha, svāhā."
28.10.4	Then he offers to the grandfather, saying, "To the lord of the Bhrigus, svāhā! To the austerity of the Angirasas, svāhā!"
28.10.5	Then he offers the great formulas: "Bhuvah, to Agni and to the earth and to the great, svāhā. Bhuvah, to Vayu and to the atmosphere and to the great. Suvah, to Aditya and to the heaven and to the great svāhā. Bhūh, Bhuvah, Suvah, to the moon and to the stars and to the directions and to the great."
28.10.6	Then he offers the Vyāhṛtis: "Bhūḥ svāhā, Bhuvaḥ svāhā. Suvaḥ svāha. Bhūr Bhuvaḥ Suvaḥ svāhātīti."
28.11.1	If the mantra is deficient or excessive, if it is poorly recited or poorly uttered,
28.11.2	If the Vasat-call is absent or past, or if it is uttered after the offering,
28.11.3	Due to the spilling of the oblation, or due to the Hotr's deficient voice,
28.11.4	And in the case of excessive burning, and in the case of any breakage of the vessel,
28.11.5	In the case of the destruction of the skull, and in the breaking, and in the entry of the four-footed animal,
28.11.6	And in the case of the loss of the sacred thread, and in the stirring of only the ghee,
28.11.7	And in case of the inversion of the oblations, and in the absence of the officiating priests,
28.11.8	At the time of the spreading of the sacrifice, when a division has arisen,
28.11.9	The oblations to Indra and Agni should be offered, and the Vyāhṛtis beginning with Praṇava.
28.11.10	The Vāruṇya, the Tantumati, and the Agnisvatī are the mantras.
28.11.11	The seven Mahāvyāhrītas and the Prajapatya are also mentioned.
28.11.12	These mantras are proclaimed for the proper completion of the sacrifice.
28.11.13	The sacrifice is not to be atoned for, as it is enjoyed by the Asuras.
28.11.14	The sacrifice enjoyed by the Asura would lead to the fault of the gods.
28.11.15	The priests and the sacrificer should be separated from the life and brahminical splendour.
28.11.16	One should remove the evil omen, and thus one should remove the faults.
28.12.1	Now we shall explain the rites of blessing.
28.12.2	One should offer the evening oblation at sunset and the morning oblation at sunrise, without transgressing the time.
28.12.3	It is known that the time for the Darśa-Pūrṇamāsa and Agnihotra sacrifices does not pass or become disturbed.
28.12.4	From the time of the morning oblation, the time for the evening oblation should not pass, and from the time of the evening oblation, the morning oblation should not be delayed.
28.12.5	If there is a fault in the evening oblation every evening, one should offer an oblation with "Salutations to the fault, svāhā" and then offer the Agnihotra.
28.12.6	If the faults of the morning offering are seen, one should offer the Agnihotra with the mantra, "Salutations to the faults of the offering, svāhā."
28.12.7	If the Āhavanīya fire follows the offering made in the east, one should offer a subsequent offering with the mantra, "Fire is the husband, the wife is the fire." Placing a piece of gold in the fire, one should offer an additional offering.
28.12.8	The Homa in case of transgression of time.
28.12.9	The time of the Full-moon should not be transgressed till the time of the New-moon; and the time of the new-moon should not he transgressed till the Full-moon.
28.12.10	The time for the offering of the Vrīhi-grahayana should not be transgresseḍ till the time for the Shyamaka-grahayana; and the time for the Yava-grahayana, till the time for Vrīhi- and Shyamaka- grahayana.
28.12.11-12	The time of the Varunapraghasa sacrifice should not be passed beyond the time of the Visvedeva sacrifice. The time of the Saakamedha sacrifices should not be passed beyong the time of the Varuna-praghasa sacrifice. The time for the Saakame dha sacrifices should not be past beyond the time of Visvedeva sacrifice.
28.12.13	The time of the spring-solstice should not be passed before the time of the autumnal solstice.
28.12.14	The time of the spring solstice should not be passed beyond the time of the winter solstice.
28.12.15	The sages used to perform the sacrifice in the two halves of the year.
28.12.16	They offered Agnihotra in the two halves.
28.12.17	On the first day, he takes fourteen spoonfuls in the evening.
28.12.18	The oblation is offered once.
28.12.19	There is one kindling wood.
28.12.20	The offering is made once, the attendance is done once.
28.12.21	The hands are wiped once.
28.12.22	Thus in the morning.
28.12.23	Then, having not offered the Agnihotra for six months, having not performed the Darsha-Paurnamasa sacrifices, the Agrayaṇa, the Catu-r-māsyas, and the Pasu-bandha, having offered oblations to Agni Pathikrita, Agni Tantumata, Agni Vaishvānara, and Agni Vratapati, having offered the Agnihotra, performed the Darsha Pūrnamāsa sacrifices, the Agrayṇa, the Caturashra, and the Pasubandha.
28.12.24	Then, if the Agnihotra has not been offered for a year, one should offer oblations to Agni Pavamāna, Agni Pāvaka, Agni Śuci, Agni Pathikṛt, Agni Tantumān, Agni Vaiśvānara, Agni Vratapati, having offered the Agnihotra, having performed the Darsa-Pūrṇamāsa sacrifices, the Āgrayana and Cāturmāsya sacrifices, and the Pasubandha sacrifice.
28.13.1	Then for the sake of oblations, rice and barley.
28.13.2	If they are not available, then priyangu, kodrava, darvaraka, shyamaka, nivara, venuya, tarasa, sampaka, root-fruits, water, and flour.
28.13.3	Ghee is for the sake of ghee.
28.13.4	The word "gavyam" is a suffix.
28.13.5	If it is not available, one should use buffalo ghee or ghee for the sake of the ghee.
28.13.6	Some people think that it is not prohibited in eating.
28.13.7	If both of them are not available, oil is the substitute.
28.13.8	If that is not available, sesame oil.
28.13.9	The oil of Atasi, Kusumbha, mustard and wood is the substitute. This is because of the authority of the learned.
28.13.10	Thereafter, if one cannot obtain the above, one should mix the flour of barley, wheat, and shyamaka with water and use it for ghee.
28.13.11	Kusha grass is used for spreading.
28.13.12	If one cannot obtain them, one can use the following: grass made of reeds, kutapas, ashvalas, muñja, fragrant grass, Arjuna, Darbha, shyamaka, milky trees, and sugarcane.
28.13.13	The grass should be used for the purposes of spreading, covering, sprinkling, purifying, tying the sacrificial post, tying the sacrificial thread, covering the sacrificial post, covering the sacrificial thread, tying the sacrificial posts, covering the sacrificial posts, tying the sacrificial threads, covering the sacrificial threads, tying the sacrificial ropes, covering the sacrificial ropes, tying the sacrificial poles, covering the sacrificial poles, tying the sacrificial stakes, covering the sacrificial stakes, tying the sacrificial pins, covering the sacrificial pins, tying the sacrificial stones, covering the sacrificial stones, tying the sacrificial slabs, covering the sacrificial slabs, tying the sacrificial altars, covering the sacrificial altars, tying the sacrificial platforms, covering the sacrificial platforms, tying the sacrificial sheds, covering the sacrificial sheds, tying the sacrificial enclosures, covering the sacrificial enclosures, tying the sacrificial gates, covering the sacrificial gates, tying the sacrificial doors, covering the sacrificial doors, tying the sacrificial thresholds, covering the sacrificial thresholds, tying the sacrificial steps, covering the sacrificial steps, tying the sacrificial stairs, covering the sacrificial stairs, tying the sacrificial seats, covering the sacrificial seats, tying the sacrificial beds, covering the sacrificial beds, tying the sacrificial couches, covering the sacrificial couches,
28.13.14	Palāśa, Khadira, and Vedha are the prescribed woods. In their absence, any of the sacrificial trees may be used. If none of these are available, then any of the following may be used: Araruka, Pittha, Kovidāra, Śalmali, Śleṣmātaka, Nīpa, Nimba, Tīlaka, Vādhaka, Vibhītaka, Rājavṛkṣa, Karñja, and Palandu.
28.13.15	Some say that any of the trees may be used.
28.13.16	At the time of giving gifts, one should give a cow, gold, or a garment.
28.13.17	If those are not available, one should give fruits, roots, or edible things.
28.13.18	But one should not perform a sacrifice without giving anything.
28.13.19	One should always be engaged in the regular rites and also in the occasional rites.
28.13.20	For one whose regular rites and occasional rites are neglected,
28.13.21	He who is on the wrong path does not go to heaven, for he has fallen.
28.13.22	Therefore, one should always perform the eternal rites with roots, fruits, honey, or sugarcane juice.
28.13.23	One should always perform the perpetual rites and not neglect them.
28.13.24	And one should not neglect the perpetual rites.
29.1.1	Now, if the Sadodhaviridhana-s are burnt, then the entire sacrifice of the gods may be performed either with or without covering. One should first take the Vasatavari-s, this is the opinion of Vadhulaka.
29.1.2	Now, the others in order.
29.1.3	Now if all the bones are broken, then taking as much as is needed of the excrement, mixing it with the Vasantīvarī, and pouring it out, one should proceed. There, one should offer an expiation with one (oblation).
29.1.4	If there is destruction of the Agnihotra, one should offer with the Agnihotra verse, "Agni is the head of heaven."
29.1.5	In the Agnihotra-place with the Vaishnavya (verse), "O Vishnu, thou art our last refuge."
29.1.6	In the ladle with the Agnieyya (verse), "This Agni is a thousandfold."
29.1.7	In the Vayu-offerings with the Vayuvyaya (verse), "Vayu, a hundred of the tawny ones."
29.1.8	In the seat with the Indriya (verse), "Indra, all have increased."
29.1.9	In the eastern part with the Vaishvadeya (verse), "All the gods hear this call of mine."
29.1.10	He should offer all the oblations of the Miṇḍa and the Vyāhṛtis.
29.1.11	If a house is burnt down, one should perform the Veshti rite. If there is destruction of everything, one should perform it with the Tantumatī rite.
29.1.12	If the Soma plants are burnt or lost, or if there is a loss or removal of the Soma plants, one should take the Soma plants as available, mix them with the Vasatīvarī waters, and proceed with the Abhiṣutya rite.
29.1.13	One should perform the Sarva-vinasha rite with medicinal herbs.
29.1.14	The text says, "Having done this, one should again perform the sacrifice."
29.1.15	One should do it in this way.
29.1.16	This is the expiation.
29.2.1	If the Maitrāvaruṇa of the Hotrakas recites the Yajya and Puronuvākyā verses for each other, or if another recites them, then this is the expiation for that.
29.2.2	The Adhvaryu, having recited the first verse of the Brāhmaṇas, should offer to the Hotṛ, with the second to the Maitrāvaruṇa, with the third to the Brāhmaṇa-cchaṃsin, with the fourth to the Potṛ, with the fifth to the Neṣṭṛ, with the sixth to the Ācchāvāka, and with the seventh to the Agnīdhra. The Adhvaryū should recite the verse in the Yoni without reciting the principal deity.
29.2.3-6	If one were to offer a spoonful of oblation with the verse, "Whatever the gods have transgressed," one should perform the expiation mentioned earlier with the eighth and ninth verses of the Dashatmaka (hymn). In the Ukthya series, one should offer in the proper order with the tenth verse, and for the Sandhya of Rathantara, one should offer with the verses of the Shipiviṣṭa Stotra at the Vājapeya.
29.2.7	Thus, in the case of additional hymns, if someone else were to offer as prescribed, the first one should offer or recite himself. If directed, he should offer himself alone. The second one should offer alone. The expiation would be thus. In the case of Soma, one should do it thus elsewhere. The Hotṛ should offer with another. The Maitrāvaruṇa should perform the prescribed expiation as mentioned earlier.
29.2.8	If the Yajus and Puronuvakya are recited in a different manner, there will be an expiation.
29.2.9	Now, in the Agnihotra offerings of the horse sacrifice, if there is a deficiency, excess, repetition, or interruption in the oblations of the wild animals, one should offer oblations of the Miṇḍa.
29.2.10	Similarly, in the construction of the bricks.
29.2.11	If one were to offer the oblations of the Devas with a different seed and a different deity, one should discard it and offer it again after producing it anew.
29.2.12	One should offer or recite what remains.
29.2.13	One should perform the expiation mentioned earlier.
29.3.1	Now we shall explain the expiations in the case of a Yajna rite that has been spread out.
29.3.2	If any of these things, viz., the medicine, milk, animal, Soma, and clarified butter, are deficient, lost, or stolen, one should take them again after producing them.
29.3.3	If one remembers before the Sviṣṭakṛt offering, it is produced.
29.3.4	If one recalls after the Sviṣțakṛt offering has been made, one should stop there and offer again with this alone, or offer together.
29.3.5	If he remembers another deity while offering, then having divided it for him, having touched it, he should offer everything with the formula, "For him svāhā."
29.3.6	If he remembers it at the place where he remembers it, then he should do it in the same way, because of the injunction.
29.3.7	If he remembers after having approached, he should offer in the places of Anvāyāta. Or he should perform another earlier expiation. If the desired deities are lost or corrupted in the defective treatise, he should repeat the principal one. All the Iṣṭis are entirely performed.
29.3.8	What is the beginning of his rite?
29.3.9	Having performed the rites beginning with the offering of the sacrificial ladle and having offered the oblations, one should proceed to one's own place.
29.3.10	In that case, one should offer oblations of sesame seeds and recite the Vyāhṛtis. Thus, in the case of an animal, one should perform the prescribed expiation rites beginning with the consecration and ending with the Sviṣṭakṛt offering.
29.3.11	Now if the morning recitation is not recited before sunrise, what is the atonement?
29.3.12	Oṣāḥ, with the banner, may the gods enjoy the sacrifice, united with the gods.
29.3.13	Having offered the oblations of "Oṃ" and the Vyāhṛtis, one should recite.
29.3.14	If the sun rises while the morning hymn is being recited, one should offer spoonfuls of oblations with the verses, "We have risen above the darkness, we have risen above the gloom."
29.3.15	If the Soma is not in the vessel, one should offer two spoonfuls of oblation with the verses, "The new one becomes new, being born, which the Adityas nourish with their rays."
29.3.16	If there is an eclipse of the sun and moon, this alone is to be done.
29.4.1	If one is about to seize the planets and seizes them in the womb without taking the deity as a partner, one should offer everything at that very moment, saying, "For him, svāhā."
29.4.2	Having again taken the deity as a partne
29.4.3	Or, one may offer to all the Grahas with one oblation. The defects mentioned in the section on the offering of oblations may occur in the case of the Grahas or in the case of cups.
29.4.4	Having taken the water, he should offer the expiatory oblation. Then, having taken it again, he should offer it in the cups. Having taken it again and offered it, he should offer in the same vessel, having concealed the gold in it, and then taking the water, he may eat.
29.4.5	That itself is the expiation.
29.4.6	If the time for the Soma-pressing should pass, one should offer with the first Gāyatrī verse of this Anuvāka at the morning pressing.
29.4.7	Similarly with the Tristubh verse at the midday pressing.
29.4.8	Similarly, with the Jagatī verse at the third pressing.
29.4.9	If one does not reach the subsequent days of the Atiratra,
29.4.10	if one reaches, there is a break in the sacrifice.
29.4.11-15	There, as an atonement, one should offer oblations to all the Hotr priests. It is known that Brahma is the four Hotr priests. Therefore, one should offer to the four Hotr alone. Beyond that, one should not count the number of days in the Ekāha (rituals). Now, the atonement for the Savanīya (rituals). If there is a putrid smell, one should discard it, produce it again, and proceed.
29.4.16	If it is not so, then he should wash it with hot water, pour ghee over it, and cook it again.
29.4.17	If it still smells bad, then he should discard it and prepare it again.
29.4.18	Similarly, for the Savanīya oblations.
29.4.19	Similarly, the Sānnāyya oblations.
29.4.20	If he were to omit a Stotra, a Sastra or a Pratigara, he should offer the Mindahuti and then resume.
29.4.21	If he were to omit one Stotriya verse, one Sukta or one Ardhasukta or a Pratigāra, he should offer Mindahuti and recite.
29.4.22	From the beginning of the Stotra-recitation till the offering, he should restrain his speech.
29.4.23	If he should emit speech, he should recite the Vedic verse dedicated to Vishnu.
29.4.24	If he should emit speech after being called, he should recite a Vedic verse dedicated to Viṣṇu, "O Viṣṇu! You are our last refuge."
29.4.25	He should again be called and offered sacrifice.
29.4.26	In cases of deficiency, excess, repetition, contradiction, or other such cases, one should offer oblations of clarified butter as atonement.
29.4.27	In all places, the oblation to Mindahuti is the body of the sacrifice, so says the Veda.
29.4.28	Therefore, it is praised by all teachers.
29.5.1	Now, if the Soma offerings are mixed together, one should remove embers from the Ahavaniya towards the north and offer on them, because Indra and Agni are the guardians of the sacrifice and the conscious one.
29.5.2	May the offered and the unoffered be satisfied, and the offered and the not-offered.
29.5.3	And the offered and the offered and not-offered. And the offered and the non-offered.
29.5.4	Indra and Agni drink this Soma, offered and unoffered, and may they enjoy it. Svāhā.
29.5.5	May the sacrificer not be deprived of his share, and may the priests not be deprived of their share, and may these creatures.
29.5.6	"Let him not drink this Soma, which has been mixed with both."
29.5.7	If the cups offered in other rites are mixed with those offered in the Soma rite, one should take Soma from the Soma (cups) and offer it in the other rites. This is the only way.
29.5.8	Now if the priests who are occupied with one rite were to be united with those occupied with another rite, or if the initiated were to be united among themselves, except at the Vratyasthima sacrifice and the Sattra, it would be the same.
29.5.9	If the Soma-juice were to increase, then having offered two spoonfuls of clarified butter with the formulas, "He desires this place for himself" and "He desires this for himself", one should follow the regular consumption of it. "Indra has come to Indra, Indra has drunk Indra's drink."
29.5.10	"I partake of that Indra-drunk Soma, which is sweet and invited, as invited."
29.5.11	If the sacrificer dies while the Soma is being pressed, he should be afraid. Having placed all the oblations in the vessel, he should offer the Soma in the Dronakalaśa, the ghee in the Juhu, and the animal in another vessel. He should offer a single oblation, saying: "Those gods to whom this share belongs, to whom the Prayājas and Anūyājas are offered."
29.5.12	Having offered the oblation to Indra, Jyeṣṭha, Varuna, Rājas, Agnihotras, and Devas, one should then proceed with the rites pertaining to the ancestors. Or one may offer again for protection.
29.5.13	When one is old and unable to perform the Agnihotra rites, there is a rite of transferring the fire to oneself.
29.5.14	When the fires are mounted on the self, one should not eat, drink, sleep on a bed, bathe in water, or engage in sexual intercourse. One should eat, drink, and sleep on a bed as one wishes. One should not bathe in water or engage in sexual activity.
29.5.15	Having washed his feet and hands, having sipped water, having sat facing the east, having taken the vow as much as is required by the Agnihotra-yajus, he should remain silent and take the vow again, meditating on Prajapati in his mind.
29.5.16	Thus one should worship, for the release of prosperity.
29.6.1	Then it is said:
29.6.2	Just as a son born dies, so does the fire that has been kindled die.
29.6.3	If one were to make it out of wood, one would cut off one's own lineage and generate enmity for oneself.
29.6.4	It should be made again.
29.6.5	It is generated from its own womb.
29.6.6	It does not generate enmity for oneself," says the Brahmana.
29.6.7	If the fire-pan falls into water, it should be smeared with a lump of cow-dung and then put back. Then it should be offered oblations and then offered oblations with the ladle. "Then he offers oblations with the following mantras: "May the fire-pan be in heaven, may the fire-pan not fall into water, may the fire be in heaven, svāhā. May the fire-pan go to heaven, may the sun be in heaven, swāhā. May Agni be in heaven, Agni be in heaven. May the fire be in the heaven, svāha."
29.6.8	With the two verses, "With the Arka-kindling woods, he lays down the Arka-kindlers; Arka is the purifier, the purifier is Arka, the remover of dust" (he lays down).
29.6.9	One should perform the rites beginning with the Muñja-grass-garland.
29.6.10	Now it is said:
29.6.11	"He who has a fire-pit, but no fire, is seized by darkness."
29.6.12	Darkness is death.
29.6.13	Krishna cloth, Krishna cow, as Dakshina.
29.6.14	He gives Krishna cloth, Krishna Cow, and gold weighing a hundred.
29.6.15	He removes death with darkness itself.
29.6.16	And gold is indeed brilliance.
29.6.17	He places brilliance in himself. Thus is the Brahmana.
29.6.18	Now if a couch, a basket, or a house were to be burnt, one should place the kindling woods with the verses addressed to Vaisvānara, with the verse, "Vaisvānara has come." With this verse consisting of eight syllables.
29.6.19	Now if the pot for the Soma-juice, the pot for rinsing the mouth, the pots for drinking, the bricks for the cauldron, the bricks for boiling, the sacrificial post, the rope, the ladle, the pot for the ladle, the ladle, or the pot for the Drona-measure were to be broken, or if any wooden or earthen vessel were to be broken at the sacrifice, then he should place it in its own place, and consecrate it with its own formula, saying, "May the earth, the life, the progeny, the cattle, not be broken for me."
29.6.20	If he were to strike a wooden vessel into the Ahavaniya fire, then if a clay one, he should pour water over it. The earth has gone to the earth, the mother has gone to the mother.
29.6.21	May we be with sons and cattle, he who hates us may be split.
29.7.1	Now we shall explain the worldly procedure of Agnihotra.
29.7.2	Formerly, they used to kindle the fires from the Garhapatya fire and the kindling woods, saying, "This is your natural place."
29.7.3	Having placed the kindling woods within the altar, one should offer in the worldly fire.
29.7.4	In the evening, one takes out the oblation, having offered the evening oblation, in the morning, one takes out, having offered the morning oblation, it is known.
29.7.5	Now the Agnihotra is omitted by four, namely, Homa, Upasthāna, Vrata and Darsha-Pūrnamāsa.
29.7.6	Having performed the Tantumati Iṣṭi, one should offer the Darsha-Pūrnmāsa sacrifices.
29.7.7	The expiation for the discontinuation of the Agnihotra is completed.
29.8.1	Now the summary of the Agnihotras in case of an emergency.
29.8.2	As for example, the confusion of the country, sickness, travelling, residence in the house of a preceptor, unavailability of place, time and materials, and other such things.
29.8.3	What is the beginning of his action?
29.8.4	One may do it in the morning, afternoon or at the time of Agnihotra, or as per the sutra.
29.8.5	Or as per the well-known practice of the sacrificer.
29.8.6-9	The Prāyascitti rite is prescribed for the one who has omitted the Agnihotra rite. The one who has omitted it should take fourteen handfuls of grass in the evening and fifteen in the morning, on the day of the new moon or the day of the full moon. All the rites beginning with the Samit are well-known. Having established the mantras as one, one should offer the Agnihotra rites in the evening and offer the Agnihotra offerings in the morning. The beginning is in the evening and the conclusion is in the morning.
29.8.10	One should not worship at the Parvan (new moon) time.
29.8.11	One should not combine the two (new and full moon) sacrifices, nor should one perform them in a hurry, nor for one who does not have faith.
29.8.12	But they also say:
29.8.13	"Lack of faith is the greatest sin, for ignorance is said to be sin."
29.8.14	"Due to ignorance, Dharma is lost, and one who has lost Dharma is said to be inferior."
29.8.15	Faith purifies the mind, faith purifies the intellect.
29.8.16	Brahma is attained by faith, faith destroys sin.
29.8.17	Therefore, one should worship Tantumati with faith, without distraction, at the right time.
29.8.18	Thus, the worldly practice is like this, the offering is like this, and in the case of transgression of the injunctions.
29.8.19	But they also say, "One should not extinguish the sacrificial fires without reason, nor in times of distress."
29.8.20	"He who removes the fire is indeed the destroyer of the gods."
29.8.21	Therefore, for one who has faith and is not biased, it is also applicable in other cases.
29.8.22	Those who are light and are observed in various places,
29.8.23	One should perform the rites with them, making it consistent with justice.
29.8.24	One who follows another scripture when his own scripture exists,
29.8.25	The person who disregards his own scriptures is equal to a person who commits abortion.
29.8.26	The sections of the scriptures of the Arsha are equal to those qualities.
29.8.27	For the purpose of examining the rites, one should perform them in times of distress.
29.9.1	As it is said, “He goes away for an unlimited time, but not for more than a year,” and there is no distinction between the husband and wife, therefore it is said that the husband and wife should be present.
29.9.2	It is also known that the wife is half of one’s self.
29.9.3	If the sacrificer goes away, then if the wife goes away for some reason, the Adhvaryu should offer the Vastospatya oblation and then deposit (the fire) with the verse, "This is your natural seat."
29.9.4	One should take it to the place where he goes.
29.9.5	Having reached there, having kindled the fire, having made a dwelling place, having melted ghee in the Garhapatya fire, having purified it, having taken four spoonfuls in the ladle, he offers a continuous oblation in the Ahavaniya fire: "May the mind and light enjoy the ghee. May he join this interrupted sacrifice."
29.9.6	Those who are desired, the dawn and the twilight, I unite them with oblation and ghee. Svāhā.
29.9.7	Then he offers a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Tantumata.
29.9.8	He gives a horn as Dakṣiṇā.
29.9.9	The Iṣṭi is concluded as prescribed.
29.9.10	Now if the sacrificer and his wife both go out, then the Agnihotra is lost. He should perform the Agnihotra in the manner prescribed.
29.9.11	Those who carry the fires should not breathe. If they breathe, the fires would become worldly.
29.9.12	When the fires are not yet set up, one should not honour the Śamya and Prāsa rites, because of the Sattr-rite being shown.
29.10.1	Now it is said:
29.10.2	"He who, having set up the fires, undertakes the vow, he fulfills all desires in the fire. If one were to go without performing the sacrifice,
29.10.3	When he is about to depart without having performed the Agnihotra, he should offer the clarified butter of the Garhapatya, having melted it and purified it, taking four spoonfuls in the ladle and offering it on the Ahavaniya, while the sacrificer is engaged, with the verse, "To thee, O Angiras, they belong."
29.10.4	When one who has installed the fires undertakes a vow, if he happens to go away, this has been explained before.
29.10.5	If the fire of one who has not laid down the sacred fires goes out, one should put it out with a piece of wood as long as a span. If it goes out before that, one should collect it, saying, "This one is one, and that one is one."
29.10.6	Having collected it, one should strike it at the time of the Agnihotra or at other times.
29.10.7	If it goes out again, one should follow it, saying, "It is mine."
29.10.8	He should go to the place where he is to be found and there they should settle him.
29.10.9	The milk of the plants enters the animals of one whose calves have been removed from the oblation and are suckling.
29.10.10	If he milks them, he would offer with a worn-out oblation.
29.10.11	If he does not milk them, he would obstruct the sacrifice.
29.10.12	One should offer a barley-gruel to Vayu.
29.10.13	Then having milked these (cows) and having brought it to that (place), having cooked rice etc. in it, one should proceed further.
29.10.14	Then if the evening milk offering becomes spoiled, one should offer rice to Indra and observe fast.
29.10.15	Having performed the rite up to the offering, one should perform the rite with the Agniya offering on the next day and then with the Indraya offering.
29.10.16	One should prepare the place for cooking.
29.10.17	Now, if both the oblations are afflicted, one should offer a cake on five potsherds to Indra.
29.10.18	One should offer it either according to the prescribed method or in a potsherd.
29.10.19	One should make the offering according to the prescribed procedure. Those who say that the potsherd is for the purpose of measuring the quantity of the oblation.
29.10.20	And one should make the offering in four vessels.
29.10.21	Here one should make the oblation in the vessel itself and perform the Sāmnāyya rite.
29.10.22-25	If his wife is not menstruating on the day of the vow, one should perform the sacrifice after keeping her aside. One should perform the sacrifice only after keeping her aside.
29.11.1	Now if in the consecration, the Upasads, or in other days of the sacrifice, as in the three-day sacrifice, the blood has been spilled, then having said, "Wash with warm water mixed with cow's urine," and having washed it, one purifies with a bundle of Darbha grass.
29.11.2	It is known that Darbha grass is water, for one becomes bathed with it.
29.11.3	It is known that this is the colour of Brahmahatya (sin of killing a Brahmin).
29.11.4	Therefore, one should not examine the oblation or touch it.
29.11.5	After ten days of the delivery, having performed the prescribed purification, one should engage the wife in rituals.
29.11.6	That ritual should be performed by the son or a student.
29.11.7	The sacrificer should recite that mantra.
29.11.8-11	If the wife is not skilled, then he should do it in this way. If there is no milk in the evening or midday meal, then he should mix some milk with water and offer it. He should not bring any other milk and offer it. The same expiation applies.
29.11.12	If one becomes a non-eater before the Soma-sacrifice is commenced, one does not offer the Agnihotra.
29.11.13	If one becomes a non eater after the initiation ceremony on the third day, then it is accomplished from that time onwards.
29.11.14	If one does not eat before the Vrata-milk, one should eat sacrificial food for three days.
29.11.15	If the milk is offered in the vow, then one should offer the oblation in water.
29.11.16	If the cow's urine etc. is ready after three days, then onwards.
29.11.17	If there is a mishap before the Pravargya rite, one should not perform it. Having performed the purification as prescribed, starting with the oblation, the cow's_urine etc. is ready from then onwards.
29.11.18	If the oblation is not ready when the time comes, then the oblation should be kept ready for three days and then the oblation prepared with cow's urine etc. should be used.
29.11.19-20	Then, having been initiated, he should restrain his speech, as also the sacrificer and his wife. From the time of the announcement, he becomes one who restrains his speech, beginning with one breast, until the Ahalyā. Having performed the Avabhṛtha rite, they perform the Avabhṛth rite on the third day after the completion of the Soma rites.
29.11.21	On other days, he should sit in the wife's room.
29.11.22	One should not go to the front of the house.
29.12.1	Now we shall explain the summary of expiations.
29.12.2	In all cases where it is not prescribed, one should offer the oblations with the words "O mind, O mind, O mind" and "Hotr, Hotr". In all cases of not observing vows, one should offer oblations with the word "O mind, o mind" and "Pitryajna, Pitryajna". If the Pitryajna is omitted, one should offer seven oblations.
29.12.3	If all the fires of the Agni-adhyaya are to be transferred to another place, then having offered a spoonful of oblation with the verse, "May the Adityas, Rudras and Vasus kindle again", one should perform the domestic rites in the ordinary fire, if half of the fires remain.
29.12.4	If the fire of the Brahma-udana is maintained, it should be like the Upaasana.
29.12.5	If the wind blows upwards, one should offer oblations to Jaya and others after the cooking.
29.12.6	If the sun rises before the Garhapatya fire is laid, one should lay it from the time when the sun rises. If the fire is destroyed in the middle, one should do the same.
29.12.7	If one obtains a suitable wife before the Dakshina, one should do this.
29.12.8	From here onwards, in the Agnihotra, Soma, Avabhṛtha and all the animal sacrifices, the wife should offer the oblations.
29.12.9	If the Garhapatya and Ahavaniya fires are extinguished, one should rekindle them. If they are extinguished, one must perform the Agni-installation rite.
29.12.10	Some say that it should be reinstalled.
29.12.11	If the wife goes outside the boundary, then there is re-establishment.
29.12.12	If the fire is lost while the wife is outside the boundary, or if the fire is lost due to the destruction of the kindling wood, then there is fire-installation.
29.12.13	The destruction of the fire due to the destruction is mentioned.
29.12.14	If the fires are carried beyond the boundary of the village or a river, they should be followed by the fires being carried.
29.12.15	If the sacrificer goes away and his wife does not go, there is no expiation here.
29.12.16	If the Anvāhārya-pacaṇī fire goes out, it should be brought from the natural fire or from a separate fire.
29.13.1	If the one-pot offering is reversed, the Adhvaryu should establish it in its own place, saying, "Follow the path of Prajapati."
29.13.2	The sacrificer recites these two verses: "I stand firm in the kingdom, in the country, I grow with all others."
29.13.3	He should offer two oblations with the verses, "May heaven and earth be established. May the offspring be born."
29.13.4	When the sacrifice is concluded, one should perform the Isti to Vaisvānara.
29.13.5	It is known that if one goes east, one conquers the world of gods.
29.13.6	If one goes south, one conquers (the world of) the ancestors.
29.13.7	If one faces west, the Rakshas would destroy the sacrifice.
29.13.8	If one conquers the world of men in the north.
29.13.9	It should be established.
29.13.10	If there is a Soma sacrifice or an animal sacrifice, and it is lost, one should offer to Vaisvānara and then offer again.
29.13.11	If the entire day of the Soma sacrifice is lost, one who has begun should cut off and complete before sitting down and then offer again.
29.13.12	One who is consecrated with Soma should not give, offer, cook, or recite.
29.13.13	They say that one should distribute it right at the beginning.
29.13.14	One who is observing a vow should not bathe, enter the water, discard one's clothes, or wash away dust.
29.13.15	Everywhere, the ritualists and the sacrificer are instructed in the vow until the end of the rite. The ritualists do not have the ritual duties elsewhere except for the great ritualists. There is no summary of all the ritual duties of the sacrificer except for the Sattra.
29.13.16	In all Soma sacrifices, in the case of the transgression of the time of Soma-drinking, in the case where the Soma is mixed with the contrary substances, in the case when the Soma is mixed in a haphazard manner, and in other unknown and known defects, one should offer all the expiations with the ladle of the Soma vessel before the Samitsya-yajus.
29.13.17	Some say, "Jayan."
29.13.18	Some say, “Abhyanan.”
29.13.19	Some say, "Rastrabhrit.”
29.13.20	Some say, "Obeisance to the ministers."
29.13.21	Some say, "O Obeisance to the Vedas."
29.13.22	Some say "Obeisance unto the Sun."
29.13.23	Some say,"Obeisance to Tani."
29.13.24	Some say ,"Obeisance to Hotr."
29.13.25	Some say , "Obeisance of the ten-fold self."
29.13.26	Some say ,'Obeisance to Purshi."
29.13.27	Some say,'Obeisance to Vishnu."
29.13.28	Some say 'Obeisance to Mahavyahritis."
29.13.29	Some say'Obeisance to Vyahritis.
29.13.30	Some say, "Prajapati."
29.13.31	Some say, "Pranava."
29.13.32	The teacher says, "All." The teacher says, "all."
