1.1.1	We shall explain the Darśa-Pūrṇamāsa sacrifices.
1.1.2	One who is going to perform the New-Moon sacrifice or the Full-Moon sacrifice should have the milk for the oblation milked on the previous day, either from one or two cows.
1.1.3	Or, having had the milk milked in a hidden place for two or three days before, he anoints it with hidden curd.
1.1.4	They are milked continuously without interruption from the day of fasting.
1.1.5	One should observe the full-moon day when the moon is full.
1.1.6	Or, one should observe it on the day after the moon is full."
1.1.7	One should observe the new-moon day when there is no moon.
1.1.8	Or, on the day after there is no moon."
1.1.9	Here is the extreme point: Whatever rites are prescribed for the full-moon or new-moon days, they are performed on both occasions.
1.1.10	One should wear the sacred thread over the right shoulder for divine rites.
1.1.11	One should wear it over the left shoulder for rites to the ancestors.
1.1.12	One should perform divine rites facing east or north, clockwise.
1.1.13	One should do rites to the ancestors facing west or south, counterclockwise.
1.1.14	One should not turn away from one's dwelling.
1.1.15	One should neither cover oneself with a ritual object nor cover another with it.
1.1.16	One should approach from the north.
1.1.17	If the Adhvaryu were to say, "Offer anywhere," he should offer in the Ahavaniya fire with ghee.
1.1.18	If the Adhvarya were to say, "Do it!" without being instructed, the Agnidhra should be the second to do it.
1.1.19	If the Yajamana were to say, "Stand anywhere and recite the mantra," he should do it."
1.1.20	The rites are performed with one mantra.
1.1.21	The mantras prescribed at the beginning are used.
1.2.1	The beginning is in the north and the end is in the east.
1.2.2	One should perform the rites with the end of the mantra.
1.2.3	If the mantra is short, one should recite the mantra at the beginning of the rite.
1.2.4	If there is an injunction like "one offers oblations twice, one offers oblations five times," then one should offer oblations separately for each mantra.
1.2.5	Now, if one were to repeat a rite in the course of a sacrificial act, the mantra should not be repeated.
1.2.6	One should offer all oblations while burning.
1.2.7	One is about to undertake a vow, he goes to a branch.
1.2.8	A Palāśa branch or a Śamī branch.
1.2.9	The one that is east and west, the east or the west, having many leaves, many branches, and fresh tips, he cuts it, saying, "For Tisha (the constellation)."
1.2.10	He bends it down, saying, "for Urja (the constellation)," and then anoints it.
1.2.11	Then he brings it, saying, "I am bringing this east and west, endowed with nourishment and energy, having many leaves and fresh tips, for the protection of cattle.
1.2.12	With that he removes six and a half calves. "O Vāyu, be here! O Vāyu, stay here!"
1.2.13	For barley-fed calves, one should collect milk in a pot, which should be the measure of six and a half parārdhas.
1.2.14	One touches the branches.
1.2.15	The same (cow) is sent forth. "May Savitr, the god, direct you to the best act. Be ye nourished for the sacrifice to Indra, the divine portion."
1.2.16	If one is sacrificing to Mahendra, one says, "To Mahendra."
1.2.17	One touches the branch with one hand.
1.2.18	When setting out, one recites the mantra: "May the pure waters, flowing well, be drunk by you. Indra's hundred autumns of milking, may Rudra's curse surround you."
1.2.19	If one is offering to Mahendra, one says "to Mahendra."
1.3.1	"May the cows be steady in this protector," and then recites, "May there be many," turning towards the sacrificer's house.
1.3.2	He places a branch facing west in the fire-chamber or in front of the fire-chamber, saying, "Protect the animals of the sacrificer."
1.3.3	Some say, "Facing east in the rear."
1.3.4	Or, the one who knows the Adhvaryu's house becomes a householder. One should examine from the fourth rite onwards, thinking, "I will do this, I will do that." These are the Adhvaryus' houses. It is known that one who knows this becomes a householder.
1.3.5	He recites over the ladle for taking up the oblation, "Thou art the sound of sacrifice."
1.3.6	He recites over the kindling wood, "The Rakshas is repelled, the evil spirits are repelled."
1.3.7	He goes to the east or north, and brings the darbha-grass from any direction.
1.3.8	He releases the first stump, saying, "Thou art the mound of Vishnu."
1.3.9	He encloses the second one, saying, "Enclosed by the gods, thou art the one that grows with the rain."
1.3.10	He releases two or three of its (i.e. the animal's) intestines, the remaining part is the share of the cows.
1.3.11	He begins the grass-bed with the formula, "For thee in the impulse of god Savitr, with the arms of Asvins, with the hands of Pusan, I begin the grass-bed, the abode of gods."
1.3.12	He gives it at the joint with the formula, "May the grass-bed of gods not injure thee. May I not injure thee transversely. May I injure thee at the joint. May I not be injured by thee."
1.3.13	He releases the fist with the nails.
1.3.14	It becomes a ladle.
1.3.15	Some say it is the size of a thumb.
1.3.16	Some say the size of a bone.
1.3.17	Some say, the size of a ladle.
1.3.18	Others say, it is unlimited.
1.3.19	In the same way, he releases the fist with nails.
1.3.20	Whatever is left out of the scraping and pouring, he does all that.
1.3.21	Some say that the Prastara is appropriate, others say it is inappropriate.
1.3.22	Some say that the Prastāra is appropriate, others that it is inappropriate. The Prastāra is the appropriate one.
1.4.1	"The divine grass, growing with a hundred shoots, may we grow." He touches the Alavana grass.
1.4.2	"May we grow with a thousand shoots." He touches himself.
1.4.3	Then he collects it with the formula, "Protect me from the earth. I collect thee well-collected."
1.4.4	From the same (grass) he makes the sacrificial grass, either of three or five strands.
1.4.5	He encloses the sacrificial grass with the formula, “Thou art the womb of the Ayus."
1.4.6	He places it with the formula "Thou art the crest of Aditi."
1.4.7	There, this is the extreme point, where the nails do not touch each other, one should encircle them clockwise.
1.4.8	Then, where they touch each other, having encircled the quality of them counterclockwise, one should enjoin them clockwise.
1.4.9	Having placed the nail with the tip facing upwards, one places the sacrificial grass with the tip facing east on it.
1.4.10	The womb is not torn apart. He places the Prāstara on the highest layer of the fire-altar.
1.4.11	Then he binds it with the formula, "For Indra-Indrani, the binding."
1.4.12	He makes a knot with the formula, “May Pusan make a knot for you.”
1.4.13	He covers it from behind with the formula, "May it stand for you."
1.4.14	Some (cover it) from the front with the formula, 'May it stand for us.'
1.4.15	Then he begins it with the verse, "The waters have begun thee, the Asvins have begun thee, seven sages have begun thee. I begin the banner of the dawn with the rays of the sun."
1.4.16	"With the arms of Indra, I have taken thee."
1.4.17	He places it on the head with the verse, “I take thee with the head of Brihaspati.”
1.4.18	He brings it with the verse,"Follow the broad sky.
1.4.19	He places the enclosing sticks on the ground near the Ahavaniya fire, saying, "I place you on the lap of Aditi."
1.4.20	He recites the formula, "You are going to the gods," over the one that is near.
1.4.21	He places it as if it were known.
1.5.1	The plants that were born three ages ago for the gods, their season is now. I bring the covering of grass, the pure water, the sacrificial, the divine, and auspicious for me. May you not cut me off. May I live a hundred autumns. Of the unlimited, the limited are bound for good deeds. May it not harm me. Whatever I have done, may it not rise up against me. May there be many. This is the placing of the covering of grass. The cutting is the binding.
1.5.2	He makes the sacrificial grass of twenty-one (blades). It is of Palasha or Khadira wood.
1.5.3	Some say that he binds the sacrificial grass of eighteen (blades).
1.5.4	There are fifteen blades of sacrificial grass for the Samidheni verses.
1.5.5	There are three enclosing sticks.
1.5.6	They are of Palasha or of Karshmarya wood, dry or moist, with leaves.
1.5.7	Then it is known as Khadira, Baibha, Audumbara, Vaikankata, Rauhita.
1.5.8	The longest, the middle, the shortest, the longest, the southernmost, the shortest, and the northernmost.
1.5.9	Two are the Samidhs of the Ahara.
1.5.10	One is the Anuyaja Samid, the twenty-first.
1.5.11	He makes a fire-stick of the Darbha grass, with or without roots, in the same way.
1.5.12	He collects fuel on it.
1.5.13	When Krishna entered the trees, assuming that form, then I collect you in twenty-one ways, well-collected. I collect the three enclosing sticks, the three kindling sticks, the life of the sacrifice, the garments, the ladle, and the courage, well-collected." Thus he equips himself.
1.5.14	Krishna is the best of all, O God, do thou go before, and bind the knot in front, looking towards the east.
1.5.15	Having thus placed it below, he puts on it the well-known pieces of wood and grass.
1.6.1	On the next day, having taken up the sacrificial grass and wood, one should perform the Full-moon sacrifice.
1.6.2	On the previous day itself, one should perform it on the New-moon day.
1.6.3	The other is that one may do as one pleases on the full moon day.
1.6.4	He makes a Veda of Darbha grass, saying, "You are the Veda by which you know the gods, and by which the Veda came to be for the gods, may that Veda be for me."
1.6.5	The one with the calf-like neck is for one desiring cattle, the one with the tail for one desiring food, the one with three layers for one desiring Brahmic lustre, and the one with three-layered head is said to be for one desiring Brahmac lustre.
1.6.6	Some say that the two former Kalpas are like the eternal one.
1.6.7	Then he places him in a space of a cubit.
1.6.8	Some say that it is from a piece of gold the size of a cubit
1.6.9	Having placed the known ends of the Vedas, he cuts a piece of Palasha wood from the branch with which he drives away the calves, inside the altar.
1.6.10	Having wrapped the root of the grass, he makes the grass-cover. He says, "Thou art the grass-cover; I have placed thee for the sacrifice. Making the oblation for Indra, thou art auspicious and bright."
1.6.11	Then he makes a filter of Darbha grass, the size of a span, saying, "Thou art a three-fold filter of the Vasus, thou art a hundred-streamed filter of the Vasu, thou art a thousand-streamed filter."
1.6.12	The root of the grass is placed at the root, the tip at the tip, and no knot is made.
1.6.13	The sacrificer recites while the grass is being made: "The three-leaved Palasha grass, as big as the palm, is the purifying grass at the sacrifice, the best purifier. May it make the oblation of milk for me."
1.6.14	They collect the grass and smear the fire chambers and the shrines.
1.6.15	The vessel of rice-gruel and the vessel of honey are smeared with cow-dung.
1.6.16	The sacrificer and his wife adorn themselves.
1.7.1	On the new-moon day, they perform the Piṇḍapitryajña under a tree in the sun.
1.7.2	Having spread the Darbha grass with their tips towards the south and east, having washed the vessels for the Pindapitryajna one by one, he places them - the wooden sword, the ladle, the vessel for keeping clarified butter, the strainer, the black antelope skin, the mortar, the pestle, the winnowing basket, and whatever else he may need.
1.7.3	The Adhvaryu, wearing the sacrificial cord over the right shoulder, pours the oblation into the vessel from the cart, using the single strainer.
1.7.4	Having filled it, he smears it.
1.7.5	Having placed the black antelope skin and the mortar, the wife stands facing east and strikes the pestle with the pestle.
1.7.6	He grinds it once.
1.7.7	Having roasted the rice-grains with the tips pointing to the south, he pours over them ghee which has been boiled or ghee which has not been boiled.
1.7.8	Having taken out the Vedi towards the south-east or towards the north-west, he sprinkles it with water and covers it with a single piece of grass. He says, "The grass is cut once, soft and tender, I am offering it to the Fathers. May my Fathers, the Pitrs, the grandfathers and the great-grandfathers, along with their followers, be seated on it."
1.7.9	Having placed this cooked rice on it, having placed to the right side the cakes, the grass, the besmearing, and the anointing, one by one,
1.8.1	The Adhvaryu, wearing the sacrificial thread, having bent the right knee, having taken up the cooked rice with the ladle, having poured over it, offers with the formula, "To Soma, drunk by the Pitrs, svadha, salutations." This is the first (offering).
1.8.2	The second one is offered with the formula, "Salutations to Yama, the son of Angiras, the father, to Svāhā."
1.8.3	The third one is offered with "Salutations to Agni, the carrier of oblations, to Svishtakrit, to Svāha."
1.8.4	He places the ladle silently.
1.8.5	He places the single-wick lamp of the southern fire, saying, "Those who, being Asuras, are releasing their forms, and are moving according to their own nature, and are taking away the cities of others and their own, may Agni drive them away from these worlds and from us."
1.8.6	The sacrificer, having placed his left knee on the ground and facing east, places three handfuls of water in a single vessel, saying, "May this one sprinkle your father." "May this one sprinkles your grandfather." "May this sprinkle your great-grandfather."
1.8.7	Here only, the one who has lowered his right hand, places three balls for the deceased, for those who follow him, and for those who will follow him.
1.8.8	If there are two deceased persons, he should give balls separately for each.
1.8.9	One can also observe two deceased persons in each ball.
1.8.10	If the father of the living is alive, he should give to the grandfather and great-grandfather.
1.8.11	Some say that one should not give to the living.
1.8.12	One should perform only the Homa.
1.9.1	If the names of the relatives are not known, then he should offer the first ball with the words, "Svāhā to the Pitrs who are seated on the earth." The second ball with the words "Svāhā, to the Pitrs seated in the sky." The third ball with the words “Svāhā,to the Pitrs seatedin heaven."
1.9.2	Placing the fourth ball silently, and saying "O Pitrs, may you distribute according to your share," he turns away.
1.9.3	He offers the Hotṛ-cup after the Hotṛ-oblation has been offered.
1.9.4	He turns back from the Hotṛ- oblation and turns towards the Avīra-oblation or the Avīra oblation itself.
1.9.5	Having turned back, he smells the remnant in the vessel, saying, "Make me a hero, O Fathers."
1.9.6	One who is sick should eat food, but one who is not sick should not eat food.
1.9.7	Similarly, having brought water in his hands, he gives unguents and anointments, saying "Anoint yourself" three times for each lump.
1.9.8	"These are your garments, O Fathers, from which the Fathers have not deprived us. Having cut off the hair and having placed it down, he says, "The garment is tenfold."
1.9.9	One should cut off the hair for a long life.
1.9.10	Having cut it off, he stands up with salutations, saying, "Salutations to you, O Fathers, for the life-giving. Having gone around them, he says, 'I am the most venerable among them.' With this (verse) he concludes."
1.9.11	Then he makes the Pitrs rise with the verse, "Rise, O Pitrs, ye heroes, ye have followed the path of Yama. Do ye go to the ancient abode. Whatever wealth and good there is with us, do ye proclaim it to us, to the deities who have a share."
1.9.12	He makes the Pitrs flow with the verse, "O Pitrs, ye are friendly."
1.9.13	He approaches with the three verses, "The mind is indeed the best of us, the mind is the best of us."
1.10.1	He throws the torch, saying, "The messenger has brought us the oblation, O Jātavedas, having made fragrant offerings, he has given them to the fathers. They have eaten them, knowing, O Agni, return again, knowing."
1.10.2	He returns with the Prajapati verse, "To Prajapati."
1.10.3	He stands by the Garhapatya with the Paṅkti verse, "Whatever is the space between earth and heaven."
1.10.4	Having struck once at the fire, sprinkling with water, he brings back the pairs of sacrificial vessels for the Pitryajna.
1.10.5	He should offer water to the ancestors, or feed a brahmin, or strike the fire.
1.10.6	"Those who are equal, of equal mind, the ancestors in Yama's kingdom, to their world, svadha, salutations. May the sacrifice be established among the gods." He strikes the first ball.
1.10.7-9	May the prosperity of those who are born together, of the same mind, of the same life, of the same soul, of the same self, of the same body, of the same lineage, of the same clan, of the same family, of the same name, of the same caste, of the same learning, of the same knowledge, of the same understanding, of the same faith, of the same devotion, of the same affection, of the same love, of the same friendship, of the same companionship, of the same association, of the same company, of the same group, of the same class, of the same kind, of the same nature, of the same character, of the same conduct, of the same behaviour, of the same speech, of the same action, of the same intention, of the same purpose, of the same desire, of the same aspiration, of the same hope, of the same expectation, of the same belief, of the same opinion, of the same view, of the same practice, of the same way, of the same path, of the same goal, of the same destination, of the same destiny
1.10.10	The fathers placed the embryo of the young man, the garland of lotuses, in the womb, as the fathers in this world, having long life, live. Thus the eating is prescribed.
1.10.11	The Piṇḍapitryajña is concluded.
1.10.12	This is prescribed for one who has not set up the fire, except for the setting up of the Garhapatya.
1.10.13	One should bring another in the place of the Garhaptya, says one.
1.10.14	In which he strikes, that one stands up. This is another (view).
1.10.15	Here the word 'Gārhapatya' would be omitted due to the prohibition of modification.
1.11.1	Then he instructs, "Spread, cover the fire, may the covered fire bless the sacrificer, may the juice of water and plants, the golden coins be the wish-yielding cows of the sacrificer, here and in the other world."
1.11.2	Then he strews the fires, the eastern ones first and the western ones later, with darbha-grass with their tips towards the east.
1.11.3	Or they may be with their tips towards north and be placed behind and in front.
1.11.4	The southern side is above and the northern side is below.
1.11.5	He arranges the place for the Brahman and the Yajamana to the south of the Ahavaniya.
1.11.6	The former for the Brahman and latter for the Yajamāna.
1.11.7	The sacrificer himself offers the Agnihotra at the Parvan.
1.11.8	The young boys also drink milk on this night.
1.11.9	Having offered the Agnihotra on this night with barley-gruel, he places the Agnihotra-remnant as the oblation for the Atancan.
1.11.10	Having washed the Saṁnāyya-vessels, he yokes them in pairs.
1.11.11	To the north of the Garhapatya, he places the pot, the milking vessel, the twig-filter, the strainer, the ladle, and the vessel in which he intends to use it.
1.11.12	Having brought the filter across the Agnihotra vessel, he pours water over it three times with the mouth facing north, with the verse, "May god Savitr purify you." He then recites the Gayatri verse backwards.
1.11.13	Then he recites over them, "The divine waters are in the beginning..." and ends with "Having been sprinkled, you are settled."
1.11.14	He sprinkles the sacrificial ladles, which are placed upside down, turning them around.
1.12.1	"Purify yourselves for the divine rite, for the offering to the gods," three times.
1.12.2	Then he bakes them, saying, "The Rakshas is baked, the evil-doer is baked."
1.12.3	Then he waits for the cows to come. They graze, giving honey, bearing offspring, of various forms, of fame. Many are born, coming into being. Here may Indra delight in the cows.
1.12.4	Taking the bell of Aditi, he places the calf on the udder with the words, "Thou art Pusha." Or he places all the calves with the words, “Thou art Pusha.”
1.12.5	Then he says, "Tell me about the one who is afflicted."
1.12.6	He recites the verse, "May I be united with you through prosperity and abundance."
1.12.7	He recitess the verse, "The one who is afflicted, may he be united with you. May you be united with the one who is alive. May you be joined with the one who lives."
1.12.8	Then he orders the village and the cattle to be brought within a month.
1.12.9	They do not go beyond the village while the cattle are being milked.
1.12.10	If it is lost, he should say, "Let there be no loss of the Saṁnāyya."
1.12.11	Taking up the Upavesha (a piece of wood), he places the embers from the Garhapatya towards the north, with the verse, "Thou art Dhriti, thou art Brahma, thou art the bestower of protection."
1.12.12	He places the pot on them, with the verse "O mother, thou art the heat of the sun."
1.12.13	Then he encircles it with the embers, with the verse,"Thou art heated by the penance of the Bhrigus and Angirasas."
1.12.14	Then he places the twig of the branch, with the tip towards the east, saying, "Thou art the purifier of the Vasus, having a hundred streams; thou art the purifier of Vasus, having thousand streams."
1.13.1	Starting from the pot with the twig, he restrains speech.
1.13.2	Holding it, he stands.
1.13.3	He recites the Dhārāghosa verse: "They milk the Utsa, the pot with four openings, the goddess Idā, the sweet-knowing one, the golden one. May Indra and Agni stimulate it for truthfulness. May they establish the sacrificer in immortality."
1.13.4	He recites the Dhūhyamana verse: "The drops are offered, the oblation is offered, the small portion is offered."
1.13.5	Having milked, he carries it.
1.13.6	He asks him, "Indra, do you know the oblation for Indra?" He replies, "I know."
1.13.7	If one is offering to Mahendra, one says, "To Mahendra."
1.13.8	One takes the name of the cow from which the milk of the gods and men is obtained.
1.13.9	One recites the verse, "She is the life of all."
1.13.10	He brings the two pots with the strainer. "The god Savitr purifies you with the strainer of Vasu, with the hundred-streamed, well-purifying one."
1.13.11	When being brought, he recites the verses, "The oblation is offered, the drop is offered."
1.13.12	He milks the second cow in the same way.
1.13.13	He recites the second verse, "She is of universal form," and the third verse, "She has universal work."
1.13.14	When the three cows have been milked, he releases speech. "The oblation for Indra, the lord of many cows, may be increased again. For the calves and men, may it be again fit for milking." He recites this three times.
1.13.15	If one is offering to Mahendra, then one says "to Mahendra".
1.14.1	Having released (the Soma), he comes back silently. Having milked the two pots, he brings the rinsing water, saying, "Be united, O you who are truthful."
1.14.2	Having melted (the butter), he carries it towards the north, as if drawing (it), saying, "Strengthen the cows, strengthen the cow-lord. May the lord of sacrifice not injure you."
1.14.3	Some say, "Towards the east." Some say, "Towards east and north."
1.14.4	Having made the Soma cold, he anoints it with curd, saying, "I anoint thee with Soma for Indra."
1.14.5	Or, "For Mahendra," if one is sacrificing to Mahendra.
1.14.6	He brings the Agnihotra-remnant, saying, "Thou art the continuity of the sacrifice; I anoint thee according to the continuity of the sacrificer."
1.14.7	Āśmarathya says that one should bring curd and then the Agnihotra leftovers. Ālekhaṇa says that one should first bring curd and then Agnihotra leftovers.
1.14.8	If one does not find Agnihotra leftovers, one should sprinkle with rice. If one does not find rice, one should sprinkle it with grass.
1.14.9	"O waters, be awake in the oblations, as ye are awake in the gods. Thus be ye awake in this sacrifice for the sacrificer who is awake." Having brought the water in a vessel of iron or wood, he pours it into the vessel with the verse, "Thou art the ladle; I pour thee for Vishnu, for the sacrifice. With the vessel full of water, those which have been purified, have gone around."
1.15.1	If he were to cover it with a pot made of clay, he should cover it with grass or wood.
1.15.2	Having covered it, he places it below, saying, "O Vishnu, protect the offering."
1.15.3	In the same way, in the evening and morning, he releases the calves for milking.
1.15.4	One should release the calves for both milkings in the afternoon.
1.15.5	Having placed the skull-bones, he milks the evening milking as the morning milking.
1.15.6	He places the strainer with the tip pointing towards the north.
1.15.7	He does not sprinkle.
1.15.8	It is known that one who has Soma should not join (the two ends of the strainer).
1.15.9	Some say that one should join.
1.15.10	Some call the Saṁnāyya offering to Indra, some call it to Mahendra.
1.15.11	Now, those who sacrifice to Mahendra are the leaders of the village, the royal priest, Urva, Gautama, and Bharadvaja.
1.15.12	They should first establish the fires and then sacrifice to Mahendra.
1.15.13	Now, those who sacrifice Indra.
1.15.14	If one who sacrifices to Indra wishes to sacrifice to Mahendra, having sacrificed to Indra for a year, one should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni, the lord of vows.
1.15.15	Then it is understood that one should worship Mahendra as desired.
1.15.16	Therefore, it is understood that whoever performs a Soma sacrifice should worship Mahendra.
1.16.1	On the next day, having arranged the fires as before, having washed the hands and utensils, he places the utensils in pairs, ten extra and ten before.
1.16.2	The wooden spade, the skull-cup, the Agnihotra ladle, the broom, the black antelope skin, the pestle, the mortar, the pestle and the stone are placed to the north of the Garhapatya.
1.16.3	The ladle, the Juhu, the Upabhu, the Dhruva, the vessel for the Prashitra, the vessel for ghee, the Veda, the vessel for water, the vessel for Prāṇīta, the vessel for Edaka, these are to be placed to the north of the Ahavaniya.
1.16.4	The remaining ones are to be placed according to their availability, at least the vessels for milking in the morning.
1.16.5	The sacrificial ladle is made of Khadira wood, the wooden sword, the wooden pestle, the wooden spoon, the wooden ladle for carrying the oblations, the Juhu ladle is made of leaves, the Upabhrt ladle of Asvattha wood, the Dhruva ladle of Vaikankata wood, and the ladle for offering the Agnihotra oblation.
1.16.6	The sacrificial ladles are of the size of a span, a cubit, or an arm's length, with skin-like edges, with roots and stems, with handles, with the size of a thumb, with the size like a crow's tail, or with the size like the mouth of a goose, and with the size like an incision.
1.16.7	Those which are not mentioned are the trees of the sacrifice. Whatever tree is fit for sacrifice, they belong to it. This is said by Ashmarathi.
1.17.1	Vailankata means the trees of the Veda. This is said in the Alakananda.
1.17.2	The trees which are not mentioned in the Veda are fit for sacrifice.
1.17.3	It is known that the trees which are not fit for sacrifice are not fit for the sacrifice. One should not offer sacrifice with them.
1.17.4-5	Having moved away from the Garhapatya, he spreads the grass in a continuous line towards the east, from the Ahavaniya, with the formula, "Thou art the continuity of the sacrifice; I spread thee for the continuity of the continuity of the sacrificer." Here the Brahman approaches.
1.17.6	He makes two blades of Darbha grass, cut at the tip and measuring a span, into a filter, saying, "You are filters. You are purified by the mind of Vishnu. You are purified."
1.17.7	He cuts it with grass or wood, not with a nail.
1.17.8	Then he smears them with water, saying, "Purified by the mind of Vishņu, you are purified. You are purified. You belong to Vishnu. You are pure."
1.17.9	Then he recites over them (the verse), "May these two, the Prāṇa and Apāna, moving together, nourish all the limbs of the sacrifice, purifying, purifying the oblation."
1.17.10	Taking the ladle for pouring the Soma, he says, "For the pressing you," and then washes it with, "You are a forest-plant, purify yourself for the gods."
1.17.11	It is understood that one should offer the Gomasa to one desiring Brahmic glory, the cow-milk to one desiring cattle, and the earthen pot to one desiring stability.
1.18.1	Sitting to the north of the Garhapatya, he brings water into a vessel covered with a filter, saying, "Who among you takes? May he take you."
1.18.2	While taking the water, he mentally contemplates this:
1.18.3	Having filled the Upabilla with water, having sprinkled it three times with the two Pavitras, he recites as before.
1.18.4	He invites the Brahman, saying, "O Brahman, I shall offer water; the sacrificer should restrain speech."
1.18.5	Having offered the water, he restrains speech. The water is offered for the sake of the oblation.
1.18.6	Born together with Brahma, held by the vital airs, not spilling, having taken up with the wooden sword, he carries (the oblations) or not having taken up. Who among you is affectionate? May he be affectionate to you. I am affectionate to the divine waters. May they unite the sacrifice for us. The goddesses are drinking, with the back of ghee, the thousand-nourishing (waters), flowing down for the sacrificer.
1.18.7	He mentally recites the mantra.
1.18.8	He places the Prāṇīta cups north of the Ahavaniya with the verse, "Who yokes you? May he yoke you."
1.18.9	Having covered with Darbha grass and taking the Pavitra cups, he touches the cups with the verse, "May the divine cups of the deities be settled for the sacrifice to the gods."
1.18.10	With the impulse of the divine Savitr, with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of Pusan, I take thee. Thou art the Agnihotra-offering-spoon.
1.18.11	Thou art for covering.
1.18.12	Thou art the one who goes forth. Thou art the one who is sent forth. Thou art for the Agnihotra-spoon. Thou art the offering-spoon. Thou belongest to the Agnihotra-oblation. Thou art the oblation. Thou art for Agni. Thou art the spoon. Thou art the ladle. Thou art the vessel. Thou art the receptacle. Thou art the container. Thou art the holder. Thou art the support. Thou art the foundation. Thou art the base. Thou art the covering. Thou art the protection. Thou art the shelter. Thou art the shield. Thou art the defence. Thou art the guard. Thou art the guardian. Thou art the protector. Thou art the preserver. Thou art the saviour. Thou art the saving. Thou art the safety. Thou art the refuge. Thou art the asylum. Thou art the place of refuge. Thou art for protection. Thou art for defence. Thou art for shelter. Thou art for covering. Thou art for safety. Thou art for salvation. Thou art for preservation. Thou art for saving. Thou art for rescue. Thou art for deliverance. Thou art for freedom. Thou art for release. Thou art for liberation. Thou art for emancipation. Thou art for heaven. Thou art for immortality. Thou art for life. Thou art for long life. Thou art the life-force. Thou art the vital force. Thou art the breath. Thou art the out-breath. Thou art
1.19.1	The sacrificer is addressed by the Adhvaryu, "O sacrificer, I am going to pour out the oblation."
1.19.2	The sacrificer replies, "Pour out."
1.19.3	If the sacrificer has to go away, he should say, "O Agni, I am going; I am going to offer the oblation."
1.19.4	Having placed a cart to the east of the Garhapatya, having placed the sacrificial dishes on it, he touches the southern yoke-pin with the formula, "Thou art the yoke-pin, the yoke-pin of the yoke."
1.19.5	Similarly the northern one.
1.19.6	Having taken up the northern yoke-pin, he murmurs: "Thou art the most excellent of the gods.
1.19.7	He places the right foot on the northern side with the formula, "May Vishnu press thee."
1.19.8	He ascends with the formula, "Thou art not injured, the receptacle of oblations."
1.19.9	He looks at the circumference with the formula, “I look at thee with the eye of Mitra.
1.19.10	Having covered it with the wind, having sat down inside the cart, having explained the Dashotr, having put down the grains of rice and barley with the formula, "May they give thee," having put down the handfuls of grains in the Agnihotra-vessel, having placed it beyond the strainer, he pours it down in the winnowing basket with the formula, “I pour down what is agreeable to Agni at the impulse of the divine Savitr, with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of Pusan.”
1.19.11	He pours three handfuls with the Yajus, and the fourth silently.
1.19.12	He pours over the cooked oblations for the sake of the distribution of the portions.
1.19.13	In the same way he pours the second cake, saying, "To Agni and Soma" at the Full-moon sacrifice, and "To Indra and Agni" at the New-moon sacrifice, without mixing them.
1.19.14	If he were to pour out into a vessel, having placed the wooden sword on the right side, he should recite all the formulas for the cart in that (vessel).
1.20.1	He touches the poured out oblations with the formula, "This is of the gods." He recites the formula, "May this be for us together" from where he pours out.
1.20.2	Taking the oblation, he comes out with the formula, "(This) I release from Varuna's noose."
1.20.3	He looks at the dwelling place, saying, "May I shine forth, the all-pervading light of the all-pervader."
1.20.4	He descends, saying, "Let the paths of heaven and earth be firm."
1.20.5	He takes it, saying, "Take the expanse of the sky."
1.20.6	He places it on the other side of the Āhavanīya fire, saying, "I place you on the lap of Aditi."
1.20.7	"O Agni, do thou protect the offering. O Agni-Soma, do ye protect the offering according to the deity."
1.20.8	"O Agni, do you protect the offering."
1.20.9	Having brought water behind the Agnihotra-vessel with the mouth of the ladle turned towards the north, and having purified it three times with the two strainers with their mouths turned towards the north as before, he recites (the following mantras):
1.20.10	He invites Brahma, saying, "Brahman, I am going to sprinkle."
1.20.11	The oblation is sprinkled by Brahma. He sprinkles, saying, "In the impulse of the divine Savitr, with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of Pusan, I sprinkle what is dear to Agni, to Agni-Soma." He sprinkles each deity three times.
1.20.12	While sprinkling the oblation, he sprinkles the fire.
1.20.13	Having sprinkled the oblation, one sprinkles the vessels.
1.20.14	Turning them upside down, one should say three times, "Purify yourselves for the divine act, for the worship of the gods."
1.20.15	Aśmarathya says, "The remaining water of sprinkling," Ālekhana says, "One should sprinkle with all (the vessels)."
1.21.1	Taking up the skin of a black antelope with the Savitrī verse, he shakes it thrice on the heap, with the head turned upwards, with the head towards the outside, with the head downwards. The Rakshas is shaken off, the evil ones are shaken off.
1.21.2	With the head turned towards the north, with the head facing south, with the head upwards, he spreads the grass on the northern side, saying, "You are the skin of Aditi."
1.21.3	He presses the ashes towards the west, saying, "May the earth support you."
1.21.4	Not discarding the Kṛṣṇājina, he places the mortar on the Ulukhalam. The mortar is made of wood.
1.21.5	Not discarding the Ulukhal, he pours the oblation. "The body of Agni, the release of speech, for the sake of the divine feast, I take you." Three times with the Yajus, and the fourth silently.
1.21.6	"Thou art the mountain, the tree-born," taking up the pestle, he thrice calls out to the one who has prepared the oblation, saying, "O one who has prepared oblation, come!" to the Brahmin, "Come quickly!" to the Kshatriya, "Come!" to the Vaishya.
1.21.7	"He strikes down the Rakshas, the enemy of heaven, the one to be slain."
1.21.8	When the rice grains have emerged, he sends the Agnidhra, saying, "Strike loudly."
1.21.9	"O Kuṭaru, thou art Madhujihva." Taking a stone, the Agnidhra strikes it on the wooden plank with the Savitrī verse recited loudly, saying, "Let us speak of strength, let us speak of vigour."
1.21.10	He strikes twice on the wooden plank and once on the stone, moving it three times and making it nine times.
1.22.1	He places the broom to the north, made of Veṇu grass, reed or bamboo, saying, "It is a broom of each year."
1.22.2	He pours out the oblation with the formula, "I know thee, O thou who art increased by rain."
1.22.3	He pours it down on the heap with the formula, “The Rakshas has been driven away; the evil spirits have been driven away."
1.22.4	He strikes the chaff with the formula, "The Rakshas is driven away."
1.22.5	Having spread the chaff in the middle of the two portions of the cake, he pours it down under the skin of a black antelope with the formula, "Thou art the share of Rakshas." He then places the cake on the skin of a spotted antelope.
1.22.6	Having sprinkled water around, he separates (the grains) with the verse, "May Vayu separate you."
1.22.7	He scatters the rice grains in a vessel with the verse, “May god Savitar with golden hands receive you."
1.22.8	He touches the scattered grains with the verse, "Purify yourselves for the gods."
1.22.9	He sends the Havishkrit with the instruction, "Make it into three heaps."
1.22.10	The wife of the sacrificer comes forward and carries (the rice).
1.22.11	He makes them thrice-husked.
1.22.12	Having placed the known husked grains on a heap, he carries away the rice-washing, saying, "This is the share of the Rakshas, let it be carried away from here."
1.22.13	Similarly, taking up the black antelope skin, he shakes it.
1.23.1	The covering has been explained.
1.23.2	On the black antelope skin he places the neck-piece, the pot with its mouth facing east, and the wooden sword, saying, "Thou art the support of heaven."
1.23.3	On the wooden sword he places the stone, saying, "You are the stone, you are the mountain." On the stone he places the lump, saying, "you are the lump, you are the Parvatee.
1.23.4	He places the grains of rice on the heated pan with the formula, "In the impulse of god Savitr, with the arms of Asvins, with the hands of Pusan, I place the offering acceptable to Agni, to Agni-Soma." Three times with the formula and once silently.
1.23.5	He places them continuously.
1.23.6-8	"He throws the eastern brick with the formula, "For Prāṇa thee." He throws the western brick with the formula "For Apāna thee." He pours down the middle region with the formula "For Vyāna thee." "He throws the eastern one at the end with the formula, "For long life, for the continuity of life." "He scatters the flour on the black antelope skin with the formula, "May god Savitr with golden hands receive you.
1.23.9	He looks at the spilled (grains) with the firm eye, saying, 'I see with the eye.'
1.23.10	The wife of the sacrificer sends the servant to grind the grains, saying, 'Grind the grains.'
1.24.1	The wife or the servant grinds.
1.24.2	Taking up the Upavesha (the wooden sword), he places the two Angaras on the Garhapatya, and then pushes one of them towards the other, saying, "O Agni, drive away the raw Agni, and establish the free from raw Agni."
1.24.3	Having placed either of the two (bricks) with the formula, "Do thou carry the offering to the gods", he places the skull on it with the formula, "Thou art firm, thou expandest the earth."
1.24.4	Having placed the skull on the left finger, he turns the charcoal on it with the verse, "The Rakshas is burnt, the evil spirits are burnt."
1.24.5	"Thou art the supporter, thou art the supporter." He places the skull-bones one by one, saying, "Thou art the support," (on the right), "Thou art the fixed support," (on) the left, "Thou art Maruts's supporter," (on) sixth, "Thou art a wall, thou art a surrounding wall," (on) remaining ones. He places them silently. He completes eight.
1.24.6	In the same way he places the skull-bone-arrangement on the north.
1.24.7	Eleven or twelve (bricks) are placed for Indra-Agni.
1.24.8	Thus, the rites are performed in the proper order from here onwards.
1.24.9	Then he covers them with embers, reciting, "Be heated by the penance of the Bhrigus and Angiras."
1.24.10	Here, the Madanti bricks are placed.
1.24.11	Having restrained speech, he pours the flour into a heated and well-ventilated vessel, saying, "In the impulse of the divine Savitr, with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of Pusan, I pour the offering agreeable to Agni, to Agni-Soma." Three times with the formula, silently the fourth time, according to the deity.
1.25.1	Then he pours them out with the two strainers, saying, "May the god Savitr purify you." Afterwards with the Gayatri verse.
1.25.2	He mixes the oblations with the Prāṇītā (verses).
1.25.3	Or with another Yajus.
1.25.4	Taking them with the ladle from the Prāṇitā (verses), and carrying them with the Veda, he brings them.
1.25.5	"The waters have united with the waters," he says while bringing them to the ground meal.
1.25.6	"You have been generated from the waters, you are connected with the waters." He sprinkles them clockwise with heated water.
1.25.7	"He unites them, saying, 'For generation I unite you.' He divides them according to their shares, saying, 'Turn away from where you will not be united again."
1.25.8	Then he touches the right-hand cake with the formula, "For Agni thee!" and the left-hand cake with "For Agni-Soma thee!" At the Full-Moon sacrifice he touches the cakes with the formula, “For Indra-Agni thee!” At the New-Moon sacrifice he does not touch the cakes.
1.25.9	"This is the face of the army of the gods. I remove it from the skull with the Veda." Having removed the bones from the skulls, taking the right lump with the formula, "Thou art the head," he places it on the right side of the skull. "Thou art the heat, the life of all."
1.25.10	In the same way, taking the left lump, he places it on left side of the skull.
1.25.11	Thus, in the subsequent rites, they are performed in the proper order.
1.25.12	Here he pours clarified butter, not exceeding (the prescribed quantity).
1.26.1	He spreads all the potsherds, saying, "Spread widely. May your lord of sacrifice spread widely."
1.26.2	He makes it like the shape of a tortoise, not too high, not having a cake, and the size of a horse's hoof.
1.26.3	Having brought it into the vessel, he anoints it with clay, saying, "Take hold of the skin." He does not make it too salty.
1.26.4	He makes it thrice over the fire, saying, "The Rakshas are hidden, the evil ones are hidden."
1.26.5	Or, "The wise lord of strength has surrounded."
1.26.6	"May the god Savitar melt thee," he heats it with torches.
1.26.7	Agni does not burn your body.
1.26.8	He releases speech with the words, "Do not burn."
1.26.9	He puts the embers of the cake into the Veda with the words, "Be united with Brahma."
1.26.10	Then, having washed the fingers and rinsed the vessel, he heats it with a lump of clay and draws three lines towards the east or the north with a wooden stick inside the altar, letting it drip, and directs it towards the west, saying three times, "To unity, svāhā," with these mantras.
2.1.1	Taking up the wooden sword with the formula, "By the impulse of Savitr," he lays it down with the grass with the formula, "Thou art a hundred-holder, belonging to the wood, the slayer of the enemies, thousand-holder, hundred-shining, thou art Vayu, of sharp shining."
2.1.2	The altar is placed to the west of the Ahavaniya. The altar is of the size of the sacrificer. It may be placed to the west or to the east.
2.1.3	The oblations should be placed in such a way that they are near to each other and are placed obliquely.
2.1.4	The Veda, having known the altar, spread out the earth. The earth carries the embryo of the kings in the worlds. From that the sacrifice is born, giving everything. Thus it is said before the Stambayajus. With the Veda, he smears the altar three times from above.
2.1.5	From the eastern half, one-third of the Veda, he takes the Stambayajur.
2.1.6	Having placed on the inner side of the altar a darbha-grass with its tip towards the east or towards the north, he strikes it with the wooden sword, saying, "O Earth, thou art the place of sacrifice of the gods, the roots of plants are thine. Do not injure me."
2.1.7	Having removed the darbha-grass and the earth with the wooden sword and having carried them away, he says, "Go to the village, to the place of cows."
2.1.8	May the sky rain for you." He looks towards the altar.
2.1.9	He scatters it towards the north, saying, "O god Savitar, bind him with a hundred fetters in the highest heaven, he who hates us and whom we hate. Let him not escape from here. May the hawk not fall from the sky."
2.1.10	It becomes a heap.
2.1.11	The Agnidhra takes it, saying, "May the hawk not fall to the ground."
2.1.12	In the same way he takes the second and the third.
2.1.13	He takes the second (brick) with the formula, "The stone has been removed from the earth, for the sacrifice to the gods."
2.1.14	He takes the third (brick) with, "The stone is removed from the earth for the sacrifice to non-gods."
2.2.1	Having taken the fourth silently, he encloses the altar with the wooden sword.
2.2.2	May the Vasus take hold of you with the Gayatri metre, on the right side.
2.2.3	Rudra of you, on the west side.
2.2.4	Aditya of you, on north side.
2.2.5	With the wooden sword, one should strike the earth. The earth is struck.
2.2.6	Then, having ordered thus, the men come and make the altar, saying, "May it be rich in wealth, rich in Rudra, rich in Aditya, the expanse of heaven, the navel of the earth, so that this sacrificer may not be harmed. This is the offering for the gods, pleasing to Aditi. May all the gods enjoy this, may they enter the sacrificer with prosperity."
2.2.7	Then, having removed the upper skin of the sacrificial post, he sends it to the heap.
2.2.8	Then he digs it, two fingers, three fingers, or four fingers deep, as much as the white part of the heel, or as much as the width of a chariot path, as much as is white, they perform the rite in the light of the god Savitar, the creators.
2.2.9	He cuts the root.
2.2.10	He digs it up to the foundation.
2.2.11	He places the two ends of the Veda-grass towards the east, towards the Ahavaniya, the buttocks towards the west, towards the Garhapatya.
2.2.12	He makes it sloping towards the east, sloping towards the north, sloping towards the front, lower in front, higher at the back, higher towards the south, with dung.
2.2.13	If he exceeds the dung, he sends it to the heap.
2.2.14	Whatever grass or root is cut by the spade, it should be cut with the spade, not with the nails.
2.3.1	It is understood that one should make the altar of the one desiring cattle with earth and excrement, and of the one desiring offspring with earth and excreta.
2.3.2	One should always sow another seed after sowing the first seed, some say one should sow another seed in the same place where the first seed was sown.
2.3.3	One should recite the digging mantra where one digs.
2.3.4	When the oblations have been deposited, one should make the altar on the full moon day.
2.3.5	On the day before, before the bringing in of the sacrificial grass, on the new moon day.
2.3.6	Having done that which is before the northern enclosing stick, one observes fast.
2.3.7	The rest is similar.
2.3.8	He invites the Brahman priest, saying, "O Brahman, I shall take up the northern enclosing stick."
2.3.9	Having been born, he encloses the altar with the Sphyi, saying, "Thou art truth" on the right, "Thou art the abode of truth" on the west, "Thou art glory of truth" on north.
2.3.10	Then he makes it even with the Sphyī towards the west, saying, "You are the law, you are the lawfulness." With the remainder of the Anuvāka.
2.3.11	Having placed the wooden sword in the western half of the altar, having placed it transversely, he instructs (the Agnidhra), "Bring the Prokṣaṇī water, place the sacrificial grass and the sacrificial grass-blades, cleanse the spoon and the ladles, bind the wife, come with clarified butter."
2.3.12	Some say that the Agnidhra should perform these rites, others say that the Adhvaryu should.
2.3.13	Having placed the Prokṣaṇī water, he places the sacrificial grass without touching the path of the wooden sword, to the right of the wooden sword.
2.3.14	He should meditate on the one whom he hates.
2.3.15	He places the wooden sword facing him on the mound in front, saying, "You are a hundred-splintered, a wooden sword, the slayer of the hater."
2.3.16	He takes the name of the one whom he dislikes.
2.3.17	Having washed his hands, he cleanses the sacrificial grass, and releases it from the tip.
2.3.18	Having made the altar and washed his hands, one should remove the vessels.
2.3.19	Placing the offerings to the north, and the sacrificial grass and kindling wood to the west, with the tips towards the east, he places them.
2.4.1	The kindling wood on the right, and the sacrificial grasses on the left.
2.4.2	Taking the ladle, the spoon, and the vessel for holding the Prasitra, he bakes it on the Garhapatya or the Vahaniya fire, with the formula, "The Rakshas are repelled, the evil spirits are repelled."
2.4.3	Having divided it among the Veda-knowers, he cleanses it, either having divided it or not.
2.4.4	Holding the ladle upright, with its tip pointing upwards, and with the tips of the other ladles pointing inwards, he should collect the grass from all sides. He should not cut the grass at the roots.
2.4.5	He should offer the oblation, smoothing it with the tips of the blades, holding it upside down, with the tips inside, the front with the middle, the back with the roots, or with the stick, saying, "Do not injure speech, do not injure life."
2.4.6	He cleans the Upabhṛt-vessel, holding it obliquely, with the tips towards the inside, with the middle ones towards the west, and with the roots towards the east, saying, "Do not injure the eye and the ear."
2.4.7	As the ladle, so the Dhruva-vessel. Do not injure the offspring and the womb.
2.4.8	Do not rub off the colour of the horse. I rub you, O horse, the conqueror of enemies. This is the removal of the ash.
2.4.9	One should not touch the rubbed and the unrubbed.
2.4.10	If one touches them, one should again burn and rub them.
2.4.11	Rubbing the rubbed ones, one says, "I burn with the most brilliant brilliance of Agni."
2.5.1	Then, having touched the cleaning sticks with water, he strikes them at the tip, saying, "Whatever art has descended from heaven and is established in the corner of the earth, with that thousand-streamed one, we destroy the enemy. Svāhā!"
2.5.2	He strikes them on the mound.
2.5.3	He binds his wife, sitting with her knees raised, with a sword, or she herself stands, or binds herself with a woollen rope, either from the inside or outside of the garment, with the formula, "May she be happy."
2.5.4	Having made a knot on the north side of the navel, he puts it around the south side of the navel.
2.5.5	"O Agni, lord of the house, do thou invite me." He recites this over the Garhapatya.
2.5.6	"Do ye invite the wives of the gods." They recite this over the wives of the deities, on the other side of the Garhapaty.
2.5.7	"The world of the wives of the divinities." "This is thy world. May there be peace for thee. Do thou not injure me."
2.5.8	"May I be like Indra's wife, without a husband, like Aditi, with good sons. May the Garhapatya fire be near you. May you have good offspring."
2.5.9	He recites the Garhapaty fire with the verse, "May we have good offspring through you."
2.5.10	My sons are the killers of enemies, and my daughter Viraṭ. I am the conqueror, my husband's world is the highest.
2.5.11	May Pūṣan fill your nest. He fills the nest of the ghee pot.
2.5.12	Aditi has filled the nest with perforated leaves. Taking the ghee pot,
2.6.1	In that (fire) which has been covered with the Pavitra, he pours out a large quantity of clarified butter, saying, "The milk of the great ones, the juice of the plants, of that which is being consumed, I pour out for the offering to the gods."
2.6.2	He places it with the sharp end towards the south, saying, "This is Vishnu's wheel."
2.6.3	Having spread it out, he pours it out.
2.6.4	He places it on the southern half of the Garhapatya, saying, "For you, O food."
2.6.5	Having taken it up with the formula, "Thou art in the Urus", having placed it on the Veda, he places it on the wife.
2.6.6	She looks at it with the formula, “The milk of the earth, the juice of plants, I look at thee with the unerring eye for the sake of good progeny."
2.6.7	He places it on the northern half of the Garhapatya with the formula, "Thou art splendour.
2.6.8	Having taken it with the formula, "For thee, O Agni, for thy brilliance," and having sprinkled it with Veda, he offers it with the formula "Thou art brilliance; do thou go along brilliance."
2.6.9	He places it on the Āhavaniya fire with the formula, "May not thy brilliance be lost to me."
2.6.10	To the north of the Prokṣaṇī he places the path of the wooden sword, with the formula, "Agni is the tongue, the good abode of the gods, for the gods, for sacrifice, for sacrifice."
2.6.11	Then the Adhvaryu and the sacrificer, having bound it, look at the clarified butter without breathing, saying, "You are clarified butter." Having recognized it, they say, "For you to eat."
2.6.12-13	Then he again pours the Soma three times through the two fore-ends of the strainer with the formulas, "Thou art bright, thou art light, thou art lustre." He pours the Prokṣaṇī water through the two strainer-ends containing clarified butter with the formula, "May god Savitr purify you." He pours it back with the Gāyatrī verse.
2.7.1	With the ladle drawn out, he takes the clarified butter within the Veda. Having placed the ladles on the Veda,
2.7.2	he takes four spoonfuls with the formula, "Thou art bright, for the bright abode, for the gods, for the Yajus, for the Yajurveda." With these three formulas and the fourth one, "For the five Vāyu deities,"
2.7.3	In the same way, he takes up (the Soma) in the Upabhṛt and Dhruva vessels with the subsequent mantras.
2.7.4	He takes eight spoonfuls in the Upabṛt, four in the Dhruva, and five in the Pāśukāma.
2.7.5	The sacrificer recites the mantras along with them.
2.7.6	Or the Adhvaryu himself may take up (the Soma), reciting the mantras.
2.7.7	The sacrificer, with the help of the priests, recites the formula.
2.7.8	He takes more in the Juhu, less in the Upabhṛt and most in the Dhruva.
2.7.9	Holding the Juhu and the Upabhrit equally, he takes more in the Dhruvā which is placed on the ground.
2.7.10	He does not take it back after having taken it inside the altar.
2.7.11	No Hotṛ-priest pours any clarified butter.
2.7.12	Having recited the Prauṣṇīra-formula, "The divine waters are in front", he addresses the Brahman-priest with the words, "O Brahman, I shall sprinkle".
2.7.13	The Brahman-priest sprinkles the fire-wood with the formula, "The fire-wood is sprinkled by Brahman for the sake of prosperity. The black one is the best of the fire-wood. To Agni svāhā."
2.7.14	"Thou art the altar," (he says) while placing the altar; "thou art the sacrificial grass," while placing the sacrificial grass. He sprinkles each three times.
2.7.15	Having placed the sacrificial grass with the knot at the front, he sprinkles it within the altar, saying, "For thee, O Heaven," for the top; "for thee, O Atmosphere," for the middle; "for thee O Earth," for the root.
2.7.16	Having placed them with the tops of the ladles, he places the roots.
2.8.1	With the ladle, he throws the knot towards the east, with the formula, "For nourishment to thee."
2.8.2	Whatever is left over of the sprinkling water, he carries it within the altar with the formula, “Svāhā to the Fathers.”
2.8.3	Having approached the right buttock, he causes the continuous stream to flow towards the left buttock.
2.8.4	He loosens the sacrificial grass with the formula, "May Pūṣan loosen thy knot."
2.8.5	He places the Urdhva-prañca (twig) above, the Udgūḍha (twig) in front, and the Pratyñca (twig).
2.8.6	He takes up the Prāstara twig from the front, does not sweep it, does not sweep back, does not shake it, but takes it as if pulling it, saying, "Thou art the mound of Vishnu."
2.8.7	In that pure (place) he pours down the wind and the out-breath, which are the sacrificer's breath, for the sacrificer who is going to the sacrifice. For at the sacrifice they were the two purifiers of the oblation.
2.8.8	Then he orders: "Spread the grass, put on the sacrificial grass, do not be careless, lie down with the sacred grass, spread the green and golden grass. These are the sacrificer, the golden ones."
2.8.9	He gives the Prastara to Brahma with the verse, "I make thee with the Prāṇa and Apāna."
2.8.10	Brahma says to the sacrificer, "I place the Prāṇa-Apāna in thee."
2.8.11	The sacrificer replies, "The Prāṇa and the Apāna are in me."
2.8.12	He spreads the grass on the southern part of the altar, from the right shoulder to the left shoulder.
2.8.13	He spreads the grass on all the altar, in plenty, not too much, with the formula, "I spread thee with the grass." It may be spread in three or five layers, towards the east or towards the west.
2.8.14	He covers the roots with the foremost (blades).
2.9.1	He recites the mantra in each layer.
2.9.2	Here some offer the Uddalaka for the Anuyaja offering.
2.9.3	Holding the Prastara, he places the Paridhıs touching the Ahavaniya from the other side, with the verse, "Thou art Gandharva, Vishavasu; thou art Indra's arm; thou art Mitra-Varuna." The southern one with the verse, "Thou art Indra's right arm; thou art Indra, the slayer of Vrtra." The northern one with the verse "Thou art Indra' s left arm; thou art the slayer of Vrtrā."
2.9.4	The Ahavaniya is in front, the southern one to the right, and the northern one to the left.
2.9.5	Thus the rites are performed in due order.
2.9.6	Having recited the formula, "May Surya protect thee from the east," he places the two kindling woods above the middle fire.
2.9.7	"May the learned Vītihotra protect thee."
2.9.8	He places the northern one silently.
2.9.9	Having placed the two ends of the sacrificial grass in the middle of the Veda, he places them with their tips towards the north, saying, "They are in the yoke of the Visas."
2.9.10	He places the Prastara on the two ends, saying, "Sit in the seat of the Vasus, Rudras and Adityas."
2.9.11	On the Prastara, he places the Juhu, saying, "You are the Juhu, the Ghata."
2.9.12	He makes the stick equal to the roots.
2.9.13-15	Having placed the Juhu below the Upabhu, having placed the Dhruva above the Upabṛt, he places them without touching each other. Having placed the UpabṚt below the Dhruva, having placed the Juhu above the Upabrt, he places it without touching each other.
2.9.16	He places the ladle to the right of the Juhu and the Dhruva to the left. "He says, "You are the bull, the son of Shakra, the son of Ghritachi, by your dear name, you sit in the dear assembly."
2.10.1	Then he recites over them with the remaining portion of the Anuvaka, "They have sat down."
2.10.2	He recites over the Ajya, "You belong to Vishnu, you belong to the Vaishnavite abodes, you belong to Prajapati."
2.10.3	Having taken the ladle, the vessel of clarified butter, the Veda and the vessel, and having sat down to the right of the Garhapatya fire, he says, "I am removing the face of the army for the purpose of consecration." Having removed the ashes along with the embers from the cake with the Veda, he recites, "O Sun, shine forth with light for the great power of Indra."
2.10.4	He strews it in the vessel with the verse, "I make thy abode auspicious with the stream of ghee. I arrange the well-prepared (vessel) with the stream of honey. May we sit in that immortal (vessel). Stand firm. May the mind be pleased with the oblation of grains."
2.10.5	He pours clarified butter on it with the verse, "May the Agni born of clarified butter grow. May Agni accept the offerings. May the sky be thy skin. May the sky become thy skin. I pour on thee the Agni who is the most beautiful, the knower of wealth, the lord of cattle, with his lustre, for the sake of Agni." He pours on the right side with this verse and silently on the left side.
2.10.6	He pours the Saṁnāyya (rice) over the oblation. "The Self of yours which has entered the animals, which has taken its place among the gods, having become Soma and ghee, may it go to the gods and obtain the heaven. For the sake of the sacrificer, me."
2.10.7	He places it in a vessel with the verse, "The moist one, the firstborn, the protector of the world, the cooked one shines forth, the generator of thoughts."
2.10.8	He does not turn it around, nor does he break it.
2.11.1	He anoints the skull-bones with the formula, "May the sap of the earth, Ira and Bhuti, not leak out."
2.11.2	Then he anoints it with the formula, "May god Savitr anoint thee with honey."
2.11.3	Having rubbed it above, he anoints it below.
2.11.4	Having made the oblations of the full-moon sacrifice, having brought them, having adorned them, and having placed them within the altar, one should offer the oblations in the four Hotrás at the full-moon. In the five Hotrás at a new moon.
2.11.5	"Bhuḥ, Bhuvaḥ" - in the first full-moon.
2.11.6	When the year has passed, one should offer them with these.
2.11.7	Āśmarathya says that the first year itself is the year. Ālekhaṇa says that the year after the year is the year.
2.11.8	He places the two sacrificial cakes on the southern and northern sides of the ladle.
2.11.9	Having placed the pot of Saṁnāyya in the middle of the Veda, he places the cooked rice on the southern side of the altar and curd on the northern side.
2.11.10	Some say that the cooked rice is placed first and curd later.
2.11.11	He places the Veda in front of the Dhruva with the verse, "This Veda found the earth, existing in the secret, in the dense and intricate places. May it find the world for the sacrificer. May it perform the sacrifice without a flaw, with abundant rites."
2.11.12	Having spread the Veda-ends, he arranges the Hotr's seat.
2.11.13	The Veda-ends are spread with Darbha grass with their tips towards the north and their bases towards the south.
2.12.1	Then he instructs, "Recite to Agni being kindled."
2.12.2	Seated, he adds fuel to the fire with each utterance of the Pranava.
2.12.3	When he knows that the fire is kindled and offered, he leaves one Anuyaja-fuel, puts the remaining fuel on the fire, and sweeps the Ahavaniya three times with the Veda.
2.12.4	Having taken up clarified butter in the ladle from the Dhruva vessel, having moved along the junction of the southern and northern boundaries, while sitting facing the south, he offers the continuous and straight libation, meditating on Prajapati in his mind.
2.12.5	Having taken up clarified butter from the vessel containing clarified butter in the spoon, he nourishes the Dhruva with the formula, "May the Dhruva be nourished with clarified butter."
2.12.6	Here is the very special point: wherever one takes the clarified butter from the Dhruva vessel, one should pour it back in the same way. Thus one nourishes the Dhruva, and the rites for the clarified butter are performed on the Dhruva alone.
2.12.7	Then he instructs, "O Agnīdh, three times rub the enclosing sticks and the fire."
2.12.8	The Āgnīdhra priest, with a bundle of grass in his hand, thrice sprinkles the enclosing sticks and the fire.
2.12.9	Silently, the enclosing sticks.
2.12.10	"O Agni, winner of the prize, we anoint thee, the winner of the prize who is going to win the prize, the winner, the winner, winner of the prizes, for winning the prizes. He anoints Agni, the eater of food, for eating food."
2.12.11	Having placed the Juhu and Dhruva upside down in front of him, he places his hands on them.
2.13.1	He offers the Anjali-libation to the Ahavaniya with the verse, "Thou art the world; do thou spread out. O Agni, the sacrificer, this is thy homage."
2.13.2	He takes up the Juhu with the verse, “O Juhu, come hither.” He takes up the Upabhṛt with the verse, "O Upabhṛd, come hither."
2.13.3	He places the Juhu on the Upabhrit with the verse, "May the well-covered one be well-covered for me today. May it be well-covered in its own place." He places the Juhu and the Upabhृt on the Dhruva with the verse,
2.13.4	There, this is the extreme limit, where one places the Juhu on the Upabhu, and offers from the mouth, and takes from the mouth.
2.13.5	And does not sprinkle, and holds the two ladles at the navel.
2.13.6	"Equal to the breath," say some.
2.13.7	Without stepping on the Dhruva (the central line), he crosses the Prastara (the line drawn from the Dhruva to the east). "He says, "May I not step on Agni-Vishnu."
2.13.8	He stands to the right. "He says, "You are the place of Vishnu."
2.13.9	The right foot is within the altar, the left foot is like a sniff.
2.13.10	Having gone around the southern end of the enclosing sticks, standing upright, when the sacrificer has begun, he offers the libation facing east, upwards, continuous, straight. "He offers the libation with the formula, "The sacrifice begins, it is upright."
2.13.11	One should offer the libation facing downwards for one who desires rain, and upwards for one who desires heaven.
2.13.12	This is the most frequent offering among the offerings.
2.13.13	Having offered, he breathes in.
2.13.14	"He takes up the ladle, saying, "O Agni, thou art great."
2.13.15	Without touching the ladles, he steps back.
2.14.1	"Protect me, O Agni, from evil conduct; do not forsake me in good conduct."
2.14.2	These two are the mantras for stepping and stepping back.
2.14.3	There, this is the extreme point, where one offers the oblations going towards the north, having gone around the northern junction of the enclosing sticks, and offers those going towards the south, having gone around to the southern junction of the enclosing stick.
2.14.4	One goes towards the south by the right (side), or towards the north by the left (side). One goes towards the south or towards the north, by the right (or) left.
2.14.5	Having returned, he anoints the Dhruva with the Juhu, with the formula, "Thou art the head of the sacrifice; may light be united with light."
2.14.6	Taking up clarified butter from the Dhruva by means of the Sruva, he pours it over the Juhu with the formula, “For the prosperity of the Soma-juice, svāhā."
2.14.7	With the formula, "Sacrifice is united with sacrifice," he anoints the Juhu with Dhruva.
2.14.8	Having placed the two ladles, having taken up a piece of grass from the Veda, he stands facing east with the Pravaras on the northern mound. "Who will be the Adhvaryu? He will be the Advaryu. I stand in the place of the sacrifice of Vishnu. Let speech perform the priestly function. Let mind perform the priestly function." "I resort to speech. Om. Earth, atmosphere, heaven." The eastern Adhvaryu says, "Who will be Agni? He will be Agni."
2.15.1	The other is the Agnidhra.
2.15.2	He takes up the Sphyi and the wooden supports for the fire-wood.
2.15.3	He addresses the Brahman with "O Brahman, I shall announce the Pravara."
2.15.4	The Brahman announces the Pravara. He says "Announce" or "Announce" (to the Agnidhra).
2.15.5	The Agnidhra responds "Let it be heard."
2.15.6	There, this is the extreme limit, where the Adhvaryu calls out, the Agnidhra, standing on the other side of the mound, facing south, holding the wooden sword with its handle towards him, and holding it upright, responds.
2.15.7	In the Agnidhra's house, in the Soma sacrifice.
2.15.8	Having called out, he chooses the Agni-devata, the Hotar, the knower, the healer, according to the Rsi, according to Manu, according to Bharata, according to the Veda, according to the Vedic.
2.15.9	He chooses three Rsi-related mantras from here onwards.
2.15.10	Or he chooses according to Manu alone.
2.15.11	The king appoints the priests of the family priest.
2.15.12	Having said, "The Brahmanas are the performers of this sacrifice," he takes the name of the Hotri in a low voice.
2.15.13	"Human" is said loudly.
2.15.14	Having scattered grass on the altar,
2.16.1	It is known that they proceed without uttering anything.
2.16.2	Where he knows that the ladle is filled with ghee, he says, "O Adhvaryu, pour it into the mouth." Having taken it in the Juhu and Upamant, he comes forward and announces, "Let us offer to Agni."
2.16.3	He offers at the Vasat call.
2.16.4	Having announced, he instructs the subsequent ones only by saying, "Offer, offer."
2.16.5	He offers the Praja offerings, moving forward towards the east, with the exception of the second offering.
2.16.6	Or, all of them here.
2.16.7	Or, he offers the kindling woods in front, the Tanūnapāt in the south, the Iḍa in the west, the sacrificial grass in the north, and the Svāhā-sound in the middle.
2.16.8	Where the fire is most blazing, there one should offer all oblations.
2.16.9	When about to offer the fourth oblation, he takes half from the Upabṛt and puts it into the Juhu.
2.16.10	Having offered the five Prāyājas, having returned, he pours the remaining clarified butter from the ladle over the oblations, first the Dhruva, then the Agniya cake, then the northern one, then the curd in the Upabhṛt, and lastly the Soma.
2.16.11	Having placed the two ladles in their places, he again takes them up.
2.16.12	Thus they take them up, until the Sviṣṭakṛt.
2.16.13	Then he proceeds with the offering of clarified butter.
2.16.14	He instructs (the Hotṛ) to recite the Anuvāka to Agni.
2.16.15	Having taken up four spoonfuls of clarified butter in the Juhu, having taken five spoonfuls in the Vātya, having announced (to the Hotṛ), he says, "Recite to Agni."
2.16.16	He offers at the Vasat-utterance in the northern half in the eastern half.
2.16.17	He does not offer any other oblation to the north of this.
2.16.18	Having returned,
2.17.1	Having ordered, "Recite to Soma,"
2.17.2	Having taken up the clarified butter as it was taken, having gone beyond, having announced, he says, "Sacrifice to Soma."
2.17.3	At the Vasat-utterance, having placed the ladle in the southern half of the eastern half, he offers with the eastern end.
2.17.4	He does not offer any other oblation with the southern end.
2.17.5	Having gone back,
2.17.6	There, this is the extreme limit: with the ladle only for the pouring of clarified butter, he offers the oblation with his hand.
2.17.7	The five-fold offering is for the Jamadagnis alone, the four-fold offering for the others.
2.17.8	Even if one is not a Jamadagni, one should perform the five-fold offering after addressing the Jamadagni.
2.17.9	Then he instructs, "Recite to Agni."
2.17.10	Having placed the ladle on the ground, he takes up the cake for Agni with the thumb and the two flesh-touching fingers, from the middle, and offers it from the front half. He offers the third portion from the rear half. If there are five portions, he offers thus: "Do not be afraid, do not be frightened, do not be harmed, do not let your brilliance diminish. I shall lift up Bharata, I shall sprinkle. I shall offer the portions back to you. May you be well, do not harm me."
2.17.11	The cuttings are of the size of the thumb joint and are not broken.
2.17.12	Having poured over the cuttings, he pours over the oblation, saying, "The cuttings that you cut, I have arranged in reverse order for myself. I have united it with ghee. May that be nourished again."
2.17.13	Having stepped across, he calls out, "Offer to Agni."
2.17.14	At the Vaṣaṭ-call, he offers in the middle.
2.17.15	Having offered the oblation of clarified butter, he offers the cake. Then the clarified butter.
2.18.1	He offers the oblations of the earlier and earlier Samhitās up to the Svishtakrit.
2.18.2	Or he should offer the oblation of the ladle.
2.18.3	Then he instructs the Upaṁśuyāja, saying, "Recite Vishnu softly," and loudly, "Recite."
2.18.4	Having taken up the clarified butter as grasped, having gone beyond, having announced, he offers silently, saying, "To Vishnu," and aloud, "Offer."
2.18.5	He offers at the Vasat-call.
2.18.6	Some call the Upamshu-yaja as belonging to Agni-Soma, others as belonging to Prajapati.
2.18.7	This is performed only on the full-moon day.
2.18.8	As at the Full-moon sacrifice, so at the New-moon sacrifice, he proceeds with the last cake to Agni and Soma, and to Indra and Agni respectively.
2.18.9	If he were to join them together, he would say, "Do you recite to Indra."
2.18.10	Or he would say, “To Mahendra,” if he were to offer to Mahendra.
2.18.11	Having spread the Juhu, he offers twice from the cooked rice, twice from the curds, four times from the Avadana, and five times from the Avadan.
2.18.12	Having sprinkled (the oblations), having gone beyond, having called (the Hotri), he offers to Indra.
2.18.13	Or to Mahendra.
2.18.14	He offers at the Vasat-utterance.
2.18.15	Having returned, he offers the two Homa-offerings with the ladle, reciting the verses, "We worship the full moon, the bull, the steed. May it bestow on us the milked, excellent prosperity, the thousandfold nourishment of wealth. For the life-breath, for the Suradhas, for the full moon, svāhā." At the full moon. "The new moon is auspicious, well-behaved, like a cow, increasing more and more. May it bestow upon us the milked excellent prosperity, the thousands of wealth, for the out-breath, for Suradhas, to the new moon, svāha." At the new moon.
2.19.1	Here he offers the most excellent oblations. The ten forms of the sacrifice are worthy of sacrifice. May the sacrificer gratify them with ghee. Being praised in the most excellent oblatioṇs, the divine sacrificer became immortal. Svāhā! The gods have appointed you as the share of strength. By this I gratify you. May you be satisfied by it. Svāhā. I am the well-done of the gods in this world. May this be pleasing to me. May there be no quarrel.
2.19.2	Then he instructs, "Recite to Agni Svishtakrit."
2.19.3	Having placed the ladle on the fire, he offers from the upper half of all the oblations, once for each offering, four times for each offering, and twice for five offerings.
2.19.4	These are the most important offerings to the deities.
2.19.5	He offers twice, without pouring back the oblation.
2.19.6	Having crossed over the Agni Svishtakrit, one should offer the oblation.
2.19.7	Having crossed over the Vashat-uttered portion in the eastern half, one offers the oblation in the eastern half.
2.19.8	Having returned to the place, one places the two ladles.
2.19.9	Here some prescribe the Prashitra (oblation) below, while others above.
3.1.1	Having placed the vessel for Idā, he offers the Idā-portion from the eastern half of the cake for Agni, reciting the verse, "The one with feet of ghee, impelled by Mitra-Varuṇa, I offer the one-faced one, having cut from the southern half."
3.1.2	Having cut the cake from the eastern half, he offers the portion for the sacrificer, reciting the verse "The one that is thin like a long thread."
3.1.3	Having mixed (the Soma) with the second Idā, he offers it.
3.1.4	Thus he offers the Idā with all the oblations.
3.1.5	These are the most important oblations for the Sauviṣṭakṛt.
3.1.6	Having poured over the oblations and the ladles, the Hotr puts the Idā into the fire.
3.1.7	Or the Hotr himself takes the Idā.
3.1.8	The Adhvaryu, having gone around along the front of the Hotṛ, steps across to the south, as if not letting go.
3.1.9	The Hotṛ takes hold of the Adhvaryu.
3.1.10	Having sat down facing west, he anoints the joint of the Hotṛ's finger with the ladle.
3.1.11	Having anointed the eastern one, he anoints (the joint of) the western one.
3.1.12	Having returned by the way he came, he places the Idā of the Idā in front, sitting facing east.
3.1.13-17	The Hotr strews the oblation-material on the palm of his hand, puts it on the fire twice, and pours clarified butter over it once. The Hotr himself takes up the oblation-materials from the north. He strews with the ladle. He pours over with the ladle. The oblation-material is called out. The Adhvaryu and the sacrificer take it up.
3.1.18	Where the Adhvaryu knows that the divine (officials) have been invoked and the human (officials) are invoked,
3.2.1	there the Adhvaryyu recites this mantra: "May I be invoked with cattle."
3.2.2	Where he knows that the sacrificer has been invoked, there the sacrificer recites this very mantra.
3.2.3	When the Idā has been invoked, the Hotṛ eats the Avāntareḍā, saying, "I eat thee offered to Vācaspati, I eat thee offered to the lord of the assembly."
3.2.4	The priests, with the sacrificer as the fifth, eat the invoked Idā, saying, “Accept thy share, do thou stimulate the kine, do thou stimulate us. May we be thy eaters, all-souled, all-bodied."
3.2.5	Having drunk silently, he remains till the wiping.
3.2.6	They wipe (the hands) within the altar, with the Pavitras, with the verse, "May the mind and light be pleased."
3.2.7	Having cut off the Agniya cake towards the east, taking the Praishitra-carrying vessel, he offers the Praishitra with the verse, "May the sacrifice be pure, may the Svishtakrit be pure, may this oblation be pure."
3.2.8	Thus the northern ones are not disturbed.
3.2.9	Having covered a measure of barley or a pipal leaf with the thumb and the middle finger, and having placed it in the offering of the Prasitra, having poured clarified butter over it, having taken it with the Veda, he offers it to Brahma in front of the Ahavaniya.
3.2.10	Having placed the Yagman portion in front of the Dhruva.
3.3.1	Having made the oblation for Agni to be placed on the sacrificial grass, the sacrificer touches it. We shall explain that in the context of the sacrificer.
3.3.2	Having divided it into four parts, he assigns it thus: This is for the Brahman, this is for the Hotṛ, this is for Adhvaryu, this is for Agnīdh.
3.3.3	This is for the sacrificer, says the Adhvaryu about the share of the sacrificer.
3.3.4	These are the heavier offerings than the Iḍā offerings.
3.3.5	Having directed the Āgnīdhra, he places the six-layered (bricks).
3.3.6	Having stepped down, having taken (the bricks), having poured clarified butter over them, having again stepped down, having taking (the bricks), he pours clarified butter over them. He completes the six-layered.
3.3.7	The Adhvaryu, having been invoked, takes the Agnihotra-cup. The sky, my father, invokes me. May the sky, my father invoke me. May Agni, from the Agnihotra-place, invoke me for life, for radiance, for long life, for prosperity.
3.3.8	He takes the Veda and the Brahman-share.
3.3.9	He takes one for the Hotri and another for the Adhvaryu.
3.3.10	The Hotṛ eats with the formula, "Thou art the share of Pṛthivī." The Adhvaryu with the formula, “Thou art the share for Antarikṣa." The Brahman with the formula, "Thou art the share in the heaven."
3.3.11	Having cooked a big rice-cake in the Anvāhāryapacan, having poured clarified butter over it, having taken it out, and having placed it near the Āhavaniya, the sacrificer touches it. We shall explain it to the sacrificer.
3.4.1	He instructs the attendants to bring the Dakṣiṇā.
3.4.2	The priests should be seated to the north of him, and he should tell them to sit to the south of him.
3.4.3	To the attendants seated to the south, he gives the Dakṣiṇa along with the Anvāhārya rice, saying, "This is the rice for the Brahmanas."
3.4.4	He again says, "Seated to the north."
3.4.5	Having placed the remnants of the oblations in the Uddhāra vessel, having sprinkled water, he instructs, "O Brahman, we are about to depart. Having placed the kindling wood, the Paridhi stones, and the fire, touch them each time."
3.4.6	The Adhvaryu, having been born, places the Anuyāja-kindling-wood on the fire. He says, "This is thy kindling-wood, O Agni. With it do thou grow and increase. May thy lord of sacrifice grow and increase. Svāhā."
3.4.7	The Adhvaryu smears the enclosing sticks and the fire with the Asfya kindling-wood sticks, silently the enclosing sticks.
3.4.8	"O Agni, winner of the prize, we anoint thee, the winner of the prize who wins the prize, the winner of prizes, the winner of prize-winning, for winning the prize. We anoint Agni, the eater of food, for eating food." Thus he anoints Agni.
3.4.9	Then, having touched the sprinkling water, he sprinkles the Āhavanīya fire with the verse, "O Rudra, the lord of beings, the moving one, the bull, the protector of cattle, do not harm us. Let this be offered to you. Svāhā."
3.4.10	Some say, "Let it be placed on a heap."
3.5.1	Having taken up the Juhu and the Upabhṛt, having brought the Upabhrit to the Juhu, having crossed (the altar) and having called (the Hotr), he says, "Do thou offer to the gods."
3.5.2	He offers at the Vasat-utterance.
3.5.3	Having called (the Hotris) and having called again, he directs with the two (verses) beginning with "Do thou offer" and ending with "Do thou make the offering."
3.5.4	He offers the Anuyājas in a reverse order, touching the first Āghāra.
3.5.5	He places the last one facing east.
3.5.6	He places the two (cups) on the highest (part of the altar).
3.5.7	Having stepped back, he places the ladles in their places and arranges them with the two verses, "May I be blessed with the blessing of the horse."
3.5.8	With the verse, "May I have the blessing of the swift horse," he takes up the Juhu with the stone on the right side. Then with the verse, "Indra has made me the lower one with his pressing," he holds the Upamant with the stone on his left side.
3.5.9	He takes up the Juhu with the formula, "Thou art Udgṛhī (taken up) and Nigrṛhi (held down)." He holds down the Upamant with the formula, “Thou art Nigrṛhi and Udgṛhi."
3.5.10	"The gods have increased the Brahman," with this formula he throws the Juhu towards the east.
3.5.11	"May Indra-Agni separate my enemies who are far away," with this formula, he throws the Upamant towards the west outside the altar.
3.5.12	Having sprinkled the Upabhṛt ladle with water, having taken it up, he anoints the enclosing sticks with the Juhu ladle and the Saṃsrava ladle, with the formula, "For Vasus thee" (he anoints) the middle one, "For Rudras thee" (heanoints) the southern one, "For Adityas thee" (he annoints) the northern one.
3.5.13	He does not place the Juhu ladle on the Prastara.
3.5.14	Having smeared the Prāstara with the Vidhṛtis, having placed the Vidhṛti-sticks on the sacrificial grass, he anoints the Prāstāra with the ladle, reciting the formula, "The known ones are going away." The tip on the Juhu, the middle on the Upabṛt, "Do not injure the womb of offspring," on the Dhruva.
3.5.15	In the same way he anoints the second, in the same way the third.
3.5.16	Having placed the grass for the expiration of life, having placed the Prāstara on the Juhu, having called out, while seated, he instructs, "The divine Hotṛs have been sent to the one who is to be addressed with good wishes, the human one to the one who has to recite the Sūkta. Recite the Sūktas."
3.5.17	While the Sūkta is being recited.
3.6.1	With the twig he strikes the fire-wood on the Ahavaniya fire, as if above, facing east, with these mantras: "May Agni, the god, go to the god, may the Maruts go to the Maruts, may the tawny one go to the tawny one." "The spotted ones of the Maruts are standing, go to heaven, then send down rain for us."
3.6.2	He does not strike back. He should not strike beyond the top.
3.6.3	He should not strike in front of himself.
3.6.4	Having bent the hand as if crooked, he holds it down at the end.
3.6.5	Where he knows that the sacrificer is looking at him, he throws the Prāstara and says, "Agni-bearer, go."
3.6.6	The Agni-bearer raises the Prāstāra three times with the Anjali.
3.6.7	Do not shake it. Do not separate it.
3.6.8	Then the Adhvaryu says to the Brahman, "Strike in succession and respond."
3.6.9	The Adhvaryu strikes in succession the grass that has been taken up in front, saying, "To your own bodies."
3.6.10	He points out with his fingers three times, saying, "This is it, this is it."
3.6.11	He touches the places of the vital airs, saying, "The vital air is not lost."
3.6.12	Having touched the mouth, he says, "O Agni, protect life; protect my life."
3.6.13	Having touched the Dhruva-stick, the Adhvaryu says, "Agni has gone." The Agnidhra says, "He has gone." The Adhvaryu calls out, "Let the Agnidhra listen." The Agnidhara says, "Let it be heard."
3.6.14	Starting from the middle enclosing stick, he instructs, "Svaga to the divine Hotrs, welfare to the human beings. Let there be peace."
3.6.15	When the Sāṁyuvāka is being recited, he strikes the enclosing sticks with the formula, "Which enclosing stick did you enclose? The middle one of the path of the sacrifice. The other two."
3.6.16	He places the northernmost enclosing stick on the embers with the formula, “The northernmost one.”
3.6.17	Having placed the mouth of the Juhu and the Upabhṛt, he offers the enclosing sticks with Srasrava, with the formula, "You are the shares of Srasrava, the great ones."
3.6.18	Here the priests eat the remnants of the oblations.
3.7.1	The Adhvaryu takes up the Veda, the Hotṛ the wooden sword, the Āgnīdhra the vessel of clarified butter, the water-pot, and the Juhū and Upamūhvṛtis.
3.7.2	The wives, about to perform the Saṃyāja rite, move towards the east.
3.7.3	The Adhvaryu takes his place to the south of the Garhapatya, the others to the north.
3.7.4	He places the two ladles on the two supports with the formula, "I place you in the seat of Agni, the lord of the house."
3.7.5	He releases the yoke with the formula, “May the yoked ones fall on the yoke.”
3.7.6	If he were to pour out in a vessel, he should release it on the wooden sword.
3.7.7	The wives perform the Samyājyā rite while sitting facing the Gārhapatya, with a loud sound or in a low voice.
3.7.8	Having taken up the Veda, he instructs, "Recite for Soma."
3.7.9	Having taken up the clarified butter as it was taken, he announces, "Recite, 'We shall offer to Soma.'"
3.7.10	At the Vaṣaṭ-utterance, he offers in the southern half.
3.7.11	The wives perform the offering with the same clarified butter as was taken.
3.7.12	He instructs, "Recitate for Tvaṣṭṛ."
3.7.13	Announcing, he says, "We shall offer to Tvaṣṭar."
3.7.14	He offers in the northern half of the fire after reciting the Vasat call.
3.7.15	Some say that one should offer Soma in the north and Tvashtri in the south.
3.7.16	One desiring a son should offer to Raka, one desiring cattle to Sinivali, and one desiring prosperity to Kuhū.
3.7.17	He instructs (the Hotr) to recite the Raka verse.
3.7.18	Having announced (to the Hotr), he says, "Offer to Raka."
3.7.19	He offers at the Vasat call.
3.7.20	He instructs (the Hotṛ) to recite the Sinivalī verse.
3.7.21	Having called out (to the Hotṛ), he says, "Recite the Sinivalî verse."
3.7.22	At the Vasat-utterance, he offers.
3.8.1	He instructs (the Hotri) to recite the Kuhû verse.
3.8.2	Having invoked (the Hotṛ), he recites, "Recite Kuhû."
3.8.3	At the Vaṣat-utterance he offers.
3.8.4	When the Parisa rite is performed, he offers to the wives of the gods, or when it is not performed.
3.8.5	He instructs (the Hotṛ) to recite the names of the wives of the gods.
3.8.6	Having called out, he says, "Recite the names of the gods' wives."
3.8.7	He offers at the Vasat call.
3.8.8	He instructs (the Hotri) to recite the name of Agni, the Householder.
3.8.9	Having called him out, he says "Recite the name of Agni the Householder."
3.8.10	He offers when the Vasat is uttered.
3.8.11	Having made his wife enter (the hall), he offers on the Garhapatya with the ladle, with the formula, "May the wife and husband go together in good deeds, may they be united in the proper place of the sacrifice, may they know each other, may they abandon enmity. May they attain the eternal light in heaven. Svāhā."
3.8.12	He anoints the joint of the thumb of the Hotṛ's hand with the ladle.
3.8.13	Having anointed the other one, he anoints the former one.
3.8.14	The Hotr puts four drops of ghee in the Iḍa, six in the Agnidhra.
3.8.15	The Adhvaryu and the wife join the Iḍa as it is being invoked.
3.8.16	The Hotṛ eats the Iḍā that has been invoked. The Agnīdhra eats. "The earth, the mother, has been invoked. May the mother, the earth, call me. May Agni from the Agnidhra call me for life, for brilliance, for long life, for happiness."
3.8.17	Having eaten, he cleanses himself.
3.8.18	It ends with the Iḍā.
3.9.1	Or with the Śamyuvant.
3.9.2	If he were to make a fire-offering with the fire-sticks, he should anoint the tip of the ladle, the middle of the spoon, and the root of the vessel for the ghee, taking the grass from the Veda.
3.9.3	Its rite is the same as that of the fire-sticks.
3.9.4	Having placed the fire-sticks and the scraping of the fire-pit in the Anvāhāryapachana vessel, he offers the Homa of grinding, kneading, and making into balls.
3.9.5	Having taken four spoonfuls of clarified butter, he offers with the formula, "O Agni, thou art not to be injured, thou art not cold." The offering is concluded with the Svāhā-utterance.
3.9.6	With ghee he offers the paste smeared on the pestle, on the mortar, on the winnowing basket, on the pestle and mortar, on the stone, on the potsherd. I offer the drops of oil that have fallen on the ground. May all the gods enjoy this oblation. Whatever drops there are in the sacrifice, I offer them all, well-offered, well-burnt, with svāhā.
3.9.7	The Hotṛ recites the Veda three times at the side of his wife, with these mantras: "Thou art the Veda, thou art the knowledge, thou art the knowable."
3.9.8	The wife moves away from him, step by step. He drives away the hater and the one who causes harm.
3.9.9	Or the wife herself recites.
3.9.10	It is known that the wife becomes like a knee to the husband.
3.9.11	Here some prescribe the release of the wife.
3.9.12	The Hotr priest, while spreading the sacrificial grass from the Havaniya fire, recites the remaining portion of the Anuvaka, "May it be full of ghee, may it be full of families."
3.9.13	Here some prescribe two Homa offerings in the Parvan ceremony.
3.9.14	It is understood that all expiations are offered with the ladle.
3.10.1	Or, taking up each time.
3.10.2	The Brahman is the foundation of the mind, the Brahman is the speech, the Brahman is of the sacrifices, the oblation, the ghee, the excess of the rite, and what is deficient. The sacrifice comes to the joints, arranging (them), the oblation offered with Svāhā goes to the gods, Svāhā. What is called out, what is called out excessively, what is pronounced with Vaṣaṭ, what is pronounced excessively, what is said, what is not said, the excess of rite at the sacrifice, and what is insufficient, the sacrifice comes to the junctions, arranging (them). The oblation offered with svāhā goes to gods, svāhā. Whatever is yours,
3.11.1	To Sarasvati, the bestower of beauty, salutations to her. To Sarasvati, bestower of beauty and wealth, salutations to Her. O Indra, make the people of the house, the well-wishers, of one mind. Salutations. Whatever I have done, whatever I have not done, whatever I transgressed, whatever I did not transgress, that, O Vishnu, you establish in the sacrifice. Salutations. O Indra, we are afraid of that, from that make us free from fear. O Maghavan, be pleased with that for our welfare.
3.11.2	Having offered the Prajapati-oblation, he offers the Dhruva-oblation.
3.12.1	Standing above the altar, he offers the Samishtayajus.
3.12.2	Having offered the first oblation, "The gods know the path", he scatters the sacrificial grass.
3.12.3	The second oblation, "To speech, svāhā".
3.12.4	The third oblation, "O Vāta, svāhā"
3.12.5	From the Hotr's seat he strews the altar, saying, "Strew! Enclose the altar! Do not injure the sacrificer! Lying on the ground, the golden, green, unadulterated, these are the sacrificer's wealth."
3.12.6	He places the sacrificial grass within the altar, saying "Who has bound you? May he release you!"
3.12.7	Then he releases his wife, saying, "I release the noose of Varuna."
3.12.8	Taking the yoke, the wife approaches him together.
3.12.9	He brings a full vessel to her in the form of a palm-cup.
3.12.10	When it is being brought, he mutters, "May we be united with life and progeny."
3.12.11	"May I rise, wiping my face, with prosperity, with cattle, with offspring, with a house-fire."
3.12.12	He places the garment on the heap of grass in front of the Sthavira, with the verse, "The garment which the gods have placed among men, those who are hostile to us, may they be here for us. May the garment and the garment-wearer give us progeny, nourishment and wealth. May the bipeds and the quadrupeds be firm and not fall."
3.12.13	"May he who is wearing the white garment die, whom I hate." He takes the name of the one whom he hates.
3.13.1	Then he strikes him with the name-taking (formula), "The enemy who has attacked the dwelling-places, Indra has driven him away with the destroying oblation. Come here, three times the Parāvata, five times the people, come three times the shining ones. As far as the sun is in heaven, may Indra, the slayer of Vrtra, lead you to the highest Parāvata, from where you will not return, to the eternal seasons."
3.13.2	He should say, "He is slain, the one who is to be slain," in reference to the one he hates.
3.13.3	When the oblations have been placed, he releases the potsherds, saying, "These are the potsherds of the Dharma."
3.13.4	The sacrificer should recite this (mantra).
3.13.5	Having established the full moon, he offers a cake on eleven potsherds to Indra-Vajra.
3.13.6	Here, the sequence is optional, but it is regulated by the sequence.
3.13.7	The sacrifice has seventeen oblations, and the Dakṣiṇā is given according to one's faith.
3.13.8	The two Śardhavatī oblations are offered at the end.
3.13.9	One may also offer it according to the same procedure on the full moon day.
3.13.10	Some consider it as obligatory, while others as optional.
3.13.11	When one offers it, one should not stop thereafter.
3.13.12	Thus having performed the Darsa-Pūrṇamāsa sacrifices, one performs them for as long as one lives, for thirty years or for thirty years.
3.14.1	The next day, the sacrificer chooses the Brahman priest, saying, "O Lord of the Earth, Lord of the World, Lord of the Great Being, I choose you as the Brahman priest."
3.14.2	I am surrounded, I am the lord of the earth, I am the ruler of the world, I am the master of the great being, I am born by Savitar the god, I shall perform the priestly duties. O god Savitar, I choose thee, thee Brihaspati, the divine Brahman. That I proclaim to the mind. Mind to the Gayatri, the Gayatri to the Tristubh, the Tristubh to the Jagati, the Jagati to the Anushtubh, the Anushtubb to the Pankti, the Pankti to Prajapati, Prajapati to the All-gods.
3.14.3	Having sprinkled water around, he sits facing the Āhavanīya fire in the place of Brahmā. "He says, "I am seated in the place of Arvāgvasu. I am born by the grace of Savitar, the divine one. I am seated in the abode of Brihaspati. I tell this to Agni, this to Vāyu, this to Surya, this to Earth."
3.15.1	There, this is the extreme limit: in the case of rites involving mantras, it is only through speech. In the case of silent rites, it is as one wishes.
3.15.2	One restrains speech until the offering of oblations.
3.15.3	It is understood that one restrains harsh speech.
3.15.4	Now some say that one should direct the speech towards the morning Anuvāka, the Sāmidhenī verses, the Prayāja and Anūyāja offerings, and the Sūkta and Sastra hymns.
3.15.5	Now some say that if something is done with a Vedic verse, a Yajus formula, or a Sāman chant, one should direct the voice towards it.
3.15.6	Now, some of them follow the tradition of the priests for each other, or as far as the priestly duties are performed by the Rk, so far the sacrifice is in the Hotṛs; as far as by the Yajus, so far in the Adhvaryus; as far as in the Sāman, so far in Udgātṛs. But wherever in the sacrifice is prescribed for the Brahman, so far the sacrifiice is in the Brahman. Therefore, in this secret, the Brahman should be silent.
3.15.7	If he is distracted, he should recite these very Vyahrtis: "Bhūr Bhuvah Suvah." This is the Vaishnavi Varch.
3.15.8	It is known that Vishnu is the sacrifice, and by the sacrifice, one sustains the sacrifice.
3.16.1	When he is addressed thus, "O Brahman, I am going to offer water," he says, "Let it be so." "Offer the sacrifice, may the deities prosper. May the sacrificer be on the back of heaven, where is the world of the seven sages and their good deeds. Place this sacrifice and the sacrificer there." "Let it be offered."
3.16.2	When he is asked, "O Brahman, I am going to sprinkle," he says, "Let it be sprinkled." Sprinkle the sacrifice. May the deities prosper. May the sacrificer be on the back of heaven, where is the world of the seven sages and the well-done. Place this sacrifice and the sacrificer there. "Om, let it be sprinkled."
3.16.3	When he is invited there, saying, "Brahman, I shall take up the northern enclosing stick," then he releases it. "O Brihaspati, take up the enclosing stick. May the seats of the gods be auspicious. Let the sacrificial grass spread on it. May the earth, the goddess, be harmless to us. May the deity increase you. May the sacrificer be on the back of heaven, where is the world of the seven sages and the good deeds. Place this sacrifice and the sacrificer there."
3.16.4	Where he invites him, saying, "I am going to sprinkle the Brahman," he releases him, saying, "Sprinkle the sacrifice."
3.17.1	When he is addressed thus, "O Brahman, I shall recite the Sāmidhenī verses," he recites thus: "O Prajapati, do recite. Do you increase the sacrifice and the deities. May the sacrificer be on the back of heaven. Where is the world of the seven sages and the good deeds, there place this sacrifice and the sacrificer." "Do recite" thus he says.
3.17.2	When he is addressed by him, "O Brahman, I shall proclaim the Pravara," then he proclaims, "O Lord of Speech, proclaim the speech. Proclaim. May the gods proclaim the sacrifice. May you increase the deity among humans. May the sacrificer be on the back of heaven. May he be in the world of the seven sages where there is good deeds. Place this sacrifice and the sacrificer there." "Oṃ, I proclaim."
3.17.3	Where he offers the Prasitra, there he waits, saying, "I see thee with the eye of the sun."
3.17.4	He addresses him when being called, saying, "Go along the path of truth."
3.17.5	Having touched water, he receives it, saying, "With the impulse of the divine Savitr, with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of Pusan, I receive thee."
3.17.6	Having arranged the grass in front, he places the staff on the ground, saying, "I place you on the navel of the earth."
3.17.7	He looks at it, saying, "With the eye of Suparna Garutmat, I see you."
3.17.8	Then he takes it with the thumb and the middle finger, and puts it in his mouth, saying, "I eat with the mouth of Agni, with the belly of the Brahman, with the Brahman of Brhaspati, I place thee in the belly of Indra."
3.17.9	Having sipped water, he again sips water, saying, "May the deities in the water pacify this (oblation). May the oblation offered to Indra go to his belly."
3.18.1	He touches the region of the navel, saying, "Do not touch me with your heat. May it settle above my navel. I place you in Indra's belly."
3.18.2	He touches the places of the vital airs with the mantras, "O speech, O nose, O vital airs," in the proper form.
3.18.3	Having washed and filled the vessel with water, he carries it towards the east, saying, "May the directions be pleased."
3.18.4	Having filled another vessel, he carries it to himself, saying, "Please me."
3.18.5	Where he gives him a share of the Brahman, he should not eat before the establishment of the sacrificial post.
3.18.6	Whatever earthen vessel is broken in the sacrifice, one should touch it and say, "May the earth go to the earth, may the mother go to the mother. May he who hates us be broken by his sons and cattle."
3.18.7	He touches the Anvāhārya rice within the Veda with the formula, "O Brahman, thou art Brahman. I offer thee to Brahman. Do not injure me. May the unoffered be auspicious to me."
3.18.8	Where he invites him, saying, "Brahman, we are about to depart," he releases it. "O god Savitar, this is told to you. May it be released and may it be offered. Brihaspati is the Brahman. Protect the sacrifice, protect the lord of sacrifice, protect me. Om, to the established one."
3.18.9	He remains here until the sacrifice is established.
3.18.10	When the sacrifice is over, having come out from the sacrificial fire, he places the Samidha (kindling wood) with the formula, "Salutations to the performed act, salutations to the unperformed act, svāhā."
3.18.11	Having placed (the oblation) he stands up with the verse, "O Jātavedas, the unassailable, the first, having sat down in this (fire), may you release us from the bondage. Release us, O Jātavedā, and bestow wealth on us. Whatever good you will bestow on us, may it be ours. May you unite us with good intentions and with wealth."
3.18.12	Thus is the sacrifice performed. The sacrifice is performed thus.
4.1.1	We shall explain the duties of the sacrificer.
4.1.2	On the Parvan day, the sacrificer shaves his hair and beard.
4.1.3	Having offered the Agnihotra, the gods, knowing the path, found the path to the sacrifice with the Veda of Manaspati. The sacrifice was united with the wind. Having recited this, the Adhvaryu kindles the fires in the morning.
4.1.4	"He takes up the eastern fire first, saying, "O Agni, may my radiance be in contests."
4.1.5	He takes up the other two silently.
4.1.6	With the second (verse) he offers to the Garhapatya, with the third to the Anvähäryapacani.
4.1.7	With three (verses) each one.
4.1.8	But one should recite the last (verse) at the Ahavaniya and offer.
4.1.9	Some prescribe the offering of Agni with the Vyähritis.
4.1.10	Some prescribe it as for the sacrificer.
4.1.11	The sacrificer stands by the fires being kindled. "I take Agni, the swift, who rises up to the rising sun, the Aditya, the light of lights, the supreme, for the sacrifice tomorrow. May the deities be pleased. The Vasus, Rudras, Adityas, with Indra, the deities, I take them first in my own abode, with my mind. Those who have entered this energy, those deities I take first. Agni here is the carrier of oblations.
4.2.1	The animals, the gods, have come to the intermediate fires. I take them in my own abode with my mind. Standing between the intermediate fires, he mutters this.
4.2.2	May the creatures here, of every form, delight in Agni, the lord of the house, and be united with him. I take them all, in my mind, to their own places. May the cattle here, of every kind, delight in Agni the lord of the House, and be united to him. I take all of them, in my mind to their own places.
4.2.3	This is the fire of the Pitrs. The Pitrs have placed it. I take it from the east. May it make us free from disease. Thus he recites for the Anvāhāryapacana.
4.2.4	May the guardians of the assembly constantly kindle you, O Agni, for victory. May you shine for me in the assembly. Having conquered, may I live a hundred autumns. Thus he recitess for the Sabhya.
4.2.5	May the food be preserved. May the seasons be brought forth. May I live for a hundred years in my house. May the serpent-born one restrain the mantra. This is the Avashasthya (mantra).
4.2.6	I proclaim Indra to the Vasus, Agni being the eldest. I proclaim Indra to Rudras, Indra being the eldest. I proclaim Indra to the Adityas, Varuna being the eldest. Thus all.
4.3.1	Aśmarathya says that one should take the one that has been brought for the Agnihotra. Ālekhana says that one should bring another.
4.3.2	Some recite them in the order: Agnihotra, fasting, and Vrata-food. Some recite them in this order: Agnihotra-kindling, fasting, and food for Vrata. Some recite them thus: Food for Vrata, Agnihotra-kind ling, and fasting.
4.3.3	In ancient times, when Barhiṣa and Āhṛta ate the flesh of a cow mixed with herbs, they ate something other than meat.
4.3.4	Before the calves were released, there was another (practice).
4.3.5	Then the sacrificer shaves his hair and beard.
4.3.6	Having gone beyond the Ahavaniya fire and having sat down facing north, he sips water with the verse, "The plants are rich in milk."
4.3.7	Then he worships the sun with the verse, “You are the supreme lord, you are the protector of vows, you are the lord of vows, I undertake the vow. I tell you that, I am able to do that, I am successful by that, may I be successful by that.”
4.3.8	If the sun has already set when he undertakes the vow, he should perform the rite with this mantra in front of the sacrificial fire.
4.3.9	It is known that one undertakes the vow with grass during the full moon and with calves during the new moon.
4.4.1	Standing to the right of the Ahavaniya, he recites, "O Agni, lord of vows, I shall observe the vow." This should be done by a Brahmin only, not by the other two castes.
4.4.2	"O Vayu, lord of vows," he stands near Vayu. "O Aditya, lord of vows" he stands near Aditya. "O Vratan, lord of vows", he stands near the Ahavaniya.
4.4.3	The gods stand at the end. The gods, O gods, be foremost among the second, the second among the third, the third among the eleventh. Come here, may I be able to do this, whatever this is. May the self do this for the self. I shall do this remedy. This is my remedy of all remedies. You two have brought the Asvins.
4.4.4	When undertaking the vow, he meditates on the ocean in his mind.
4.4.5	He observes this vow: He does not eat meat, does not approach a woman, does not sleep on a bed, avoids untruth, and fasts for that night, eating water or forest fare. One may eat forest fare as one wishes.
4.4.6	Some say: From the path, from honey, from the Praśātika.
4.4.7	He should eat the roots and fruits of the forest, or nothing at all.
4.4.8	He should keep awake during the night of the new moon.
4.4.9	Or he should do as much as he is able.
4.4.10	He should not sleep above.
4.4.11	He may sleep above.
4.4.12	But he should be a follower of the vow.
4.5.1	He should sleep in the fire for the sacrifice or in the fire for domestic rites.
4.5.2	On the next day, the sacrificer, having crossed the Ahavaniya fire and the Brahmasadan, sits facing the Ahavaniya.
4.5.3	While sitting there, he recites the mantras for the rites being performed.
4.5.4	When the fires are being spread out, he recites the formula, "Both the fires are being strewn. May the deities be near me. I am near the domestic ones. May the cattle be near me for the sake of protection."
4.5.5	The goddesses who have filled this entire world with the ten syllables, may they lead us to the sacrifice with their knowledge, may they lead with prosperity. Purified by the Brahman, who yokes you? May he yoke you for all desires, for the worship of the gods. Those who flow forth in front,
4.6.1	When the oblation is being offered, he recites the verse, "We invoke Agni, the Hotar, here."
4.6.2	Having recited this, he restrains speech until the oblation is offered.
4.6.3	He recites the verse "Who yokes you? May he yoke you" while going to all places of rest.
4.6.4	When the altar is being swept, he recites the verse: "The young woman with four locks of hair, well-dressed, resembling ghee, in the middle of the world, being swept for great good fortune, may she milk for me, the sacrificer, the desires."
4.6.5	He recites the Stambayajus over the (sacrificial) post being carried away, "The gods who hate me with the mind, with speech, with the Veda, with action, with hearing, with the heart, I cut off his head with Indra's thunderbolt."
4.6.6	When the pile of earth is being taken up, he recites this verse: "I am building this house for him who among you gods practices celibacy, the wise one who meditates in the directions, the ascetic, the secret messenger among humans."
4.6.7	He recites the formula, "I take thee, the southern and northern (parts of the altar) for the sacrifice, for the Praja, for the Agni, for the Soma, for the Brahman, for the Veda, for the Veda-reciter, for the Veda reciter, for the Brahman. O Brihaspati, do thou take the altar. May the seats of the gods be yours. May the sacrificial grass spread on it. May the space between the two be good. May the earth be the goddess."
4.7.1	When the skin is being removed, he recites this verse: "When you struck, we were afraid of injuring the earth, plants and water. O Adhvaryus, with the wooden mallet, you struck the sky. May the Moru protect us from that. When you struck, we feared that we had injured it. We made the altar cruel with our minds, desiring the gods. May we not go to that injury. May the earth be auspicious for us. May it be with all the worlds."
4.7.2	He recites the Anumantrana formula, "Having become the earth, she nourished greatness. Then the goddess nourishes the streams, the divine ones, and they go to the sacrifice. The plants, the waters, the Sakvaris here."
4.7.3	Having taken up the sprinkling water, he recites the formula, "I invoke the divine waters, the goddesses, for the sake of praise and sacrifice, by day and night, with their offspring, the waters."
4.7.4	When the sacrificial grass is being spread, he recites the verse, "May the sacrificial grass grow within the earth, may the plants that have been cut be spread. May those whose roots you have cut with the spade, be auspicious and may they be well-spread."
4.7.5	Having sprinkled the clarified butter and the Prokṣaṇī water, he recites the verse, "May the water and clarified butter purify each other well by the purifying rites of Savitr. The goddesses Shakaris, knowing each other, have come to this sacrifice with Shakaris."
4.7.6	The sprinkling of clarified butter has been explained. The taking of clarified butter is as follows:
4.8.1	When the sacrificial grass is being spread within the altar, he recites (the verse), "May the plants and waters be agreeable to the sacrificer here, the rain-giving clouds and Parjanya. May they grow with golden colour and a hundred shoots, untainted."
4.8.2	He recites over the spreading of the sacrificial grass, "The hair is the first, the most auspicious, agreeable to the gods, for the seat, the sacrificial grass. Place the sacrificer in the excellent world. Place me on the back of heaven, in the highest sky."
4.8.3	When the altar is being spread, he recites (the following): "The young woman with four locks, well-dressed, wearing garments of ghee, she who is being spread for great prosperity, may she milk for me the desires of the sacrificer. May she be auspicious, strong, and kind to me. May she be nourishing and beneficial to me. May (she be) nourishing and beneficial to my energy and strength. May she nourish food and energy. May she nourish my Brahmanic splendour. May she nourish strength and energy. May (she) nourish the clan and prosperity.
4.9.1	He recites the formulas for the enclosing sticks as they are being placed around (the fire). "He recites the formulas in accordance with the respective formulas, "Thou art firm, I am firm among my kinsmen," and "May I be honoured in this sacrifice. I place the enclosing sticks for my non-agitation. The supporter, the supporter of the supporter, Agni, may he drive away the enemies from here."
4.9.2	He recites over the Ahavaniya, "I yoke thee with divine Brahman for the carrying of oblations, O Jātavedas. The kindlers of thee, O Agni, are the well-born, the most excellent, may we live long, having offered to thee. If, O Agni, anything of this sacrifice of mine should be lost, or if any of the ghee should be spilt, by that, O Viṣṇu, I strike down the enemy, the one with evil life. I place him in the presence of Nirṛti. The most brilliant, the most shining, the most radiant, the ones who rise at dawn, those forms of thine, O Agni,
4.9.3	When the (earth) is being held up, he recites: "I cut off the enemies, the born and the unborn, by the holding-up (of the earth). I destroy their families and machines. May I be the best of my own people. The gods are pushing the families and machines. They are destroying all evil, all sin, all misfortune, all bad luck. The goddess is sinking into the world of good deeds. Give us offspring and wealth. Be firm, be holding, be self-holding, be life-holding.
4.9.4	When the Prāstara is being cut, he recites this verse: "This Prāstara holds both, it holds the Prayāja and Anūyāja offerings. It holds the Samidh twigs of various forms. I place the ladles in it."
4.10.1	The ladle being filled, he recites (the following): "O Juhu, ascend the path of the gods, where the sages, the first-born, the ancient ones, are. Having golden wings, your limbs are well-prepared. Carry me to the worlds of the virtuous. You are Juhu, the golden one, belonging to the Gayatri metre, enjoyed by the poets. Without being harmed, lead the sacrifice. Lead the sacrifice to the gods with the divine Agni's blessing." Thus he recites for Juhu.
4.10.2	I have overcome my enemies, the born and the unborn, the foes and the kinsmen. I have overcome the sacrifice, like a cow with good milk. May I be superior, and my enemies inferior. May the Upabṛt be well-disposed, the Ghrtachi, with the Tristubh metre, the knower of all. Without being harmed, may you lead the sacrifice. May you lead the sacrifice to the gods with the divine protection of Indra. This is the Upabृt.
4.10.3	He who has been hostile to me in speech, mind, or life, O Agni, may I be above him, and he below me. Thou art Dhruva, the firm earth, full of wealth, with the Jagati metre, knowing all. Do thou lead the sacrifice without fail. Lead the sacrifice to the gods with the divine protection of the All-gods. Thus Dhruva.
4.11.1	May it be settled on me, the auspicious, on the auspicious earth. May it spread with offspring and cattle, in the good world, in heaven, on earth, in the atmosphere, may I be superior, my enemies inferior. This ladle is eager to offer oblations, with a hundred fingers, with the Anushtubh metre. It anoints all the offerings of the sacrifice with the divine protection of Brihaspati. Thus the ladle.
4.11.2	This pot is filled with ghee, cut with a hundred streams, with the divine protection of the wind. Thus he takes up the pot of ghee.
4.11.3	He recites over the two cakes being offered, "Thou art satisfaction, the Gayatri metre; satisfy me with brilliance and with the lustre of Brahman. Thou art satisfaction, the Tristubh metre; satisfy me by strength and by vigour. Thou art satisfaction; the Jagati metre; satisfy me through offspring and through cattle."
4.11.4	The oblations are placed within the altar. He touches them with the formula, "Thou art the sacrifice, thou art the sacrifice, all-pervading, may I be all-pervasively present, past and future. May there be a hundred blessings for me, may there be a thousand blessings for me, the blessings of prosperity and cattle." This is the Agni-purorasa. "Thou art Prajapati, all-pervasive, may I be present all-pervatively, past and future, may there be hundred blessings for me. May there be thousand blessings for me. The blessings of prosperity and of cattle."
4.12.1	This is the immortal organ of Indra. By this organ the cattle have been brought to Indra. By this the gods have come to me. May I be here. May I be endowed with strength, fame, and vigour. May the cooked food be deposited in me. The cooked food has been deposited.
4.12.2	What Indra, the lord of creatures, poured on the earth, that has entered into you. This is the bright honey, the strength of the horse, by which he placed himself above the great Indra. May the curd nourish me. Thus is curd.
4.12.3	All the (objects) are touched together. With this Anuvāka, "May my lustre be in contests." This sacrifice has come together with oblations, with the Rk, with the Sama, with the Yajus, with the deities. By that we conquer the worlds having the Sun. May we attain the friendship of Indra and immortality."
4.12.4	He recites the Sāmidhenī verses while they are being recited, with the verse, "May the Angirasas, with the morning Prastara verses, accomplish the sacrifice."
4.12.5	He prays for whatever blessing he desires.
4.12.6	Where he knows that the fire is kindled, he recites this formula over the Ahavaniya fire: "The fire is kindled, offered, and Svāhā-uttered. May it protect us. Svāhā to the gods. This is our homage."
4.12.7	"O Agni, may your heat be for the sacrificer. May your heat overcome the enemies."
4.12.8	He recites over the ladle being filled, "Thou art mind, belonging to Prajapati."
4.12.9	"Thou art speech, belonging to Indra, destroying the enemies," over the ladle.
4.13.1	When the two best (priests) are being consecrated, he mutters: "The gods are the fathers, the fathers are the gods. I am what I am, and I worship. I do not transgress him for whom I am. My own is the desired, my own is the given, my own is fulfilled, my own is exhausted, my own is offered. Agni is my witness, Vayu is my hearer, Aditya is my announcer, Heaven is my father, Earth is my mother, Prajapati is my kinsman. I am what he is, and I worship."
4.13.2	He recites the Prajānas for the Prayājas, reciting with each verse, "I delight in Spring, the season."
4.13.3	One is mine, one is his, whom we hate and who hates us. Two are mine, two are his, whom we hat and who hates us, Three are mine, three are his, whom w hate and who hates u Four are mine, four are his, whom ve hate and who hatesus. Five are mine, none are his, whom v hate and who hatesu
4.13.4	He recites the two portions of clarified butter with the formulas, "The sacrifice is with Agni as the eye. By the offering to the gods, may I be with sight." This is the offering to Agni.
4.14.1	"The sacrifice is with Soma as the eye. May I be with sight by the offering to the Gods." This is the Soma offering.
4.14.2	Some recite the entire Anumantrana (formula) for Agni and Soma, saying, "By offering to the gods, may I become one with sight."
4.14.3	For the Agniya Purorasa oblation, he recites the Anumantrana formula, saying, "May I become one with the voice of Agni by offering to the gods."
4.14.4	"May I be invincible to him, may I conquer him." This is the name of the one whom he hates, which is taken at the Upāṁśuyāja.
4.14.5	"May I be the slayer of Vritra through the worship of Agni and Soma." This is the one taken at the Agnisomiya.
4.14.6	"May Indra and Agni be the slayer of Indra through the worship of Indra and Agni." This is the Indra-Agni.
4.14.7	"I am Indra, the sacrificer of the gods, may I be the conqueror of the senses," so says one who sacrifices to Indra and Sannāyya.
4.14.8	"I am the sacrificer of Mahendra, may I attain the greatness of the conqueror," so says one if he sacrifices to Mahendra.
4.14.9	"I sacrifice to Agni Sviṣṭakṛt, may I attain longevity and stability through the sacrifice," so says one sacrificing to Agni Sviṭṭakṛt. "May Agni protect me from evil deeds," so says one.
4.14.10	"May I be the enemy of Indra's enemies in the sacrifice to the gods." This is for Vaimṛdha.
4.15.1	When the Ida is being brought, one recites, "Come, O beautiful, come, O of good color." Having reached, one says, "You are invited, I am invited. I am yours."
4.15.2	At the Upāṃśu-offering he recites seven verses to the cows of the gods: "Come hither, for more, come hither, for better, come hither, come hither, O mind, come hither, curd, come hither, ghee, come hither, truth."
4.15.3	Thou art the seven human cows, thou art the mind, thou art the wealth, thou art the Ratni, thou art the Rati, thou art the son, thou art the daughter, thou art the goddess, thou art the divine, turn to me.  May the kind ones be kind to me with kind ghee. Let no one deceive me. The Brahman who gives this (gift) is a sage.  Like water rising from the sea, speech stands at the head. With ten horns, he directs the directions. Thus it is said.
4.15.4	When the Hotṛ calls out to the Idā, then the sacrificer, looking at the Hotṛ, should meditate on Vāyu in his mind. Vāyu is the calf of the Idā. May you, with that calf, Vāyu, milk the faith, austerity, and the heavenly world for me."
4.15.5	When the Idā is being called out, he mutters, "May that be true for me." He concludes with, "May I attain your favour."
4.15.6	When the Iḍā is invoked, he recites, "By the sacrifice to the gods, may I be prosperous and have cattle."
4.15.7	When the Iḍā, being carried for eating, is recited, "The Iḍā cow with her calf has come, flowing with milk, full of energy. May she come to us with food and oblations, with cows, for the Iḍās."
4.16.1	The broom has been explained.
4.16.2	He touches the sacrificial cake for the Barhis-sitters, saying, "Bind, swell, let not my giving be exhausted, let not my making be exhausted. Thou art the bestower of the directions; may the directions be bestowed on me. May the directions, both divine and human, be bestowed on me; may the day and night be bestowed on me, may the half-months be bestowed on me." May the months be bestowed on me," may the seasons be bestowed on me;" may the year be bestowed on me." Thou art the besTower; may thou be bestowed on me."
4.16.3	He touches the Anvāhārya-rice, the Anvāhāryya-rice, the near one, saying, "This is the vessel of truth, full of a thousand streams, he who is not to be exhausted, he has supported the earth, the atmosphere and heaven. With that rice-pudding, one crosses over death." With the remaining portion of the Anuvāka, he says, "You are the share of Prajapati."
4.16.4	Brahma touches it with the same.
4.17.1	When the Anūyāj-kindling-sticks are being laid down, he recites over them, "This is thy Agni-kindling-stick; by it do thou grow and increase. May thy lord of sacrifice grow and increase, and may we grow and increase."
4.17.2	The one who has been set up, the one who is being set up, the Agni whom I am setting up, may the gods cut off his progeny and his root. O Agni, whoever attacks us, whether equal or inferior, like the burning of a firebrand, may there be no remnant of him. O Jātavedas, whoever hates me, and whom I hate, and who hates me, may Agni burn them all. Whoever I hate, and whoever hates me.
4.17.3	The offering of the kindling wood is accompanied by the recitation of the following mantra: "The altar, the sacrificial grass, the offered oblation, the kindling wood, the enclosing sticks, the ladles, the ghee, the sacrifice, the verses, the mantras, the offerings, and the Vasat-utterance - may all these be united. When the kindling wood has been offered, may all the offerings be united."
4.17.4	He recites the Anuyājas with the formula, "By the sacrifice of the Barhis may I be endowed with progeny." With each formula.
4.17.5	When the two ladles are being arranged, he recites over them with the formulas, "By the impulse of Vāja may I be endowed." With two formulas.
4.17.6	He recites over the enclosing sticks being placed (in position) the verses, "We desire to propitiate the Vasus, the Rudras, the Adityas with the sacrifice."
4.18.1	He recites the formula over the sacrificial grass being spread out: "May the sacrificial grass be spread out with the oblation, with ghee, with the sun, with the Vasus, with the Maruts, with Indra, with all the gods. May it go to the divine sky. Svāhā!"
4.18.2	Where Agni knows, "This is the oblation," he recites the mantras of the respective deities, saying, "I follow Agni's prosperity." With these mantras, according to the deity.
4.18.3	When the Hotṛ takes the name of the sacrificer, he should say, "We have come for blessings, desiring to give milk."
4.18.4	When the grass is being pulled out in front, he recites (the verse), "The peg has been pulled out from heaven, has been raised up from the earth. With that thousand-jointed one, may you torment the hater. May the hater grieve for me, O plant. May I not grieve."
4.18.5	When the enclosing sticks are being removed, he recites over the Āhavanīya fire, "I release your ropes and rays."
4.18.6	He recites over the Samyuvāka, "By the sacrifice of the god Vishnu, may I attain stability through sacrifice."
4.18.7	The Brāhmaṇas, the Bhṛgus, the Vasus, the Angirasas, the Yatis, the Arthavabhās, the Vasus and the Angirasas have performed the morning ceremony of this sacrifice. May he go to that (heaven) which he desires to go to. He takes the name of the one whom he desires.
4.19.1	Having placed the Veda within the altar, he touches it with these mantras: "You are the Veda, you are the knowledge, you are the knowable."
4.19.2	After "you are the knowable," one should then take the name of whatever one wishes to accomplish against one's enemy.
4.19.3	He recites the formula, "For the sake of Soma, I am offering a sacrifice to the gods" for the first (offering) and "For the sake Tvashtri, I am offering sacrifice to the gods", for the second.
4.19.4	"May I be prosperous through the sacrifice to Raka." "May I be prosperous with cattle through the sacrifice to Sinivali." "May be prosperous with cattle and nourishment through the sacrifice to Kuhu." He recites these three mantras to the three wives and also recites the mantras to the sacrificers.
4.19.5	The two excellent Pātnīvat offerings are offered with the two formulas, "The wives of the gods, Agni the householder, the union of the sacrifice, by that union may I prosper through the offering to the gods."
4.19.6	He recites the formula, "May Ida protect us with ghee. Those who desire the gods are purified in her place. The goddess of the world, the goddess of the world."
4.19.7	"May I be devoted to her who is Sarasvati, the goddess of wealth. May I be devoted to the goddess of wealth." Having offered the oblation at the end of the offering of fruits, the mouth is cleansed.
4.19.8	When the Samīṣṭyajūṣa has been offered, he eats the share of the sacrificer with the formula, "May the sacrificer be united with the blessing."
4.19.9	If the sacrificer goes away, he should offer the share of the sacrifice on the Dhruva ladle with the formula, “I place you in the world named Vibhān, together with the sacrificer."
4.20.1	Then he recites the verses, "O sacrifice, may I be complete. May the sacrifice be auspicious for me. May you be accomplished as Svist, as Aristha, as Yajna. Obeisance to you, O sacrifice, obeisance to you, obeisance to the sacrifice. May you be completed with prosperity, with good fortune, with brahminical splendour. May you be fulfilled in accordance with the prosperity of the sacrifice. Obeisance to your sacrifice, obeisance, obeisance to your sacrifice."
4.20.2	He touches the (sacrificial) grass placed within the altar, saying, "Who has bound you? May he release you."
4.20.3	Then he causes a continuous stream of water to flow over it, saying, "You are true, may I be true."
4.20.4	Then he sprinkles it in each direction, saying, "The divine priests purify in the eastern direction" with these mantras as appropriate.
4.20.5	The remaining (water) he takes inside the altar, saying, "I send you to the ocean; go to your own place. May I be without a break in progeny; may my milk not be spilled."
4.20.6	"The mouth which thou hast cleansed in the water, O Sarasvati, and the honey in the cows and horses, thereby make my mouth rich in strength, O Sarasvati."
4.20.7	At the end of the Veda on the right side, he steps forward with the right foot in the steps of Vishnu, reciting three times the formula, "Thou art the step of Vishnu." Standing, he recites the fourth verse.
4.20.8	Then he stands facing the sun, reciting the formula, "We have gone to the light, the light has come to us." He concludes with the verse, "May I be united with the light."
4.21.1	Rising today, O Sun, may you destroy the seven enemies of mine. Destroy them with lightning from heaven, and make them sink down below. Rising today, may you divide us as a father divides his sons. May you grant long life to him who wishes for it. Grant it to us, O Sun. Rising today, O beneficent Sun, ascending to the upper heaven, remove my grief, O Sun, and destroy my distress. I place my distress in the hawks, and in the ropanaka birds. And in the yellow-robed ones, my distress.
4.21.2	He circumambulates, saying, "May the auspicious ones turn around the auspicious one. May the sinful ones be defeated."
4.21.3	If he is to perform a curse, he should say, "I am casting the life of the human Uṣyāyanya with grief" and should cast it with the heel of his right foot.
4.21.4	He recites over the Anvāhāryapacana fire, "O Agni, O Vahn, do thou cook for us the food, for the son, for the father, for the offspring, for the body, for the growth."
4.21.5	Having gone around the Ahavanīya fire, he recites over it, "Thou art brilliance." "May I be united with offspring, may my offspring be united with me."
4.21.6	"May the kindled Agni shine for me. May I shine for thee, O Agni, when kindled." Having kindled (the fire) again, he recites, "May the sacrifice be prosperous, may I be more prosperous." Having approached the Garhapatya, he recites the formula, "O Agni, do thou purify the life-breaths." Having reached the end with the formula, "May there be a hundred winters."
4.21.7	He takes the name of the son and pronounces the benediction, "May she be luminous for the son." If the son is not born, he pronounces the benedictin, "May she (the wife) be luminous for the husband." If the son has been born, he pronouces the benediction, "May she be luminous to him (the son)."
4.21.8	If there are many sons, he should take the names of all and pronounce the benediction, "May she be luminous in the sky."
4.22.1	Sitting inside the altar, he recites the verses "Those gods who are the destroyers of sacrifice" and so on.
4.22.2	He consecrates the entire dwelling place with the verse "Who will release you?"
4.22.3	Here some prescribe the consumption of the sacrificial portion.
4.22.4	The Brahman-Sacrificer should eat of the two Saṁnāyyas. "This oblation be for me for progeny, for ten heroes, for all the clans, for welfare. For the self, for progeny, for cattle, for safety, for the world, for rain, may Agni make my progeny abundant, may he bestow food, milk, and semen upon us, may he bestow prosperity, wealth, and energy upon us." "Thus have I performed the rites of Śṛta and Dadhīkṛti."
4.22.5	Then he releases the vow.
4.22.6	Standing to the south, he recites over the Āhavanīya fire, "O Agni, lord of vows, I have observed the vow."
4.22.7	This is for the Brāhmaṇa alone, not for the other two castes.
4.22.8	"He addresses Vayu with the words, 'O Vayu, the lord of vows,' he addresses Aditya with the words, ‘O Aditya, the lord of the vows,’ and the Ahavanīya with the words, “O lord of the vows of the vows.”
4.22.9	He recites the words, "The sacrifice has been renewed, it has been renewed."
4.22.10	Having stepped forward, he should say, 'O Agni, the lord of cattle,' this one.
4.22.11	When he is going out, he says to the Brahmanas, "I have satisfied you."
4.22.12	Now this is not known to the sacrificer when he is absent. So Asmarathya and Aalekhana say that the sacrificer's absence is prescribed in this way. The difference is only that the Adhvaryu performs those rites after touching them.
4.22.13	The sacrificer should recite the mantras facing the direction of the fire. He should recite the Viṣṇukrama steps facing east. He should say "Gomati". He should say "Gomatī".
5.1.1	One who is about to kindle the sacred fires should collect the kindling wood from an ashvattha tree that has a shami tree as its embryo and whose roots are not touching the ground. Some say that the roots should not be touching the ground.
5.1.2	The one who is the Ashvattha with the embryo of the Shami tree, with this (verse).
5.1.3	Or with the northern (verse).
5.1.4	The seven earthly and seven wooden materials are explained by the Brahmanas.
5.1.5	He brings them with these mantras, in accordance with their form, saying, "The form of Vaishvanara flows on the earth."
5.1.6	The sacrificer touches the (bricks) collected with the verse, "O Jātavedas, I have collected thee."
5.1.7	One should deposit (bricks) in Krttika constellation, if one desires, "May I be the foremost and lustrous among Brahmanas."
5.1.8	One should make a deposit in Rohini constellation, if one wishes, "May I grow all the plants."
5.1.9	One should put (bricks) in the head of the constellation of Aries, if one wishes to be wealthy.
5.1.10	He who was good before, may become worse. He should again take up the Vasu.
5.1.11	He who desires that his progeny should be generous, should take up the two Phalguna (stars) in the east.
5.1.12	He who wishes to be fortunate, should take up (the stars) in the west.
5.1.13	Some mention the opposite.
5.1.14	One should take up Hasta, if one desires, "May they give to me."
5.1.15	One who has an enemy should deposit it in Citra.
5.1.16	Some say that one should deposit it in the Citra constellation for the sake of a king.
5.1.17	It is known that one should deposit in Visakha for the sake of offspring, in Anuradha for the sake of prosperity, and in Prishthapada for the sake of establishment.
5.1.18	Some say it should be in the Surya constellation.
5.2.1	A Brahmin should deposit in the spring.
5.2.2	In summer or autumn, the king.
5.2.3	In autumn, the vaishya.
5.2.4	In the rainy season, the chariot-maker.
5.2.5	In winter, all castes.
5.2.6	Now if one is going to perform a Soma sacrifice, one should not observe the seasons or the stars. One should perform it in any season.
5.2.7	One should perform it on the new moon day or the full moon day.
5.2.8	If the full moon falls in the two Phālguna months, one should not perform the Agnihotra.
5.2.9	Some say that there is a rule for the fourth caste, others say that there is no such rule.
5.2.10	Some say there is no rule for the son of a living father, others say there is such a rule.
5.2.11	One should perform the Agnihotra at the end of the rainy season, and one should not go to a stranger's house.
5.2.12	He places the sacrificial post in the direction of the gods, inclining towards the east, with the formula, "Go away, go away."
5.2.13	In that (post) he digs a northern chamber, in front of the middle post, for the Garhapatya.
5.2.14	In front of the Garhapatyâsrayana he makes the Âhavanîya.
5.2.15	A Brâhmana should kindle the fire in eight steps, a Kshatriya in eleven, and a Vaisya in twelve.
5.2.16	It is known that it is to be placed in twenty-four places.
5.2.17	Some say it is unlimited.
5.2.18	Some say that it is the eye-sign.
5.2.19	To the right of the Gārhapatya fire, in the third part, he makes the place for the Dakṣiṇāgni fire.
5.2.20	They spread the line in front of the Āhavanīya fire.
5.2.21	In front of the Sabhya and Āvasatha fires.
5.2.22-25	Then the sacrificer shaves his hair and beard. The husband and wife, wearing linen garments, should kindle the fire. At the time of giving the Dakṣiṇā, they are given to the Adhvaryu. One should place them in front of the Brahmauḍanika (fire). Some say, one should place them in the east of the Sambhāranivapana (fire).
5.2.26	If one is going to kindle the fire on a particular lunar day, then one should do so in front of the fire on that lunar day, either on the twelfth day, or on the fourth day, or on a three-day, or on a two-day, or even on a one-day.
5.3.1	Having brought the fire from the tree-top or from the sun, one should kindle the fire in the Brahmaudana-pit, which is located behind the Garhapatya-pit.
5.3.2	At night, on the skin or on the sacrificial grass, he silently offers the Brahma-rice in four measures.
5.3.3	Or, "For you, by the impulse of the divine Savitr, with the arms of the Ashvins, with the hands of Pusan, I offer what is pleasing to Brahma, to the vital breath," for the first.
5.3.4	"For Brahma, to the exhalation," for the second.
5.3.5	"For the Brahma, to the inhalation," for the third.
5.3.6	The fourth is called Brahman. Having cooked in milk, he offers in four water-vessels.
5.3.7	In four water-vessels
5.3.8	Some say, "Do not pour out, do not collect."
5.3.9	Having cooked like rice for the living, having taken it out, he offers with the verse, "To the wise Prajapati."
5.3.10	Then having divided it into four parts, having anointed it with ghee, he offers it to the four Ārṣa deities as if cutting off (the oblations).
5.3.11	To those who have eaten the oblations, he gives a common boon.
5.3.12	Having brought the remaining rice-gruel and clarified butter, he puts three moist and fresh Palasha wood-sticks of the size of a span, having a knot, on the Brahmo-dana, having opened it.
5.3.13	He kindles the fire with Samidha-kindling verses, with Gāyatrī verses for the Brāhmaṇa, with Tristubh verses for the Rājanya, and with Jagatī verses for the Vaiśya.
5.3.14	He should observe this vow.
5.3.15	He should not eat meat, nor should he approach a woman.
5.3.16	His fire should not be taken out of his house, nor should it be brought from elsewhere.
5.3.17	This fire should not follow him.
5.3.18	He should not go away.
5.3.19	If he does follow or go away, he should cook the Brahma-rice, kindle the kindling woods, and then perform the remaining rites, and establish the fires.
5.3.20	If he does not install it within a year, he should do it in this way.
5.3.21	He who is going to install the fire the next day observes this vow that night.
5.3.22	He does not eat meat, does not approach a woman, and does not sleep on a bed. He should avoid untruth.
5.3.23	Some say that only the Adhvaryu should observe the vow, others say that all should observe it.
5.4.1	In the Garhapatya fire-place he binds a black goat with the verse, "O Agni, do thou unite us with progeny."
5.4.2	With the sounds of the Vīṇā and the Tūṇa, they keep awake the sacrificer during that night with auspicious hymns.
5.4.3	With the verse, "With the shells, do thou kindle the fire; with the shells, do kindle the fire," he kindles the fire during that night.
5.4.4-7	In that (fire) he should rub the kindling-sticks at dawn, with the two verses, "Jatavedas, the seed of the world," "He follows this Agni." The kindling-sticks are given to the sacrificer, Agni repels the Rakshas. The sacrificer waits for them, with the verse, "The great one, the mistress of the house, in the abode of truth."
5.4.8	Having taken it with the verse, "Do you ascend the ten," he recites with the two verses.
5.4.9	Then he restrains speech with the verse, “I approach truth from untruth.”
5.4.10	Speech is restrained from the churning of Agni.
5.4.11	Then the Adhvaryu and the sacrificer take Agni in themselves with the two verses, "I take Agni first in myself."
5.4.12	He throws away the fire-places, saying, "I throw away the unclean thing of this (house)."
5.4.13	Having thrown it away, he sprinkles it with the verse, "The goddesses have favoured us."
5.4.14	He scatters the materials on dry and windy places.
5.4.15	Having divided them into two parts, he puts half in the former and half in the latter.
5.4.16	"The ashes of Agni, the excrement of Agni." He puts sand in the place of the Garhapatya.
5.4.17	Thus in the place of Anvähäryapacani, thus in the place of Ahavaniya, thus in the places of Sabhya and Aväsathya.
5.4.18	Thus the rites are performed in order.
5.5.1	He puts the earthen pots one by one.
5.5.2	You are the knower, the fulfiller of desires. So say the Ushanas.
5.5.3	"When he scatters it, he thinks mentally, "Whatever black moon there is, may that be here."
5.5.4	"Rise, O Agni!" (he says) while scattering the mound of ants.
5.5.5	"Whatever is immortal on earth," he scatters the mound of ants in the Garhapatya fire-place.
5.5.6	"Whatever immortal is in the sky," he scat-ters in the Anvähäryapacaniya fire-place.
5.5.7	What is not nectar in heaven, that is in others.
5.5.8	From the sea, indeed, is the Sudha.
5.5.9	As far as the tip was, that is the Boar-slain.
5.5.10	The Goddess is here.
5.5.11	One who is casting sand should meditate on the one whom he hates.
5.5.12	Having placed gold pieces to the north of the provisions, he recites, "Those auspicious forms of yours, O Jātavedas."
5.5.13	Having placed each one, he gives it to the hated one.
5.5.14	If he does not find the hated one, he should throw it away.
5.5.15	Having mixed them thus, he sows them with the verse, "The first to be born was Agni," etc.
5.5.16	All the materials are brought together. The two verses, "May your bodies be united, may your hearts be united" are recited.
5.6.1	The ashes of the BrahmauDanika fire are collected and placed in a vessel. The Dashotrani fire is placed in a vessel and is placed near the fire. The horse is rubbed with the fire. The verse, "Be born with the fire, O Agni" is recited.
5.6.2	When the fire is being rubbed, the Yajamana is made to recite the four Hotr verses.
5.6.3	When born, he gives a boon.
5.6.4	"When born, he breathes, saying, 'I breathe thee with the breath of Prajapati.'
5.6.5	Then he takes him in his arms, saying, 'The immortal was born by the mortal.'
5.6.6	Then, having raised him eastward, before sunrise, while the Rathantara is being sung, seated in the sacrificial requisites, he places the Garhapatya."
5.6.7	"He should place (the pot) of the Bhrigus, saying, 'I place thee in the vow of the lord of vows of the Bhrigas.' He should place (the one) of the Angiras, saying, ' I place thee in the vows of the lord of the vows of the Angiras.' He should place the one of the Brahmanas of the Angiras. He should place (one) of the Adityas, saying, 'l place thee in the vowa of the lord of vowa of the Adityaa, the gods.' He should place one of the other Brahmana women. He should place the king, saying, ' l place thee in the VOWS of the lord of VOWS of Varuna, the king.' He should place a Kshatriya, saying, '1 place thee in the Vows of the lord of Vows of Indra, the lord of strength.'
5.6.8	He places all the fires in the materials.
5.7.1	Having placed them in the manner of the Rṣyādhāna, he places them with the Vyāhṛtis, "Bhūr Bhuvaḥ."
5.7.2	Then with the two verses, "Bhuḥ Bhūmane" and "Bhūmiḥ Bhūmane,"
5.7.3	The sacrificer stands by what has been placed with these two.
5.7.4	Then with the verse, "Gharmasirasaḥ, Gharmasirasaḥ,"
5.7.5	The sacrificer stands by it after having placed it.
5.7.6	Then he places them at the end with these (verses):
5.7.7	"I spread the truth, the dung, for the well-placed Garhapatya." With these two (verses)
5.7.8	The sacrificer stands by the placed (bricks) with "I am yours.
5.7.9	Then he makes the sacrificer recite the Agni-form at the right ear of the horse: "O horse, bring that dear form of Agni, the purifier, which is among the animals. O horse, bring that form of Agni, which is dear to the water, which is purifying. O horse, that dear form of the sun, which is pure, bring it."
5.7.10	Having kindled the Garhapatya fire, he should take up the kindling wood for the Ahavaniya fire, saying, "For strength and power I take thee up."
5.7.11	While the kindling wood is being taken up, he chants the Vamadevya hymn.
5.7.12	One should take up the fire from above while taking it up.
5.7.13	One should not take it up too far.
5.7.14	The kindling wood is taken up and held in place.
5.7.15	Then he places the Anvāhāryapacana ladle, having brought it from somewhere or other, on the fire.
5.7.16	Or having churned with the two kindling woods.
5.7.17	Having placed it with the Rṣyādhāna ladle, he places it with the Vyāhṛtis, saying "Bhuvaḥ".
5.7.18	Then with the two serpents, "Bhūmiḥ bhūmane" with this third one.
5.7.19	The sacrificer worships what has been placed with these two.
5.7.20	Then the wind, with the head of heat, is Prāṇa.
5.7.21	The sacrificer stands up with this very (wind).
5.8.1	Then he goes forward with the horses at the head, towards the east, with the verse, "Go, O wise one, along the eastern direction," and with these four verses, "From heaven, from earth, from the atmosphere."
5.8.2	He takes it from the knee-joint, then from the navel, then from the mouth.
5.8.3	One should not separate Agni and Aditya.
5.8.4	He takes Agni first and follows it afterwards.
5.8.5	Brahma turns the chariot to the right or the wheel of the chariot, saying, "O Brihaspati, I go around with the chariot."
5.8.6	Some say that the Brahman recites this verse of the invincible one.
5.8.7	Thus he turns the chariot as long as the wheel revolves three times.
5.8.8	If one has an enemy or a rival, then one should again turn the wheel three times.
5.8.9	At the end of the journey, he gives a boon.
5.8.10	Having placed the gold on the path of the Samaya, he crosses (the altar) with the verse, "Thou art the sky, the path of the sun, the support of the sacrificer."
5.8.11	He makes the horse step forward towards the east with the foot on the north side of the pile of wood, with the verse, “It has been established.”
5.8.12	Having turned to the right on this very step, he makes it step back towards the north.
5.8.13-17	He should step aside so that the embers of the fire, as they are placed, would fall on the foot. If there is no horse, one should perform this rite with a bull. It is known that the foot of the goat is to be placed. Some say that the foot of a pot is to be placed.
5.9.1	When the sun has risen half-way, he places the Āhavanīya fire.
5.9.2	If one desires Brahmic glory, one should place it when the sun has risen completely.
5.9.3	Having placed it with the Rṣyādhāna (mantra), one places it with the Vyāhṛtis: Bhūḥ, Bhuvaḥ, Suvaḥ.
5.9.4	Then with the Sarpāñjī (mantra) and the fourth one: Bhūmiḥ, Bhūmnī.
5.9.5	The sacrificer stands by with these two (mantras).
5.9.6	Then the sun is placed on the head of the hot-headed one, and the eye.
5.9.7	The sacrificer stands with this alone.
5.9.8	With two (verses) beginning with 'I place thee, O breath, in the immortal.'
5.9.9	Having placed at the end, he stands with 'Thou hast eaten, thou hast eaten.'
5.9.10	When the (Agni) is placed, he sings the Vāravantīśa (Sāman).
5.9.11	One should not touch the fire which is not for one's own good and which is not offered with oblations. One should pacify it with ghee and herbs. This is understood.
5.9.12	The form of thine, O Agni, which is dear among the cattle, which is in the earth, which is in Agni, which is in Rathantara, which is in Gayatri, that I have taken for thee. To that be svāhā. The form of thine which is dear among waters, which is in heaven, which is in Vayu, which is in Vaimate, which is in Trishtup, that I have for thee. To it be svāhā! The form of thine that is dear in the sun, which is in Heaven, which is in Aditya, which is in Brihat, which is in Jagat, which is in Anushtup, that have taken for thee.
5.10.1	Having pacified the Āhavanīya with ghee and herbs, he places the Sāṃbhāvasthāyī in the Ṛṣyādhāna.
5.10.2	Or having churned with the two kindling woods.
5.10.3	In the assembly hall, the Sāṃbhava is placed. In the dwelling place, the Sāvasthāyin.
5.10.4	It is known that the Sāṃbhavasthāyīs are in the Dakṣiṇāgni.
5.10.5	One says, "One should sing the Yajñāyajñiya," while another says, "In all."
5.10.6	It is known that one should sing the Sāman hymns at the installation of the fire.
5.10.7	Some say that one should not sing the Sāmans at the installation of fire.
5.10.8	With the three Agni Pavamānī verses, he places three Samidh twigs of the ashvattha tree, with these three verses: "O Agni, you purify the life-giving forces."
5.10.9	The three kindling-sticks of the Sami-wood, smeared with ghee, are placed with the three verses, "From the ocean, with the rays," etc.
5.10.10	"Agni, well-kindled, shine forth in front," is the Udumbara-wood; "We worship thee, O Agni, in thy highest birth," is the Vaikankata-wood; "O Savitar, the desirable, the variegated," is the Sami-wood.
5.10.11	One each for all.
5.10.12	In the morning, he silently offers the Agnihotra without reciting any mantras.
5.10.13	In the forest, the sacrificer stands near the Āhavanīya fire with terrible mantras and forms, saying, "With those terrible forms of yours, O Agni, go to him whom you hate."
5.11.1	Having poured out the clarified butter across the strainer, having purified the spoon and the Juhu, having heated them and having wiped them, having filled the spoon with four spoonfuls, he offers the Pūrṇāhuti with twelve spoonfuls. Having recited the verse "Seven are thy Agni, O Agni, seven thy tongues", he offers at the end of it with the Svāhā-call.
5.11.2	When the Pūrṇāhutis have been offered, he gives a boon.
5.11.3	In the same way, he pours out, sprinkles, burns, and cleanses in the subsequent Darvihoma offerings, and finally makes the offering with the Svāhā sound.
5.11.4	If one were to ask, "Which offerings are made in the Darvihoma offerings?"
5.11.5	Then the sacrificer approaches the Āhavanīya fire with the remaining portion of the Anuvāka, "O Agni, those two auspicious forms of yours, the Viraṭ and the Svarāṭ."
5.11.6	Then he offers this oblation, "Those who are to Agni in heaven and on earth."
5.11.7	Then he worships the five fires in order, beginning with the Āhavanīya, with the following verses: "The Āhavanīya is worshipped with the verse, "May the shining one protect me." The Anvāhāryapacchana is worshipped with the words, "May the father protect my progeny." The Garhapatya is worshipped with, "May the man protect my offspring." The Āhavanīya is worshipped, "May the praiseworthy one protect my cattle." The Sabhya is worshipped, "The Sabhya may protect my assembly." The Avāsathiya is worshipped, "May the one who knows the truth protect my mantra." All the five fires are worshipped with the words "May the five fires protect me."
5.12.1	He begins the procedure of the Agniya (offering).
5.12.2	It is similar to the offering of the Agniya.
5.12.3	One offers the Agniya cake on eight potsherds.
5.12.4	The oblation is offered after having been placed, sanctified, and sprinkled. Then, having taken it from between the Sāṃbhāravāsathya (sacrifices), and having sprinkled it, he places the dice on the dice-board, puts gold on the dice, arranges them, and offers with the verse, "He who has sat down with firm vows."
5.12.5	When he is giving a hundred dice to the sacrificer, he says, "Let us play with the barley grains. Let us not injure the joints."
5.12.6	The sacrificer rises up after having won the game.
5.12.7	They should play with the cow on that day in the assembly hall.
5.12.8	They should not injure its joints.
5.12.9	One should offer it to the members of the assembly.
5.12.10	Whatever she takes, both the food and the cooked food should be offered to Brahmins.
5.12.11	In the middle of the assembly hall, having placed gold, he offers with this verse: "Pra Nūnam Brahmaṇaspati"
5.12.12	Then the sacrificer stands by the fires with these two verses: "May heaven and earth be auspicious, those who are Agni, of one mind."
5.12.13	The Dakṣiṇā is equal to the time of the Dakṣiṇās.
5.12.14	It is understood that the Dakṣiṇa should be given in increasing amounts.
5.12.15	The Agnīdhra gives the first Upasparśana, the Sārasūtra,
5.12.16	and a goat and a horse to the Brahman.
5.12.17	A cow to the Hotṛ,
5.12.18	a bull to the Adhvaryu,
5.12.19	and a pair of cows, a garment, and a chariot to all.
5.12.20	The sacrificial fee for the Agni-installation is either six, twelve or twenty-four.
5.12.21	One should collect the sacrificial fee as prescribed. So says one.
5.13.1	Except for the prescribed sacrificial fee, says another.
5.13.2	If one installs the fires without wealth, one should give a cow as sacrificial fee.
5.13.3	The Iṣṭi comes to an end with success.
5.13.4	When about to offer the evening Agnihotra, he offers the Grahas in the Ahavaniya fire, having mentally followed the Dashahotar.
5.13.5	He offers the Agnihotra for twelve days in the Ajashres.
5.13.6	He observes the vow.
5.13.7	One should offer oneself or another should offer for twelve nights.
5.13.8	One should not go away.
5.13.9	One should wear fresh clothes.
5.13.10	One should oneself offer on the thirteenth day.
5.13.11	The cow from which the first milking is taken for the Agnihotra is the fee for the Agnihotra.
5.13.12	One should offer the Agnihotra with these Vyāhṛtis: Bhūr Bhuvah Suvah.
5.13.13	When the year is over, one should offer it with these Vyāhritis.
5.13.14	Āśmarathya says that the first year itself. Ālekhaṇa says that the year is the year.
5.13.15	When the twelve (days) are over, he offers the Tanu-oblations.
5.13.16	To Agni Pavamāna, a cake on eight potsherds; as Dakṣiṇā, gold weighing thirty (mānas).
5.13.17	The Iṣṭi comes to an end with success.
5.13.18	Then to Agni Pāvaka, to Agni Śuci, as Dakṣiṇa, gold weighing thirty, forty.
5.13.19	The Iṣți comes to an end successfully.
5.13.20	One may offer the Tanu-offerings the next day.
5.13.21	Some say that one may offer them at the end of half a month, a month, a season, or a year.
5.13.22	The rites are similar to those of Agni.
5.13.23	One who is going to perform a Soma sacrifice is not known.
5.14.1	One may offer the Tanuh-offerings before a year.
5.14.2	Or having offered oblations to Agni Pavamāna, Agni Pāvaka, and Agni Śuci, one may offer to the deities of Soma.
5.14.3	Above the oblations to the Tanas, one should offer an Ekādaśakapāla oblation to Agni-Soma, an Ekādaśapāla oblation dedicated to Indra-Agni, and a Ghṛta cake to Aditi.
5.14.4	The animal sacrifice to Agni-Soma is to be performed by the Brāhmaṇa alone, not by the other castes.
5.14.5	The procedure is the same till the cooking of the rice.
5.14.6	The rice cooked and kept aside is taken out with the mantra for distribution.
5.14.7	He mixes it with the other rice.
5.14.8	The procedure up to the covering of the pot is the same.
5.14.9	Having covered the pot of the animal sacrifice to Indra-Agni, he places the pot of cooked rice with the first pot-mantra.
5.14.10	"You are firm." He recites the mantra "You are firm" or "You are firm".
5.14.11	He pours the ground rice into the covered pot and pours it out.
5.14.12	Having poured the ghee with the Yajus, he brings it to the pot of cooked rice.
5.14.13	He recites the mantra according to the authority.
5.14.14	He pours the cooked rice with the mantra for placing on the fire.
5.14.15	He places the cooked rice in the pot itself.
5.14.16	This is the procedure for the offerings of cooked food, except for the taking of clarified butter.
5.14.17	There are seventeen Sāmidhenī verses.
5.14.18	The offering of oblations is similar.
5.15.1	He recites the Anumantrana verse for the oblation offered to Aditya: "May I attain stability through sacrifice, O Aditya, by worshipping the gods."
5.15.2	In the same way, he recites the Anumantrayana verse for all the oblations to Aditya.
5.15.3	At the time of dividing the oblation of the sun into four parts, he offers everything to Brahma.
5.15.4	The four officiating priests who are students of the Vedas eat it.
5.15.5	For them, having eaten, he gives a cow as a gift.
5.15.6	Some say that the offerings to the deities are performed silently.
5.15.7	The Iṣṭi comes to an end successfully.
5.15.8	One who is about to perform the Darsa-Pūrnamāsa sacrifices should offer two oblations to Sarasvati before the commencement of the rites, the Pūrna oblation first and then the Yat te devā adadhur oblation.
5.15.9	He performs the Anvarambhaniya Iṣṭi.
5.15.10	He offers an oblation of eleven potfuls to Agni-Visnu, a rice-pap to Sarasvati, and a cake on twelve potfuls to Sarasvata.
5.15.11	One desiring prosperity should offer to Agni Bhaga a cake on eight potsherds as the fourth oblation.
5.15.12	The offerings are similar.
5.15.13	One recites the mantra "May I prosper with the divine worship of Sarasvati, speech and food" while offering to Sarasvati.
5.15.14	In the same way, one recites the mantra while offering to all the deities associated with Sarasvati.
5.15.15	In front of him, he offers the Jayas to Sviṣṭakṛt, reciting the twelve verses beginning with "Cittam and Citti" and ending with "May Prajapati grant me victory." He should offer the thirteenth verse, "May Prajapति grant me victory."
5.16.1	The fourteenth verse, "O Agni, the giver of strength," is for one desiring brahminical splendor.
5.16.2	His fame becomes bright among the people, and his own self becomes like a spotted cow.
5.16.3	The sacrificial fee is a pair of cows.
5.16.4	The Iṣṭi comes to an end with the Siddha (oblation).
5.16.5	One who is about to perform the Darśa-Pūrṇamāsa sacrifices, having mentally followed the four Hotṛ-priests, offers the Graha in the Āhavanīya.
5.16.6	One undertakes the Darśa and Pūrṇamāasa sacrifices.
5.16.7	The Pūrṇamāsī first.
5.16.8	For one who sets up the fire on the new moon day, this is the unmodified procedure.
5.16.9	But at the Pūrṇamasi, on the earlier Parvan, there is the Iṣṭi with Anvarambhaṇīya, immediately after the Sadyaspavrjiya.
5.16.10-16	He performs the Full-moon sacrifice on the next day. Now these are the observances of one who has established the sacred fires. He should not speak untruth. A brahmin should not stay in his house without being invited. He should honour a guest who arrives at sunset. He should eat neither in the evening nor in the morning without having offered the Agnihotra oblation.
5.16.17	He should not give anything other than food at night.
5.16.18	One who gives food at night should give it in the morning.
5.16.19	One should not eat food cooked with barley flour.
5.16.20	One should avoid using wet wood.
5.16.21	One should refrain from eating food that is kept inside a boat.
5.16.22	One should build a boat on one's own.
5.16.23	One should never offer silver or gold on a sacrificial grass.
5.16.24	He should approach his wife silently, making the sound "hīṃ".
5.17.1	We shall now explain the Punaḥādheya (re-installation of fire).
5.17.2	The procedure for the installation of fire has been explained.
5.17.3	We shall now discuss the modifications.
5.17.4	It is understood that one who does not perform the Agniādheya (installation of fire) performs the Punaḥādhēya (re-establishment of fire).
5.17.5	When the son of Jānyā was born, when the moon was eclipsed by Rāhu, then one should light the fire again, so say some.
5.17.6	One who desires offspring, one who desires cattle, one who desires food, one who desires stability should light the fire once again, so it is known.
5.17.7	Āśmarathya says that the time for the renewal of the vow does not expire as long as one lives. Ālekhaṇa says that it expires after a year.
5.17.8	One who is about to consign the fire to the fire-altar should offer an oblation of eight potsherds to Agni and an oblation of twelve potsherds to Vaiśvānara.
5.17.9	In front of him he offers this oblation to Svishtakrit: "O Agni, with that form of yours which is dear to the cattle, which is purifying, do thou enter the earth together with it, with the Rathantara Sāman, in the Gayatri metre, svāhā."
5.18.1	The body of thine, O Agni, which hath fallen into the waters, which is dear to thee, with that enter the atmosphere, with the Vāmadevya hymn, with the Tristubh metre. From that bestow on us food and strength, and increase the householder's rites. Svāhā. The body of thine which hath fallen into sun, which is dear and pure to thee, with it enter heaven, with the Brihat hymn, with the Jagat metre. From that restrain the rain. Svāhā! The forms of thine, O Indra, which were divided, which the Boar brought forth,
5.18.2	He deposits the burning fires on the full-moon day.
5.18.3	One says that the fire should be released for a year, another says that it should be released for an unlimited time.
5.19.1	Now these are the stars for the re-installation: Rohini, Punarvasu, Anurādha.
5.19.2	One should install in the rainy season or autumn.
5.19.3	It is known that the installation is at midday.
5.19.4	All of them should be placed at midday, says one. The Ahavaniya and the Sabhya and the Avasihya are the other two.
5.19.5	All of them are similar up to the placing of the Garhapatya.
5.19.6	One places the Garhapaty with all the serpents.
5.19.7	All of these are similar up to raising the Ahavaniya.
5.19.8	The sacrificial grass is made of Upolava grass, which is cut in the autumn and dried in the sun. Having kindled the fire on that kindling wood, he places the Ahavaniya fire.
5.19.9	He places the Anvähäryapacani fire with the verse, "What the angry one has cast away from you."
5.19.10	He places the Ahavani ya fire with the verse "What has been cast away from your mind."
5.19.11	He stands by each fire placed with the verse, "May the mind and light be pleased."
5.19.12	The silence is the same as in the Agnihotra.
5.19.13	One offers the Agnihotra silently, saying, "Seven are thy kindling woods, O Agni, seven thy tongues."
5.19.14	The silence is the same in the offering.
5.19.15	He offers a cake on eight potsherds to Agni.
5.19.16	This is his place for the eight potsherds.
5.19.17	There are fifteen kindling verses or seventeen.
5.19.18	At the beginning of the Anuyājas, they perform silently, except at the Sviṣṭakṛt.
5.19.19	Up to the Prayājas, it is common.
5.19.20	At the four Prayājas, he places four Vibhakti-s.
5.20.1	Agnagne, Agnāv agne, Agninā agne, Agnim agne.
5.20.2	One should offer the oblation above the Yajamaha. This is one view. The other view is that one should offer it before the invocation.
5.20.3	If one wishes to injure someone, one should offer the oblations above the Prayājas and before the Vasat-utterance.
5.20.4	The Prayāja is the best, because it is self-sufficient.
5.20.5	The two Ajyabhāgas are common.
5.20.6	The Agnivaan offering of clarified butter is offered with the verse, "We invoke Agni with praise."
5.20.7	The Pavamanvaan offering of Soma is offered with the words, "O Agni, you purify the life-giving (waters)."
5.20.8	He offers with the words, "May Agni, the purifier, enjoy this offering of clarified butter."
5.20.9	One who desires offspring or cattle should offer the Soma in the world of Agni with the words, "Agni is the head."
5.20.10	The two oblations and the two Svishtakrit offerings are the two verses beginning with "O Agni, today..."
5.20.11	One offers oblations around the cake with the verses "Again with energy and prosperity..."
5.20.12	The Dakshina is given at the same time as the Agni-installation.
5.20.13	One gives Dakshina for both the Agni-installation and the re-installation.
5.20.14	These are the Dakshina for the re-installation.
5.21.1	The chariot is again made, the garment is again woven, the bull is again let loose, the gold is again melted.
5.21.2	The Anuyājas are similar.
5.21.3	In the case of two Anuyājas, he places two Vibaktis, 'To the god Agni' and 'To the god Agnis'.
5.21.4	The Vibaktis have been explained.
5.21.5	The Anūyājā is self-sufficient.
5.21.6	The Iṣṭi comes to an end with success.
5.21.7	He offers the cake on eleven potsherds to Agni and Varuṇa.
5.21.8	This (cake) indeed occupies the place of the Agnisomiya (cake).
5.21.9	One who offers the cakes to all deities,
5.21.10	The Punaḥādheya comes to an end.
5.21.11	One who would kindle the fire after the Punaḥādheyā, should offer these oblations: Lakaḥ, Salakaḥ, Sulakaḥ.
5.21.12	They know the place of the oblations to Agni in the kindling woods.
5.21.13	If one who has ascended the kindling woods perishes, one should perform the installation again, says Aśmarathya. It is the installation of Agni, says Ālekhana.
5.21.14	If one knows that both have followed him, one should perform it again.
6.1.1	We shall explain the attending of the fire.
6.1.2	At the time of kindling, the wife and the sacrificer observe the vow until the offering.
6.1.3	When the oblation is being carried, the sacrificer follows it until the offering. 
6.1.4	Some say that one should stand when the oblation is carried.
6.1.5	One who is about to offer should touch water with the verse, "You are lightning, remove my sin. I approach truth from truth, with faith."
6.1.6	You are the rain. Bestow on me. I have come from truth to truth. In the waters, in faith. Having offered thus,
6.1.7	one who is about to perform all the sacrificial rites, having performed the rites, touches water.
6.1.8	Having not risen from the northern oblation, he stands by the Ahavaniya fire with the verses, "Those who are approaching the sacrifice" and the other six.
6.1.9	"May my lustre be in the contests." With these four verses, one should worship Agni in the waning fortnight.
6.1.10	Then in the waxing fortnight, having recited the verse "O Agni, you are the most excellent of all," and having worshipped with the remaining verses, one should finally worship with the verse "O mother of the sky, you have borne the lord."
6.1.11	In the year, he attends on the Garhapatya with the Agni Pavamānī verses.
6.1.12	He attends on the Ahavanīya with these six verses, "O Agni, do thou purify the life-breaths."
6.2.1	"O Agni, may I have life; may I have life for thee." Thus he addresses himself to Citravasu. In the evening he says, "May I have thy welfare in the end." In the morning he says, "O Arvavasu, may I have thy welfare at the end."
6.2.2	One addresses oneself to Citravasa three times and to Arvavasu three times.
6.2.3	He places the kindling-sticks on the Āhavaniya fire, saying, "O Agni, thou art the kindling-stick; protect me from the curse." The second, "Thou art the kindling stick of Soma; protect me from injury." The third, "Thou art kindling-stick of Yama; protect me from death." The fourth, "The kindlers have protected thee for a hundred winters." Having placed them, he stands up reciting the remainder of the Anuvāka, "Thou hast reached the lustre of the sun, O Agni.
6.2.4	The mouth is cleansed, O Soma, in thy rite. We have borne thy mind in our bodies and have become progeny-bearing.
6.2.5	He stands near the cowshed, reciting, "I see my progeny." He recites the last verse, "May they be many."
6.2.6	Some say that he stands between the fires and recites.
6.2.7	Having touched the calf with the formula, "O Agni, thou art the collection of all forms", he attends upon the Garhapatya with these six formulas, "O Agni come to us from heaven, from heaven, from the sky, from the sky."
6.3.1	He attends upon the cow-pen with the formula, “I see you with energy, may you see me with energy. May your wealth be established in me." With the last one.
6.3.2	Some say that he touches the calf.
6.3.3-6	He stands by the Ahavaniya with the verse, "This is the most excellent of Savitar." He concludes with the verse, "The breaker of the yoke, the breaker of the yoke." He stands by the Garhapatya with the verse "O Agni, the lord of the house." He concludes with "A hundred snows." He takes the name of the son. The rite for the son who is born and the rite for the son not born have been explained.
6.3.7	Then he says, "The divine thread is cut. May the human not cut it. May you not cut it from the divine abode. May you not from the human."
6.3.8	Having kindled the fires between them, he sits down with the words, "For the thread of light, for you."
6.3.9	In the same way, he attends in the evening with the Agni-upasthāna.
6.3.10	In the morning, with the Avam-neka. In the morning, with Pratah.
6.3.11	The two hands are placed on the head while being sprinkled. The verses of sprinkling are recited.
6.3.12	He stands by the Āhavaniya with the remaining verses.
6.3.13	One should recite four northern verses for the Agniṣṭoma and Viṣṭoma, and two Yājyā and Anuvākyā verses for the Āgneya.
6.3.14	Some prescribe the Agni-upasthāna with Vyāhṛtis.
6.4.1	Some say, “I am able to support.”
6.4.2	Some say, “I can support, may my faith not fail.”
6.4.3	Some say out of affection.
6.4.4	Some say that it is with the three-fold Mahitrī. May the three mighty ones be friendly. May the friendly one of Mitra, the Aryaman, the hard to assail one of Varuna, for they have no adversary in the battles, in the contests. The enemy does not rule over them. For they are the sons of Aditi, the givers of wealth, who bestow constantly. They give to the worshipper the good things.
6.4.5	Thus is the rite of approaching the fire when one is going away.
6.4.6	The Adhvaryu should perform those rites which are common to all.
6.4.7	The sacrificer should recite the mantras facing the direction (of the fire).
6.4.8	When going away, he says, "Prepare the fires."
6.4.9	He approaches the fire with the verses of Viraj and Bhasva, as in the case of the installation of fire.
6.4.10	He places the kindling-wood on the Ahavaniya with the verse, "May the first-born Jātavedas know my name."
6.4.11	Standing between the fires, he mutters, "May Mitra-Varuna protect these houses of mine, may they be protected by you, may Pūṣan guard them, may they be safe from harm, may they be restored to us when we return."
6.5.1	He goes forth with speech restrained, saying, "Do not let us go astray from the path, O Indra, from the sacrifice of the Soma-presser. Let not the evil spirits be within. Lead us to the higher regions. O Agni, lead us to the higher realms with ghee unoffered. With prosperity and many children."
6.5.2	He restrains speech near the fires and releases it far away.
6.5.3	One who is observing a vow goes away.
6.5.4	He stands facing the season.
6.5.5	If the fire is not present, he stands facing it, saying, "I am here, I am there, I am here, I stand facing you, O Agni, with breath, speech, and mind. Do not let my life be cut off. I stand facing you with the light of the all-pervading Agni."
6.5.6	Having made the kindling-sticks, he approaches the fires with the verse, "Those who bring the all-giving (fire) with an untroubled mind, O Agni, may your dwelling-place not be harmed. Salutations to you, O Agni, salutations to your dwelling-place. O Agni, shine forth your body. May I be united with prosperity."
6.5.7	He restrains speech near the fires and releases it far away.
6.5.8	He says, "Arrange the fires," when returning from a journey.
6.5.9	He worships Bhavasvat with the Viraj verses as in the Agni-adhyaya.
6.5.10	He recites the mantra, "May Mitra-Varuna protect my house."
6.6.1	"May Mitra-Varuṇa protect my house, may Pūṣan protect it for our return."
6.6.2	He puts three kindling-sticks on the Āhavaniya fire, saying, "Thou art the kindling-stick of Agni."
6.6.3	Having put them down, he stands up, saying, "My name and thine, O Jātavedas," with these four verses.
6.6.4	He offers the oblation on the Proṣṭhapada day, saying, "May the mind and light be pleased," with this verse.
6.6.5	One should not offer on the tenth day.
6.6.6	Now when one has stayed for nine and a half nights and then departs with his house, all the other carts are yoked together.
6.6.7	Then the one belonging to Agni is yoked on the right, the one belonging to Vāstoshpati on the left.
6.6.8	Then he offers to Vāstospati.
6.6.9	"O Vastospati, do thou know us well." Having recited this verse, he offers with the subsequent verse.
6.6.10	He does not offer what has not been offered.
6.6.11	Having sprinkled the ashes, he places the fires separately on the two fire-sticks, as many as are to be kept permanently, with the verse, "This is thy permanent abode."
6.6.12	Or else he says, "O Agni, come here with that body of thine which is fit for sacrifice." He thus places him in himself.
6.6.13	He who is going to strike, mutters, "Come down, O Jātavedas."
6.6.14	If the horse is not brought forward, they should bring it forward first. They should take it away.
6.6.15	If it is lost, they should not bring it back. It is known that they should not bring back.
6.7.1	We shall explain the Agnihotra.
6.7.2	The sacrificer instructs in the evening, "Lift up the Ahavaniya," and in the morning, "Lift up."
6.7.3	The Adhvaryu or the Brahmacarin or the Kshirahotra priest, taking the Upavesha, recites over the Garhapatya with the verse, "Thou art Dhriti, thou art Brahma, thou art the protector."
6.7.4	Then he awakens him, saying, "Wake up, O Agni, and be watchful. May the done and the undone be united. May the All-gods and the sacrificer be seated in this upper place."
6.7.5	Formerly, from the Garhapatya fire, which had been kindled by the union of the shadow, he draws out the blazing Ahavaniya fire, saying, "With thy voice I draw thee with the Hotr, with thy breath with the Udgâtri, with thy eye with the Adhvaryu, with thy mind with the Brahman, with thy ear with the Agnidh, with these five divine priests I draw thee."
6.7.6	When the sacrificial post is being raised, the sacrificer mutters: "Bhūr Bhuvah Suvar Om! Being raised, may it raise me from sin. Whatever I have done unknowingly or knowingly, whatever evil has been done by me, may I be freed from all that and released from it." In the evening, he recites: "Whatever evil has been done knowingly or unknowingly, may I be released from all that and freed from it." In morning.
6.7.7	He establishes the fire in the place of the Āhavanīya with the formula, "I offer the oblation of immortality to the fire of immortality. I offer the fire to the earth for the conquest of immortality. By that I conquer the endless desire. Prajapati conquered it first. Agni to Agni, svāhā." In the evening he offers to the Sun with the formula, “To the Sun, svāhā.” In the morning.
6.8.1	The sacrificer himself, having brought the kindling woods, places them on the fires in the manner of the great kindling woods.
6.8.2	On the Āhavaniya fire he places the largest one.
6.8.3	The Garhapatya fire is always to be kept burning.
6.8.4	In the evening and morning they should take out the Āhavani ya fire.
6.8.5	Or it may be taken out in the evening and kept till the morning Agnihotra.
6.8.6-10	The Ahavaniya fire is always kept burning. Or for one who desires long life. Every day the Aharahavana fire should be brought in or churned out. Or it may be always kept burning. The Sabhya and Avashthya fires are always kept burning.
6.8.11	He carries the fires around, saying, "O Agni, O king, be purified!" to the Ahavaniya; "O Agni, the shining one, be purified!"
6.8.12	to the Anvähäryapacani; "O Agni the householder, be purified!" Having offered thus, he carries the fires around.
6.8.13	He strews the fires, the Garhapatya, then the Anvähärvapacani, then the Ahavaniya.
6.8.14	Having washed the Agnihotra vessels, he places them in pairs to the north of the Garhapatya - a Khadira ladle, a Vaikankati Agnihotra vessel, a cloth, an Arya-made Agnihotra spoon, an upright-headed ladle, a non-rotating ladle.
6.8.15	Having announced the setting of the sun, he releases the calf to the right of the Agnihotra cow.
6.8.16	Then, having turned it towards the east or the west, they milk it with a vessel and a milking-pot.
6.8.17	One says, "A Śūdra should not milk," while another says, "A non-Śūdra should not be allowed to milk."
6.8.18	It is known that a Śūdra should only milk the Agnihotra, because that is the sacred offering and does not exceed it.
6.9.1	The former two should be milked for the eldest son, or for the son of the eldest son, if he desires to be the Purodha, or if he has lost his wealth. The latter two should be milched for the youngest son, or for his son, if he wishes to be the Puro dha, or if he is the youngest and inferior.
6.9.2	The former should be milked first for the eldest son and the grandson of the eldest. The latter should be milked for the youngest son and the grandson. This is according to some.
6.9.3	According to the rule of milking as one pleases,
6.9.4	one does not touch.
6.9.5	One takes away the milk.
6.9.6	The sacrificer sits down behind the Ahavaniya fire, having gone around along the south. The wife sits down in the place of the sacrificer, in the world of the wife.
6.9.7	Having brought it, he offers the Agnihotra at dusk or in the evening, having seen the star or the sun.
6.9.8	Some say that one should offer the Agnihotra at dawn or in the morning when the dawn has risen, when the sun has risen, when it has set, or when speech begins to speak.
6.9.9	If one offers at sunrise, one obtains the Agniṣṭoma; if at midday, the Ukthya; if in the afternoon, the Ṣoḍaśin; if in the first part of the night, the Jāgatika; if in the last part of the night one obtains the Rātriparayāya. This is known.
6.9.10	One should not think that one should offer at all these times. One should think that it is offered in an emergency.
6.9.11	He sprinkles the fires, the Garhapatya first, then the Anvähäryapacani, then the Ahavaniya.
6.10.1	"In the evening he says, "I sprinkle thee with truth." In the morning he says, "With truth I sprinkle thee with truth."
6.10.2	Some say, "In the evening he sprinkles thee with truth and truth, and in the morning he sprinkles thee with truthful truth."
6.10.3	Having thus offered, he sprinkles.
6.10.4	Having moved away from the Garhapatya, he causes a continuous stream of water to flow towards the east from the Ahavaniya, saying, "You are the continuity of the sacrifice. I lead you to the continuity of the continuity of the Yajna."
6.10.5	"You are Dhṛṣṭi, the Brahman. You are the Brahman." Having taken up the Upaveṣa, he places the embers from the Garhapatya towards the north, saying, "The creator of the past, the remover of the present, the fear of the future."
6.10.6	Having made them empty, he places the Agnihotra on them. The place of Ida is full of ghee. O Jātavedas, do thou accept this oblation. Those domestic animals of various forms, may their seven be here.
6.10.7	Then, kindling him with grass, he looks at him, saying, "May I rise up with animals and with strength."
6.10.8	When it has been raised, he generates it with water either by means of the ladle or by means of the hand, saying, "Do not let me be separated from your radiance."
6.10.9	If one desires brilliance, if one desires brahmic glory, if one desires to attack, if one desires (to be) firm, or if one desires, "May a hero be born to me," one should generate it.
6.10.10	Similarly, having ignited it with grass, he performs the three fire-offerings, saying, "The Rakshas are within, the enemies are within."
6.10.11	Having offered the oblations, he carries it away towards the north, saying, "You are the heat, the giver of prosperity and nourishment. Here, let us accumulate strength."
6.10.12	Having placed the ladle on the Garhapatya fire, having taken up the ladle and the Agnihotra vessel with the Savitrī verse, he bakes them on the Garhapatra fire with the verse, "The Rakshas is repelled, the evil spirits are repelled."
6.10.13	Having baked, he touches them with the verse, "May the sacrificer and his wife be unharmed."
6.11.1	The Yajamāna is addressed thus: "I shall offer the oblation to the gods for the sake of the Yajamāna." In the evening, he says thus: "I am offering the oblation to gods for the sake and removal of the sins of the Yajaman." In the morning, he says thus:
6.11.2	"You are the oblation of the gods. O Death, give me freedom from fear. May there be safety for me. May there be freedom from fear for me." Having uttered this in a low voice, the sacrificer utters loudly, "O Adhvaryu, take the oblation to the gods. May I be free from sin."
6.11.3	If the sacrificer does not follow, the Adhvaryu himself should utter it.
6.11.4	He offers four full ladles, saying, "I offer thee to Agni and to earth." He offers the first ladle. "I offer thee (to) water and to plants." He offers the second. "I offer (thee) to wind and to space." He offers the third. "I offer to thee the sun and to heaven." He offers the fourth.
6.11.5	One should not close one's eyes while offering to Agni.
6.11.6	Having offered, one should gaze at the great.
6.11.7	Having taken up the Agnihotra, he touches the spoon and the pot with the Dasahotr verse, "May the gods, the evening-goers, protect me with prosperity. May the gods, the morning-goers, protect with prosperity." In the evening, "May the morning-goers protect me with prosperity." In morning.
6.11.8	Where he would lead them, there he should place them, saying, "May my cattle be more numerous."
6.11.9	Taking a Palāśa twig the size of a span, he offers it to the Garhapatya fire, saying, "O Agni, may I be able to offer you oblations."
6.11.10	Running forward, he recites the Dashotr hymn.
6.12.1	He offers it above, saying, "Strike the sky."
6.12.2	He places it in the middle region, saying, "Svāhā to Agni Vaisvānara."
6.12.3	Having taken up the wind, he places it on the sacrificial grass to the east of the Ahavaniya with the verse, "May it bestow life on me."
6.12.4	He places the kindling wood in the middle of the fire with the verse, "This is your kindling wood, O Agni. May you grow and flourish with it. May your lord of sacrifice grow and flourish. Svāhā!"
6.12.5	At the time of sunset, he offers with the verse, "Agni is light, light is Agni, svāhā." At sunrise, he offers with, "The sun is light, light the sun, svāhā.
6.12.6	Alternatively, at sunset, he offers, "Agni the light, light the Agni, svāha." At sunrise, "The sun the light, light is the sun, svāhā."
6.12.7-8	"He wipes the paste downwards in the evening with the formula, "For Isha thee." "He wipes the paste upwards in the morning with the formula, "For Urja thee." "He spreads the paste on the sacrificial grass with the formula, "Do thou bestow brilliance upon me." "He spreads it with the formula, “Do thou invigorate the plants for me."
6.12.9	He waits for the Garhapatya fire, reciting, "O Agni, lord of the house, do not burn me. May my subjects be immortal. May there be light."
6.12.10	He offers the second oblation silently, omitting the first one, reciting, "To Prajapati Svāhā."
6.12.11	Having offered many times, he smears it again.
6.13.1	He smears it again for further consumption.
6.13.2	"O Rudra, be gracious, O Mṛḍānār, be gracious, be gracious, you who are deceitful. Salutations to you. Do not injure me." He sprinkles the fire three times with the ladle, saying this.
6.13.3	He points towards the east.
6.13.4	Having wiped off the paste in the same way, he says, "Grant me offspring." Having placed it, facing east, he smears the paste on the mound to the south, saying, "For the Pitrs, for the Pitrs, I praise."
6.13.5	Having touched water, he eats twice with his fingers, making no sound, saying "Pūṣā is" first.
6.13.6	Having sipped water, he says "I invoke you for the embryos, for the embryos" second.
6.13.7	He does not send it to his teeth.
6.13.8-9	Having turned around the ladle with the handle towards the north and having sipped water with the ladle with the eastern or northern handle, he says, "May the semen of Agni be my progeny." In the evening, and "May the semen of Surya be my progeny." in the morning. Having gone out, having cleansed the Agnihotra-place, he smears the paste on the sacrificial grass.
6.13.10	Having filled the ladle with water, he carries it forward, saying, "For the serpents, I invoke the serpents." The first (verse). "I invoke the ants." The second. "I invoke the non-serpents." The third.
6.13.11	He turns to the right.
6.13.12	He does not throw the sacrificial grass towards the Ahavaniya.
6.13.13	He burns the Agnihotra-vessel with the formula, "The Rakshas are repelled, the evil spirits are repelled."
6.13.14	He places his hand on it.
6.13.15	Having heated the hand, he directs the Agnihotra- vessel towards the north with the formula, “I invoke thee for the seven sages, for the seven sages.”
6.14.1	Having filled the ladle with water, he carries it towards the Ahavaniya with the verse, "I offer immortality in the earth, in the fire, in the all-pervading Agni, svāhā."
6.14.2	In the same way, he carries it to the Garhapatya.
6.14.3	He carries it to the wife with the verse, “I invite thee to the houses from the houses.” The younger one goes first, then the elder one.
6.14.4	If the wife does not follow, he should offer twice on the earth.
6.14.5	From this very remnant of the Agnihotra, he offers twice or four times with the ladle into the Garhapatya, saying, "O Agni, lord of the house, accept the offering, svāhā."
6.14.6	"O lord of food, give us food," into the Anvāhāryapacana.
6.14.7	There is no offering for the other two. This is the other.
6.14.8	Having offered, he should rekindle with the verse, "May it blaze, may it blaze, may the blazing one blaze."
6.14.9	The offering of the oblation has been explained.
6.14.10	One desiring cattle should offer Agnihotra with milk at two times.
6.14.11	Having placed the oblation first, one should bring the other.
6.14.12	One desiring brilliance should offer with ghee, one desiring cattle with milk.
6.14.13	Some people offer milk as a regular offering.
6.14.14	For one who desires the senses, one should offer curds; for one who desires a village, barley; for one who wishes strength, rice; for one who seeks fame, with sesame; for one who wants brahmic glory, with Soma.
6.14.15	One who desires brahmic glory should offer ghee for twelve nights.
6.14.16	If one offers with ghee, this is the rule. At the time of pouring out the water, one should pour out with two fresh darbha grass blades.
6.14.17	If one were to offer with curds, rice or Soma, then whatever is prescribed for the offering of ghee, all that should be done.
6.14.18	One should offer Agnihotra thus prescribed for as long as one lives.
6.15.1	We shall explain the Āgrayaṇa.
6.15.2	One performs the Āgrayaṇeṣṭi with rice that is cooked first.
6.15.3	There are seventeen Sāmidhenī verses.
6.15.4	The rite is that of the New Moon.
6.15.5	Here is the final section on all the animal sacrifices and oblations offered at the New Moon and Full Moon. The rites of the New Moon and the Full Moon follow.
6.15.6	They are concluded by three means: success, prohibition, and repetition.
6.15.7	Where there is a substitution of a natural object by an unnatural one, the latter should be treated as the former. For example, the grass-blades made of reeds are to be treated as the grass-blades of Saccharum spontaneum; the rice-grains of black gram are to be treated like the rice-grains; the pot made of cow-dung is to be treated like a pot made of clay; and the cake made of barley is to be treated as a cake made of rice.
6.15.8	Here the inference is based on the similarity of the objects.
6.15.9	The general rule is that the sacrifice to one deity is changed to that to two deities, and that to two deities is changed to that of many deities. For example, the Agnēya sacrifice is changed to that for two deities, and the Agnēya and Sōma sacrifice is changed to the Indra-Agni sacrifice.
6.15.10	The exception is the sacrifices to the natural deities, such as the Indra-Purōḍāśa and Soma-Caru.
6.15.11	The natural deities themselves are the exceptions.
6.15.12	Now if one were to offer another oblation to the natural deity, then the oblation would be like the Visnu-oblation.
6.15.13	If one were to perform a sacrifice with an Isti, with an animal sacrifice, or with Soma, one should perform it on the new moon or the full moon.
6.15.14	There, the two fortnights are established.
6.15.15	Having placed the eastern fortnight, one should perform the Isti in the northern fortnight.
6.15.16	Then having established the one-day-rite, he performs the Isti of the Sadyaskala rite.
6.15.17	Or in the same procedure.
6.16.1	The Darsa-Pūrṇamāsa and the Vikriti.
6.16.2	When there is a conflict between the Darsa-Pürnamāsa and the vikriti, the Darsa-Purnamāsa are stronger.
6.16.3	Those which are directly heard in the animal sacrifices for the Isti are stronger.
6.16.4	He makes the sacrificial grass of twenty-three (blades).
6.16.5	Here is the extreme limit: The wood should be increased in the case of the Sāmidhenī verses, and should be as before in the case of Prati-hvasas.
6.16.6	The utensils are equal up to the purpose.
6.16.7	He puts three knives.
6.16.8	He puts two pestles on three mortars and two stones.
6.16.9	The same till the taking of the ladle.
6.16.10	He takes the ladles with the formula, "For the garment."
6.16.11	The same till the pouring down.
6.16.12	Having poured down the Agniya cake on eight potsherds of the old grains, he pours down the Indra-Agni cake on eleven potsherds of new grains.
6.16.13	The cake to Agni-Indra on twelve potsherds.
6.16.14	The Visvedeva cake is cooked in milk.
6.16.15	The oblation of Somasya is of Shyamaka rice, on one potsherd.
6.16.16	Or he may offer only the new ones, not the Agniya.
6.16.17	The mantra for the touching of the implements is:
6.16.18	Having offered the Agrayan oblation, he offers these oblations: "To Shatayudha, to Shatavira" - five.
6.16.19	Up to the black antelope skin, it is the same as the grass.
6.16.20	On one black antelope skin, he places three pestles and two mortars.
6.16.21	Up to the pouring, it is similar.
6.16.22	Having placed all the oblations, he calls out to the one who has prepared the oblations.
6.16.23	Having brought all (the oblations), they strike the pestle and mortar.
6.16.24	In succession, he pours out all the oblations; he pours out, purifies and separates them.
6.16.25	But one may also grind the grains on a single stone, taking them in turns.
6.16.26	In this case, the mantras beginning with sowing and ending with sifting should be repeated.
6.17.1	One should call out for the offering of oblations at the very beginning.
6.17.2	Having taken all the grains, one should release the speech.
6.17.3	At the end of all, one should sow the husks.
6.17.4	From the time of the string-like condition, he should discard each seed.
6.17.5	Or, he should examine it with a seed of the same kind.
6.17.6	This is the rule for seeds of different kinds from now on.
6.17.7	Up to the removal of the oblations.
6.17.8	Having removed the one-pot offering, he fills it with ghee.
6.17.9	The rule for the one-pot Vaishvadev offering has been explained.
6.17.10	He does not make the offering with the names of the months.
6.17.11	It is the same as the offering of the oblations.
6.17.12	He recites the mantra, "May I attain union with the vital airs of all the gods through the sacrifice to the gods."
6.17.13	He recites the formula, "I have offered to heaven and earth. May I attain the earth and heaven through the worship of gods."
6.17.14	Similarly he recites the formula for all the deities of heaven and earth.
6.17.15	They eat together.
6.17.16	He eats the grains with the formula, "May the gods have chosen the good and the better for us."
6.17.17	Agni, the first, may eat, for he knows how to eat the oblation. May the auspicious one, the all-nourishing one, make the plants grow. This is for the Shyamaka grains.
6.17.18	Some say all should eat with the mantra, while others say only the sacrificer should eat the sacrificer's portion.
6.17.19	Those calves that are born before Ekastaka, the first of them is given as Dakshina.
6.17.20	The Iṣṭi comes to an end with success.
6.18.1	If one were to perform the Śyāmāka rite according to different procedure, then when the Śyāmās are cooked, one should offer cooked Śyāmākas to Soma.
6.18.2	Its procedure is the same.
6.18.3	One gives as Dakṣiṇā the clothes of this much difference.
6.18.4	The Iṣṭi ends with success.
6.18.5	One performs the rite of barley which is cooked first.
6.18.6	The rite of these is explained by the grains.
6.18.7	"This much is different: 'That sweet-mixed barley, Sarasvati has spoken, Indra was the lord of the chariot, the hundred-armed, the Maruts were the Dānava-givers.' He eats the barley."
6.18.8	Those whose calves are born after the first eight days, to them he gives the first-born as Dakṣiṇā.
6.18.9	The Iṣṭi is concluded successfully.
6.18.10	One should offer the New-Moon or Full-Moon sacrifice with only nine (sacrificial) substances.
6.18.11	One should perform Agnihotra with only nine (kinds of) substances.
6.18.12	Having initiated the Agnihotrī with only nine (sorts of) substances, one should offer oblations with her milk in the evening and morning.
6.18.13	Or, having cooked rice in four pots in the Garhapatya fire, having offered to the deities of the Agnyādheya and to the Svishtakrit, he should feed Brahmins.
6.18.14	Haritayava, Sami, and Dhani are the grains of grasses, and Shaka is not included.
6.18.15	Mulapalashaka are the fruits of trees.
6.18.16	Having performed with grains, one should offer with grains; having performed with barley, one should offer only with barley; having performed with grains, or barley, one should perform with grains.
6.18.17	Thus one performs and offers for as long as one lives, for as long as life lasts.
7.1.1	When about to perform the animal sacrifice, having mentally followed the Hotṛ six times, he offers the oblation with Grahas in the Havaniya.
7.1.2	With the ladle, he offers the Yūpa-oblation with the verse, "O Vishnu, do thou extend thyself."
7.1.3	The Adhvaryu takes up the ladle and the ladle-ful of clarified butter that remains in the vessel, and the carpenter takes up the cutting instrument.
7.1.4	In which direction they are going to erect the sacrificial post, they go in that direction.
7.1.5	These are the sacrificial trees: Palāśa, Khadira, and Rauhitaka.
7.1.6	One desiring Brahmic glory should make a post of birch.
7.1.7	He is always desirous.
7.1.8	If one erects a post on a day without stars,
7.1.9	If one desires of him, "May he be without a firm footing," then one should offer him a tree with a single branch. If one desires of a man, "May he become without cattle," then one should make an offering of a tree with dry leaves. If one desires, "May he have cattle," then one makes an offering of a many-leaved tree with many branches. If one makes an offering to a tree that is firmly rooted, it is known that one does so for the sake of firm footing.
7.1.10	If it is turned to the right, one should not turn it. If it is turned towards the north, one should not make it turn. If it is straight, with an upright blade, and its tip is slightly bent downwards, one should turn it. If the tip is bent downwards towards the east, west, or north, one should turn that.
7.1.11	Having touched water, one recites: "I have gone beyond others."
7.1.12	Taking ghee in the ladle, he anoints (the wood) with the formula, "May god Savitr anoint thee with honey."
7.1.13	"O plant, grow for him." Thus he places the plant within.
7.1.14	"O well-set, do not injure him." Thus he strikes with the axe.
7.1.15	The first chip that falls down, having taken it away, he cuts it at the knee or ankle.
7.2.1	Then he makes it flow towards the east or towards the north, saying, "May it not injure me in front, may it not injure me from the middle."
7.2.2	"O Vanaspati, grow with a hundred shoots," he offers at the wrapping.
7.2.3	"May we grow with a thousand shoots," he touches himself.
7.2.4	He arranges the pieces of wood one by one, saying, "This is your own share, this is your own share."
7.2.5	By this very (rite) he sends him away in front.
7.2.6	The measures are from one cubit to thirty-three cubits.
7.2.7	The sacrificial post for the Soma sacrifice is three or four cubits high, and the post for the animal sacrifice is higher. Some say that the other posts are for the Somiya sacrifice.
7.2.8	Then he makes it not too thick, not too thin, and not too small at the top, with eight corners.
7.2.9	It is made without a base, from the root.
7.2.10	In the middle, there is a cup, one cubit in size, with eight corners, sloping towards the middle.
7.2.11	As far as the topmost part of the Angulikaṇḍa, so far above the cup the sacrificial post is raised. Some say two fingers, others three fingers.
7.2.12	Having made the Avakṣaṇas, he offers a cake on eleven potsherds to Agni-Viṣṇu.
7.2.13	There are seventeen kindling verses.
7.2.14	The Iṣṭi comes to an end with success.
7.2.15	This is the place for the Agnihotra-fire.
7.2.16	One should not take the Agnihotra-vessel from the cow-pen, says another.
7.2.17	Having taken a branch that has fallen down, he makes the altar in front of the Agnihotra-pit.
7.2.18	It is the size of a chariot-wheel in length, the size of a yoke in front, and the size of an axle in the back.
7.2.19	Having made the enclosure towards the north, he measures the southern altar-pit and the northern altar-platform.
7.3.1	Having placed the ladle with the eastern mouth towards the north, he draws a line towards the north with the wooden sword, saying, "Thou art mine to be given." So towards the south, towards the east, saying, "thou art mine to be taken." So towards the west, towards the north, saying, "Protect me from being deprived." So towards the north, towards the east. saying, "Protect from being afflicted."
7.3.2	Having moved forward from the northern end of the Vedi, he measures the Cātvāla silently with the same Samyu.
7.3.3	Taking the wooden sword with the Savitrī verse, he draws a line. "He draws the Rakṣas, he draws the evil spirits."
7.3.4	Having dug down to the knee-level or three Vitasti-lengths, he carries away the soil with the verse, "Agni knows the way."
7.3.5	He places it on the northern altar, saying, "Thou art a lioness, thou art a she-buffalo."
7.3.6	In the same way he takes the second and the third, saying, "He who is in the second," he takes the second; "He who is on the third," he takes the third.
7.3.7	Having taken the fourth silently, he spreads it to the size of a dice, saying, "Spread widely; may thy lord of sacrifice spread widely."
7.3.8	He sprinkles with the water of the Dhruva vessel, saying, "Purify for the gods."
7.3.9	Whatever is left over of the sprinkling water, he should pour it out on the southern side of the altar, in a single place, and place it there, saying, "The waters carry away the evil."
7.3.10	He should meditate on the one whom he hates.
7.3.11	He scatters sand, saying, "Be pure for the gods."
7.3.12	He marks the ends of the northern altar. "The Brhat Sāman is the most extensive, may it drink the sweet Soma. May it bestow life in the sacrificial cloth without interruption. The wind-driven one, who protects with his own self, nourishes the creatures in many ways."
7.3.13	Having made a four-cornered northern navel, the size of a span, in the middle of the northern altar.
7.4.1	He touches the Vedi and the Uttaravedi with the four-tufted grass, saying, "O young one, O small one, O receptacle of ghee, in the middle of the world, the gods dwell together there, rejoicing in the highest heaven."
7.4.2	Then he circumambulates it in each direction and sprinkles it with the mantras, "Indraghosha protects you with the Vasus in the east," and so on, according to the form.
7.4.3	Tvaṣṭā protects thee from above with forms. Thus from above.
7.4.4	What is left over of the sprinkling water? The same.
7.4.5	One says, "One should place the fire on the previous day," while another says, "One completes the sprinkling and then settles down."
7.4.6	Having kindled the kindling wood in the Āhavanīya fire, he instructs, "Recite for Agni being led forward."
7.4.7	Having thrice recited the first verse, having taken up the kindling wood and having placed the Upayamani-sticks, he offers the Udyat-homa with the verse, "O Pavaka, whatever we have done, if we have done anything wrong, may you be the first and then the second. May you be nourished with ghee. Do not injure me. Svāhā to the attained one in front."
7.4.8	Having offered the remaining oblations, they proceed towards the east.
7.4.9	When the fire is placed above, having taken up five spoonfuls of clarified butter, he pours it over the gold, and then pours it over the northern altar with the formula, "Thou art a lioness, the possessor of seven, svāhā." On the right shoulder, with the formula, “Thou art a lion-ess, the bestower of good progeny, svāhā.” On the left hip, with the formula “Thou art a leoness, the besTower of prosperity, svāhā”. On the left shoulder, with the verse, “Thou art the bestower of the sun, svāhā". On the right hip, with the verse “Thou art the lioness, the bestower of the gods, svāhā.
7.5.1	Having taken up the ladle with the formula, "For the Bhūtas thee", they place the enclosing sticks of Pautidra wood around the Uttaravedi with the formulas, "Thou art the life of the universe", "Thou art the firm one", "Thou art not to be shaken".
7.5.2	He puts the materials at the navel, the fragrant incense, the white woolen cover, the white woolen cloth, the woolen cloth with fringes, the woolen cloth without fringes. Some say, "the woolen cloth without fringes." "You are the ashes of Agni, you are the excreta of Agni."
7.5.3	With the same (verse) he puts the northern enclosing sticks.
7.5.4	Where he knows, "I am sinking, O Hotr, in my own world," there he establishes the fire in the sacrificial materials. "May the sacrifice be established, may the good wishes be established, may your possessions enter you in many ways. Making a long life for the sacrificer, you illuminate the one who is to be praised with the immortal."
7.5.5	Having placed (the fire) in the fire-pan, he kindles it with the verse, "The sacrifice has returned to its own place, according to Manu. We have placed you in the fire-pit, according to Manu, according to Manu we kindle you, O Agni, according to Manu the Angiras. We offer to the gods who are worthy of sacrifice."
7.5.6	Here, having offered the full oblation in the Saptavati (mantra), one offers the Ati-mukti oblations: "May Agni, knowing, lead the sacrifice. May the destroyer of sacrifices not know him. May the gods be told the sacrifice. May he go to the lord of sacrifice, svāhā." "May Vayu, the sun, the sacrifice lead the sacrifice, knowing. May the destroyer not know him. Let the gods be told of the sacrifice. May it go to the lord, svāhā.
7.5.7	Here some prescribe the full oblation.
7.6.1	Here one should undertake the rites beginning with the sacrificial grass if one were to kindle the fire on the previous day. If one were to perform the rites ending with sprinkling, then one should undertake the rite beginning with the sacrificial grasses at that time itself.
7.6.2	He places the sacrificial grass, the sacrificial grass-holder, the Prastara of Aśvaval grass, and the sacrificial grass on the Ikshu-grass.
7.6.3	The enclosing sticks made of Karṣmary wood are placed on the sacrificial grass.
7.6.4	He makes the fire-wood of twenty-three (sticks).
7.6.5	The vessels are similar up to the purpose.
7.6.6	He places the second ladle for the Vasah-homa, the second ladle for Pṛṣadājya, two ladles for melted butter, a pot for the flesh of the animal to be cooked, two ladles made of Kārṣmarya wood, two ladles to pour the Vapa, a two-pronged and a single-pronged ladle, a ladle for the heart, a ladle for Svara, a ladle for Sudhīti, a rope, a branch of the Plakṣa tree, an Udumbara wood, a Maitrāvaruṇa staff, and whatever else he may need.
7.6.7	There, the offerings to be made to the Upabṛt-vessel and to the Dhruva-vessel are to be made in the Pṛṣadājya-vessel.
7.6.8	The offerings to be made in Sānāyya, Ukhaya, Pāśu-śrapayṇī, Vapa-śrapayṇa, Hṛdaya-śūla, and Plaksa-śākha are to be made.
7.6.9	The offerings for the Sruva, Svadhita, and Payas are to be made to animals.
7.6.10	One does not offer the Prāṇīta-oblations.
7.6.11	Having placed the fires, having washed the hands, having taken up the vessels, having spread the Uparāji grass, having made the strainers, he instructs, "The sacrificer should control his speech."
7.6.12	Having controlled his speech, he touches the vessels.
7.6.13	Having performed the sprinkling of the Prokṣaṇī waters, having invoked the Brahman-priest, having sprinkled the vessels, having released speech with the Havishkṛt formula, he then takes up the subsequent Pariṣṭut-graha.
7.6.14	Upto the Prāṇāyāma, it is common.
7.7.1	The Sruva, the Svadhisthiti, the Sruca, and the Patni are to be anointed with ghee and curd. The instruction is given thus: "Anoint the Patni with ghee and curd." The instruction ends here.
7.7.2	The offering of ghee is common.
7.7.3	Having offered ghee, he offers curd in the second vessel of ghee.
7.7.4	The procedure is explained by ghee itself, except for the offering.
7.7.5	Because of the similarity in the taking of the oblations.
7.7.6	He takes four portions in the Juhu and four in the Upabhu.
7.7.7	Having mixed curds with ghee, he takes five portions of clarified butter and says, "This is the milk of the earth."
7.7.8	He takes it in the Dhruva vessel as per the prescribed procedure.
7.7.9	The similarity is up to the placing of the ladles.
7.7.10	Having placed the ladles, having placed the Dhruva ladle in front, having taken the wooden sword with the Savitrī verse, having traced the Yūpa-pit around the Āhavanīya fire, half within the altar and half outside the altar, with the verse, "The Rakṣas have been traced; the evil spirits have been traced."
7.7.11	Having dug up the sacrificial post, he cleanses it with the formula, "Whatever the carpenter has cut off from the top of thee, may all the pure ones cleanse it with water. May they cleanse the pure one."
7.7.12	He sprinkles the sacrificial post with the sprinkling formula containing barley-seeds, "For thee, O Earth," at the root, "For thee O Atmosphere," in the middle, "For thee. O Heaven," at the top.
7.7.13-16	In the pit he puts down the remaining (oblations) with the formula, "May the world be purified, the abode of the Pitrs." He puts down the barley-grain with the formula, “Thou art barley, thou art the destroyer of our enemies." He spreads the sacrificial grass with the formula, "Thou art the abode of the Fathers." He puts the Yūpa-wood with the formula, "Thou art the leader of the Fathers." He offers the oblation with ghee with the formula,"May heaven and earth be filled with ghee. Svāhā." He offers with the formula, " "May heaven and earth, the two, be filled with ghee." He offers to the Fathers with the formula,"
7.8.1	Then he instructs (the Hotṛ) to recite (the appropriate formula) while the sacrificial post is being anointed.
7.8.2	"He anoints the tip of the sacrificial post with the formula, "May god Savitr anoint thee with honey."
7.8.3	Having anointed the cup all around with the formula, "Thou art Indra's," he releases it with the formula, "From the auspicious plants." He releases it from below.
7.8.4	The sacrificer anoints the end with the sacrificial post-wood, touching all around.
7.8.5	At the time of the girdle, he touches it three times.
7.8.6	From the anointing onwards, the sacrificer does not release the sacrificial post until the covering.
7.8.7	Then he instructs, "Recite as the post is being raised."
7.8.8	He raises it, saying, "You fill the sky and the space between."
7.8.9	He places it in the hole, saying, "May you reach those abodes."
7.8.10	Then he consecrates him with the two verses, "Let him see the deeds of Vishnu."
7.8.11	One should make the half of the front part of the sacrificial post inclined towards the outside.
7.8.12	He measures the lower part without making it visible.
7.8.13	Having measured the distance from the fire, he encloses it with clay, reciting, "For the sake of Brahman, for the sake of the Kshatriya."
7.8.14	He makes firm with the Maitrāvaruṇa staff, saying, "Make firm the Brahman, make firm the Kshatra."
7.8.15	He should sprinkle water on the ground, saying, "Raise the earth." With the Sarashana hand, he cleans the sacrificial post, saying, "This is Vishnu's spreading out."
7.8.16	He looks at the tip of the sacrificial post, reciting, "That is Vishnu's supreme abode."
7.8.17	The two Rasana-twigs are made of Darbha grass, twice the length of the Vyāma, and three times the length of the Vyama.
7.8.18	Then he instructs:
7.9.1	"Recite while the garment is being sewn."
7.9.2	He sews it three times clockwise in the middle region, or at the navel, with a thread three times the length. "You are the sewing, may the divine classes sew you."
7.9.3	He makes the upper thread the highest.
7.9.4	Having placed the girdle at the end, he puts it on.
7.9.5	Having made the two ends equal, he gives the eldest son to the eldest son, saying, "Thou art the son of heaven."
7.9.6	Taking the Svara, he puts it in the middle girdle, in the upper one, saying, "I put thee in the upper girdle of the sky."
7.9.7	Then they bathe the animal, which is without blemish, without teeth, without horns, made of iron, with three corners, of two forms, and fat.
7.9.8	He takes up the two darbha-blades with the formula, "For Isti thee."
7.9.9	He takes up a branch of the Plaksha tree with the formula, "Thou art the Upavir."
7.9.10	One should take up a branch which has many leaves and many twigs for one who desires cattle.
7.9.11	With the two verses, "We are conquering the Prajapati" and "We are approaching the gods, the divine hosts", he offers the animal in front of the sacrificial post, facing east, with the two verses, and with the last verse, "May you enjoy the prosperity, may you be united with Indra and Agni, I am offering you the animal agreeable to Indra and Agni".
7.9.12	"Thou art the womb of Agni," he puts down the lower part of the churning stick. "The two testicles are here," he puts down two darbha-blades pointing eastwards.
7.9.13	"Thou art Urvashi," he takes up the lower churning stick. "Thou art Pururava," he takes up (the upper churning stick).
7.9.14	"Having anointed the testicles with ghee," he anoints the hole of the ladle with ghee.
7.9.15	"Thou are life," having put together the two churning sticks, he instructs.
7.10.1	"Recite to Agni being churned."
7.10.2	After reciting three times, he churns clockwise three times with the mantras, "May the Gayatri metre be born after you," etc.
7.10.3	"Recite to Agni born."
7.10.4	"Recite as he is being struck."
7.10.5	Where he knows, "The god is the god of the sacrifice," he strikes the northern boundary with that. "May you be joined together, may you be united."
7.10.6	Taking ghee in a ladle, he offers with the verse, "Agni moves in Agni, having entered."
7.10.7	Taking the rope with the Savitrī verse, he ties the right half of the head of the animal with the noose. "He says, "With the noose of truth, I bind you, O divine oblation."
7.10.8	Then he ties it to the sacrificial post facing east, saying, "I bind you, pleasing to Indra and Agni, the human tormentors."
7.10.9	Those animals which are offered in the Ekadashi sacrifice, he ties them to the north of the sacrificial post, and the Ekadashi animals to the south.
7.10.10	Then he sprinkles it from above, saying, "For you I sprinkle the agreeable (water) from the waters, from the plants, for Indra-Agni."
7.10.11	He makes it drink, saying, "You are the best of waters."
7.10.12	He sprinkles below with the verse, "May the gods accept this oblation offered by us. O divine waters, do you relish it."
7.11.1	Then he instructs, "Recite to Agni being kindled."
7.11.2	The same as in the case of Dhruvasamana.
7.11.3	He anoints the animal in front of Dhruva and Samanjana with the verse, "May your breath go with the wind." On the head, he anoints with the verse, "May the limbs be joined with the sacrificial posts." On the shoulders, he anoints, "May the lord of sacrifice be with the blessings." On the hips, he anoints.
7.11.4	The same as the Pravara.
7.11.5	Having taken up the Hotr with the natural (kindling) wood, having again called out, he appoints the Maitrāvaruṇa (to chant) the call, saying, "Mitra-Varuna are the rulers, from the rule."
7.11.6	Up to the Prayājas it is common.
7.11.7	Having taken up the Juhu and the Upamant, having gone forward and called out, he says, "Do you recite for the kindling wood."
7.11.8	At the Vasat-call he offers.
7.11.9	Having called out and having sent, he sends out the others.
7.11.10	In the fourth (layer) he places the Upabṛt.
7.11.11	In the eighth (layer) all.
7.11.12	Having offered ten Prayājas, he pours down the Ekādaśa-offering.
7.11.13	Having returned, he anoints the Svāru and Svādhiti with the Juhu, three times the Svāru, once the Svādhiti, either a stream.
7.11.14	With them he anoints the animal, saying, "You two anoint the animal with ghee, you two protect the animal."
7.11.15	With the anointed stream he anoints the beast.
7.11.16	With the same he eats the cooked oblation, with the other he cuts it.
7.11.17	Cutting according to one's wish is another.
7.12.1	He again covers the melted butter.
7.12.2	Giving the wooden sword to the friend, he says, "This is your place, sit down."
7.12.3	Then he instructs the Agnidhra, "Recite as the Parigni is being performed."
7.12.4	The Agnidhra takes up the torch from the Avanyā and performs the Parigni rite, reciting, "The animal, the Shamitra area, the sacrificial post, the Atri, the Ahavaniya, and the clarified butter."
7.12.5	Some say that he performs the Parigri rite only on the animal.
7.12.6	When the fire is being carried around, one offers oblations to the Apāyas. The Prajānantas receive it back. The first one says "five".
7.12.7	Having gone around three times and placed the torch, he goes around three times again.
7.12.8	Having released the animal from the yoke, the Adhvaryu and the sacrificer approach it with the omentum and the ladle.
7.12.9-11	Having taken the Āhavaniya fire-brand, the Agni-bearer goes forward, reciting the verse, "When they know that Agni is being brought forward." They lead the animal towards the east, towards the east of the sacrificial post, reciting the verse "The Revatis enter the lord of sacrifice, the beloved."
7.12.12	The Adhvaryu recites the formula, "The sacrifice is the life of the sacrificer."
7.12.13	The Agnidhra throws the torch towards the north.
7.12.14	He becomes the Shamitra.
7.12.15	One should take it from the Garhapatya or make a churning stick.
7.12.16	One should place one of the two sacrificial grass blades used to bind the animal for the purpose of covering.
7.13.1	He recites the verse, "May the body be united with the body" while standing to the right of the fire.
7.13.2	They tie the animal facing east with its feet pointing north.
7.13.3	After saying, "Binding the animal that is dying," the Adhvaryu turns away from the animal being tied.
7.13.4	The Adhvaryu and the sacrificer sit down looking at the clarified butter. May the offspring of all forms, the universal sustainers, the mothers, dwelling together in the Agni-house, protect us with milk and ghee. May those whose udder is full of honey and ghee in four streams, and who are rich in milk, be ours for the growth of life in this cattle-pen.
7.13.5	When the animal is consecrated, he offers the consecratory oblation with the verse, "The animal has not done any harm."
7.13.6	He releases the noose of the animal with the verse, “O Shamitar, you have come.”
7.13.7	Having released the noose with the one-pointed stake, he throws it into the sacrificial pit and says, "The noose is released."
7.13.8	If he is practising sorcery, he should say, "I am making the lower one hostile."
7.13.9	The wife worships the sun, saying, "Salutations to him, the extender."
7.13.10	Then she leads her towards the east, saying, "Go straight."
7.13.11	The wife sprinkles water in the sacrificial pit, saying, "The goddesses, the waters, are pure and youthful."
7.14.1	Having stepped out, the wife and her husband sprinkle themselves in the sacrificial pit. "We are pure, having entered. May we be your protectors."
7.14.2	The wife nourishes the life of the animal, the Adhvaryu sprinkles (it).
7.14.3	Some say that the Adhvaryus nourishes and the wife sprinkles.
7.14.4	With these mantras as per the form.
7.14.5	"He says, "Where did your life go?", and places it on the neck.
7.14.6	Whatever is cruel in you, whatever is settled in you, that he makes the entire animal swell.
7.14.7	May the navel swell. May the anus swell. May the pure conduct swell. He makes the feet swell.
7.14.8	"May there be peace to the waters, may there be peace to plants." Having poured out the remaining water, he places the grass with its tip towards the east, near the right navel, saying, "O plant, protect him."
7.14.9	"O Svadhiti, do not harm him." He places the grass with Svadhiti on it, with its tip towards him.
7.14.10	Having taken out the tip of the sacrificial grass, having smeared it with blood, he puts it aside with the formula, "Thou art the share of Rakshas."
7.14.11	Having touched water, he takes out the omentum with the formula, “Thou art for the gods.”
7.14.12	He pours it down with the formula, "Purify for the gods; cleanse for the gods."
7.14.13	He pours down the omentum-holding spoons with the formula, "Thou art the ghee; thou art the heaven and earth."
7.14.14	"O Urge, thee!" (thus) he sprinkles the single-pointed one.
7.14.15	"Uncut, the wealth, the good hero, thee, agreeable to Indra and Agni, I cut out." (thus) he places it around.
7.14.16	"The offering has been purified by the good, the taking out of the offering." Having taken up the offering, he goes to the offering of the offering.
7.14.17	The offering ladle and the offering spoon are again taken up by the Adhvaryu and the sacrificer.
7.14.18	"May the earth and the atmosphere be favourable to you." Thus he goes forward.
7.15.1	He spreads the oblation on the fire-place, saying, "The Rakshas is repelled, the evil spirits are repelled."
7.15.2	Taking the torch again, the Agnidhra goes forward first.
7.15.3	Thus the Adhvaryu goes forward towards the Ahavaniya.
7.15.4	Thus he places the oblation on a piece of wood at the end.
7.15.5	The Upabarhaṇā priest throws the Uḍumvara wood into the Āhavaniya and the Agnīdhra fires.
7.15.6	Having brought the Vapa from between the two mounds and the sacrificial post and the Āhavaniye fire, the Pratiprasthātṛ, seated towards the south facing towards the north, cooks the Vapa in the Āhavani ya fire.
7.15.7	Having removed the tip of the sacrificial grass from under the Vapa, he says, "O Vayu, do thou blow away the embers."
7.15.8	Having taken ghee in the ladle, he offers with the verse, "They have appointed thee as the bearer of oblations."
7.15.9	He instructs the one who is offering the oblation, "Recite after the Stokas."
7.15.10	When the cooked meat is ready, he pours it over like a Saṁnāyya, then places it on the sacrificial grass on a fig branch with the verse, “Make the herbs very tasty.”
7.15.11	Having released the Vapa and the Sravanibha by means of the two Prāyājas, having recognized that they are filled with ghee, having gone to the Uttara Prajā, having caused the Sravanibhā to be announced, he says, "Do you offer to the Vasat-uttered ones."
7.15.12	He offers at the Vasat-utterance.
7.15.13	Having returned, he pours clarified butter over the Dhruva ladle, if he is going to offer the two portions of clarified butter, then the clarified butter, then (the ladle with) the fat, then the ladle with the omentum.
7.15.14	Then he proceeds with the two portions of the clarified butter, if he is offering the two portions of butter.
7.15.15	Then he offers the Parivapya first, with the formula, "Svāhā to the gods."
7.15.16	Then he instructs.
7.16.1	"Recite the Anubrūhi for the fat of the goat's omentum to Indra and Agni."
7.16.2	Having spread the ladle, having placed a piece of gold, he offers the entire omentum.
7.16.3	Having placed the piece of gold above, he pours clarified butter over it.
7.16.4	It does not become burnt.
7.16.5	If the sacrificer has four omentums, the omentum becomes five.
7.16.6	If there is no gold, one should offer from the ghee.
7.16.7	Having crossed over and having called out, one should offer the fat of the goat's omentum to Indra and Agni.
7.16.8	At the Vaṣaṭ-call, one offers with the verse, "May I go to the gods with the omentum."
7.16.9	Then one offers the remaining omentum with the verse, “To the gods, svāhā.”
7.16.10	He offers the Vapa and the Sravanis with the verse, "May the wind, going upwards in the sky, be auspicious to us." The eastern one has two points and the western one has one point.
7.16.11	Then he offers with the Srasava.
7.16.12	He pours clarified butter over the hole of the animal.
7.16.13	Having gone out, together with his wife, they cleanse themselves in the Cātvāla. "Let the waters carry away today the filth and whatever is harmful, whatever is false, whatever is cursed, whatever is fearful. I release myself from the curses, from Varuna, from Yama, the lord of the dead, from all divine sins, and also from human sins. May all the waters release me from that sin, from all sin."
7.16.14	When the omentum has been offered, he gives a boon, a decorated maiden, a bull, or three heifers.
7.17.1	Having washed the vessels for the Pasupurodāsa, he arranges them, those that are used for the medicinal purpose.
7.17.2	Having made the Pavitra, he instructs, "The sacrificer should restrain speech."
7.17.3	He touches the vessels from where speech is restrained.
7.17.4	He offers the animal-oblation on eleven potsherds or twelve potsherds, having the same deity as the Vrihi-oblation.
7.17.5	Having released speech with the Havishkrit-formula, he cuts the animal.
7.17.6	He instructs (the sacrificer) thus: "Do not cut the anus, do not cut the intestines, the spleen, the liver, the kidneys, the fat."
7.17.7	The animal is roasted on two pots.
7.17.8	Having struck the heart with a spear, he roasts the cake with the Yajus and the purified oblations.
7.17.9	He puts the paste of barley on the spread sacrificial grass.
7.17.10	When the animal is roasted, he proceeds with the cake.
7.17.11	"Recite the Puronuvākyā for Indra-Agni, recite the Puronuvākya for the cake to Indra-Agni." Having instructed thus, he says, "Recite the puronuvākyās for Indra-Ag Agni, recite the puronuvākya to the cake to Indra Agni."
7.17.12	"Recite the puronovākyā for Agni, recite the yājya for Agni." Having instructed thus he says, "recite the puronuvakya for Agni, recite yājya for Svishtakrit."
7.17.13	The Maitrāvaruṇa and the Ṣaṣṭha Adhvaryu partake of the invoked Idā.
7.17.14	They sprinkle themselves.
7.17.15	Here he offers the cakes of the Pasupurodāsa with the Homa of the paste of barley flour.
7.17.16	He releases the skulls.
7.17.17	Having offered the clarified butter of the Juhu, he asks three times:
7.18.1	"Are the oblations cooked? Are they pacified?"
7.18.2	He replies three times, "They are cooked," "They are pacified."
7.18.3	When the heart is moved three times, he makes it the supreme.
7.18.4-6	Having gone around towards the north, he pours clarified butter over the heart, with the verse, "May thy mind be united with my mind, may thy breath be united with my breath. The offering to the gods, agreeable to Indra-Agni, is ghee. Svāhā." "Svāhā! The heat is not to be missed." He recites this verse while the heat is rising. If he were to churn a beast, he should recite this verse.
7.18.7	Having besmeared the animal with clarified butter as in the Sāmnayya rite, having taken it out through the intervening space between the Cātvāla and the Utkara, having taken the animal across the Havaniya and the sacrificial post, he places it on the southern end of the altar.
7.18.8	The sacrificial grass is of Ficus glomerata.
7.18.9	He offers the animal in the middle of the limbs.
7.18.10	He spreads four (pieces of) grass on the Juhu and Upasad, on the vessel filled with grains, on the Vasahomāhavanīya and on the ladle.
7.18.11	Having placed two pieces of gold on the Juhu-Upasad, he instructs (the Hotṛ) to recite the Anuvāka while the Havir is being offered.
7.18.12	He offers on the heart, then on the tongue, then on the chest, then on the left thigh, then on the sides, then on the kidneys, then on the right buttock, then on the anus.
7.18.13	He offers twice on each of them.
7.19.1	Or else, having offered in order on the three principal ones, he offers on the remaining ones as he pleases.
7.19.2	The ladle is anointed with fat, the fat being the offering.
7.19.3	Having placed a piece of gold above, he pours over it.
7.19.4	Having poured over the three parts, he pours over the three parts in the Upabṛt, and once each in the Svishtakṛt. He offers once each on the right thigh, the left thigh, the buttocks and the anus.
7.19.5	Having first divided the anus into two, he puts the larger part into the Upabhṛt.
7.19.6	He divides it into three.
7.19.7	Having divided the middle part into two, he places it in the Juhu; the larger part in the Upabhrit and the smaller part in the Ida.
7.19.8	The broth is fat. The Upabhṛta is filled with fat.
7.19.9	Having placed a piece of gold above, he pours over it twice.
7.19.10	He divides the Idā into seven parts in a vessel: the heart, the tongue, the liver, the kidneys, the anus, the anus and the seventh part of the anus.
7.19.11	Having ascertained the right hip, the kidneys, the spleen, the intestines, and the fat, he pours hot water over them.
7.19.12	He takes up the Vasahomā of hot water.
7.19.13	He pours the water with a ladle.
7.19.14	Once for the one with four ladles, twice for the one with five ladles.
7.19.15	Having sprinkled the cooked and uncooked meat, and the cooked and un-cooked rice, he touches all the meat and rice together, saying, "Indra is the breath, deposited in every limb."
7.20.1	He offers the Vasahomas with the side, saying, "May Agni, the lord, bless thee."
7.20.2	Then he places her on the side with the same formula, "Svāhā! May the heat not fail."
7.20.3	Then he instructs, "Recite the Yajus for the offering of the goat to Indra and Agni."
7.20.4	Having crossed over and called out, he says, "Recite for the offering of goat to Indra and Agnis."
7.20.5	The Pratiprasthātṛ offers the Vasahomas with the formula, "O Agni, do thou drink the ghee, the drinker of ghee."
7.20.6	Having offered, he places it on the ground.
7.20.7	He offers the oblation at the Vasat-utterance.
7.20.8	He offers to the directions with the Vasahomas, separately, with the formulas, "To the directions Svāhā, to the quarters Svāhā."
7.20.9	He offers to each direction separately. At the end he offers to the east with the formulas, “Svāhā to the directions, salutations to the directions.”
7.20.10	Having offered the Nariṣṭa oblations, having offered the clarified butter once with the Juhu ladle, he says, "Do recite for Vanaspati."
7.20.11	Having stepped across and having been invoked, he says, “Do recite for Vanaspatī.”
7.20.12	He offers at the Vaṣaṭ-call.
7.20.13	Not stepping across again, he instructs, "Do recite to Agni Sviṣṭakṛt."
7.20.14	Having taken the Upamant from the Juhu, having called out, he says, "Do thou offer to Agni Sviṣṭakṛt."
7.20.15	At the Vasat-utterance, he offers.
7.20.16	Having returned, he places the ladles in their places.
7.21.1	He places the Medasvatī Hotr in the Antareḍa.
7.21.2	He strews the Medas, he places the Medas, and he pours the Medas.
7.21.3	When the Ida has been invoked, he takes the Adhvaryu to the Udumbara wood, and the Agnidhra to the Vaniṣṭha wood.
7.21.4	He makes the six-fold offering complete.
7.21.5	They eat and sprinkle themselves.
7.21.6	Then he gives the instructions: "O Agnidhra, bring the sacrificial grass and the sacrificial grass-blades. O Upayashtar, sit down. O Brahman, we are about to depart." The sequence of instructions is the same as before.
7.21.7	It is similar to the Anuyajas.
7.21.8	Having taken up the Juhu and Upasad ladles, having brought the clarified butter to the Juhu ladle, having stepped across, having called out, he says, "Do you invoke for the deities."
7.21.9	He offers at the Vasat call.
7.21.10	Having called out, having called out again, he instructs the subsequent ones only by saying, "Do you send."
7.21.11	Having brought the embers from the Samitra fire, the Agnidhra places them on the northern part of the altar.
7.21.12	The Pratiprasthātṛ, having made eleven pieces of the intestines, cut across, and having placed them in the Vasahomāhavanīya, offers the Anuyājas with each piece, saying, "Go to the ocean, svāhā" with each formula.
7.21.13	The Pratiprasthātr smears the grass with the paste, saying, "To you from the waters, to you from the plants."
7.21.14	The mind is my heart, and that which is called the Self.
7.22.1	Having offered eleven Anuyājas, having returned, having poured the Svāru into the Juhu, he offers the Svāru in the Juhu, saying, "May your smoke go to heaven, your flame to the atmosphere, and your ashes to the earth. Svāhā."
7.22.2	The same as the Patnīsamyājas.
7.22.3	All (the priests) offer with the Juhu and the Upabhu, with the Vājavati verses.
7.22.4	On all the ladles he anoints the Prāstara.
7.22.5	He instructs the Sūktavāk to recite the Sūkta.
7.22.6	All (the priests) pour down (the Soma).
7.22.7	All (the Soma) he places on the Kasta.
7.22.8	The wives of the sacrificer perform the Jaghanyā.
7.22.9	He offers Soma with clarified butter, Tvaṣṭar with clarified butter.
7.22.10	The Adhvaryu pours the oblations on the raised buttocks of the Iḍā for the wives of the gods, on the low (buttocks) for Agni, the householder.
7.22.11	Four times for the four oblations, five times for the five oblations.
7.22.12	Here there are no spreading and pouring over.
7.22.13	The Adhvaryu puts the Iḍā on the raised buttocks, on the low ones for Agni, the priest.
7.22.14	The remaining buttocks the wife gives to the Adhvaryu.
7.22.15	He gives that arm to the Brahman, if he is not a Brahman.
7.22.16	It is equal to the Samitsya-yajus.
7.22.17	One offers three Samitsya-juhus: "O sacrifice, go to the sacrifice, this is your sacrifice, O Lord of sacrifice, the gods know the path."
7.22.18	Between the sacrificial post and the fire-pit.
7.23.1	Having gone out, they move around with the Hridayashula.
7.23.2	At the junction of the dry and the wet, it causes heart-ache. You are the one who causes grief. You grieve against him who hates us and whom we hate."
7.23.3	Having approached the sun with these two verses, "O king, from each abode, release the highest noose of Varuna," they perform the sprinkling in the Catvala, saying, "May the waters and plants be friendly."
7.23.4	Having placed the kindling woods, they proceed without waiting.
7.23.5	Having placed the kindling wood in the Āhavanīya with the words, "May it be kindled, may we be kindled," they stand up, reciting, "I have followed the waters."
7.23.6	In the same way, the wife stands up, having placed the kindling sticks in the Garhapatya.
7.23.7	The sacrificer stands up by the sacrificial post, reciting, "Aspiring for good heroism."
7.23.8	The animal sacrifice is concluded.
7.23.9	In the same way, one should offer a sacrifice with an animal every six months or every year.
7.23.10	One should not let a year pass without offering a sacrifice with an ani- mal to one who has established the sacred fires.
7.23.11	If one lets a year pass, one should offer the sacrifice of a goat.
7.23.12	It is said that the sacred fires of one who has established them become overfed if one eats meat after a year without offering a sacrifice.
7.23.13	If he eats, he should eat with this (mantra): "I offer the food to the fires with my mind. May they eat it together with my speech. I am not negligent, I am not careless. I am acting with a benevolent mind. May they all eat together."
7.23.14	If he is instructed to eat, he should eat after reciting this mantra.
8.1.1	One who is going to perform the Cāturmāsya sacrifices offers the oblations to the five Hotṛ-priests in the Havirdhāna fire, following them mentally.
8.1.2	He offers cooked rice to Vaiśvānara Agni in twelve potsherds and cooked rice to Pārvana.
8.1.3	He gives gold to Vaiśvārara and a cow to Pārvata.
8.1.4	The Iṣṭi comes to an end with success.
8.1.5	This is the place for the Anvārambhaṇīya Iṣṭi.
8.1.6	On the full moon day of Phalguna or Caitra, he performs the Visvadevya sacrifice on a ground sloping towards the east.
8.1.7	Some say that the Ahavaniya fire should be used for the Darsha-Purnnamasa sacrifices, while others say that the Sauma fire should be used.
8.1.8	Everything else is done as prescribed, except for the sowing of seeds north of the altar.
8.1.9	The procedure for the New Moon sacrifice is followed.
8.1.10	Everything is the same until the calves are driven away.
8.1.11	"You all, O Agni, increase (the oblation) for the gods." Thus he sends forth the cows.
8.1.12	Up to the bringing of the sacrificial grass, it is common.
8.1.13	The sacrificial grass becomes sprouting.
8.1.14	He binds it in three ways and again in one way.
8.1.15	Thus he makes the kindling wood with twenty-three pieces.
8.1.16	Up to taking up the vessels, it is common.
8.1.17	He places the second vessel for the melted butter, the ladle, two vessels for melted butter, three vessels for cooked rice, a wooden vessel for the Soma-juice, and a wooden vessel for pressing.
8.1.18	All this is similar up to the pouring out.
8.1.19	He offers the cake on eight potsherds to Agni, rice-gruel to Soma, cake on twelve potsherds to Savitr, rice-grucl to Sarasvati, rice-gruc! to Pusna, cake on seven potsherds to Maruts, milk-rice to the Visve Devls, cake on one potsherd to Dyavaprtthivls.
8.1.20	Up to the distribution of the cooked rice, it is common.
8.1.21	He takes out the rice-gruel from the cooked rice with the verse, "O Indra, do thou take out the rice-grue! for us."
8.1.22	He binds them together with the others.
8.1.23	He takes out the Pūṣan portion of the mixed and ground (barley).
8.2.1	It is equal to the morning milking.
8.2.2	When the morning milk has been heated, he brings in the evening milk and when the curds are prepared, he drains them, makes them free from whey, and having taken them out in two vessels, sprinkles them with a portion of the whey and puts aside the known quantity of whey.
8.2.3	Having placed the oblations and having brought them near the water, he takes up the subsequent enclosing sticks.
8.2.4	The procedure is the same up to the instruction.
8.2.5	The instruction is "Take up the clarified butter and curds."
8.2.6	The procedure is the same as the taking of the clarified butter.
8.2.7	One takes up the clarified butter from the animal-sacrifices.
8.2.8	This is the only difference.
8.2.9	Having taken the clarified butter twice with the two formulas of the Upabṛt, he takes curd twice, saying, "Thou art the milk of the earth."
8.2.10	With one Upabṛta formula, he takes clarified butter at the end.
8.2.11	This is indeed the case if one were to offer in the month of Caitra.
8.2.12	If one were to offer on the day of Phalguna, one should take the clarified butter mixed with curd, as in the case of animal sacrifice.
8.2.13	The non-offering of the oblations is due to the absence of the offering.
8.2.14	Having offered the oblation on one potsherd, he fills it with ghee.
8.2.15	He makes it the Viṣṭṛ-oblation.
8.2.16	He places the oblations with the formulas, "Bhūr Bhuvah Suvar."
8.2.17	The horse is on the heap.
8.2.18	When the year is completed, he should place them with these (formulas).
8.2.19	Having placed the oblations, he performs the Nirmanthya rite without covering. He performs the Nirmanthyā rite.
8.2.20	There are seventeen Samidheni verses.
8.2.21	The same as at the Prayāja offerings.
8.2.22	One offers nine Prayāja offerings. The same as at the Prāyaṇīya Istis.
8.2.23	At the fourth (offering) one places the Upāṃśu cup in the place of the Upāṃshu cup.
8.2.24	One pours clarified butter over the Upāṃshus.
8.2.25	The same up to the giving of the oblations.
8.2.26	One proceeds with the Savitrī verses and the Ekakapāla verses in a low voice.
8.3.1-3	He recites the formula, "By the sacrifice to Pūṣan, may I be prosperous and possessed of cattle." In the same way he recites the formulas for all the offerings to Pūṣa. Having performed the offering of cooked rice, having placed the cake on a single potsherd on the sacrificial grass, having spread it on the Juhu ladle, he offers the entire cake on a single potsherd.
8.3.4	Here, having placed the ladle on the fire, he offers with the ladle placed on the fire.
8.3.5	If the offering is turned around, having taken it back, he should offer again after pouring clarified butter.
8.3.6	Having given a boon, he prepares the ladle. Some say, not with the hand.
8.3.7	Then he offers to him with four names of months: "To Madhava svāhā, to Mādhava svāhā, To Shukra svāhā, and to Shukti svāhā."
8.3.8	The sacrificer recites the benedictions of the Iḍā for the welfare of the year.
8.3.9	The first-born calf is the Dakṣiṇā.
8.3.10	He offers the nine Anuyājas with fresh ghee.
8.3.11	The Hotṛ recites the Sūktavāka, "May there be welfare to those who are a year old; may there be welfare to the divine abode."
8.3.12	Having struck the enclosing sticks, he instructs, "Recite after the horses."
8.3.13	Having spread the Juhū ladle on the grass or in the vessel, he brings the horse.
8.3.14	Without pouring over, without stepping over, having called out, he says, "Sacrifice to the horses."
8.3.15	He offers when the Vasat-call is uttered.
8.3.16	He offers the second when the Anuvṣat-call is made.
8.4.1	The Hotṛ, sitting with knees raised, offers the Anāvanam.
8.4.2	Having offered to the Vājin, he destroys the Avashin.
8.4.3	He offers to the Vājins in the direction of the predominance of the Vājin. As in the case of the animal sacrifice.
8.4.4	Having called out to the food, they eat it in front of the Hotṛ, then the Adhvaryu, then the Brahman, then the Agnīdhra, then the sacrificer.
8.4.5	Or having divided equally.
8.4.6	All of them should call out together with the names of their respective duties.
8.4.7	"The call is "Call him!" and the response is "Called!"
8.4.8	Whatever semen of mine is produced, whatever is born again, whatever stands firm for me, thereby make me immortal. Thereby make me very prolific. I shall eat the invited portion of that Soma which has been invited.
8.4.9	The same as the Samitsti-yajus.
8.4.10	One offers the Pasukani Samitsti- yajus.
8.4.11	The Isti comes to an end with success.
8.4.12	Having shaved off the beard with a three-edged razor, having shaved off the hair on the cheeks with a razor of iron, he should shave off the hair on his head. He should not go beyond the truth. What is there beyond the truth?
8.4.13	In the same way, he should shave the hair on the head with the subsequent mantras on the subsequent days.
8.4.14	For four months he does not eat meat, does not approach a woman, does not sleep before sunrise, and does not eat honey.
8.4.15	Some say that eating honey is the only exception.
8.4.16	Some say one should approach one's wife during the ritual season.
8.4.17	In the same way, he performs the vow in all the intervals between the four months.
8.5.1	Then, in the four months, he performs the Varuna-prastha sacrifices.
8.5.2	The procedure for these is explained in the Visvedevata (sacrifice).
8.5.3	We shall now discuss the modifications.
8.5.4	Up to the removal of the calves, it is the same.
8.5.5	The Pratiprasthātṛ removes the calves for the Marutīya Amāgvas.
8.5.6-10	The Adhvaryu (places) the two sacrificial posts in front of the Ahavaniya fire, the northern one for himself and the southern one for the Pratiprasthātṛ. They are of the same height, of the size of a span, and not touching each other. Whatever the Adhvaryu does, the Pratiprasthatṛ does. The Pratiprasthätṛ carries the Stambayajus towards the northern sacrificial post, either from the front or from the back.
8.5.11	By this alone he moves upwards.
8.5.12	The Utkara, the Agnidhra, the Hotṛ, and the Brahman are equal.
8.5.13	Here is the extreme division: The Adhvaryu performs those rites on the north, the Pratiprasthātṛ on the south.
8.5.14	Then he joins them together.
8.5.15	Having begun at the southern end of the northern half of the Vedi, he draws a line towards the south.
8.5.16	Having made the northern half of that which is to the north of the southern half of the enclosure, he pours out the northern half of it.
8.5.17	The pouring out of the materials takes place in both places.
8.6.1	On the previous day, one should place the fires and the oblations.
8.6.2	They are similar until the bringing of the sacrificial grass.
8.6.3	Two bring the sacrificial grass and two bring the wood.
8.6.4	They are equal until the use of the vessels.
8.6.5	Both use the vessels.
8.6.6	The ladles are made of shalmali wood or gold, for the southern guest hall.
8.6.7	The offering is similar to the offering of the Agni-bricks.
8.6.8	Having offered the five regular offerings, the Adhvaryu offers the Ekadashakapaala cake to Indra-Agni.
8.6.9	Having silently offered the barley grains in the Karambha vessels, the Adhvarus offer the barley grains with the mantra, using the replicas of the sheep.
8.6.10	The Pratiprasthâtar offers to the Maruts, the Adhvariyu to Varuna.
8.6.11	He offers the body in one pot.
8.6.12	It is similar up to the offering of fruits.
8.6.13	He places all the grains in the pot for the Avabhṛtha rite.
8.6.14	He places the pot for roasting the barley with the mantras and the replicas of the sheep.
8.6.15	They roast the barley a little.
8.6.16	They pour them down and recite the Adhiśramana mantra.
8.6.17	The two who are to pour out the oblations recite the Udvasana-mantra.
8.6.18	The roasted grains are to be poured out.
8.6.19	The time for sowing the seeds is to be determined.
8.6.20	Wherever the grains are to be roasted, it should be done in this way.
8.6.21	The grains are to be covered with flour.
8.6.22	The grains for the Amikṣā are to be covered.
8.6.23	The Varuna-niṣkāsa is to be placed in a known place.
8.7.1	Having placed the oblations ending with Indra-Agni, the wife prepares for each person a vessel of dough from barley that has been ground and heated a little, or from barley that has not been ground, as many as the sacrificer's sons and grandsons are, with one extra.
8.7.2	She also prepares for the women.
8.7.3	They make replicas of sheep.
8.7.4	The Adhvaryu makes a replica of a ram, the Pratiprasthātṛ a ewe.
8.7.5	The woman makes the signs of a woman, the man makes the signs of man.
8.7.6	Then they make the two with the hairless ones.
8.7.7	If the hairless ones are not found, they should be placed with the Kus grass.
8.7.8	Or they become like a pot-cooked (meal).
8.7.9	Having placed the body on one potsherd, having brought the oblations, having kindled the fire of the Ahavaniya with kindling woods, he instructs (the Hotṛ) to recite the Anuvāka while the fires are being taken around.
8.7.10	All those instructions which are common, the Adhvaryu alone should give.
8.7.11	The fires are being taken together, the fires are being carried together.
8.7.12	They place the fires taken around in the northern fire.
8.7.13	He releases the vow in the northern (direction).
8.7.14	Then they take up the two northern enclosing sticks.
8.7.15	Up to the announcement, it is common.
8.7.16	He bows down to the announcement according to the authority.
8.7.17	Up to taking the clarified butter, it is common
8.8.1	Both of them take up the clarified butter for the Paśukas.
8.8.2	Thus is the difference between the two offerings of clarified butter and curds. Having taken clarified butter with one mantra, he should take curd twice, saying, "Thou art the milk of the earth."
8.8.3	With two mantras, clarified butter is taken at the end.
8.8.4	Thus indeed, if one were to perform the Sravanas.
8.8.5	Now if they were to take the Soma on the full-moon day of Āṣāḍha, then they should do as in the case of the animal sacrifice.
8.8.6	Up to the offering of the oblations, it is similar.
8.8.7	Having offered the oblations ending with Indra-Agni, he places the sheep and its replica for the Amikṣā.
8.8.8	He places the sheep in the Marutīya (oblation) and the ewe in the Vāruṇī (oblation).
8.8.9	Those who offer a hundred or a thousand Śamī leaves and Karīra fruits.
8.8.10	He offers in the Karambha vessels.
8.8.11	Having removed the one-spoonful offering, he places the oblations on the northern altar.
8.8.12	On the southern altar, the Marutīya oblations and the Karambha pots.
8.8.13	They exchange the oblations of the two sheep with the replicas.
8.8.14	On the Marutya (fire) he places a female sheep, on the Varuna (fire) a male sheep.
8.8.15	One is called "moving with the two churning sticks" and the other "the Adhvaryu".
8.9.1	Then he instructs, "Recite when the fires are burning."
8.9.2	In the same way, he cleanses the two fires and bends down the Paishacya (fire).
8.9.3	The fire on the north is well-swept, the one on the south is not swept.
8.9.4	Then the Pratiprasthātṛ asks the wife, "How many husbands do you have?"
8.9.5	If she does not mention the husband she knows, she would obstruct her beloved kinsman. If she points him out, it is known that she binds him with the noose of Varuna.
8.9.6	"As much as he tells, Varuna may take them." Having said this, he takes the wife to the Uddana. "We invoke the Praghas."
8.9.7	Having spread the chaff on the ground, having placed the Karambha vessels, having poured clarified butter over them, having placed them with the tops facing downwards, standing towards the east, facing the south, the sacrificer together with the wife offers the Karambha-vessels in the southern fire.
8.9.8	The Yajamana recites the Puronuvākyā, "O Indra, I offer to you."
8.9.9	The wife and the Adhvaryu recite the Yajya, "Whatever is in the village and whatever is in the forest."
8.9.10	Or the Adhvaryus alone may offer.
8.9.11	The other two should follow.
8.9.12	They recite the verse, "We have done the deed, O deed-doer," while moving away from each other.
8.9.13	Then he cleans the southern fire.
8.9.14	The Adhvaryu alone chooses the Pravargya.
8.9.15	Both of them offer nine Prayājas each.
8.9.16	Having offered the Ajyabhāga oblations,
8.10.1	the Pratiprasthātā stops.
8.10.2	The Adhvaryu gives the Havir offerings.
8.10.3	Having offered with the Indra-Agni offering, the Adhvaryu stops.
8.10.4	The Pratiprasthātr offers with the Marutvatiya offering.
8.10.5	With the former offering, he offers the sheep together with the Avadānas. With the latter, he offers the Śamī leaves and Karira fruits together.
8.10.6	The Pratiprasthātṛ moves forward and stops.
8.10.7	The Adhvaryu moves forward.
8.10.8	With the former offering, the Adhvaryu offers the sheep together. With the latter offering, he offers Śamī leaves, Karira fruits, and the Avadāna together.
8.10.9	Having offered the one-pot oblation, he offers with the four subsequent months, saying, "To the sky, svāhā! To the sky-like, svāhā!" "To the food, svāhā; to the energy, svāhā."
8.10.10	They offer separately at the Svishtakṛt oblation, and the one who offers together is guilty of a sin.
8.10.11	The sacrificer mutters the benedictions for the Iḍā at the time of the benedictions for Iḍā, saying, "May there be welfare for those with calves."
8.10.12	The bull is the southern direction.
8.10.13	He offers the nine Anuyājas with fresh ghee.
8.10.14	He prays for the welfare of the calves, for the divine abode, with the Sūktavāk verse. The Hotṛ prays.
8.10.15	Both of them proceed with the Vāja hymn.
8.10.16	"May the drops enter you. May the juice of the veins enter me. May you be satisfied with my juice. I partake of the share of you who have been invoked and offered, with the Vāja hymns."
8.11.1-3	They consume the right-hand portion of the horse. May the horse, the consuming of the horse, protect us. The semen deposited for strength, the immortal, may it bestow power and wealth. May we not be injured. Consuming the horse, they say, "We consume the invited portion of him who is invited." The one who places the two ladles on the support says this.
8.11.4	The Adhvaryu alone makes the wives offer.
8.11.5	Both of them offer the Pasukani Samitsya-offerings.
8.11.6	The Isti comes to an end with success.
8.11.7	They cleanse the Avabhṛtha with husks and the Varuna-offering.
8.11.8	There the entire Avabhṛtha is performed, except for the chanting of the Saman, the Adhvamantra and the eating of the Rijiṣa.
8.11.9	The husks are the place of the chaff.
8.11.10	The chaff is the place of the one-pot offering.
8.11.11	Or one should offer a one-pot oblation to Varuna.
8.11.12	One should proceed with the chaff as the place of the oblation.
8.11.13	Or one does not offer the oblation to Soma.
8.11.14	One should silently offer the chaff and chaff-place in water.
8.11.15	Then, having put on other garments, one should go out.
8.11.16	If he so wishes, he should give these garments to someone.
8.11.17	Having returned, he performs the rite.
8.11.18	The rite of turning back and the conduct of the vow have been explained.
8.12.1	Then, in four months, he performs the Sākamedha sacrifices every day.
8.12.2	He offers a cake on eight potsherds to Agni, the leader, at sunrise.
8.12.3	Some say that it moves along with the rays.
8.12.4	The Iṣṭi comes to an end with success.
8.12.5	Rice cooked in milk to Maruts, the Scorchers, at midday.
8.12.6	The Iști comes to an end successfully.
8.12.7	He begins the procedure of the Gṛhamedha.
8.12.8	It is similar up to the removal of the calves.
8.12.9	The householder who does not know the Veda takes away all the calves.
8.12.10	Having made the altar, he makes the Vedi.
8.12.11	Here there is no kindling wood or sacrificial grass. He does not carry the Praṇītā waters.
8.12.12	Having arranged the fires, having washed the hands, having employed the vessels, having spread the Olapāji grass, having made the Pavitra, he instructs, "The sacrificer should restrain speech."
8.12.13	He touches the vessels with controlled speech.
8.12.14	To Maruts, the household priests, he offers a cooked rice-ball in the evening, having milked from all cows.
8.12.15	Having milked all cows in the purifying (rite), having purified the milk and the rice-grains, he sows them.
8.12.16	He cooks rice for the Garhapatya or Anvähäryapacani fire.
8.12.17	Then he takes up the subsequent enclosing (of the fire).
8.12.18	The same till the announcement.
8.12.19	Here the Adhvaryu does not censure the fire.
8.12.20	The same till the taking of the clarified butter.
8.12.21	He takes it in the Dhruva vessel alone.
8.12.22	Having consecrated the sprinkling water, having invoked the Brahman, having sprinkled the altar, having taken the remaining sprinkling water, having consecrated the fire, having placed the Dhruva within the altar, he places the ladle with the formula, "This has been placed."
8.12.23	He consecrates the clarified butter with the formulas, "You are Vishnu, you are the abode of Vishnu, you are Prajapati."
8.12.24	He does not offer the Prastara to her. Thus, on the sacrificial grass of Sāntapana, one should perform the rite of the householder. So says some.
8.13.1	Having taken out that cooked rice, having placed the known arrow, he takes out three balls of rice.
8.13.2	He places the pot without being emptied, and the Darbha grass without being shaken.
8.13.3	Having taken out the cooked rice, he offers it after reciting the Gayatri verse and decorating it.
8.13.4	At night, they perform the rites of the householder.
8.13.5	Here there are no Sāmidhenī verses, no Āghāra offerings, and no Prayāja offerings.
8.13.6	Having placed the Veda on the Āhavanīya fire, he instructs, "O Agni-bearer, rub the fire three times."
8.13.7	The Agni-bearer rubs the fire three times.
8.13.8	Having offered the Pravargya and the two Ajya-cups, he directs (the Hotri) to recite the Marut-saman verses to the Maruts, the householders.
8.13.9	Having spread the Juhu, he offers twice for each of the Odanas, four times for the four Avadanas, and thrice for the five Avadanas.
8.13.10	Having poured over (the oblations), having stepped across, having called (the Hotri), he says, "Do thou recite the Marut verses to the Marut-householders."
8.13.11	He offers at the Vasat-utterance.
8.13.12	At the Svishtakrit of all the cooked rice, he offers once each.
8.13.13	Having invoked the Idas of all, the priests eat that Ida.
8.13.14	They offer cooked rice to the ministers, as much as is left over from the oblations.
8.13.15	If there is plenty of cooked rice, others also may eat.
8.13.16	The wife eats from the house of her neighbour or from the house of the householder.
8.13.17	The Grīhīmaṇḍala ends with the Iḍā.
8.13.18	They anoint, they rub.
8.13.19	They let the calves graze.
8.13.20	They spend the night together, well-disposed, without turning their faces away.
8.13.21	The neighbours also cook.
8.13.22	They kill the cows.
8.14.1	He begins the ritual of the Kraidin.
8.14.2	At the end of the night, they tie the calves of the Agnihotra and Abhivanī cows.
8.14.3	Before the morning Agnihotra, they perform with the full ladle.
8.14.4	Having spread out the ladle, having filled the ladle with the grass-cover, and having placed the ladle with the unscattered grass, he adds it to the fire.
8.14.5	Having poured over (the ladle), he offers on the Garhapatya.
8.14.6	Having followed the ladle with this verse, he offers with the subsequent verse.
8.14.7	Having called the bull, he offers with its bellow.
8.14.8	If the bull does not bellow, the Brahman should say, "Offer."
8.14.9	He gives the bull whose bellow he offers to the Brahman.
8.14.10	He offers a cake on seven potsherds to the Maruts, the frolicking ones, in union with the sun rising.
8.14.11	Some say, "In union with the rays, moving."
8.14.12	The Iṣṭi comes to an end.
8.14.13	When the sun has risen, having milked the cow facing the east, he offers a cake on eight potsherds to Maruts, the self-praising ones.
8.15.3	The Agniya-offering on eight potsherds, the Nitya-offerings on five potsherds, and the Indra-Agni-offering on eleven potsherds, Indra-offering on one potsherd, and the Visvakarman-offering on one potsherd.
8.15.4	The same upto the pouring of the spoonfuls.
8.15.5	Agni, the Hotr, the Duta, has stood up for the sacrifice. May the heaven and earth protect thee in this sacrifice. Thou, O heaven and earth, protect in this sacrifice. O Svistakrit, be for Indra and the gods. Accept this oblation of ghee. Svāhā. He offers the Sruva-spoonful.
8.15.6	Having offered the Ekakapala oblation without the Vrt, he offers with the four subsequent months, saying, "To Sahas, svāhā! To Sahasya, svāhā!" "To Tapas, svāhā; to Tapasya, svāha."
8.15.7	The sacrificer recites the benediction of Ida in the benedictions of Ida, saying, "May there be welfare for the calves of this year."
8.15.8	The first-born calf is the Dakṣiṇā.
8.15.9	May there be welfare for the young calves. The Hotṛ recites the Sūktavāka verse, "May there be welfare for you."
8.15.10	The Iṣṭi comes to an end with success.
8.16.1	The procedure of the Pitryajña is commenced.
8.16.2	To the southeast, he constructs a sacrificial altar measuring the height of the sacrificer, with four corners.
8.16.3	The corners are in the directions, and the middle ones are in the intermediate spaces.
8.16.4	Then having surrounded it on all sides, he makes the door towards the northern corner.
8.16.5	Having made it end with the Uddhana, having brought the fire from the Anvähäryapacana, he places it in the middle.
8.16.6	This is the Ahavaniya in this ritual.
8.16.7	There, those mantras which are of both gods and ancestors, they should be recited. "You are the offering for the gods and ancestors. I am able to perform the rite for you, O gods and ancestors."
8.16.8	They should proceed according to the natural order. This is another view.
8.16.9	Up to the bringing of the sacrificial grass, it is the same.
8.16.10	One should give the sacrificial grass with its roots or without its roots.
8.16.11	The sacrificial grass is longer than the sacrificial grass-bunch, the sacrificial grass-cover is longer than the grass-cover.
8.16.12	They are equal in the act of spreading.
8.16.13	One should spread (the grass) towards the south, facing east, or towards the north, facing west.
8.16.14	He offers to Soma, the father, a cake on six potsherds; to the Barhis-possessing Fathers, cooked rice; to the Agni-possessed Fathers, curds churned out of milk for the goddess of the dawn.
8.16.15	These oblations are made of barley.
8.16.16	Having moistened the barley with sprinkling water, they are pounded.
8.16.17	The same is the case with the cooking of rice-grains.
8.17.1	Having divided the cooked rice-grains into three parts, they put a pot in the Anvāhāryapachana for frying and fry the third part of the rice-grains in it.
8.17.2	The rite of cooking has been explained.
8.17.3	The rice-grains are ground and covered.
8.17.4	The same is the case up to the putting of the pot.
8.17.5	In the southern half of the Garhapatya, he places six potsherds. In the Anvāhāryapacani, he places a potsherd for the purpose of cooking rice.
8.17.6	He pours the oblations into different vessels.
8.17.7	He pours out.
8.17.8	Having brought the flour and milk, he brings curd.
8.17.9	He makes half a vessel.
8.17.10	Having mixed the flour with a sugarcane-stalk, he churns the milk-rice, facing south, without being interrupted, and with the ladle.
8.17.11	He puts it in the ladle.
8.17.12	Having placed the cake in the Anvāhāryapachana vessel, they fry the barley-grains.
8.17.13	They are here only, until the offering-materials are removed.
8.17.14	Then he takes the next portion.
8.17.15	The taking of the clarified butter is common.
8.17.16	He takes the clarified butter from the southern half of the Garhapatya.
8.17.17	All are taken in four spoonfuls.
8.17.18	They are spread here only, until the bringing of the oblations.
8.17.19	The spreading of the sacrificial grass is common.
8.17.20	Having taken the sacrificial grass, he spreads the fire three times, moving clockwise.
8.17.21	He strews three times, going back and forth, saying, "May the offspring be born," and "May the offspring grow," holding them upright.
8.17.22	It becomes a mound.
8.18.1	He places two enclosing sticks, the middle one and the one on the right.
8.18.2	There are no supports here.
8.18.3	He places the mound silently.
8.18.4	They bring the oblations of ghee one by one.
8.18.5	First they carry the fire, then the water pot, then the sacrificial offerings.
8.18.6	One by one they adorn them, this is their turn, so say some.
8.18.7	To the right, they place the broom, the grass, the ointment, and the unguent. Having placed each one separately, they spread out and make the sacrificial threads facing east.
8.18.8	Then he instructs, "Recite to Agni, to the gods, to the ancestors, to the kindling."
8.18.9	He recites this Sāmanidhini three times, "We invoke you, O Ushanas."
8.18.10	He places the kindling wood only once, dividing it into three parts.
8.18.11	Having poured the ladleful, he instructs (the Hotṛ) with "O Agnīd, do thou rub the enclosing sticks and the fire three times each."
8.18.12	Up to the Pravara it is common.
8.18.13	Having called out, he says "Do thou sit down, O Hotṛ."
8.18.14	This much is the Pravara.
8.18.15	He does not choose an Arṣeya or a Hotṛ.
8.18.16	He offers four Prāyaṇīya oblations on the bare ground.
8.18.17	Having performed the two Ajyabhāgas, having poured out (the oblations), they make the Yajñopavītas (to be worn) from east to west.
8.18.18	Here some prescribe the Parishrayana (ceremony).
8.18.19	They shift the Ajya, they shift the oblations, the priests move around.
8.18.20	To the right of the Juhu he places the Upamant; to the right of the Upamant the Dhruva; to the right the Puronamisha; to the right he places the cooked rice; to the right, the cooked rice, the Mantha.
8.18.21	Here the Juhu is equal, here the Puronamisa, here the Brahman and the sacrificer are equal.
8.19.1	Then he orders, "To Soma, the father, according to the Svayambhu."
8.19.2	Having spread the Juhu, he offers two portions of each oblation along with the Svishtakrit. He recites the Puronuvākyās twice, both with Pranava.
8.19.3	He offers the Avadanas of the six Avadanas in the five Avadanas, and the five Avadana in the four Avadanas.
8.19.4	In the six Avadana, he offers the principal oblations twice from the principal oblation.
8.19.5	Having offered the Purorasa, he offers the Dhānas.
8.19.6	Similarly, of the Mantha.
8.19.7	Having sprinkled, having gone beyond, he makes the call with "Svāhā". "Let it be Svāhā" is the response.
8.19.8	He instructs with "Soma, with the Fathers, Svāhā".
8.19.9	"Those who have come to our Svāhā" becomes the response.
8.19.10	"Svāhā, homage" is the Vaṣaṭ-call.
8.19.11	Then he instructs, "To the Fathers, seated on the sacrificial grass, Svāhā."
8.19.12	Having placed the Juhu on the fire, having taken up the Dhānas, he offers the Mantha.
8.19.13	Similarly, the Purorāśa.
8.19.14	Having sprinkled (the oblations) and having gone beyond towards the north, he invites (the deities) with the words, "May there be Svāhā." The reply is, "Let there be Svāha."
8.19.15	He instructs with the words, “The Pitṛs seated on the sacrificial grass, may there be Svāhe."
8.19.16	The reply is, "Those who have come to our abode."
8.19.17	He makes the offering with the words, "Svāhā, salutations."
8.19.18	Then he instructs the Pitrs, the Agniṣvāttas, with the words, "For the Svāhā."
8.19.19	Having placed the ladle on the ground and having taken up the oblation from the pot, he offers the oblation of the cake.
8.19.20	Similarly of the cooked grains.
8.19.21	Having sprinkled (the oblation) and having stepped over towards the north, he calls out with the words, “Svāhā.” He responds with the words, ”Let there be Svāhā.”
8.19.22	He instructs the Pitrs Agniṣvāttins with the words, "For the Svāha."
8.19.23	Those who have come to the Svādhamā (offering) say, "Svādhamā."
8.19.24	One makes the Vasat-call with "Svādham namaḥ."
8.20.1	Some prescribe the commencement after the mixing of the offerings.
8.20.2	Then one instructs, "To Agni Kavya-vāhana, Svishtakṛt, Svādhe."
8.20.3	Having spread the Juhu, he offers the oblations of all the deities, taking four spoonfuls from the right half of the Juhu, and five spoonfuls from the left half.
8.20.4	Having poured the melted butter over the Juhu, having stepped over towards the north, he calls out "Svāhā" and the response is "Svāhā".
8.20.5	Having instructed "Svāhā to Agni, the carrier of oblations, the well-offered one",
8.20.6	Those who have come to the Svādhamā (offering)
8.20.7	He makes the Vasat-call with "Svāhā namaḥ."
8.20.8	Having placed the Idā at the beginning of the Mantha, he offers the other two. Some say, "He offers the Mantha and the Idā."
8.20.9	They consume the Idā that has been invoked with the Avagraha. The Hotṛ first, then the Adhvaryu, then the Brahman, then the Agnīdhra, then the sacrificer.
8.20.10	Taking a pitcher of water, he circumambulates the fire three times sprinkling it, reciting, "May the Fathers be purified." He then circumambulates three times in the opposite direction, reciting, "The Creator has produced the various forms."
8.20.11	Having mixed the remnants of the oblations, he places three balls in the three lines, in the southern half, the eastern half and the northern half.
8.20.12	This is the opposite.
8.20.13	With these mantras, as in the ball-offering to the Pitrs.
8.21.1	Having said, "Having wiped off the smear on the northern line, the Pitrs may take their share as they please," and having gone out towards the north, they stand near the Ahavaniya.
8.21.2	They recite the verse, "We, O Maghavan, have praised you, O Su-sandarśa."
8.21.3	They stand near the Garhapatya reciting the verse, "They have eaten and are eating."
8.21.4	The Fathers, the good, have eaten. Thus they go away.
8.21.5	The Fathers, the good ones, have gone away. Thus they return.
8.21.6	Having cut off the tenth or the eleventh (portion), they come forward, saying, "These are your garments, O Fathers. Do not do anything else to us, O Fathers."
8.21.7	The rites beginning with the application of collyrium and ending with the placing of the Garhapatya are performed as in the Piṇḍapitṛyajña.
8.21.8	Here some recite the sprinkling.
8.21.9	They loosen the sacrificial cords, which are worn over the left shoulder.
8.21.10	The priests move around, exchanging their ladles.
8.21.11	Having covered the covering-cloth, he instructs, "O Brahman, we shall proceed."
8.21.12	He offers two Anūyājā offerings without the Barhis.
8.21.13	He instructs the Hotṛ to offer the first Anūyājya offering with the words "Offer to the gods" and the second with the words "Make an offering".
8.21.14	The Hotṛ recites the Sūktavāka.
8.21.15	Here the wife does not attend, nor do they perform the Samyājyā, nor does he offer the Samīṣṭi-oblation.
8.21.16	The Iṣṭi comes to an end with success.
8.21.17	Some say, "May you be prosperous."
8.22.1	He offers a pot for each person, like the pots for the Karambha offering.
8.22.2	Having placed the potsherds on the northern half of the Garhapatya, he bakes them.
8.22.3	Then having poured over them, or not poured over them, and having taken them out, he places them in the potsherds or in the potsherded ones.
8.22.4	Some say: "They are carried away by the sheath."
8.22.5	The one-pronged fire-brand of the southern fire is carried away, going away from the fire.
8.22.6	Having gone to the intermediate space between the north and east, he digs a hole and pours a handful of earth, saying, "For as many as we are, for them this handful."
8.22.7	Having placed the four-wayed fire-brand on the ground, having spread it around, having spread a Palasha leaf in the middle, having taken up all the skull-cups one by one, having poured them together, he offers with the verse, "This is your share, O Rudra, along with your sister Ambika. Accept it, svāhā."
8.22.8	The sacrificer recites the benedictory verse, "Obeserving the cow, the medicine," with two verses.
8.22.9	Taking one potsherd for each person, they go around the crossroads three times, reciting, "We worship Tryambaka."
8.22.10	If the wife is also interested in marriage, she should also go around, reciting, "May we worship Tryambaka, the fragrant one, the one who knows the husband. May you be released from bondage like a cucumber. Do not fall away from your husband."
8.22.11	They leave them there and take them back.
8.23.1	"O Bhaga, O Bhaga, may we be blessed by your blessing."
8.23.2	They pour down the water for the sacrificer, saying, "For the one who is near, for the one who is far."
8.23.3	They should pour down for the one who desires.
8.23.4	One says, "For the sacrificer," the other says, "For whoever desires."
8.23.5	Having made them into a ball, they place it in the upper cowpen and stand by a tree. "This is your share, O Rudra, accept it. With this favour, may you go beyond the wealthy. The bow-less one, with the Pināka in his hand, clad in a hide." They go away three times.
8.23.6	Having sprinkled (the ball), they cleanse themselves with the verse, "May the waters and plants be friendly."
8.23.7	Having made the Samidhs, they come back without waiting.
8.23.8	Having placed the kindling-wood on the Ahavaniya, they stand up reciting, "I have followed the waters."
8.23.9	Thus the wife stands up after placing the kindling- wood on the Garhapatya.
8.23.10	Having returned, he offers a cake on eight potsherds to Aditya in ghee.
8.23.11	The procedure for this is explained in the Agni-adhyaya, except for the gift of a boon.
8.23.12	Some mention a white horse.
8.23.13	These sacrifices are performed immediately, except for the sacrifice of the army and the sacrifice of the games.
8.23.14	Then one turns back.
8.23.15	The turning back and the conduct of the vow have been explained.
8.24.1	Then in four months, one performs the Sunasiri sacrifice on every fourth, third, second, or first day of the month.
8.24.2	The procedure of the Visvedeva sacrifice has been explained.
8.24.3	We shall now describe the modifications.
8.24.4	Upto the offering of the oblations, it is common.
8.24.5	Having offered the five regular oblations, namely, the Agniya oblation on eight potsherds, the Indra-Agni oblation on twelve potsherds, and the Vaiśvadeva oblation in the form of rice-gruel, the Indra-Sūna-Sīra oblation on twelve potsherds, the Vāyu oblation in the shape of milk, and the Sūrya oblation on one potsherd,
8.24.6	The procedure of milk obtained in the morning milking has been explained.
8.24.7	Having offered the one-pot oblation, he offers with the name of the last month, "May the serpent move for Angshpa, svāhā."
8.24.8	The sacrificer recites the benediction of the cows in the following year in the benedictions of the Ida.
8.24.9	A cart with twelve cows, or with six cows, or with eight cows, or with one cow.
8.25.2	One desiring cattle should offer the Vaishvadev sacrifice.
8.25.3	If in this season his cattle would have the most milk, or if in spring his cattle would have most milk, then one should offer the Vaishnava sacrifice.
8.25.4	One desiring cattle should offer only the Vaishnava, not the other seasonal sacrifices, until he obtains a thousand cattle.
8.25.5	Having obtained a thousand cattle, one should offer sacrifices at the proper time with the other Parvas.
8.25.6	One who desires a village should offer sacrifice with the Shunashīriya.
8.25.7	It is known that one who desires offspring, one who desires cattle, one who desires food, one who desires stability should offer sacrifice with this rite, having determined the rainy water.
8.25.8	We shall explain the rites lasting for five years.
8.25.9	Having performed three seasons and having performed the year, one should desist for a month.
8.25.10	Having performed two seasons and having performed a year, one should perform the year and then desist.
8.25.11	The ritual is for Vaisvānara and Parjanya. The ritual is for the five Hotras.
8.25.12	Having performed the Cāturmāsya rites, one should offer a Soma sacrifice.
8.25.13	This is the form of Soma, as it is known from the Catu-r-masya sacrifices.
8.25.14	If one is unable to perform the Soma sacrifice, one should perform it with animals. If one is unable to do that, one should perform the Catu-masya sacrifices again. It is known that one should omit a month in every three years. One should omit a month, as it is well known.
9.1.1	The expiation prescribed in the scriptures is prescribed for the transgression of injunctions.
9.1.2	If the expiatory rites are prescribed for one sin, then they should be omitted in other cases, because of the difference in the meaning.
9.1.3	Recitation, Homa and Ijya are the expiatory acts.
9.1.4	They are meant for removing sins.
9.1.5	They should be performed after the sin.
9.1.6	If the sin is removed, then the entire rite should be performed again.
9.1.7	Since it is not mentioned, it should not be performed again.
9.1.8	If the Anvāhārya-fire goes out, one should offer on the Garhapatya with the verse, "O Agni, may the Angiras be yours."
9.1.9	Having deposited the fires separately in the kindling woods, one goes away.
9.1.10	Where he settles down, there he establishes this Iṣṭi.
9.1.11	If the Āhavaniya fire of one who has been initiated is extinguished, having taken another fire, having recited the verse, "Agni has proclaimed the dawn," and having stood at the place of the fire, he offers the ladle full of ghee with the verse, "To him who has Agni as the deity, who is full of oblations, who dwells in the house, O Agni, be kind, svāhā."
9.1.12	He offers this oblation with the verse, "This is Vishnu, who has conquered."
9.1.13	He should recite the Yajus of the Vrata-offering with his mind.
9.1.14	Whoever follows this should omit the offering.
9.1.15	He should churn the Garhapatya fire.
9.1.16	He should restore the Anvähäryapacani fire to its original state.
9.1.17	If the fire of one who has established the sacred fires goes out before the dawn, he should collect it, saying, "This one is one, that one is one. Enter into the third light. May you enter into the beautiful body. May you be dear to the gods, the supreme creator."
9.2.1	If it goes out beyond the dawn, he may follow it.
9.2.2	Then he should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Pathikrita.
9.2.3	He should bring grass from the edge of the path.
9.2.4	A bull is the sacrificial fee.
9.2.5	The Isti comes to an end with success.
9.2.6	If the calves have been separated from the sacrificial animals and are being milked, one should offer a barley gruel to Vayu.
9.2.7	If the cow from which the milk is to be drawn is removed, they should draw milk from whichever cow is available.
9.2.8	If the calf is removed from the other cow, one should observe fast.
9.2.9	If the milk intended for offering becomes spoiled in the evening, one should offer cooked rice to Indra and observe fast.
9.2.10	Whatever is obtained in the morning should be cooked.
9.2.11	The other offering should be Indra's cake.
9.2.12	He should offer the morning milk after mixing it with the evening milk.
9.2.13	Then, having removed the calves from the northern oblation, one should observe fast.
9.2.14	This is the expiation for the morning milk when there is distress.
9.2.15	Here, one should offer the evening milk after mixing it.
9.2.16	If both of his milkings are afflicted, he should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni and Indra.
9.2.17	Āśmarathya says, "He should offer to both deities, Agni and Indra." Ālekhana says, "He may offer to Indra alone."
9.2.18	The cake on eight potshers to Agni is always offered.
9.2.19	Then, having taken away the calves from the cows for the subsequent oblation, one should observe fast.
9.2.20	If his wife is not menstruating on the day of his vow, he should perform the sacrifice after covering her.
9.2.21	One should spread a piece of gold to the north.
9.3.1	Having worshipped her, he should invoke her thus: "I am the Udgītha, you are the Dyāvāpṛthivi. I am the Sāman, you are the Ṛk. Let us both come together and generate the semen for a son, for a son who knows, for prosperity, for offspring, for good offspring, for good strength."
9.3.2	If the Agnihotra or the Saṁnāyya offering were to be spilled, one should offer it in the Vālmīka-vessel with the Prajāpati-verse and then stand up with the words "Bhūr".
9.3.3	If it is the Agnihotra, one should offer again after milking another cow.
9.3.4	If it is Saṁnāyyā, one should drive away the calves from the other oblations and observe a fast.
9.3.5	If an insect falls into the Agnihotra or Sāmnāyya, one should offer it with a middle leaf, reciting the Dyāvāpṛthivī verse.
9.3.6	Then, having milked another cow, one should offer again, if it was an Agnihotra.
9.3.7	If it was a Sāmnāyy, one should drive away the calves from the other oblations and observe a fast.
9.3.8	If the Agnihotra is spilled, one should offer with the verse, "Mitra, knowing, arranges the people. Mitra supports the earth and heaven. Mitra sees the fields with his unblinking eyes. Offer the oblation to Mitra, the true one, with ghee."
9.3.9	Then, having milked another (cow), one should offer again.
9.3.10	If the subsequent oblation is offered before the previous one has been offered, then he should offer the previous one with the subsequent one. Having placed the kindling wood with the verse addressed to the tree, "O tree, where you know the secret names of the gods, there do you lead the offerings," he should offer again silently.
9.3.11	Then having milked another (cow), he should offer again.
9.3.12	If the first oblation is offered and the Āhavaniya fire goes out, one should offer the last piece of gold after placing it in the fire, with the verse, "Agni has gone to the wives, the wives to Agni. Svāhā!"
9.4.1	If the embers of the Paridhi should fall outside the Prayajas, he should place them in the hollow of the ladle, saying, "May not the sacrifice be in darkness, may not the sacrificer be in darkness." "Salutations to thee when thou art stretched out, salutations to thee when stretched out, salutlations to thee when thou sittest down. Do not injure the Adhvaryu, do not injure the sacrificer." If (they fall) in front, "Do not injure the Brahman, do not injure (the sacrificer)." If (they fall on) the right, "Do not injury the Hotri, do not injure
9.4.2	Then he strikes him with the verse, "The thousand-horned bull, the knower of beings, the Stoma-backed, the ghee-possessed, the well-directed, may he not abandon us, the one who has fallen asleep, and may we not abandon the protection of cattle and the protection of heroes."
9.4.3	Some say that one should offer after striking.
9.4.4	One should strike with the same thing with which one would fall.
9.4.5	If the fire of one who has established the sacred fires is being churned and does not catch fire, then one should churn it again, reciting the verse, "Men generate the praised, distant-seeing, householder, the sage, from the kindling woods with the rays of fire." Having recited this, one should take it from where one sees another and offer it after playing with it.
9.4.6	Then one should churn again without haste.
9.4.7	If he does not find another, he should offer at the right ear of a goat.
9.4.8	But he should not eat the goat.
9.4.9	If he does not find a goat, he should offer in the right hand of a brahmin.
9.4.10	But he must not separate from the brahmin.
9.4.11	If he cannot find a brahmin, he should offer on a bunch of darbha grass.
9.4.12	But he shouldn't sit on darbha grass.
9.5.1-3	If one does not find darbha grass, one should offer in water. Āśmarathya says, "One should not say, 'These are edible and these are not edible.' One should take this for a year even if it is not edible." Ālekhaṇa says, "One does not wash one's feet with water." Some say,
9.5.4	If the fires of one who has established the sacred fires are mixed with other fires, he should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Viśvakarman.
9.5.5	The Iṣṭi comes to an end with success.
9.5.6	If the fires of one having established the sacred fires become mixed with other fires and if they are separated, he should offer to Agni Viśva-karman a cake on eight potsheds.
9.5.7	Then to Vrata-pati.
9.5.8	The Iști comes to an end successfully.
9.5.9	If the fire of one who has established the sacred fires burns down his house, he should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Kṣamāvata.
9.5.10	Then to Vrata-pati.
9.5.11	The Iṣṭi comes to an end with success.
9.5.12	If they were to be mixed with something that has been burnt, he should offer to Viśikha and Śuci.
9.5.13	Then to the Vrata-pati
9.5.14	The Iṣți comes to an end successfully.
9.5.15	If they were to be mixed with lightning, one should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni, the lord of waters.
9.5.16	Then to the lord of vows.
9.5.17	The Iṣṭi comes to an end when it is accomplished.
9.5.18	If they were to be mingled with the fire of a corpse or the fire of a child-birth, one should offer to Agni, the sprout-holder, a cake on eight potsherds.
9.5.19	Then to the lord of the vow.
9.5.20	The Iṣṭi is concluded with success.
9.5.21	Now if all (the priests) assemble, one should perform the Kṣāmavati rite at the end.
9.5.22	If the Agnihotra-pot leaks, he recites over it, "May Agni, Indra, Tvashtri, Brihaspati, the earth, the water, the sky, the wind, the sun, the moon, the stars, the heaven, the sacrifice, the gods, the Rishis, the Vedas, the truth, the law, the truth, and the law, may they all be for me. May the embryo that is leaking be free from disease. May Agni, Indra, Tvashtr, Brihaspati have placed it on the earth. May it not reach Nirriti. May it go away."
9.5.23	If it has leaked, he should pour it back.
9.6.1	If it is not placed, he should recite with the Vaisnava mantra.
9.6.2	If the moon rises before the oblation is offered, one should divide the rice into three parts. The middle ones should be made into an eight-pot cake for Agni Datra. The oldest ones should be made as a rice-gruel for Indra Pradatra. The youngest ones should be made a rice-grual for Vishnu Sipivista.
9.6.3	Which deities should one offer to when the Anirupta-abhyudita (rite) is performed? To the natural deities, says Ashmarathi. To the modified deities, says Aalekhana.
9.6.4	This is one view. Another view is that it is not so.
9.6.5	If one who is a performer of the Darśa-Pūrṇamāsa sacrifices should transgress the New Moon or Full Moon, he should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni, the path-maker.
9.6.6	One should bring the sacrificial grass from the edge of the path.
9.6.7	A bull is the sacrificial fee.
9.6.8	The Isti is concluded with success.
9.6.9	Now some know this: "The sacrifice of him who has a sacrifice in progress is cut off." He who has a sacrifice going on should offer this Antareshti. The one who is for Agni at the Full Moon is the one for the New Moon. He should offer it to Agni Pathikrita. By that he again finds the path and does not cut off the sacrifice.
9.6.10	If a householder with the sacred fire goes away on a journey and eats meat or has intercourse with a woman on a parvan day, he should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni, the lord of vows.
9.6.11	Some people say that one should observe the vow.
9.6.12	If a householder with the Sacred Fire sheds tears, he should offer this oblation.
9.6.13	As for what should be done when the Agnihotra cow is attacked: Āśmarathya says, one should perform the expiation rite. Ālekhaṇa says, one should do only what is prescribed for distress.
9.7.1	If the Agnihotra cow lies down when attacked, one should make her get up with the verse, "The divine Aditi has risen, in the form of the world, for the protection of the sacrifice, making a share for Indra, Mitra, and Varuna."
9.7.2	Having milked it, he should give it to a brahmin who does not eat food.
9.7.3	If it is trembling, one should milk it.
9.7.4	If the milk is spilt while being milked, one should recite: "Whatever milk was spilt on the earth, whatever milk was spilt on plants, whatever milk was in the water, whatever milk was at home, whatever milk was with the calves, may that milk be with me."
9.7.5	Then he sprinkles it with water, saying, "I send you to the ocean" with this verse.
9.7.6	Having offered it in the prescribed manner, one should offer again after milking another (cow).
9.7.7	If milk spills, if it is placed on the fire, or if it drips, one should offer it with the verse, "If it spills, if it drips, offer it with this verse." This is the opinion of Ashmarathi. One should offer it as it is and then offer again after milking another cow. This is the opinion by Aalekhana.
9.7.8	If the milk is being drawn and it spills, or if it is drawn and then taken away, or if it has been taken away for the offering, one should offer the milk that has been drawn again. This is the view of Āśmarathya. One should offer the milk as it is and then offer the milk that is drawn again. This view is of Ālekhana.
9.7.9	If the Soma has been spilled while being poured out, one should sit down at the place where it has been spilled and again take it up. Having offered it as it is, one should offer again after churning out another (portion).
9.8.1	If it has been spilled once, twice or thrice while being poured out - this is not to be worried about, it is understood.
9.8.2	The debate on the Agnihotra of the Krittikas was spoken by Ashmarathi, the debate on the ladle was spoken by Aalekhana.
9.8.3	If the fourth part spills out, then taking the remaining from the vessel, and taking four spoonfuls, one should offer. One may recite the Varuni verse of ghee and offer with the Varuni verse.
9.8.4	If while being milked, it breaks, it should be milked after being repaired.
9.8.5	If the milk is milked by another, if it is kept by another, if the milk is let out by another, if while being poured out, it is poured out by another, or if it is poured out again after being poured out by another.
9.8.6	If the ancient (oblation) is being taken away, he should touch it with the formula, "Thou art offered in the world-supporting body of Prajapati. Svāhā!" Having recited the Varuni verse of clarified butter, he should offer with the Varuni verse.
9.8.7	If blood or something discolored is being milked, having placed it in the Anvāhāryapacana, he should offer it with the formula "To Agni, the Rudra-possessed, Svāhā!"
9.8.8	If it were to be scattered, one should say, "May it be scattered on the one I hate."
9.8.9	If it were to be spilled at the evening offering, one should not eat until the morning offering. If it were to spill at the morning offering, one should eat until the evening offering.
9.9.1	If the dog runs between the fire and the Agnihotra oblation, one should take ash from the Garhapatya fire and run towards the Ahavaniya fire, reciting, "Vishnu has conquered."
9.9.2	One should sprinkle the dog's footprint with ash.
9.9.3	One should know this as the single-slayer of pigs.
9.9.4	If the sun rises before the fire has been taken out, one should take out the fire and then perform the Agnihotra.
9.9.5	A learned brahmin should take out the Agnihotra fire and perform the Agnihotra.
9.9.6	Having established the fire, having placed the Agnihotra, having sat down without breathing, having offered, having given a boon, having stood with "Bhuḥ," says Āśmarathya. "Bhuḥ, Bhuvaḥ, Suvaḥ" says Ālekhaṇa.
9.9.7	He observes this night without eating.
9.9.8	On the next day, he offers a Varuna oblation of ten potsherds and a cake to Agni, according to some.
9.9.9	The Iṣṭi comes to an end with the Siddha.
9.9.10	If one were to offer the Agnihotra at night, one should offer with the formula, "Salutations to the fault of the season, svāhā."
9.9.11	Aśmarathya says that this is the regular Agnihotra. Alekhana says that one should offer the Agnihotra regularly after having offered the Agnihotra with this formula at the time of the sunset.
9.9.12	There the same Homa-rite is to be followed.
9.9.13	Herein, the difference is that one should say "Bhūr Bhuvah Suvah" before the Hotr's recitation.
9.9.14	If one were to delay the Agnihotra offering in the morning, one should offer the morning oblation with "Namah Svāhā".
9.9.15	Āśmarathya says that this is the eternal Agnihotra. Then, having performed the offering with this mantra, having brought the time to an end, having offered the eternal Agnihotra, having given a boon, having offered, one should stand up with the words "Bhūr Bhuvah Suvah".
9.9.16	Having made the Havaniya fire follow him, he should take another fire, reciting, "Agni has proclaimed the dawn as the foremost."
9.9.17	Then he should recite this mantra, "May you be safe here, do not abandon me, (and) this one, the son of Amuṣyā."
9.10.1	There he should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni, a cake on eleven potsherds to Indra, a cake on twelve potsherds to Viṣṇu, a cake on thirteen potsherds to Sarasvatī, a cake on fourteen potsherds to Pūṣan, a cake on fifteen potsherds to Yama, a cake on sixteen potsherds to Nirṛti, a cake on seventeen potsherds to Varuna, a cake on eighteen potsherds to Soma, a cake on nineteen potsherds to Savitr, a cake on twenty potsherds to Brhaspati, a cake on one potsherd to Mitra, and a cake on one
9.10.2	The Iṣṭi is concluded with success.
9.10.3	When it is established, the husband and wife, observing silence, abstain from food and attend to the fire.
9.10.4	One should offer the Agnihotra with the milk of two animals in the evening.
9.10.5	One should perform the Iṣṭi for Agni Vratapati with a cake on eight potsherds.
9.10.6	The Iṣṭi is concluded with success.
9.10.7	If the sun rises while the fire is not yet taken out, one should take four spoonfuls of clarified butter and proceed with the morning Agnihotra.
9.10.8	A learned Brahmin, a descendant of the sages, should take out the fire and proceed with the Agnihotra.
9.10.9	Having established the fire, having placed the Agnihotra in front, having sat facing east, one should offer with this clarified butter: "May Uṣas, the leader, enjoy the sacrifice along with the gods, the sweetest offering to the gods, svāhā."
9.10.10	Then one should offer the Agnihotra regularly.
9.10.11	There, the same rules apply for the offering.
9.10.12	The expiation is that which is performed at dawn.
9.10.13	There is no difference here. One does not follow the Ahavaniya.
9.10.14	One should offer a cake on eight potshards to Agni Jyotishmati.
9.10.15	The Isti is concluded with success.
9.11.1	Now, if the sun rises or sets while the fire is not yet taken up, one should offer two spoonfuls with the verse, "May the mind and light be united. The thirty-three threads."
9.11.2	If one offers when the sun has not yet set, one should offer again after sunset and then stand up with the verse, "May the two of us be of one mind."
9.11.3	If one were to offer at midnight, then having offered again at dawn, one should attend as before.
9.11.4	If the Agnihotra is not offered when the sun has risen, if it is intended to be offered before sunrise, then if it is at the end, having carried it forward, one should run towards the east.
9.11.5	Having approached it, one should sit near it.
9.11.6	When one becomes distressed, one should offer with the formula, "Bhūḥ svāhā."
9.11.7	If the Garhapatya fire were to be blown out in the absence of the wind blowing on the Ahavaniya, having followed the Ahavaniya fire, having placed the ashes of the Garhapaty fire near it, one should churn it with the verse, "Agni first came from here."
9.11.8	Then he should recite the following mantra over it: "For prosperity, for wealth, for strength, for radiance, for offspring."
9.11.9	Having placed the Āhavaniya fire, he kindles it. The two fires at the Utsada are kindled by the Samitdhātr. "One is the Samrāṭ, one is the Virāj."
9.11.10	Then he should offer an oblation to Agni Tapāsvān, Janadvā, Pāvakavān on eight potsherds.
9.11.11	The Iṣṭi is accomplished and comes to an end.
9.11.12	This alone is kept in the Garhapatya fire, followed by the Āhavani ya fire, as an expiation.
9.11.13	Here one does not follow the Garhapatya. One should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Jyotishmata, not to Tapasvita.
9.11.14	The Iṣṭi is concluded with success.
9.12.1	If the fire of the Agnihotra is extinguished in the evening, one should take the Agnihotra fire and place it in front of the fire that has been extinguished, and then follow it with the Agnihotra fire.
9.12.2	A brahmin who knows much should take out the fire.
9.12.3	If one has borrowed money earlier, one should give it back.
9.12.4	This is also done in the morning.
9.12.5	If another fire should follow the Agnihotra fire that has been offered in the morning, one should follow it, then churn out another fire, and offer the Agnihotra. If one is not in a hurry, one should do this.
9.12.6	If one is in a hurry, then one should follow the previous fire, then churn out a new fire facing east and offer the Agnihotras.
9.12.7-8	If he has a fire-pit, he should make it in front of the fire-pit. If he does not have a fire-pit and wants to make one, he should make a fire-pit in front of the pit. If he has a fire and wants to make another, he should make the other fire in front of the first fire. If he wants to make a fire-pan, he should make one in front of the pan. If he is making a fire-pan and wants to make a new one, he should put the old one in front of it. If he makes a fire-pan in front of the old one, he should offer it there. Then he should offer an oblation to Agni Tapashvin, Janadvin, and Pāvakavata on eight potsherds. The Iști comes to an end with success.
9.12.9	If another fire were to follow the fire at which the Agnihotra has not been offered in the evening, then one should take the fire from the original fire and offer the Agnihotra, moving towards the east.
9.12.10	Then he recites the formula, "Agni was born first from these sources of birth, the knower of beings. He carries oblation to the gods with the Gāyatrī, Triṣṭubh, Jagatī and Anushtup metres. May he know us. May he delight in food, wealth, strength, lustre, in the lord. He delights him. May the lord of the earth be seated on the soft ground." He makes him sit on the soft ground.
9.13.1	The two Sārasvata oblations are indeed the Rk and the Sāman. By means of them he makes him prosper, by means of them he prospers.
9.13.2	One should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Jyotishmati and a gruel of barley to Varuna.
9.13.3	The Isti comes to an end with success.
9.13.4	Now, if another fire should follow the one whose Agnihotra has not been offered, then one should churn out fire from those very ashes.
9.13.5	If there are no such ashes, then one should touch the ashes and churn out fire. It is known that one generates it from its own source.
9.13.6	Then he should offer an oblation to Agni Tapashvin, Janadvin, and Pavakavin on eight potsherds.
9.13.7	The Iṣṭi is concluded with success.
9.13.8	Now, if one of the two fires goes out, one should rekindle it from the same wood.
9.13.9	If there is a fire-brand or a spark, one should rub it with ashes and kindle it. It is known that one generates it from its own source.
9.13.10	Then one should offer an oblation to Agni Tapashvin, Janadvin, and Pavakvin on eight potsherds.
9.13.11	The Iṣṭi is concluded with success.
9.13.12	One should not perform the Anugati Iṣṭi.
9.13.13	These are the oblations to be offered: "Svāhā to Mitra, Svāhā to Varuna, Svāhā Surya, Svāhā Agni, Svāhā Vratapati Agni, Svāha to Agni Tapashvin, Janadvin, Pavakavati Agni, Svāhe to Agni Shuchi, Svāhā Jyotishmati Agni."
9.13.14	One should offer oblations with the Vyāhṛtis, each separately and all together.
9.14.1	If the Agnihotra of a person is lost, he should offer a cake on eight potshards to Agni Tantumati.
9.14.2	If one were to offer a sacrifice to another person's fire or if one were to offer to another person'sthe fire, one should offer a cake to Agni and Vishnu on eleven potshards.
9.14.3	If one would take out the fire from another person's house, one should offer to Agni Agnivati a cake on eight potshards.
9.14.4	If a man, a dog, or a cart passes between the fires while the Agnihotra oblation is being placed on the fire or is being offered, one should offer with this verse, "Thirty-three threads."
9.14.5	Some say that if a cart or a chariot passes between the fires.
9.14.6	He does not specify the time.
9.14.7	Then sprinkle water here and recite the mantra.
9.14.8	One should omit the word "viṣṇu" and recite the mantra.
9.14.9	Having followed the Ahavaniya, he should direct it towards another. The first step of Agni is followed by the rays of the sun. There, O Agni, you gather the most prosperous. Unite us with good will and prosperity. You, O Agni, are the most brilliant, the most desirable Hotṛ, the most excellent. With you, they spread out the sacrifice.
9.14.10	Then he should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Pathikrita.
9.14.11	He should bring the sacrificial grass from the edge of the path.
9.14.12	A bull is the sacrificial fee.
9.14.13	The Isti comes to an end with success.
9.14.14	One should offer this (cake) when the Stotra is confused, this (cake) in the case of a weapon,
9.14.15	this (cake) when fires are extinguished by fire,
9.14.16	this (is offered) when a person dies.
9.14.17	It is understood that it is generated by the deceased.
9.14.18	They should offer the Agnihotra with the milk of this cow, which has given birth, until her body touches the fires.
9.15.1	He strews the fires with darbha grass, with the tips pointing towards the south and east.
9.15.2	Holding a firebrand below, he runs forward.
9.15.3	He offers Soma to the Pitrs in the eastern half, and Agni to the Kavya-carriers in the northern half.
9.15.4	They should sprinkle water for rinsing the vessels towards the south.
9.15.5	They should give the sacrificial ladle to the Brahmana.
9.15.6	They should drink water.
9.15.7	The stone for grinding the oblations should be of iron, and the mortar of wood.
9.15.8	If the ghee is not purified, he should cut off the life of the animal and give it.
9.15.9	If it is purified, he should give the wealth that is depicted in his house.
9.15.10	This is the opposite of some, namely, cutting off the depicted in the purified and cutting off the depicted.
9.15.11	If it spills out of the ladle, he should place a piece of wood pointing east at the place where it spilled, with the formula, "To the lord of beings svāhā." He should place a piece pointing south-east, with the formula "To the lord (of the world) svāhā." Pointing west, with the formula "To the lord of the beings svāhā." Pointing north, with the formula "To the being svāhā."
9.15.12	Then one should sprinkle it with this (verse), says Ashmarathi. One should sprinkle you with this (verse). The Adhvaryu and the Pratiprasthātṛ should recite this verse.
9.15.13	One should recite this verse over the spilled oblation: "To the lord of beings, svāhā! To the lord of worlds, svāhā!" Some say that one should recite this verse: "To the protector of beings, svāhāk."
9.15.14	He does not speak about any oblation.
9.15.15	The sacrifice went to the gods. May it be blessed for me. So say those who recite this mantra after the offering of clarified butter.
9.15.16	If the offerings are spilled, one should take them up with the three verses, "The waters that are poured forth, the waters that are held back," and offer them with the verse, "The waters are spread out."
9.16.1	If the pot is broken, he should join it together with the formula, "I join you with the Gayatri consisting of one hundred syllables."
9.16.2	Then he should pour water over it with the verse, "The heat is unbroken, the giver of life."
9.16.3	Then he offers this oblation with the verse, "The thirty-three threads."
9.16.4	Then, having prepared another skull, he should offer it in the skulls, saying, "May the gods come to the heat."
9.16.5	Thus indeed, if it were to break before the offering.
9.16.6	If it were to break after the offering, he should offer with this same mantra.
9.16.7	If the skull were to be destroyed, he should offer the Aśvinam with two skulls, and the Dyāvāpṛthivyam with one skull.
9.16.8	It is understood that the officiating priest is a Bhārgava and the Dakṣiṇā is given in a single year.
9.16.9	If it is known that the sacrifice has been performed in accordance with the rules, then there is no need for expiation. This is the view of Āśmarathya. If the articles have already been used, then there is expiation. This view is of Ālekhana.
9.16.10	If one were to offer oblations to the wives while performing the sacrifice, one should offer oblations to Vaisvānara with twelve potsherds.
9.16.11	The Iṣṭi is concluded successfully.
9.16.12	One should offer this oblation at the new moon or full moon.
9.16.13	If one were to eat new grain without offering this oblation.
9.16.14	If one's two sons were born, one should offer a cake on twelve potsherds to Vaiśvānara.
9.16.15	If the verses of praise and response are in Triṣṭubh or Jagatī metre.
9.16.16	If Rudra is to be propitiated for the sake of cattle, one should offer a cake in the Raudra Vastu form.
9.16.17	One should perform the sacrifice for the chief of the Niṣādas with that.
9.16.18	It is known that the Dakṣiṇā is either a black antelope skin, a horn, a donkey, a deer, or a deer-skin, or two vessels made of Śafaka and Śyāmaka grass, or two bowls made of conches.
9.17.1	One who has practiced celibacy and then approaches a woman should offer a fierce he-goat.
9.17.2	They move in the waters with its offerings.
9.17.3	They do not move with its oblation, nor is there an animal cake.
9.17.4	It ends with the Iḍā. They are endowed with prosperity.
9.17.5	It is either of Nairṛta or Prajāpati.
9.17.6	If the oblation perishes, that sacrifice is taken by Nirriti.
9.17.7	Whatever is left over, he should keep aside.
9.17.8	For a sacrifice is the atonement for a sacrifice.
9.17.9	He should give that sacrificial fee to the one he hates.
9.17.10	If it were to be exhausted according to the story, it would be atonement. This is the opinion of Ashmarathi. If it were not to be obtained from the gifts, it would be the opinion of Aalekhana.
9.17.11	It is understood that the water has taken away the impure oblation.
9.17.12	If the oblation becomes spoiled without being offered to the deity, one should offer it to the deity after taking it away with water.
9.17.13	The mantras beginning with the taking of the ladle should be repeated.
9.17.14	If the oblation of the deity to whom the oblation is offered is lost, one should offer it with ghee. Some say that one should offer it silently.
9.18.1	If all the oblations are lost or spoiled, one should offer them with ghee, counting them as oblations of ghee, and perform the Iṣṭi with that.
9.18.2	One should perform another Iṣṭi, not inferior to this.
9.18.3	It is understood that the sacrifice is performed as an expiation for the sacrifice.
9.18.4	How does one know that the oblation is defective? If it is not fit to be eaten by the noble ones who know dharma and desire dharma, one should not offer it to the gods with that.
9.18.5	It is understood that the oblation that is poorly cooked is dedicated to Yama, and it goes to Yama.
9.18.6	Having placed the oblation in the Anvāhāryapachana, having cooked rice in four pots, he should offer it to four Brahmins as if it were cooked rice.
9.18.7	Among them, a Bhārgava should be one who eats.
9.18.8	If he has promised a gift and then withdraws it, he should give land that is fertile and well-established.
9.18.9	If one were to perform a sacrifice without Dakṣiṇā, that sacrifice would be deficient, and the sacrificer would have a short life.
9.18.10	One should give a fertile field.
9.18.11	If one were to invoke a deity without a share, one should offer it with ghee as if it were brought.
9.18.12	If one remembers a deity that has been excluded, one should stand up and invoke it.
9.18.13	If the gods should transgress, one should offer a libation with this (verse).
9.19.1	If the gods or the sacrificer should transgress in the offering or the offering-verses, one should give whatever wealth is variegated in his house.
9.19.2	If the oblation should fall down, one should tell the Agnidhra (to offer) with "Offer!"
9.19.3	He offers it with the formula, "I offer to Agni's mouth. May the sacrificer not be injured, may the sacrificer's wife not be injured, and may the sacrificial waters not be injured." Or he may offer with the formula, “I offer to the mouth of such and such a deity.”
9.19.4	To the deity to whom the offering is made, one should give a full vessel.
9.19.5	If the oblation is taken by a deity, or if it is burnt by a deity, he should give the abundant wealth that is in his house.
9.19.6	If the oblations are exchanged, one should offer this expiation: "You are our Agni, O Agni, you are our Agni."
9.19.7	One should offer these very oblations in all cases of exchange.
9.19.8	If the sacrificial cake falls down, either on the ground or on the fire, then having removed it and placed it on the sacrificial grass, one should offer it with the verse, "Why do you fly? Why do you fly? O peaceful one, come here for peace. Having become the silent one fit for the sacrifice, you have come to your own abode. Do not harm, sent by the gods. With ghee, the brilliance of ghee, do not injure us in any way. For the sake of peace of union and safety, come to this sacrificial grass."
9.19.9	If the sacrificer becomes one who performs the expiation rite, it is known that he performs the expiation rites.
10.1.1	One who is going to perform the Jyotiṣṭoma sacrifice in spring appoints the officiating priests in the form of Brahmanas, young or old, not deficient in speech, not deficient in limbs, and speaking in a high voice, four in number.
10.1.2	Or all.
10.1.3	When he chooses four priests, he chooses the Adhvaryu, the Brahman, the Hotṛ and the Udgātṛ.
10.1.4	"The Adhvaryu is the divine Aditya, the divine deity. May he be my Adhvaryu." Having chosen the divine Adhvaryu in a low voice, he chooses the human one loudly, saying, "This is the human one."
10.1.5	The moon-god is the divine Brahman. He is my Brahman. Having chosen the divine Brahman in a low voice, he chooses the human one aloud.
10.1.6	Agni is the divine Hotri. He is my Hotri. Having chosen the divne Hotri in a low voice he chooses the human Hotri aloud.
10.1.7	The divine Udgātṛ is Parjanya, the god; he is the Udgātṛ; he is the divine Udgātā; having chosen the divine Udgāta in a low voice, he chooses the human in a loud voice.
10.1.8	The Kauseetkinas mention the fifth, the Sadasy, the Mahartr, as the Udgātā.
10.1.9	He becomes the observer of the rites performed and not performed.
10.1.10	He is chosen.
10.1.11	"The sky is the divine member of the assembly. May it be my member of the assembly." Having taken the divine member of assembly in a low voice, he says loudly, "This is the human one." He takes the human one.
10.1.12	"The waters are the divine goddesses who desire the office of Hotr. May they be my office-desirers." Having taken the office-desirous ones in a low voice he says loudly, “This is the human and that is the human.” He takes the human ones.
10.2.1	The rays are the divine Chamasa-officiating-priests. May they be my Chamasa-officiants. Having taken the divine Chamasa officiating-priests silently, he takes the human ones aloud, saying, "This one and that one is human."
10.2.2	Having put on the sacrificial thread, having sipped water, standing towards the east or north, or sitting, he recites: "You have told me life, you have told me radiance, you have told fame, you have told prosperity. May I be long-lived, radiant, glorious, prosperous, and may I be praised. May I be all." Having said this, he may tell or know.
10.2.3	"May the god Soma go to the god, may Soma go by the path of truth. I go forth, having abandoned evil." Thus he goes forth, having promised.
10.2.4	"You are the path named 'Pdwā', the path of Soma. May I go to Soma." Thus he stands on the path.
10.2.5	"The fathers are the earth." Thus he stands facing south towards the fathers.
10.2.6	Then he calls him to the house.
10.2.7	And covering him, he makes him a Kundalin.
10.2.8	And he gives him a single cow.
10.2.9	He initiates on the new moon or the full moon.
10.2.10	His initiation is unlimited, lasting for half a year.
10.2.11	One should not offer a Soma sacrifice without having offered the Darśa-Pūrṇamāsa sacrifices.
10.2.12	One should offer the other sacrifices without having offered the Agniṣṭoma.
10.2.13	Some people call the Atiratra the first sacrifice.
10.2.14	One should not perform the Brihat-sutra without performing the Rathantara-sutra.
10.2.15	The day of the new moon or the full moon is the day of the sacrifice.
10.3.1	They measure the eastern ridge, which is elevated in front.
10.3.2	It has doors in each direction, with the fifth door facing the northeastern corner.
10.3.3	Some say that they are placed on the Sraktis.
10.3.4	Having followed the seven Hotras in the mind, he offers the Grahas in the Ahavaniya.
10.3.5	He performs the Diksaniya Isti.
10.3.6	He offers a cake on eleven potshards to Agni-Visnu or a rice-pap in ghee to Agni-Visņu.
10.3.7	The Diksaniya is concluded with the Patnisamyaja offerings.
10.3.8	Whatever is done before the Agniṣṭoma, all that is done in a low voice.
10.3.9	Here there is no Anvāhārya.
10.3.10	The sacrificer shaves his hair and beard on the northern side of the eastern beam.
10.3.11	He gives the cow to the south, saying, "May the waters come up, may the living come up."
10.3.12	Having bound the three darbha-blades with a three-stranded thread, he places them with their tips upwards, saying, "O herb, protect him."
10.3.13	He places it with the formula, "O Svadhā, do not injure him."
10.3.14	He sows with the formula, “O Devashruti, sow these seeds.”
10.3.15	The sacrificer mutters this formula, “May the later ones be well.”
10.3.16	He shaves the beard first, then the cheeks, then the hair. So it is known.
10.3.17	He cleans his teeth with a twig of the Udumbara tree, not causing any bleeding.
10.3.18	Having cleaned his teeth, he makes his nails.
10.3.19	First on the left hand, starting from the little finger, then on the right hand.
10.3.20	First the elephant, then the foot.
10.3.21	He bathes in the sacred place called Lomashāvakāvalam.
10.3.22	The plants become continuous.
10.4.1	Some say that one bathes in a pond.
10.4.2	Having placed gold in the pond called Śaṅkhinī, he bathes with the verse, "May the waters purify us." Having bathed, he recites, "I have risen up from them, pure and purified."
10.4.3	Having sipped water, he puts on a fresh silken garment, saying, "Thou art the body of Soma, protect my body."
10.4.4	He puts on the girdle, saying, "You are the girdle of Soma."
10.4.5	He eats the food which is agreeable to him, saying, "thou art strength."
10.4.6	He eats curds mixed with ghee and honey, and drinks water.
10.4.7	He anoints the younger and younger (parts of the body) upwards.
10.4.8	Having mixed ghee with a bunch of Darbha grass, he anoints three times from the front, saying, "You are the giver of radiance, give radiance to me."
10.4.9	The face is anointed first, then the limbs in the natural order.
10.4.10	He becomes anointed.
10.4.11	He is anointed with a single-eyed ointment.
10.4.12	If he does not reach the Trikakud, then with whatever collyrium he has anointed his eyes.
10.4.13	With a tuft of grass, or with a bunch of darbha grass, or with darbha grass, he should move clockwise, starting from the right, and say, "You are the eye of Vritra's pupil. Protect my eye." Three times clockwise, twice counterclockwise.
10.5.1	Then he purifies him with twenty-one darbha-grass-broom, seven by seven, three times, with these formulas: "May Citpati purify you, may Vakpati purify you, the god Savitar may purify you."
10.5.2	He applies this formula "With the flawless purifier" everywhere.
10.5.3	Twice he rubs upwards from the navel, once downwards.
10.5.4	He recites this Anuvaka, "Pavamana, the purifier of gold," while being purified.
10.5.5	"What the gods do to the gods," and "O lord of purification, by whom you are purified, to whom you are purified," and "I am able to do that."
10.5.6	Having entered by the eastern door, having gone beyond the Ahavaniya fire, standing to the south, he recites the Ahavaniya with the remaining portion of the Anuvaka, "Indra-Agni, heaven-earth."
10.5.7	This is his course till the Soma-drinking.
10.5.8	Here some prescribe the Diksaniya Isti.
10.5.9	At the Dikshaniya sacrifice, he offers four oblations to the deities of initiation with the ladle, reciting the following mantras: "To Akriti, to Pratiti, to Agni, Svāhā."
10.5.10	With the ladle, he offers the fifth oblation, reciting: "The great goddesses, the waters, are auspicious to all."
10.5.11	Having filled the ladle with four spoonfuls, he offers a full oblation with twelve spoonfuls, with the verse, "All the gods are the leaders of the sacrifice."
10.5.12	Some say that one should offer after making a hole in the ground.
10.5.13	Having spread the black antelope skin, the right front foot is placed on it.
10.5.14	Having made two parallel lines joined with meat.
10.5.15	The sacrificer touches the white and black lines on the skin of black antelope spread out on the altar with its neck towards the east and with the hair upwards, with the verse, "The Rg and the Sama are established in the art."
10.5.16	Having ascended the altar up to the knees, he recites the verse, "This is the wisdom of the one learning the Sūtras," twice.
10.6.1	Having ascended, he recites this verse, "I have ascended this good boat."
10.6.2	"He anoints the shoulder, saying, 'Thou art the protection of Vishnu; thou art the protection of the sacrificer; protect me.'
10.6.3	He covers the head with the turban, saying, 'Protect me from the shining of the stars.'
10.6.4	He anoints the head as well as the body.
10.6.5	He places the pot and the bundle of grass on the wife's head.
10.6.6	They call it a net and a bundle."
10.6.7	It is known that the Krsna-cows are the source of life.
10.6.8	Then he makes her wear a garment of Kshauma cloth, with the hem towards the east.
10.6.9	They say that the face should be turned upwards.
10.6.10	The sacrificer is tied with a rope made of Muñja grass, with a girdle of three strands, at the middle of the earth, with the formula, "This is the energy of Angiras."
10.6.11	Having made a knot on the north side of the navel, he ties it on the south side of the navel.
10.6.12	He ties the wife with a yoke, saying, "I bind you together as in the Darsha-Pūrnamāsa."
10.6.13	Then he gives him a three-valved or five-valved black horn, turning to the right, saying, "You are the womb of Indra, do not harm me."
10.6.14-17	With this very mantra, he binds it. With that, he digs up a clod of earth from the Veda, saying, "For your crops, for your abundant crops." "For your abundant crops," he scratches his head. When he scratches his head, "For your teeth, for your abundant teeth," he scratches his teeth. "For your teeth, to be abundant," he scratches his gums. "For your abundant teeth," "For your joints, for your abundant joints," he scratches his joints. "For your joints, to be abundant." "For your abundant joints," "For the knot in your throat, for your abundant throat," he scratches his throat. "For your throat, to be abundant. For your abundant throat," "For what is bound in your heart," he scratches his heart. "For what is bound," "For all your limbs," he scratches his limbs. "For all your limbs."
10.6.18	Then he gives him the sacrificial staff of Udumbara wood, measuring up to his mouth, with the verse, "Thou art the tree, the heavenly, the bright, the giver of light. Thou art the giver of light to the sacrificer."
10.6.19	Some say that it should be of any tree that bears fruit and is fit for sacrifice.
10.6.20	He receives it with the verse, “The divine tree is well-established today.
10.7.1	He recites the formula, "Thou art the gift of the vow, thou art the gift of vow, thou art a great gift, thou art the great gift. Thou art the gift of heaven, thou art the giver of heaven, thou protectest me from the enemy, from the enemy of this sacrifice."
10.7.2	Then he lowers the fingers, reciting, "Svāhā to the sacrifice in the mind," twice; "Svāhā, to heaven and earth," twice; "Svahā, to the sky," twice.
10.7.3	He makes a fist, reciting, "Svahā to the sacrifice in wind."
10.7.4	Then he makes him recite the Sambhāraya-formulas, beginning with "Agni with the formulas."
10.7.5	Then he restrains speech until the rising of the stars.
10.7.6	If he releases speech before the stars, he should recite the formulas of Vishnu, Agni-Vishnu, Sarasvati, and Brihaspati, and then again restrain speech.
10.7.7	If he should let loose his speech in the form of a curse, he should say, "Thou art the guardian of vows, O Agni."
10.7.8	Then he informs him, "This Brahman, the son of so-and-so, the grandson of so-andso, the great-grandson of so-and so, the son of the son of soand so, the grandson of the grandson of soand so," three times in a low voice and three times aloud.
10.7.9	Whoever is initiated, he should be addressed as a brahmin.
10.7.10	One is initiated in the afternoon.
10.7.11	If one wishes that he may be ascetic, then one should initiate him in the morning.
10.7.12	Having risen, he releases the black antelope skin.
10.7.13	He observes this vow: He does not eat meat, does not approach a woman, and does not sleep above it, out of disgust for untruth.
10.7.14	He speaks in a human voice, to the wise, to the learned.
10.7.15	"The word "learned" is used to address a brahmin, while "wise" is used to refer to a kṣatriya or vaiśya."
10.7.16	A brahmin, kṣatriya, or vaiśya should speak to each other.
10.7.17	They should then address him.
10.7.18	If a conversation with a Śūdra were to be appropriate, he should say to one of them, "Examine this."
10.8.1	One should not give away the Soma before buying it.
10.8.2	One should not use a black-horned goad before giving away the Dakṣiṇās.
10.8.3	One scratches with a black-horn goad.
10.8.4	One smiles while holding it.
10.8.5	Seeing impurity, he recites: "The mind is untied, the eye is poor, the sun is the best of lights, may I not be deprived of initiation."
10.8.6	Increasing, he recites, "May the strength increase, may the energy increase, may the strength increase, do not let my initiation and austerity be destroyed."
10.8.7	One should not go away from an initiated person who is not measured.
10.8.8	He should not sleep anywhere else except in a place where the sun has risen and not yet set.
10.8.9	One should sleep facing the southern direction of the Ahavaniya fire.
10.8.10	One should not sleep on one's back or face down, nor should one turn away from the fire.
10.8.11	One is said to smile and come out according to the season.
10.8.12	They speak according to the time.
10.8.13	He should not spit, nor chew betel, nor think during the day, nor urinate.
10.8.14	If he does, he should do so in the shade.
10.8.15	He releases water, saying, "I release the offspring, I release the distress, svāhā." They enter the earth.
10.8.16	He does not cook, does not give, does not offer any oblations except for the Soma rites.
10.8.17	He should torment himself until the black color of his eyes disappears.
10.8.18	One should not cut off the black antelope skin. Thus one is freed from punishment.
10.9.1	If one were to be elsewhere than the black antelope skin, one should recite this mantra: "May the gods go to the eye ointment. May the blessing of the sacrifice not be lost."
10.9.2	One should not utter his name, nor proclaim his sin, nor address him directly. One should address him only when initiated.
10.9.3	He should not eat the food of the Agniṣṭoma sacrifice.
10.9.4	If the Agniṣṭomayajña is over, or if the omentum has been offered, or if the king has been bought, then one may eat.
10.9.5	One may also undertake the consecration after having set aside the sacrificial materials for the purpose of the sacrifice.
10.9.6	Then others may eat.
10.9.7	These vows are observed from the day of consecration onwards.
10.9.8	Then these are the uses of substances: scratching with a black antelope horn, sitting on a black antelope skin, and holding a staff.
10.9.9	The wife who is observing the milk vow becomes a celibate.
10.9.10	She releases four fingers, saying, "May you be desired."
10.9.11	Having milked, seeing the constellation, she releases the speech, saying, "I am observing the vow."
10.9.12	He keeps awake during this night.
10.9.13	Barley-gruel is the vow for a king, milk-rice for a Vaiśya, and milk for a Brāhmaṇa.
10.9.14	These are the vows for consecration.
10.9.15	But at the Upavasatha (ceremony) there is the division of the breasts for all.
10.10.1	The husband cooks the vow-food for the sacrificer on the Garhapatya fire, and the wife cooks it on the Dakṣiṇāgni.
10.10.2	The expiation for the Agnihotra that has been spilled is the vow.
10.10.3	Now some indeed perform the vow with milk alone.
10.10.4	One should not do it like that. One should perform the vow after cooking barley-gruel in milk.
10.10.5	If it is small, one should cook after milking another (cow) and perform the vow.
10.10.6	If milk is not available, one should perform the vow by cooking in water.
10.10.7	If he were to die, they should give him curd.
10.10.8	If he were to die of hunger, they should give cooked barley to him. They should give him fried grains. They should give ghee to him. At least they should give fruits. This is known as the Agnihotra not being interrupted.
10.10.9	Having taken the vow beyond the Ahavaniya fire, he gives it.
10.10.10	Then he says to him, "O Vraty, observe the vow."
10.10.11	Those who are not initiated do not see one who is initiated observing the vow.
10.10.12	"May I attain the divine mind," he says, touching his hands.
10.10.13	"Those gods who are born of mind, united with mind," he observes the vow at midnight.
10.10.14	Having performed the vow, he sips water with the verse, "May these waters be auspicious to us, may they be our womb, may they be well-behaved in our belly, may they be the givers of wealth, the faultless, the faultless ones, may they be auspicious for our life."
10.10.15	The one who gives the vow recites the verse at the end of the vow, "Make the fires luminous, O wife, restrain your speech, O wife, control your speech."
10.11.1	He worships the rising sun with the words, "The words of the cattle are in the bull, O Agni, they are in the bright sun, O Agni. I send them to you according to your share. May they be auspicious for us. May they return to us."
10.11.2	When the sun has risen, he releases the speech with the words, “The vow is performed, the vow is done.”
10.11.3	In the same way, he performs the vow at midday.
10.11.4	The one who is giving the vow at the time of sunrise or sunset should restrain his speech. He should make the fires bright. The one who is initiated should restrain his speech, saying, "O wife, restrain your speech."
10.11.5	In the same way, thereafter.
10.11.6	At midnight and at noon, he gives the vow.
10.11.7	In the same manner, until dawn.
10.11.8	The one who is giving a vow at sunrise or sunset should control his speech.
10.11.9	There is one view that there is no vow on the day of birth.
10.11.10	One who is going to sleep recites over the Āhavanīya fire, "O Agni, you do guard well. We shall sleep well."
10.11.11	On waking up, he mutters, "You, O Agni, are the guardian of vows." He concludes with, "May all the gods protect me."
10.11.12	If one is going to sleep, or if one wakes up after sleeping, or if one is not going to sleep, one should say, "O Agni, you are the one who observes the vow."
10.11.13	This is the rule for going to sleep and waking up from now on.
10.11.14	"Pūṣan, the giver, Soma, the giver of wealth."
10.12.1	He instructs those who have come together.
10.12.2	Whatever they obtain, the god Savitr accepts it. May you give me wealth of wealth. May Soma give more. Do not be deficient in fulfillment. May I not be deficient in life. May I have enjoyment in the moon. With these mantras, as appropriate.
10.12.3	One accepts with the Savitri mantra.
10.12.4	One begs for alms for twelve days for the sake of Dakshina.
10.12.5	"He directs her to Vayu, saying, 'To thee, O Vayu!' (if she is) lost.
10.12.6	'To thee, O Varuna!' (if she has) sunk in water.
10.12.7	'To Nirriti!' (if she) has died.
10.12.8	'To Rudra!' (if she was) killed by Mahadeva.
10.12.9	'To Indra!' (if she died) by a ram.
10.12.10	'To the Maruts!' (if she perished) by a blow.
10.12.11	'To thy Indra, the conqueror!' (if she dies) in battle.
10.12.12	"To Yama thee!" when the name is unknown.
10.12.13	If he finds a cow that has been stolen, he should not graze her with the cows.
10.12.14	If he tries to go, he should kindle the fires separately and go by chariot.
10.12.15	If there is no chariot, he should go taking a chariot part.
10.12.16	"Go to the good, go to the better!" he recites over the Ahavaniya.
10.12.17	The goddesses are the waters, the waters are the feet of the waters. Thus he crosses the waters.
10.12.18	He crosses the stone, saying, "I follow the unbroken thread of the earth."
10.12.19	Placing sand or a stone in the middle and on the other bank, he says, "May I be united with the earth."
10.12.20	If he crosses by boat, taking the kindling woods and the chariot, he crosses.
10.12.21	If there is no chariot, one should cross taking the chariot-part.
10.13.1	Having requested a kṣatriya, one should determine the place of sacrifice to the gods, saying, "We have come to the place of sacrifice of the gods on the earth, sloping towards the east and north."
10.13.2	One should not request the place of sacrifice.
10.13.3	One should worship the sun with this mantra: "May you see this, O Creator! May you see this in the sky! May you see the highest Rati! The most excellent truth, the immortal ones, they say. The sun shines with the rays, following heaven and earth, the son of the gods."
10.13.4	One should not go beyond the ritual of worshipping the gods.
10.13.5	At the very beginning, some people prescribe the conclusion of the Devyajan.
10.13.6	One should offer Soma to the deity in the Purohvishi Devyajan. The Devyajan offerings are prescribed as optional. They are explained in the Brahmanas.
10.13.7	It is known that one buys Soma from Kautsa.
10.13.8	Some say that one should buy it from a Shudra.
10.13.9	On the northern altar, having spread the skin of a red-coloured animal with the hair pointing towards the north, having placed the king on it, having placed the pot of water towards the north, he instructs, "O Soma-seller, purify the Soma."
10.13.10	When the Soma-seller has purified the Soma, he examines the king.
10.13.11	Those who witness the examination do not become affected.
10.14.1	The procedure of the Pravargya rite is commenced.
10.14.2	Herein, these are not performed: the Agni-anvähâna, the Vrata-upayanam, the Patnî-sannahanam, and the Anvâhâryya.
10.14.3	In all the Soma-sacrifices and animal-sacrifices, these are not done.
10.14.4	In the Udayanîya and Anûbandhyâ rites, the Vrataupayanam and Patnî-sannahanam are performed.
10.14.5	All the rites are performed at the Upavasatha-rite, except the Anvāhārya-rice.
10.14.6	Here is the extreme limit: Whatever oblation comes in the regular course, the rites performed in connection with it are not repeated, as in the case of the Pasupurodāsa, the Prayāja and Anuyāja offerings, and other similar rites.
10.14.7	He offers rice to Aditi at the Prāyaniya rite.
10.14.8	He is cooked in milk.
10.14.9	It is the same as the house.
10.14.10	Having taken out the cooked rice, he places it in six potsherds.
10.14.11	In the same pot, he places the ladle with the ladle-ful of rice, saying, "This is known."
10.14.12	There are seventeen kindling verses.
10.14.13	It is similar to the two portions of clarified butter.
10.14.14	He offers four oblations of ghee, Pathya in front, Svashti to the right, Agni to the rear, Soma to the left, Savitar to the north.
10.14.15	In the middle, Havisati.
10.14.16	The Prayaniya (Satra) ends with the verse "May we be united with the good."
10.14.17	Here some mention the offering of the king.
10.14.18	Having taken four spoonfuls of the clarified butter meant for the Dhruva offering at the Prāyaniya (Sāmidhenī) verses, he should place it on the Darbha grass along with gold and then offer it with the verse, "This is your bright body, this is your lustre."
10.14.19	This is the Soma-purchasing cow. If she is not cut, not pierced, not deaf, not blind, not seven-hoofed, not red, not tawny-eyed, not one-year-old, not two-year-old but sound, with a long tail, with long ears, with that one buys Soma for the sixteen-fold sacrifice.
10.15.1	He offers looking at it, saying, "Thou art the Jūr, held in the mind."
10.15.2	Having taken another four-fold portion, he takes up the gold from the ghee with the verse, "Thou art Sukra, thou art Amrita."
10.15.3	He recites the verse, "This is the oblation for all gods" over the ghee.
10.15.4	Having released the gold, he stands facing the sun with the verse, "The eye of the sun has ascended."
10.15.5	He recites over the Soma-purchasing cow, "Thou art the mind, the mental." He recites with the verse, "Indra, for thee, the Soma."
10.15.6	Then he steps on the six steps to the right of her right foot, reciting these mantras, "Thou art Vasu, thou art Rudra."
10.15.7	He steps on the seventh step, reciting, "May Brihaspati lead thee to a pleasant union."
10.15.8	Having worshipped the gold, he offers this four-grasped oblation, saying, "I touch the head of the earth, in the place of the Ida offering to the gods, in the ghee, svāhā."
10.15.9	As far as the ghee has spread, he draws around with the wooden sword, saying, "The Rakshas are drawn around, the evil ones are drawn around."
10.15.10	In the same way, he draws around again with the black-horned one.
10.15.11	As long as the water is boiling in the pot, he pours it down with the verse, "May we have wealth."
10.15.12	The Adhvaryu gives it to the sacrificer with the verse, “May we have wealth.”
10.15.13	The sacrificer gives it to his wife with the verse, "May we have wealth."
10.15.14	The Adhvaryu recites the verse, "Do not be separated from me in the possession of wealth," when giving the portion to the wife.
10.15.15	He makes the wife count the Soma-purchasing coins, saying, "O goddess, look at the divine Urvashi."
10.15.16	He places the foot-washing water near the foot-washing pot, saying, "Raise the earth."
10.15.17	Having washed the hands with gold in the foot-washing, he sows the third seed in the cold ashes of the Garhapatya.
10.15.18	Similarly, the third seed in Avashina of the Ahavaniya.
10.15.19	The third seed in the Avashina of Akshopajanana.
10.15.20	His wife keeps it in the house.
10.15.21	He stands facing the sun with a golden hand.
10.16.1	"O divine Sun, we are buying Soma. We tell you that. Arrange the seasons, arrange the fees as per the seasons and as per the deities."
10.16.2	Here some mention the king's offering.
10.16.3	The king goes to the path with a cart, but the path is not visible.
10.16.4	It is removed before the fruit is taken out.
10.16.5	Having released the king on both sides and having established him facing the mouth, he recites the mantra, "May your rays be released."
10.16.6	With the northern (part of the) king, having spread out a double-folded silken cloth with its neck towards the east and its end towards the north, he measures the king with his hand holding gold, with the formula, "To that god Savitr..."
10.16.7	He measures with each (part) separately.
10.16.8	He holds the thumb in all (parts).
10.16.9	With the same (part) with which he first (measures), he does not (measure) the fifth (part). With the same (part), he measures the last.
10.16.10	Five times with the Yajus, five times silently.
10.16.11	Having collected the remaining (grass) for the offspring, having tied the ends of the garments, he puts on the turban made of linen, saying, "For the Prāṇa thee!" and "For the Vyāna thee!" he ties it up.
10.16.12	He looks at the sky, saying, "May the offspring follow thee! May the offspring follow thee!"
10.16.13	The sacrificer, having given the Soma-seller the price, recites the mantras beginning with "This is your Gayatra share" and ending with "Tell this to my Soma-seller."
10.16.14	Then the Soma-seller says, "The Soma is for sale."
10.16.15	The Soma-seller says "For sale."
10.16.16	He buys it, saying, "I buy Soma from you, the vigorous, the milky, the heroic, the conqueror of foes. I buy it with a cow."
10.16.17	This is explained.
10.16.18	"Soma, the king, deserves more," says the Soma-seller.
10.16.19	"Soma deserves more," says also the Adhvaryu.
10.17.1	He buys it with gold, saying, "The bright from you, the bright I buy."
10.17.2-6	The Soma-seller says, "Soma is worthy of more than this." The Adhvaryu says, "Soma indeed is worthy of more." He buys with the verse, "Thou art the body of Tapas." The Soma-seller says "Soma is worthy more than this." The Adhvaryu replies, "Soma indeed, is worthy of more.
10.17.7	He buys with a cow, with a bull, with a he-goat, with a pair, with a garment.
10.17.8	He buys with ten or with an unlimited number.
10.17.9	It is known that he buys with three.
10.17.10	Some mention four: with a cow, gold, a goat, and a garment.
10.17.11	If one were to buy Soma with only one cow, one would buy it with a cow that has twenty-one characteristics.
10.17.12	If the cow is without horns, without ears, without eyes, with seven hooves, reddish, with tawny eyes, and belongs to one owner, some people mention it as auspicious.
10.17.13	It is known that one should buy Soma for thirty thousand, for a hundred for the Vājapeya, for two for the Rājasūya, and for a thousand for the Aśvamedha.
10.17.14	Having taken gold from the Soma-seller, he gives a white woolen garment to the sacrificer, saying, "May there be light for us."
10.17.15	At the proper time, the sacrificer makes the navel of the ten-stringed filter.
10.17.16	The auspicious rite is to be performed, the rite of purification is to be performed. This is known.
10.17.17	He ties the black (thread) saying, "I tie the neck of the serpents, the venomous ones."
10.17.18	With that he pierces the Soma-seller, saying, "O Soma-seller, I pierce you."
10.17.19	He directs the Soma-sellers, saying, "To my own radiance." With the remaining part of the Anuvaka.
10.18.1	The Soma-seller gives the king the Soma, saying, "Thou art mine own, thou art mine own, for this rite am I born. With truth I take thee, with truth protect me."
10.18.2	When the Soma has been bought, he makes it over.
10.18.3	The sacrificer gives the Maitrāvaruṇa the staff.
10.18.4	Some say, "He gives the staff to the Maitrāvaruṇā at the Svāṃśu-rite.
10.18.5	The sacrificer recites the formula over the king being led, "O Mitra, come to the place of good friendship."
10.18.6	He places the sacrificer's thigh on the right thigh of the Adhvaryu, "O Indra, enter the right thigh, the shining one, the shining one."
10.18.7	The sacrificer asks the Adhvaryus, "O Adhvaryus! Are you ready?"
10.18.8	The Adhvaryu says, "We are ready."
10.18.9	How is the sacrificer unable?
10.18.10	The Adhvaryu says, "We have composed the praise of Vishnu, the Brihatī verses, the Yajus verses, the mountains have been shaken, I have gone down to the well-flowing waters." The Adhvaryu restrains.
10.18.11	The sacrificer recites the Soma purchase formula, "May Rudra lead you," with the remaining part of the recitation.
10.18.12	Having exchanged it with another cow, he releases it in the owner's cattle-pen.
10.18.13	The Soma-sellers are killed with a stick of Ficus glomerata and a stone.
10.18.14	Some say they are killed with clods, others with wooden clubs.
10.19.1	Taking the king, the Adhvaryu rises, saying, "Rise up with life for my life."
10.19.2	He takes it, saying, "Take up the sky."
10.19.3	In the hole of the cart, he places the black antelope skin with its neck towards the east and with the hair towards the north, with the formula, "Thou art the seat of Aditi."
10.19.4	He makes the king sit on it with the formula, “Thou art seated on the seat of Aditia.”
10.19.5	He then covers him with a cloth with the formula, "He spread the sky over the forests."
10.19.6	He covers the black antelope skin again with the formula, "He rose up, the knower of beings." With this Sūrya verse.
10.19.7	He yokes the two oxen, saying, "This is the yoke, this is the load-bearer."
10.19.8	He touches the yoke, as in the case of the Darsha-Paurnamasa sacrifices.
10.19.9	He yokes the cart, saying, "Thou art Varuna."
10.19.10	He supports it, saying, "May Varuna support thee."
10.19.11	He removes the yoke-halter, saying, "thou art Varuna."
10.19.12	"He places the dice, saying, 'Thou art the prop of Varuna.'
10.19.13	He places the bull, saying, 'The noose of Varuna is turned back.'
10.19.14	He yokes the northern bull in the same way.
10.19.15	Bearing a twig of the Palasha or the Sami tree, the Subrahmanya moves in between."
10.19.16	Then he instructs the king Soma, who is being bought and thrown, saying, "O Brahman, recite the speech. O Subrahmanya, I invoke Subrahmanya."
10.19.17	After the first utterance has been repeated three times,
10.20.1	he proceeds with the words, "Proceed, O lord of the earth," and ends with "You are the means of attaining well-being for the sacrificer."
10.20.2	They proceed towards the east and then turn towards the south.
10.20.3	The Adhvaryu and the sacrificer cross the path to the north, saying, "We have crossed the path."
10.20.4	The sacrificer waits for the king being led away with the Agnisomiya formula, holding the ear, saying, "Salutations to Mitra and Varuna, the seers."
10.20.5	The fires are kindled.
10.20.6	They place the big one on the Ahavaniya fire.
10.20.7	The Adhvaryu takes up the stool.
10.20.8	It is of the size of an arm-span, with the head, with the navel-deep feet, with the string of Muñja grass, made of Udumbara wood.
10.20.9	Now this is the extreme case: wherever the Adhvaryu should make many performers perform, they should do it. Where there are two Pratiprasthātrs, the second one should be there.
10.20.10	He places the chariot with the formula, "Thou art Varuna."
10.20.11	He places it facing east.
10.20.12	He places it with the formula, “May Varuna place thee.”
10.20.13	"Thou art Varuna's (noose)." He throws the dice.
10.20.14	"Thou art Varuna, the binder." He throws the dice-stick.
10.20.15	"The noose of Varuna is loosed." He loosens the dice-stick (from the dice).
10.20.16	"Thou art the seat of Varuna's sacrifice." He places the seat to the right of the Ahavaniya.
10.20.17	The right bull is released, the left one is not released.
10.21.1-6	Now he begins the rite for Atithi. He places the sacrificial grass and the enclosing sticks of Khadira wood on the sacrificial grass, the sacrificial grass and enclosing sticks of Khadiral wood on the sacrificial barhis, the sacrificial grass on the sacrificial grass. He makes the sacrificial grass of twenty-two kinds of wood. It is similar till the pouring of the oblations. When the wife has begun (the rite), he pours out the oblation for Atithi. The wife herself or with her hand.
10.21.7	He takes it five times with these mantras: "O Agni, you are the guest of Viṣṇu."
10.21.8	One says, "May all be auspicious and may the Anushajya be acceptable." Another says, "May it be auspicious in the three."
10.21.9	The cake for Viṣṇu is made of nine potsherds.
10.21.10	From now on, the Vedic texts are dedicated to Viṣṇu.
10.21.11	Having released the speech with the Havishkrit formula, he releases the bull in the same way.
10.21.12	"He takes the king's garment, saying, "You are Varuna."
10.21.13	"He says to the king, "You are Varuṇa, the upholder of vows."
10.21.14-15	The Soma-king, the most auspicious of the auspicious, the most excellent of the excellent, the most brilliant of the brilliant, the most radiant of the radiant, the most auspicious, the most auspicious among the auspicious, the best of the best, the most excellent, the most excellent among the excellent, the best, the best among the best, the excellent, the excellent among the excellent. Having brought him down, they carry him, saying, "Go to the heaven, go to the heaven." He places the eastern door-post with the verse, "Those who worship with oblations your abodes."
10.22.1	Having gone beyond the Ahavaniya fire, he spreads the skin of a black antelope with its neck towards the east and its hair towards the north, saying, "You are the seat of Aditi."
10.22.2	On it he makes the king sit down, saying, "Sit on the seat of Aditis."
10.22.3	Then he covers him with a garment, saying, "Thou art Varuna, the upholder of vows."
10.22.4	Then he attends on him with the Varuna verse: "Salutations to Varuna, the great, the wise, the guardian of immortality, may he grant us protection, three-fold. May you protect us always with blessings."
10.22.5	Then he instructs the king and the fire not to go between.
10.22.6	Up to the taking of the Soma-grahas common to all.
10.22.7	He takes four spoonfuls of clarified butter.
10.22.8	Having approached the four-fold Hotr-priest-ship, having explained the Sambaharya-formulas, he performs the Nirmanthya-rite without the covering.
10.22.9	There are seventeen Samidheni verses.
10.22.10	It is similar upto the Prayajas.
10.22.11	In the fourth (Samidheni) he brings all the Upabhṛt-spoonful to the Hotr-spoon.
10.22.12	Here he does not pour clarified butter over the Upabhrit-spoon.
10.22.13	The Iḍā-offering is concluded.
10.22.14	One should say, "All the Purorāśa is offered to Iḍā" and another says, "May it be free from fault."
11.1.1	One who is going to perform the Pravargya rite, having gone to the north, on a day of the waxing fortnight, on an auspicious constellation, on the full moon or new moon day, having placed the Kantakī kindling wood silently, offers four spoonfuls with the verse, "May the mind be united." If he is not initiated,
11.1.2	If the initiated one were to place the kindling wood on the fire, he should not offer it, but should only recite the formula. This is another view.
11.1.3	Then he takes up the wooden sword, either of Khadira wood, or of Udumbara wood, or of Vaishnava wood, or of Vikankata wood.
11.1.4	The size of this is the same as that of the one used in the Agnihotra.
11.1.5	Taking up the chisel with the formula, "By the impulse of Savitr, the divine Savitr," he invites the Brahman with the formula, "Rise, O Brahmanaspati."
11.1.6	The Brahman rises.
11.1.7	Both of them recite the northern half of the verse.
11.1.8	They take up the skin of black antelope.
11.1.9	They caress the goat with the tail hanging down, the horse with the bull.
11.1.10	The Aśvaprathāmas go forward, reciting, "May Brahmanaspati go forth."
11.1.11	These are the materials for the fire-altar, which are brought forward when the altar is completed.
11.1.12	The first one digs the clay in front of the Āhavanīya, the other one digs the clay one after the other.
11.1.13	He spreads the skin of a black antelope with its neck towards the east and its hair towards the north, and recites over it the formula, "May the divine earth and heaven be favourable to me."
11.1.14	He strikes the mound with the formula, "I may prosper today at the head of the sacrifice."
11.1.15	He takes it away with the formula, “For the sacrifice thee, for the head of the sacrificethee.”
11.2.4	The rest is similar.
11.2.5	Then, "You are the strength of Indra," over the Putika grass.
11.2.6	The rest is similar. 
11.2.7	Mixing the hair of the black antelope and the hair of the goat, "You are Agni's offspring, the semen of Prajapati,"
11.2.8	The rest is the same.
11.2.9	Then he makes them smell the horse, saying, "Give life, give breath."
11.2.10	Then he milks them with the Ajya-verse, "May honey make thee sweet."
11.2.11	Some prescribe the milking before the sprinkling.
11.2.12	Many noble ones take them after having taken them.
11.2.13	He places it on the northern side of the dwelling, on the ground covered with grass, on the ground sprinkled with water.
11.2.14	Then he sprinkles them with the Madantīs, saying, "May Madhu make thee sweet."
11.2.15	All the things that are used in the Upavasatha rite, and whatever other hard things one may think of,
11.2.16	Here is the extreme limit: Whatever is done in the Pravargya rite, all that is done with the Madantī.
11.2.17	No woman sees him, nor a Śūdra.
11.2.18	He should not do so with his face turned away.
11.2.19	He should do so with his mouth turned away, playing on the flute.
11.2.20	One should not go between the Pravargya and the sun.
11.2.21	Wherever the Pravargya may be interrupted, if the sun sets, one should stop at the end of the day and complete the remainder the next day.
11.2.22	He makes a lump of clay with the formula, "Thou art the head of the sacrifice."
11.2.23	Holding it with the thumbs with the formula, “You are in the place of sacrifice,” he makes the great hero of the size of a palm or of an unlimited size, having the shape of wind, three-edged or five-edged.
11.2.24	With the Gayatri metre I make thee. Thus the first. With the Trishtup metre. Thus the second. With the Jagat metre. Thus the third.
11.2.25	Or with all of them one by one.
11.2.26	He makes the tassel of the sacrificial grass, saying, "Thou art the tassel of the sacrifice."
11.2.27	"May Aditi take your nest." He makes the nest with a reed-stalk, as long as he thinks that the oblation has reached the gods, the Sauvitrakṛt, and the Agnihotra.
11.3.1	He puts back the third portion.
11.3.2	He places it on the sand to the north, with the verse, "May the sun's rays protect you."
11.3.3	In the same way he places the second, and in the same way the third.
11.3.4	The other rites are performed silently.
11.3.5	He makes the ladle of the same clay as the ladle, with a handle and a spout, like the ladle and the ladle-stick.
11.3.6	The Adhvaryu's post is of the same wood as the sacrificial post, but smaller.
11.3.7	The ladle for melted butter is made of the same wood, with a handle of the same wood and a spout of the same wood.
11.3.8	If the fire is already kindled, he places the bricks in the fire-place, saying, "O Kulayinī, O Gharmā."
11.3.9	Then they make them smooth with smoothers, with unwoven woollen cloths, with Gavidhuka grass, with Klitaka grass, with Vaniparva grass, with ghee.
11.3.10	Then, when he is fumigating them, he fumigates the first-made great hero, having taken it with the two horns, over the Gārhapatya, having ignited the dung of the horse Vṛṣṇi, saying, "You are the dung of the Vṛṣṇī horse."
11.3.11	In the same way he fumigates the second, in the same way the third.
11.3.12	The others silently.
11.3.13	From now on he takes the great heroes with the two horns.
11.3.14	Having dug a pit in front of the Garhapatya, having spread it with the materials for cooking red rice, he places the first-made Mahāvīra there, saying, "You are light."
11.3.15	"You are radiance," for the second one. "You are light," for the third one.
11.3.16	Having silently listened to the others, he covers the materials for cooking with blood, lights the Muñja grass on the Garhapatya fire, and observes a fast. "He says, "To the light in front," "To the light on the right," "To Jyotis on the back," "To Tapas on the left."
11.4.1	Or with all (the mantras) everywhere.
11.4.2	While being cooked, he attends to them with the verse, "You attend to the heaven with your greatness." With this verse, he attends to the cooked oblations.
11.4.3	All the attending rites are accompanied by mantras.
11.4.4	When the oblations are cooked, the Adhvaryu, having taken them with the verse "For success, for prosperity," places the first-cooked Mahāvīra oblation with the verse, “May the god Savitr release you."
11.4.5	He places it on the sand towards the north, saying, "May the directions and quarters be filled."
11.4.6	He then examines it, saying, "I examine you with the eye of the sun."
11.4.7	In the same way, he removes the second one, and the third one.
11.4.8	He removes the others silently.
11.4.9	Then he sprinkles them in a clockwise direction with sand, saying, "I am enclosing this one, the son of so-and-so, with cattle and brahmic lustre."
11.4.10	"With cattle" means for a king; "with cattle" means for the Vaishya.
11.4.11	Then he anoints them with plenty of ghee, reciting the three verses, "I anoint you with the Gayatri metre" for each one.
11.4.12	Or with all (the verses) for each one.  
11.4.13	Then he makes them wear the black antelope skin, reciting, "O god, I am following you."
11.4.14	The verse is to be recited after this.
11.5.1	Those who are going to perform the Pravargya rite, close the doors.
11.5.2	They cover the wife's bed.
11.5.3	The Hotr sits behind, the Adhvaryu in front, the Brahman to the right, the sacrificer, the Prastotar and the Agnidhra to the left, and the Pratiprasthâtar.
11.5.4	Having sprinkled the Madanti waters, having performed the Sāntī rite with the first Anuvāka, having spread Darbha grass in the northern direction, he places these great heroes there, saying, "O god, you are the Purāṇa, you are the Savya."
11.5.5	This mantra is to be recited after the above.
11.5.6	Here itself, he places all the Parigha weapons.
11.5.7	The Udumbara-wood throne of the emperor is the best.
11.5.8	Some call the Rajasaṃdya the youngest.
11.5.9	It is made of Mauñjī grass, with a single string, and is suspended.
11.5.10	There are four Uduṃbarī ladles.
11.5.11	Of these two are not burnt,
11.5.12	The youngest of the burnt ones is the Upāmanī, and the smallest is the Prāṣṇī vessel.
11.5.13	Two sacrificial ladles of Udumbara wood, two wooden spoons of Udumbara, two wooden spoons the size of a great hero, two wooden spoons for stirring, two wooden spoons, two wooden spoons with holes, three Udumbara ladles, six Udumbara spoons, three Udumbaras, three Yaksas, six Udumbaras, six pieces of wood.
11.5.14	Thirteen enclosing sticks of Vikaṅkata wood, and a piece of wood for kindling.
11.5.15	There are many kinds of fuel for the summer fire, such as khadira, udumbara, vaikaṅkata, and karsmarya wood.
11.5.16	There are three kinds of black wool, with white and black hair.
11.5.17	It is known that the staff is the length of one's arm.
11.5.18	Some say it is made of udumbara wood.
11.5.19	There should be two golden objects, made of silver and gold.
11.5.20	They are worth a hundred.
11.5.21	The two Vedas are called Mauñja. One of them is suspended.
11.5.22	The Mauñja is the name of the Veda, the Mauñja is its origin, the three Mauñja are the Visākha ropes.
11.5.23	Two Mauñja threads, not torn at the ends.
11.5.24	The two kinds of grains, not ground, are called Rauhiṇya.
11.5.25	The gravels are from the Khara mountains.
11.5.26	"One says, "In the darbha-grass-made filter."
11.6.1	Having purified the Prokṣaṇī water, he invites the Brahman with the words, "O Brahman, we shall proceed with the Pravargya rite. O Hotṛ, praise the Gharma. O Agnīdh, place the two Rohiṇī cakes. O Pratiprasthātṛ, move (the cart). O Prastôtṛ, sing the Sāmans."
11.6.2	"Brahma sprinkles the Yajus, connected with the Sāmans, with the Upamshu (chant). Having recited 'Oṃ, they proceed with Indra', he recites loudly.
11.6.3	Or he recites loudly with 'They proceed'. All the rest is recited in a low voice.
11.6.4	Brahma sprinkles everything that is to be sprinkled with the Parigha (vessel).
11.6.5	He sprinkles three times with these mantras: 'For Yama, for thee; for the sacrifice, for thee;'
11.6.6	He sprinkles with the formula beginning with "abhi".
11.6.7	It is understood that he sprinkles and then spreads (the grass).
11.6.8	Having brought forward the king's seat towards the east of the Ahavaniya fire, and having placed it in front of the king's couch, he spreads on it the skin of black antelope with its neck towards the east and with its hairy side upwards. On it he places the two Apracharaniyas along with the Sahāvira, with the formula, "O god, do thou move forward, with the day."
11.6.9	The mantra to be recited above is as follows:
11.6.10	Then, taking the sacrificial grass with the verse, "May the rays of the sun, the shining ones, come forth," he exits through the southern door, approaching the Hotr and the Garhapatya from the rear. He then strikes the sacrificial grass with his right hand, for the Hotr to see.
11.6.11	He plants a stake for the calf to the right of the eastern door.
11.6.12	To the right of the western door he plants a stake for a goat and to the left for a sheep.
11.6.13	He stretches three ropes of Visakha over them.
11.6.14	They tie them at the proper time.
11.6.15	Then he sows the chaff.
11.6.16	One to the north of the Garhapatya, one to the north of Āhavanīya, one in the intermediate space between the northern and eastern parts, the place where the ashes are thrown away, outside the place where the water is sprinkled.
11.6.17	Thus they become separate by the removal.
11.7.1	At this time the Pratiprasthātṛ performs the consecration of the ladle-offering with clarified butter in the vessel.
11.7.2	There is no consecration for this, says another.
11.7.3	Having placed the two sacrificial dishes of barley-flour on the fire, the Agnidhra attends to them silently.
11.7.4	Having taken up the great hero with the two horns, he cleanses the ashes with the Veda not being covered.
11.7.5	With the ladle he offers seven or one Pranahomas in the Āhavanīya with the formula, "To Prāṇa svāhā, to Vyāna svāhā."
11.7.6	Then he anoints him with ghee, saying, "May the god Savitr anoint thee with honey."
11.7.7	Having placed a silver coin on the other axle, and having established it with the words, "Protect the earth with austerity," and having given the great hero to another, or having taken two bundles of Muñja grass, he lights the tips of the southern ones on the Garhapatya, saying, "To thee, O Agni, the shining one."
11.7.8-12	The roots of the northern ones are in the light. The roots of the southern ones are in the radiance. The tips of the northern ones are in the heat. He places them upside down on the golden (altar), saying, "You are light, you are radiance." It is known that he makes the southern ones northern.
11.7.13	He places the great hero above them, saying, "Rest, O great one."
11.7.14	Then he fills it with ghee, saying, "They anoint him, they spread him out."
11.7.15	The sacrificer, not touching the great hero, holding the Praja and Pradesa, recites the mantras beginning with "Unassailable in front" according to the form.
11.7.16	"He touches the earth with the formula, "May the earth be auspicious to thee." " He touches the earth with this formula.
11.8.1	The Adhvaryu and the Pratiprasthātṛ, having taken the embers from the Garhapatya, place them towards the north with the formula, "For success to thee." "
11.8.2	They encircle him with the formula, "Thou art the fire, thou art the encircling."
11.8.3	Then he places him with thirteen enclosing sticks of Vikaṅkata wood, saying, "Thou art the east" (the Adhvaryu) places (the enclosing sticks) towards the east, and "Thou art the west" (the Pratiprasthātṛ) places them towards the west.
11.8.4	In the same way he places them with the subsequent (enclosing sticks) with the subsequent formulas, the Adhvaryu with the former (enclosing sticks), and the Pratiprasthātr with the subsequent (ones).
11.8.5	The Adhvaryu places the thirteenth (brick) on the right side, with the formula, "Thou art the covering of the atmosphere."
11.8.6	He then covers it with a golden plate, with the formula "Protect the heaven by penance."
11.8.7	He then recites over it three verses beginning with "By these hymns".
11.8.8	Then he takes up the whisks, saying, "Thou art the Gāyatrī," the first; "Thou art the Tristubh," the second; "Thou art Jagatī," the third.
11.8.9	With these he sprinkles three times upwards, saying, "Honey, honey."
11.8.10	He gives one to the Pratiprasthātṛ, one to the Agnidh.
11.8.11	The Adhvaryu, the Pratiprasthātṛ and the Agnīdhra, holding the fire-stirring sticks, move around thrice in a clockwise direction, holding them upwards.
11.8.12	Then they sit around him, the Adhvaryu in front, the Prati-prasthātṛ on the right, the Agnidhra on the left.
11.8.13	Stirring the fire without touching each other, the kindlers sit down to kindle it with the Praṇava.
11.8.14	It is known that when the fire is kindled, the golden (fire-stirring stick) is taken.
11.8.15	Where he knows the path, where the two Asvins have released the burning grass, there the Adhvaryu addresses the Mahāvīra: "Ten in the east, ten in the south." With the Anuvaka.
11.8.16	Where he knows the path of the Apnasvati, the speech of the Asvins, there the Advaryu says as he rises: "The heat is pleasing."
11.8.17	Then, without shaking, they go around three times, beginning with the Adhvaryu.
11.8.18	Taking the wooden sword, he gives it to the Pratiprasthātṛ.
11.8.19	The Pratiprasthātr takes it and places it in front of the Āhavanīya.
11.8.20	Then, standing in the light, all the priests and the sacrificer, reciting, look at the Mahāvīra, saying, "I see the protector."
11.8.21	The Pratiprasthātṛ recites the remaining portion of the Anuvāka over the wife who has been seated in the Pratiṣṭhā-place, with the verse, "May Tvashtri, the creator, help you."
11.9.1	Then he instructs, "O Agni-bearer, place the two Rāuṇeya cakes."
11.9.2	He places the two cakes on the two spoons which have been spread and sprinkled, without being chanted.
11.9.3	The southern one is to be joined with the southern joint of the enclosing sticks, the other with the northern joint.
11.9.4	Taking the rope with the Savitrī verse, he comes out through the eastern door and thrice calls the Gharma-milker in a low voice, saying, "Come, Aditi! Come, Sarasvati!"
11.9.5-7	Having gone around along the front of the Āhavaniya, having taken up the ladle, having gone out by the right door, having thrice called out loudly, "Come, come," as one would call a friend, he says, "You are the turban of Aditi." Having placed the ladle on the Gharma-milking pot, he says, “You are Vayu, the calf.” He says, “May Pusan let you loose,” and lets it loose.
11.9.8	He recites the verse, "That is thy breast, O Moon, which gives heat," while milking the cow.
11.9.9	"Let the calf approach the cow," he says while placing the calf near the cow. "May Brihaspati approach thee," he says.
11.9.10	"Let Dānava be thy protector," he says while touching the udders.
11.9.11	"Let thy milk flow to the eldest milker, to the Asvins, to Sarasvati."
11.9.12	The Pratiprasthātṛ silently takes the smaller goat.
11.9.13	Having given the milk to the Agnīdhra, having run forward, they take up the implements of offering, saying, "You are Gayatra," for the first, "You are Trishtup," for the second, "You are Jagat," for the implement of offering, the Pratiprasthātr.
11.9.14	Where he knows, "Rise, O Brahmanaspati," there the Agnidhra rises.
11.9.15	Where he knows the sound of a cow or a buffalo, he brings that milk.
11.9.16	While being brought, he recites: "May you come with the share of strength and energy."
11.9.17	Indra and Asvins, the essence of honey, he brings the milk of the great hero.
11.9.18	"Svāhā to you, O ray of the sun, for the control of rain," he recites while the sun is rising.
11.9.19	"Thou art the honey-offering." (The Adhvaryu) takes up the goat's milk.
11.10.1	Some people take up the goat' s milk first.
11.10.2	Having taken up the Mahāvīra with the two horns, having wiped it with the Veda-cover, having wiped it, the Pratiprasthātṛ takes it up with the formula, "I take thee up with the sky."
11.10.3	"Thou art the splendour, go to the splendour."
11.10.4	"To the wind named Ocean, svāhā."
11.10.5	"To Agni, the lord of wealth, svāhā.
11.10.6	At this time the Pratiprasthātṛ offers on the southern Rauhiṇa ladle, with the formula, "May the light of the day be enjoyed with the banner, may it be well-lighted among the lights, svāhā."
11.10.7	The Adhvaryu, crossing to the south, looks at the Brāhmaṇācārya, with the verse, "All directions are present here."
11.10.8	"He has invited all the gods here," (says the Adhvaryu) looking at the Hotr.
11.10.9	Having recited the formula "Svāhā to the heated (oblation)," having called out and having been called out in return, he directs (the Hotr) to recite the formula, "One should offer the heated (oblations)."
11.10.10	At the Vasat-utterance, he offers with the formula, "O Asvins, do you drink the heated (oblution)."
11.10.11	At the second Vasat-utteran ce, he offers with "Svāhā, O Indra and Vāyu."
11.10.12	The sacrificer recites the formula, "The heated (oblation) is drunk by the Asvins," at the end of the Anuvāka.
11.10.13	Then, holding it above the Āhavanīya fire, he fills it with curds and milk.
11.10.14	He recites the formula, "May it flow forth, may it flow forth for nourishment and strength."
11.10.15	Then he directs it towards the directions, saying, "For Tvishi, for thee," towards the east; "For Dyumna, for thee," to the south; "For Indra, for thee," in the west; "For prosperity, for thee,"in the north.
11.10.16	Having returned, having brought the remaining (Soma), having placed it within the altar, having placed the Soma-drains in the eastern mound, having placed the silver and gold in the mound, he places the great hero.
11.11.1	"May Dharma and Sudharma hold my Brahmanas."
11.11.2	"May the Kshatras hold (my Brahmanas)." This is for a king. "May the Visas hold (my Brahmana)." This is for the Vaishya.
11.11.3	"May not the wind scatter you."
11.11.4	If he is to perform a rite of sorcery, he should say, "I am placing you in the breath of so-and-so, may he go to a useless place together with so-and-such."
11.11.5	Here, the Pratiprasthātṛ offers the northern Rauhiṇa as before.
11.11.6	At the Upāyana, he places the pieces of wood, saying, "To Pūṣan, the sharer, svāhā." With these mantras.
11.11.7	Having smeared the sixth portion on all the unguents, he offers it, looking towards the east, and repelling the wind from the north, with the formula, "Svāhā to Rudra, the Hotr of Rudra."
11.11.8	He touches the water.
11.11.9	Some prescribe the offering of the portions before the offering to Rauhiṇa.
11.11.10	Having placed the Kaṇṭaki twig silently, he offers the Agnihotra silently.
11.11.11	Or with the formula, “Bhūḥ svāhā.”
11.11.12	At the Upāyana, they consume the remaining (oblations) after calling out to each other. The Hotṛ first, then the Adhvaryu, then the Brahman, then the Pratiprasthātṛ, then the Agnīdhra, then the sacrificer.
11.11.13	All of them consume directly, or the sacrificer alone consumes directly, the others indirectly.
11.11.14	Having consumed the oblation with the words "The oblation is offered, the oblation is sweet," he gives the Upāyana to the Pratiprasthatṛ.
11.12.2	Having taken the fire from the place of recognition, the king places it in the evening with the formula, "Svāhā to thee from the rays of the sun." In the morning with the formula, Svāhā to thee, from the stars."
11.12.3	Where he recognizes the grass with water, with the formula, “O Agni, the destroyer of enemies, the all-knowing one,” he releases the cow.
11.12.4	In the same way, he performs the Pravargya rite in the evening and morning.
11.12.5	In the Triyopasat, it is done six times, in the Satopasat, twelve times, and in the Dvadashopaasat, twenty-four times.
11.12.6	This is the difference.
11.12.7	In the evening, he offers the Rauhina with the northern mantra.
11.12.8	"He puts the kindling-wood of Kantaki in the evening with the formula, "May I be protected from the day, may I be protected from night." In the morning with the formula, "May I be protected against night, may I be prtoected from day."
11.12.9	He offers the Agnihotra in the evening with "Agni is light, light is Agni, svāhā." In the morning, with "Sūrya is light, light, is Sūrya, svāhā."
11.12.10	The Samṛṣṭhoma is the same.
11.12.11	He should sprinkle at the Agniṣṭoma.
11.12.12	One should not sprinkle at the Ukthya.
11.12.13	One should sprinkle at the Viśvajit with all the Pṛṣṭhas.
11.12.14	One should nor sprinkle at the first sacrifice.
11.12.15	One should or sprinkle.
11.12.16	One should (sprinkle) for one who is learned and knows the Veda.
11.12.17	One should also sprinkle for a bad Brāhmaṇa.
11.12.18	Some say that this is for one who desires Brahmic glory.
11.12.19	Having abandoned it, he should not eat meat, should not approach a woman, should not drink in a clay vessel, and his wife should not drink the leftovers.
11.12.20	It is understood that one attains brilliance.
11.13.1	The sacrificer, about to consign the Pravargya vessel, gives a goat to the Agnidhra, a milch-cow to the Brahman, a tawny cow to the Hotri, and a golden one to the Adhvaryu.
11.13.2	He pours the remaining chaff on the eastern chaff-heap.
11.13.3	Having placed the royal couch to the north of the Ahavaniya, he places all the Parigha-vessels on it.
11.13.4	Having taken four spoonfuls in the ladle made of Udumbara wood, he offers three oblations in the Ahavaniya fire with these mantras: "O Agni, your brilliance is in heaven."
11.13.5	Or the Pratiprasthātṛ, taking three pieces of wood with a twig, lights one of them in the Āhavaniya fire and places it in the mouth of the sacrificer. The Adhvaryu offers it with the verse, "O Gharma, your heat is in heaven."
11.13.6	Having kindled another fire on the Āhavaniya, having struck it in front and having placed it on the navel-bone, the Adhvaryu offers it with the verse, "O Gharma, where is thy heat in the sky?"
11.13.7	Having kindled another fire on Āhavaniya and having struck it in the front and having placed on the knee-bone, the Ādhvaryu offers it by the verse, "Where is thy heat on the earth?"
11.13.8	He strikes him down on the Ahavaniya fire.
11.13.9	At this time the Pratiprasthātṛ brings the wife to the fire, reciting, "May Anu-matī follow us today."
11.13.10	They go out, reciting, "Do thou follow us, O Anu-matī."
11.13.11	They bring the Methi plant, they bring the Mayūkha plants, they take the Khara plants.
11.13.12	He removes the Khara plant to the south.
11.13.13	Then, having placed two feet of this Samrāḍāsandī within the altar and two outside the altar, he instructs, "O Prastôtṛ, sing the Sâmans."
11.13.14	Together with his wife, they perform the final part of the Sâman three times.
11.13.15	At half the distance, the second one is placed outside the altar, the third one is placed beyond the altar.
11.13.16	"For thee the highest in heaven" (they say) when they go forth for the first time; "for thee the highest in Brahman" (they say), when they go forth the second time; "for the highest in the offering" (they say when they go forth) the third time.
11.14.1	Then having placed the king's seat to the north of the northern altar, he orders, "O Prastotar, sing the Varsahara Saman, O Gâyatrar, sing the Gayatra Saman."
11.14.2-5	They perform the Nidhana of the Iṣṭahotra Sāman, not of the Vārṣāhara Sāman. If one were to sprinkle from above, then one should recite the Vārṣāhāra Sāman. Having taken a pot of water, one should sprinkle the Uttaravedi three times while moving clockwise, reciting, "You are charming, for the sake of peace." One should move counterclockwise while sprinkling three times, reciting, "May you give peace and may you give peace."
11.14.6	"Having touched the northern end of the northern altar with the formula, "The navel of the four-cornered altar is the truth," he places the two Khara-sticks in the north and arranges them with the formula, "The assembly is the life of the universe."
11.14.7	In the place of the broom, he places the Khara-stick with the formula, "Away with hatred, away with ill-will."
11.14.8	Having touched water, having placed a golden coin on the northern side of the northern navel, having brought the great hero to be used in the rite, he brings the other two (coins) either in the east and west or in the south and north.
11.14.9	Then he brings the milk of the cow to be used in this rite, saying, "You are the milk of the earth, arranged for the gods."
11.14.10	You are the light of the trees, the juice of the plants. Honey.
11.14.11	We lead you, O Vājin, with the Vājin. Curd.
11.14.12	In the same way he fills the second and the third.
11.14.13	One may bring the Vājin first, honey second, and curd third.
11.14.14	This is your food, this is your excrement. He fills the ones that have been sprinkled with curds mixed with honey.
11.14.15	He sprinkles the others for the sake of not being empty.
11.14.16	He makes it in the shape of the sun.
11.15.1	If he wishes to make it in the shape a man, having brought the other two here, he makes the shape of the head.
11.15.2	The upper part of the sacrificial thread is the form of the hair.
11.15.3	The two golden pieces or the two ladles are the form of the eyes.
11.15.4	The two ladles are form of the nose.
11.15.5	The milking pot is the form of ears.
11.15.6	The sprinkling pot is the form form of the mouth.
11.15.7	The ladle for melted butter is the form of neck.
11.15.8	The two wooden spoons are the form of chest.
11.15.9	The two pieces of skin are the form of shoulders.
11.15.10	The two Rāuhiņas are the form of the arms.
11.15.11	The ten Udumbara kindling sticks are the form of fingers.
11.15.12	The eastern Methi is the form of the back.
11.15.13	The two Dhavitras are the form of sides.
11.15.14	The third in the middle is the form of chest.
11.15.15	The middle Upayana is the form of belly.
11.15.16	In that, he puts all the rope-made (objects), the form of intestines.
11.15.17	The thigh is the form of the bone below the hips.
11.15.18	The knees are the form of the bones around the thighs.
11.15.19	The third bone in the middle is the form of a penis.
11.15.20	The heels are the form of bones in the calf.
11.15.21	The ten Udumbara twigs are the form of fingers.
11.15.22	The remaining flour of the Rāhuṇaka is the form of marrow.
11.15.23	He places the Mauñja-grass above, spreading it out. It is the form of the skin.
11.15.24	He covers it with Avaka-grass and Dhūpata-grass. It is the shape of flesh.
11.15.25	He sprinkles it with curds mixed with honey. It is the colour of blood.
11.15.26	He covers (the body) with a black antelope skin, with the neck towards the east, with the hair turned upwards. It is the hair and skin.
11.15.27	He places the Samraḍ-seat above, making it the form of sovereignty.
11.16.1	He should place it on the northern altar for one desiring brilliance, on the southern altar for one desiring food.
11.16.2	He should put it in front or behind.
11.16.3	He should set it on a river island.
11.16.4	If he sets it on a river-island, he should not sprinkle it.
11.16.5	Where one would hate, where he is, in the branch of the Udumbara tree, one should deposit it, saying, "This I am taking away the life of so-and-so, the son of so-and so, through grief."
11.16.6	It is known that grief indeed takes away his life, and he soon meets with calamity.
11.16.7	Where there are Darbha grass with continuous roots, there one should deposit it for one who desires rain.
11.16.8	On the northern altar, they always recite the Kalpa.
11.16.9	The birds do not leave it, because it is the offering to Agni.
11.16.10	Here some recite the sprinkling.
11.16.11	Then they stand near it, reciting, "You are named Ranti, the divine Gandharva." They conclude with, "With offspring, with prosperity."
11.16.12	The Marjālīyas of Ucchiṣṭa Khara, while sweeping, say, "May the waters and plants be friendly."
11.16.13	Having offered twice on the Garhapatya with "We have risen from darkness and approached the sun" and "We have risen to that bright one," they stand up with "This bright one is for us"
11.17.1	If the heat should fall on the Skandhas, one should recite the two verses, "May the sky fall on the earth."
11.17.2	If lightning strikes while the heat is moving, one should offer with the verses, "The lightning that strikes in front..." according to the appropriate verses.
11.17.3	If lightning strikes from all directions, one should offer all the verses.
11.17.4	Then he offers these oblations for atonement in the heat, with the formulas, "To Prāṇa svāhā, to Pūṣan svāhā."
11.17.5	He places the brick for heat with the verse, "From his heat the light shines forth."
11.17.6	He places a brick for the nest with the verse, "Those thy moist wombs, O Agni,"
11.17.7	He touches the accumulated fire with the formula, "Thou art Agni, thou art Vaisvānara."
11.17.8	"Bhūr Bhuvah Suvah" are the general expiations.
11.17.9	If the great hero is falling, one should raise him with the two verses, "O Agni, do thou rise up, O Agni, do thou shine forth."
11.17.10	If it were to be split, one should anoint it with the firm-meaningful expressions of the verse "If the moon were to split," and with the verse "What is other than beans and flesh, what is without, what is not, that I anoint."
11.17.11	If it were to become unfit for use, one should give it a place to another.
11.17.12	If he has not gone beyond the heat, or if he has not gone back, then with these two verses, "With energy and wealth, again," he goes back.
11.18.1	Then he offers these expiations when the heat is exhausted: "May the heat not exhaust us. May it not exhaust us." Eight.
11.18.2	If the sun were to set while one is moving in the heat, one should bind a darbha-blade with gold and, having gone around the fire, should stand facing the sun, reciting the two verses, "I have risen up from the darkness" and "I have risen to the bright". Having offered oblations on the Garhapatya fire, and having gone away, one should stand facing the rising sun the next day, reciting the verse, "May the Suparnas (birds) attain long life".
11.18.3	They consume the hot milk with the Anuvāka "Bhūr Bhuvah Suvah."
11.18.4	If the milk-giver does not come at the time of milking, having milked another cow, she should be excluded and given to a brahmin at the Sutyā ceremony.
11.18.5	If the milk of the hot milk is not available, having made the fourth part of the curd, one should feed it.
11.18.6	If one milks curd, one should recite the Barhaspatya hymn. If one milks milk, one should recite with the Asvin hymn and its commentary.
11.18.7	If one milks blood or anything discolored, one should offer into the Anvähäryapacana fire with the formula, "To Agni Rudravat Svâhâ."
11.18.8	If one sits down, one should offer with two Rg verses.
11.18.9	If she sits on something unclean or unfit for sacrifice, one should offer with the Agni-Varuna verse or with the Agni-verse.
11.18.10	If she is attacked by a wild animal, one should offer the Vayu-verse.
11.18.11	Or if she falls down, or is scattered, or is torn apart, or is killed by a tiger, one should offer milk from a goat and a cow, and perform the rite of sprinkling.
11.19.1	Now, then, the Pravargya at the Sutya.
11.19.2	If the dawn is red, then it should be performed.
11.19.3	It is performed at the time of the rising of the sun, at the time of its setting, at the time when it is about to rise, or at the time when the sun has risen.
11.19.4	Or in the morning, at the time for the morning Soma-pressing.
11.19.5	Or at the midday pressing, when the Pavamana has been sung.
11.19.6	It is known that it is performed only once in the Agnidhra-chamber.
11.19.7-9	These are the Pravarjanas. They may be performed with the Upa Sada Pravarjanas.
11.19.10	He should place a burning torch on both sides of him, saying, "O Agni, be united with Agni."
11.19.11	Then he should recite the mantra over him once, saying, "Once for you, O Agni, is the homage." With the remaining part of the recitation.
11.19.12	If a vulture, a crow, a heron, an owl, or a bird possessed by a ghost speaks with a bloody mouth, saying, "What is this? What is this? The owl with a long face is saying this. What is this? Having entered the elements and stretching out its thighs, with these mantras according to the signs, the same as the Urmuka and Pratyasna, etc."
11.20.1	If the heat-stricken insects were to be killed, one should kill them with the Anuvāka, "I kill the insects with Atri."
11.20.2	Or, this expiation could be performed universally.
11.20.3	If one were to perform sorcery, one should offer a portion of blood with the Anuvaka, "May the cooked food be brought."
11.20.4	If one is about to curse someone, one should perform the three-night ritual of celibacy and then go and curse him with the Anuvāka, "I curse you with Brahman."
11.20.5	If one hates someone, one should go to his cattle pen and bury a plant of one's own with the Anuvaka, "May it be uprooted and withered."
11.20.6	Or one can shake the right-side pillar of the cattle pen's gate.
11.20.7	If the Udgātṛ does not sing the Puruṣasāman, then the Adhvaryu himself should sing it with the Anuvāka "Bhūr Bhuvaḥ Suvaḥ".
11.21.1	Now we shall explain the Anvāntaradīkṣā.
11.21.2	Having shaved his hair and beard on a Parvan day, in the afternoon, in the auspicious lunar asterism, having gone out towards the east or west, having placed the fire in a place covered with grass, having arranged it as before, having touched the Madanti water, having performed the Sānti with the first Anuvaka, he places four Samidh twigs of Udumbara wood, anointed with ghee, with these mantras: "Earth is Samid."
11.21.3	Then the deity approaches him, saying, "O Agni, lord of vows, I shall observe the vow."
11.21.4	Then he recites the entire text, beginning with the first and ending with the last.
11.21.5	Having performed the peace with the last text, he closes his eyes and restrains his speech.
11.21.6	Then, having covered his head with a new cloth, he goes to the village when the sun has set.
11.21.7	He remains silent all night.
11.21.8	The next day, when the sun has set, having kindled the fire and spread the darbha grass, he shows the six-fold and seven-fold (objects). Some say that the seven-fold (are): fire, sun, water pot, stone, calf, Mahānāgni, and gold as the seventh.
11.21.9	He may also teach the three (Vedas) in succession, and the others as they come.
11.21.10	Then he worships the sun with the verse, "O Suparna, the bird, etc."
11.21.11	Here he gives his clothes to the teacher.
11.21.12	Then his life of celibacy begins.
11.21.13	It is permanent.
11.21.14	He should not eat at night.
11.21.15	If he eats, he should eat what has been heated.
11.21.16	He should not use a clay pot.
11.21.17	He should not speak with a woman or a Śūdra.
11.21.18	He should climb like a wheel.
11.21.19	He should carry neither sandals nor an umbrella.
11.21.20	He should neither look at a crowd, nor at houses, nor at bodies, nor at a dead body, nor at one who has committed suicide.
11.22.1	On the eighth day of the lunar fortnight, he observes fast and refrains from speaking.
11.22.2	He should also not sleep.
11.22.3	He should observe this vow for a year.
11.22.4	He should study in this very year.
11.22.5	If he does not study in this year, he should observe this vow until he studies.
11.22.6	After a year, having placed the fire in the shed, having spread it as before, having dismissed with the mantras recited in reverse order, having offered the kindling woods, having worshipped the deities, having given a gift to the teacher, he shaves his hair and beard.
11.22.7	Then his study is prescribed.
11.22.8	In the daily routine.
11.22.9	He should not study when the chapter has not been concluded, nor at night, nor when he is suffering from a disease, nor when he has fallen into sexual intercourse, nor when he eats meat, nor when he shaves his hair and beard, nor when he makes his nails and teeth clean.
11.22.10	He should not study when he is naked, or anointed, or wet, or in a wet place, or when it has not rained, or when he is looking at green barley.
11.22.11	Not in the vicinity of a domestic animal, not in the vicinity of an animal in the forest, not in water, not in clouds, not in shade, not when the sun has set.
11.22.12	Not when a bird has flown away, not when blood is seen, not when looking at houses, bodies, corpses, or those who live at the end of their lives.
11.22.13	Having placed the fire in the shed, having spread it around, having sat on the Darbha grass beyond the fire, holding Darbha grass or Dūrvā grass, one should recite the Veda facing the east.
11.22.14	Or having given a boon, one should recite.
11.22.15	One who is about to recite should perform the Śānti rite with the first Anuvāka and then recite.
11.22.16	Having recited, one should recite with the last Anuvāka.
11.22.17	While studying, he should not utter any other words.
11.22.18	If he sees that the peace has been disturbed anywhere, he should again study after making peace.
11.22.19	Having gone out for the Pravargya rite, he should not study anything else without returning.
12.1.1	When the Atithya is offered, he pours the clarified butter for Dhruva into a pan or a vessel, taking five spoonfuls of Tānūnaptrā, with these mantras: "I take thee for Apati."
12.1.2	The sacrificer and the seventeen priests touch (the sacrificer). The five great priests touch (the sacrifice) along with the sacrificer. It is not to be assailed, not to be assailed by the gods, the protector of the curse, not to be cursed.
12.1.3	The sacrificer touches (the sacrificer) saying, "May the lord of initiation think of my initiation."
12.1.4	The sacrificer should thrice sniff at it, saying, "I offer thee in Prajapati, in the mind."
12.1.5	Or he may offer it on each day of the vow.
12.1.6	Then he orders, "The fires are drinking, the waters are drinking."
12.1.7	The Agnidhra says, "The goddesses are drinking, the immortal ones, growing with truth."
12.1.8	The Adhvaryu says, "They are rushing towards them."
12.1.9	Having sprinkled the king with the Madanti-formulas, they make him flourish with hands holding gold. They say, "The rays of the divine Soma are being enjoyed by you." The formula ends with "May your Soma pressing be auspicious."
12.1.10	Having placed the hands on the southern end of the Veda-grass, with the palms facing downwards, he says, "O Indra, do thou be pleased with me."
12.1.11	Then he directs, "O Subrahmanya, do thou call out to Subrahmanya."
12.1.12	In the same way he directs in all the Subrahmanya-calls.
12.1.13	He makes the sacrificer recite the Subrahmaṇya formula, "Thou art Subrahmaṇyā. Thy foot is heaven. Thou art Subrahmaṇa. Thy foot is the quarters. Thy fifth foot is the nether world. Do thou milk forth food, strength, brilliance, power, and Brahmic glory."
12.1.14	In the same way, he makes the sacrificer recite the Subrahmaṇya verses.
12.2.1	Then he approaches the intermediate initiation.
12.2.2	Standing to the south, he recites over the Āhavanīya fire, "O Agni, lord of vows, you are the lord of vows."
12.2.3	He puts on the belt.
12.2.4	He pulls the fist.
12.2.5	He becomes one with the heated vow.
12.2.6	The Madantī-s purify him.
12.2.7	He performs the Vrata-s with the verse, "O Agni, that Rudra-like form of yours..."
12.2.8	The sacrificial grass for the Atithya-s, the Upasads, and the Agnisomiya-s is known as the Prastara and Paridhi.
12.2.9	Having performed the Pravargya, one should commence the sequence of the Upasads. The Upasads may be performed first.
12.2.10	The sacrificial grass is spread out, and the enclosing sticks are placed around.
12.2.11	He makes the sacrificial grass of ten kinds of wood.
12.2.12	Having made the altar, having spread the fires, having washed the hands, having arranged the vessels, having spread the Olapāji grass, having made the strainers, he instructs, "The sacrificer should restrain speech."
12.2.13	Having restrained speech, he touches the vessels.
12.2.14	Having consecrated the Prokṣaṇī water, having invited the Brahman, having sprinkled the vessels, having released speech with the Havishkṛt formula, he takes the Darbha grass from the sacrificial grass.
12.2.15	Having placed the wooden sword, he instructs, "Bring the Prokṣani water, place the kindling wood, cleanse the spoon and ladles, and bring clarified butter."
12.2.16	Up to the taking of the clarified butter, it is common.
12.2.17	He takes it up in the Dhruva vessel only.
12.2.18	Having sprinkled the Prokṣaṇī water, having invited the Brahman, having sprinkled the sacrificial grass and the altar, having taken the remaining Prokṣaṇa water, having recited the Agni mantra, having placed the first Āghāra-Samidha, having placed the Dhruva within the altar, he places the ladle, reciting the verse "This has been placed."
12.2.19	"He recites the formula, "Thou art Vishnu, the abode of Vishnu, the abode belonging to Prajapati."
12.3.1	Having placed the Veda in front of the Dhruva, he instructs the Samidhenis.
12.3.2	There are nine Samidhenis (verses).
12.3.3	Having poured the Sruva-portion, he instructs, "O Agnidh, do thou touch the enclosing sticks and the fire three times each."
12.3.4	The Pravara is the same as the one mentioned before.
12.3.5	Having called out, he says, "O Hotr, do you recite."
12.3.6	This is the extent of the Pravara.
12.3.7	When he knows, "O Adhvaryu, take up the ladle filled with ghee," then he takes up the Dhruva ladle with eight spoonfuls, and the Juhu ladle with four spoonfuls.
12.3.8	Taking it up, he instructs, "Recite for Agni."
12.3.9	Having crossed over the Agni, he says, "Let us offer to Agni."
12.3.10	At the Vasat-utterance, he offers half of the Juhu.
12.3.11	Not crossing over again, he instructs, "Recite for Soma."
12.3.12	Having called out, he says, "Let us offer to Soma."
12.3.13	At the Vashat-utterance, one offers the entire (Juhu).
12.3.14	Standing right there, he instructs, "Recite for Vishnu."
12.3.15	Having placed the ladle on the fire-pan, having called out, he offers to Vishnu.
12.3.16	He offers at the Vasat-utterance.
12.3.17	Having returned, he offers to the Upasads with the ladle, "That form of thine, O Agni, which is not consumed."
12.3.18	If they fight in front, one should offer on the first, silver on the middle and gold on the last. This is known.
12.3.19	If they fight in battle, according to some.
12.3.20	Having offered the Upasad, they nourish the king and conceal him in the same way.
12.3.21	Then they perform the Upasad.
12.3.22	Then he orders, "O Agni, proclaim the wives of the gods. O Subrahmanya, call out to Subrahmanya."
12.3.23	The Agnidhra, sitting down to the west of the Garhapatya, recites the Devapatni-hymns, beginning with "Sene indrasya" (RV 10.125.1).
12.3.24	The Subrahmanya calls out to the Subrahmanya.
12.3.25	The Upasad comes to an end.
12.4.1	They proceed with the Apvarga and Upasad rites in the afternoon and evening.
12.4.2	He offers on the Ayasya fire.
12.4.3	The morning prayers are to be recited in the evening, and the evening prayers in the morning.
12.4.4	Placing the left hands below the right, they lie down.
12.4.5	At midnight he performs the rite of the four-breasted one.
12.4.6	He keeps awake during this night.
12.4.7	In the early morning, they perform the Pravargya and Upasad rites.
12.4.8	Here, he offers the Upasad oblation in the Rājasūya.
12.4.9	When the Upasad is concluded, he measures out the large altar, saying, "I am measuring you, the flowing one, the cow of the gods, the well-milking one, the non-dripping one. May Indra drink Soma. May there be peace for us."
12.4.10	Having gone forward three steps from the front end of the post, he strikes the peg.
12.4.11	That is the peg for the Veda.
12.4.12	Then having gone forward thirty-six steps from that, he strikes the post.
12.4.13	That is a peg for the sacrificial pit.
12.4.14	Having gone fifteen steps to the south of the peg, he strikes the peg fifteen steps to the north.
12.4.15	They become the hips.
12.4.16	Having gone twelve steps to the south from the peg of the sacrificial pit, he strikes the other peg twelve steps to the north of it.
12.4.17	They become shoulders.
12.4.18	Then he measures it with the measuring-rod and the string, and makes it even.
12.4.19	He makes the Prṣṭhyā even.
12.4.20	Then they make it even with the Sphayana, the Viṣaṇā, and the Parshva.
12.5.1	Then he consecrates it with the Darsha-Pūrṇamāsa rite, except the bending.
12.5.2	Having made the enclosure towards the north, he measures the northern altar-platform towards the south of the pit for the sacrificial post, of the size of a yoke or of the size of the altar-platform, or of ten steps on all sides.
12.5.3	Having advanced towards the north from the northern end of the altar, he drives in a peg.
12.5.4	It becomes the Cātvāla.
12.5.5	On the other side of the sacrificial post, at a distance of twelve steps, is the heap of earth.
12.5.6	On the other side of this heap, at a distance (of six steps) is the Āgnīdhra shed.
12.5.7	Between the sacrificial post and the heap of earth is the place for moving about; between the sacrificial post and Āgnīdhara shed, according to some.
12.5.8	Whatever one is going to bring near the altar, he should bring it near with this (verse).
12.5.9	Having covered the altar with the northern altar, having sprinkled it up to the end, having covered it with Udumbara branches, he covers it with the northern altar.
12.5.10	He performs the vow at midday with three-nipples.
12.5.11	They proceed with the evening and afternoon (vows).
12.5.12	He offers on the Rājasūya fire.
12.5.13	He performs vow at midnight with two-nipples.
12.5.14	In the forenoon, they perform the Pravargya and Upasad rites.
12.5.15	Here, he offers the Upasad oblation to Haraśaya.
12.5.16	At that time itself, in the afternoon, they perform the pravargya and upasad rites. 
12.5.17	He offers the upasad oblation only to Haraśaya
12.5.18	He performs the vrata rite with one breast at midday.
12.5.19	The Upasads are concluded.
12.6.1	Having dismissed the Pravargya, having taken the Agni around the fire, having taken the curd-heated (milk) for the Amikṣā, he makes the calves drink (the milk).
12.6.2	He should indicate the Amikṣa to Mitra-Varuna and Indra to the curd-heated milk.
12.6.3	Then the Adhvaryus bring a large quantity of sacrificial grass as in the case of the Darsha-Pūrnamāsa.
12.6.4	Then he takes up the subsequent articles, as in the Darsha-Pūrnamāsa.
12.6.5	One does not perform the rite of injuring the one who has not taken up the articles, till the sprinkling.
12.6.6	Having sprinkled the Prokṣaṇī water, having performed the sprinkling, having invited the Brahman, he sprinkles the altar and the sacrificial grass three times, as in the case of the Darsha-Purnamāsa.
12.6.7	Then they spread the sacrificial grass on the entire great altar, as in the Darsha-Pūrnamāsa sacrifices.
12.6.8	Those who kindle the fire, they spread the sacrificial grasses, those whose young Indra is a friend, some recite this verse for spreading.
12.6.9	On the other side of the altar, they turn the front-pillar towards the Havirdhāna-shed, having been washed, with the knot of the rope loosened, with the yoke fastened, with the cover spread.
12.6.10	Then he offers the oblation on the northern side of the altar with the verse, "They yoke the mind."
12.6.11	From this point onwards, the rites pertaining to the Āhavanīya are performed.
12.6.12	With the third foot of the verse, he anoints the axle of the southern Havirdhāna cart with his right hand three times towards the east, with the formula, "May a hero be born for us for the rite." He does not anoint the northern one on both sides. So says some.
12.6.13	In the same way he anoints the northern one.
12.6.14	Then he instructs.
12.7.1	When the two Havirdhāna-carriers are about to throw (the Soma), he says, "Repeat after me."
12.7.2	When the first (verse) has been repeated thrice, they take it up and recite it, saying, "The Adhvara is being performed, going towards the east."
12.7.3	If the dice fall out, he should recite this formula: "O god, you have spoken well. You have spoken well."
12.7.4	The Adhvaryu, having placed gold on the southern path of the southern Havirdhāna, offers with the verse, "This is Vishnu, who has gone forth."
12.7.5	In the same way, the Pratiprasthātṛ, having placed gold in the northern path of the northern Havirdhāna cart, offers with the mantra, "The cow that gives milk, the cow that gives food."
12.7.6	Here is the extreme limit: The Adhvaryu should perform the rites pertaining to the southern direction, the Pratiprasthātṛ those pertaining to the northern direction.
12.7.7	The Hotr, in the third part, removes the fear of the Janas by means of his mind and foot, and says, "You have removed the fear of the people. Turn the wheels, go to the house of Soma." Some say, "Adhvaryu," some say, "Brahman," some say, "
12.7.8-11	Having placed the Uttaravedi on the three steps or on an unlimited space, having placed the Prāgvāṭa on the back of the Uttaravedi, having placed the Havirdhāna cart on the back of it, having placed the Sadas on the back of that, having placed the Āgnīdhra on the back of this, having placed the Iḍā on the back of him, having placed the Dhruva on the back of her, having placed the Barhiṣad on the back of them, having placed the Upabhṛt on the back of these, having placed the Anvāhārya on the back of those, having placed the Pṛṣadājya on the back of all these, having placed a pot of water on the back of everything, having placed the wooden sword on the back of water, having placed the ladle on the back of wood, having placed the spoon on the back of ladle, having placed the sacrificial grass on the back of spoon, having placed the Darbha grass on the back on sacrificial grass, having placed the pot on the back of Darbha grass, having placed a wooden sword on the pot, having placed the fire on the back of wooden sword, having placed the Veda on the back of fire, having placed the Brāhmaṇas on the back of Veda, having placed the Hotr on the back of Brāhmaṇās, having placed the Adhvaryu on the back of Hotr, having placed the Brahman on the back of Adhvaryu, having placed the Udgatr on the back of Brahman, having placed the Prastotṛ on the back of Udgatr, having placed the Nestr on
12.7.12	The Adhvaryu strikes the southern corner-post of the southern Havirdhāna-shed with the southern corner-pole, saying, "For heaven or for Vishnu or for earth."
12.7.13	So does the Pratiprasthātṛ.
12.8.1	The northern corner-post of northern Havirdhāna shed with the northern corner-pole, reciting, "Which are the manly powers of Vishnu, I proclaim."
12.8.2	He binds them on the two sacrificial grass-blades, saying, "Thou art the thread of Vishnu."
12.8.3	He makes a knot, saying, "The firm one of Vishnu."
12.8.4	The first knot which he would make, that would be known.
12.8.5	They then loosen it.
12.8.6	They throw up the dice upwards and encircle them from above.
12.8.7	Having struck the two posts in front of the Havirdhāna, he places a bamboo with its top towards the north and installs the Raraṭī on it, saying, "You are the Raraṭa of Viṣṇu."
12.8.8	Having placed a transverse bamboo on the Raraṭi, he says, "You are Viṣṇu's thread."
12.8.9	He makes a knot, saying, "Thou art the firm of Viṣṇus."
12.8.10	The first knot that he ties, that he should know.
12.8.11	"He places the middle covering, saying, 'Thou art the back of Vishnu."
12.8.12	"He places on the ends of the Raraṭa, saying, 'In the strainer of Vishnu.'
12.8.13	"He places in the interstices the Katas and Tejanis, saying, 'The Katas and Tejani.'
12.8.14	They are called the Antavartas.
12.8.15	"O Giriva, thy song is around thee." He puts it around.
12.8.16	They let loose the two doors, the eastern and the western.
12.8.17	The Sālamukhiyas, the Hotrakas, and the Uttara Veda are similar.
12.8.18	The Adhvaryu puts the knot on the southern door, the Pratiprasthātṛ on the northern one, saying, "Thou art the thread of Vishnu."
12.8.19	He makes the knot, saying, "You are the firm of Vishnu."
12.8.20	The first knot that is tied should be known and loosened.
12.9.1	One touches the equal (knot) with the formula, "You are Vaishnava, for Vishnu."
12.9.2	The sacrificer goes out facing east from the Sammitā. "He recites, "Vishnu praises that (sacrificer) for valour, the terrible deer, the most excellent, in whose three strides all the worlds are pervaded." "It is known that he goes out thrice.
12.9.3	Some say that he goes out once.
12.9.4	They spread the Havirdhāna shed facing east.
12.9.5	The Agni-dhrā family is in the east, the Sadasi in the south, half inside the altar and half outside.
12.9.6	The Sadasi is in the west, running north to south.
12.9.7	Here is the extreme limit: the Adhvaryu should not go beyond the Havirdhana in the east.
12.9.8	If he goes beyond, he should move with a verse to Visnu or to Ksatrapati.
12.9.9	He should not go beyond Sadasi in the west.
12.9.10-12	If he were to cross the Iḍa verse, it is known that he should move. Having moved three steps eastwards from the corner of the rear half, he marks the Udumbara post in the middle of the entire sacrificial hall. Having moved towards the south of the Prsthya line, he marks the Audumbara post in the middle of the entire hall.
12.9.13	The Sadas is known to be nineteen cubits in width and twenty-seven cubits in length. Some say it is eighteen cubits.
12.9.14	Some say that the Sadas is made as much as one thinks is sufficient for the priests, the sacrificial posts, and the spreading out.
12.9.15	Having taken up the spade with the Savitrī verse, he draws a line around the pit with the Udumbara twig, saying, "The Rakshas is drawn around, the evil ones are drawn around."
12.9.16	Having dug, he sprinkles the Udumbara with the sprinkling water containing barley, saying, "For you, O Heaven," for the top, "For you O Atmosphere," for the middle, "For you Earth," for the root.
12.9.17	The lowering of the waters, the spreading of the barley, the covering of the sacrificial grass, the post has been explained.
12.10.1	He erects the post with the eastern ear, with the eastern shoulder, saying, "Thou spreadest upwards to heaven, thou fillest the atmosphere."
12.10.2	He lays down the post with the easten ear, with the easten shoulder, saying, "May the Maruts, longing for heaven, lay thee down."
12.10.3	The pouring around, the sprinkling, and the sprinkling of ghee have been explained in connection with the sacrificial post.
12.10.4	Then, having placed gold between the ears of the animal, he offers with ghee, saying, "O heaven and earth, may you be filled with ghee! Svāhā!" He sprinkles it all over.
12.10.5	The sacrificial post of the sacrificer's wife is made of Udumbara wood, the longest of all, as they are made to the best of their ability.
12.10.6	The sacrificer himself makes the Sadas smaller.
12.10.7	If one desires, 'May the rain be timely', one should make it lower; if one desires, 'may the rain be untimely', one should make (the Sadas) higher. It is known that one should make it up to the navel.
12.10.8	He places the middle pieces of wood, saying, 'Thou art Indra'.
12.10.9	"This is the seat of Indra" (he says) for the southern ones.
12.10.10	"This is the shade of the All-people" (he says), for the northern ones.
12.10.11	He makes the southern ones northern.
12.10.12	The southern ones are facing each other.
12.10.13	One should make the Agniṣṭoma nine-layered, the Ukthya fifteen-layered, the Atiratra seventeen-layered, and the Sodashin nine-layered or fifteen-layered.
12.10.14	The Navacchati is to be recited by one who desires splendour. The Chasti is for one who desires. The Kalpas have been explained by the Brahmanas.
12.10.15	The mantras of Indra are these: Antavarta, Parishrayana, Samkasha, Parisevana, Granthika, and Abhimargana.
12.11.1	We shall now explain the Uparavanas.
12.11.2	Below the southern Havirdhāna, in the four intermediate spaces, there are four Parāksas, with the mouth of a Pradeśa and the interval of a Pradeṣa, not separated, above and below.
12.11.3	Taking the ladle with the Savitrī verse, he draws a line. He draws the line, "The Rakshas is drawn, the enemies are drawn."
12.11.4	First on the southern side, then on the other side, then on northern side, then on eastern side.
12.11.5	Thus the rites are performed in due order.
12.11.6	Having dug up to the depth of an arm, he strikes with a spade, reciting the formula, "For the destruction of Rakshas, for the destruction of Valgas, I am digging the Vaisnava (pit)." He recites the formula only once.
12.11.7	"Thou art Viraj, the slayer of foes." Having taken up the arm, he throws out the excrement, saying, "I throw out this Valag, who has dug a hole for us, whether he is equal or unequal."
12.11.8	Having placed him in the hole of the upper-side, he says, "I am putting him down, he who is equal or unequal to us, who is hostile, by the Gayatri metre."
12.11.9	In the same way, having taken the northern arm with the northern mantra, he throws the dung with the northern mantra. He is obstructed by the northern and northern metres. These are mentioned: Triṣṭubh, Jagatī, Anushtubh, Paṅkti.
12.11.10	"He removes the dung with the words, "The obstacle is removed."
12.12.5	The Adhvaryu says, "Good!"
12.12.6	The sacrificer says, "Let it be good for us together."
12.12.7	Then they move around in the opposite direction.
12.12.8	The sacrificer touches the one who is to his north of the two in front, and the Adhvaryu touches the one who to his south of the two in back.
12.12.9	They touch hands below.
12.12.10	The sacrificers asks, "O Adhvaryu, what is here?"
12.12.11	The Adhvaryu replies, "Good!"
12.12.12	The sacrificer says, "That is mine."
12.12.13	Then he touches them with these mantras, "You are Viraj, the destroyer of enemies."
12.12.14	Then he sprinkles them with the sprinkling water mixed with barley, saying, "I sprinkle the destroyers of Rakshas, the destroyers of Valgas, the Vaishnavas."
12.12.15	He sprinkles them, saying, "The destroyers of Rakshasas, the destroyers of Vala, I sprinkle the Vaishnavas.
12.12.16	"Thou art Yava, thou art the giver of Yava, our enemies." He throws the Yava.
12.12.17	He spreads the sacrificial grass, saying, "Thou art the destroyer of Rakshas, thou art the destroyer of Valagas, I spread the grass of Vishnu."
12.12.18	He sprinkles with clarified butter, saying, "The destroyer of Rakshasas, the destroyer of Valaganas, I offer the oblations of Vishnu."
12.12.19	Some recite these mantras in this way.
12.13.2	The one in front is smaller, the one behind is larger.
12.13.3	He places two on the right and two on the left, saying, "I place the two that destroy the Rakshas and the Vala, the two that belong to Vishnu."
12.13.4	He encloses them, saying, "The two that destroy the Raksas and the Vāla, I enclose them, the two that are of Vishnu."
12.13.5	He strews them, saying, "The two that destroy Raksas and Vala, I strew them, the two of Vishnu."
12.13.6-8	He consecrates with the formula, "Thou art Rakṣohana, Valaghana, Vaishnavī." He consecrates the arrow-covering skin with the formula, “I consecrate thee as Rakṣohana and Valaghana and Vaishnavī.” He spreads the arrow-covering-skin on the arrow-covering boards with the tips towards the north, as if sprinkling. With the formula, “Rakṣohana, Valagha, Vaishnavam, I spread thee.”
12.13.9	And on that (altar) he places four stones with their edges upwards, of the shape of a hammer, and one in the middle, the fifth, large, with the formula, "Thou art large, the large stone; speak to Indra the large speech." On each one.
12.13.10	He makes a four-cornered wooden post in front of the southern Havirdhāna-shed, as much as he thinks is sufficient for the vessels.
12.14.1	He pours down the embers from the Cātvāla.
12.14.2	In the Āgnīdhra-shed, within the altar, he places the Āgnīdhrīya wooden post with the formula, "Thou art the wooden post, the carrier."
12.14.3-7	He recites the mantra "With the Raudra army" everywhere. To the right of the Sadobila, on the Prishthya, the Hotrīya fire is called "O Agni, you are the bearer of oblations." To the left of the Hotrīy, the Prashashtriya is called "O Shvatra, you are the wise one." To the north of the Hotrīj, the Udic is called "O Tutha, you are the knower of all." This is for the Brahmanaschamsin.
12.14.8	"Thou art the Ushija, the wise one," says the Potu.
12.14.9	"Thou art the Anghari, the Bambhari," says the Neshtru.
12.14.10	"Thou are the Avsyu, the Duvasvana," says the Acchavasaka.
12.14.11	"Thou, the Marjalya, art the purifier," says the Agnidhra.
12.15.1	Then he approaches the others.
12.15.2	"Thou the Samra, the Krsanu," he says to the Ahavaniya.
12.15.3	"You are the assembly, O Pavamāna," when they chant the Bahispavamāna.
12.15.4	"You are the bright one, the shining one," the Cātvāla.
12.15.5	"You have not been touched, O Agni, the eater of oblations," the Sāmantrīra.
12.15.6	"You possess truth, you are the light of heaven," the Audumbara.
12.15.7	"You, O Agni, are the light of Brahman, the heavenly abode," the Brahman-seat.
12.15.8	You are the ocean, the all-pervading, says the Sadas.
12.15.9	You are the unborn, the one-footed, says the Salamukhiyam.
12.15.10	You are a serpent, the supporter, says the Prajhitam.
12.15.11	You are Kavya, the carrier of Kavya, says the Anvaaharyapachana.
12.15.12	Here some recite the spreading of the sacrificial grass.
12.15.13	Then he orders, "Spread the sacrificial grass, give the vow, call the transgressors of the vow."
12.15.14	They do not spread the grass on the hard ground or on the sacrificial posts.
12.15.15	Here one gives the vow of fasting.
12.16.1	He begins the ritual of the Agniṣomīya animal sacrifice.
12.16.2	He ties the sacrificial grass and the sacrificial grass for the Atithya on the branch of the fig tree, and the sacrificial grass of the Atithya around the kindling wood.
12.16.3	He makes the kindling wood of twenty-three pieces.
12.16.4	Because of the similarity of the taking of the clarified butter.
12.16.5	He takes the clarified butter of the Pasukas at the door of the house.
12.16.6	From here onwards the rites of the Garhapatya are performed.
12.16.7	They give the Soma, they give the trough, they give the Vāyu-vessel, they give the Dronakalaśa, they bring the wife, they make the Anāsas flow.
12.16.8	They perform the Śālamukhiyā rite after the Garhapatya rites.
12.16.9	The wife goes around the Agni in the eastern direction, saying, "Let the wife of the Brahman go."
12.16.10	"O Agni, the householder, do thou invite me." Thus they recite at the door of the house, beginning with this verse, until the invocation of the Gārhapatya.
12.16.11	Brahman stands near and makes the king.
12.16.12	The ministers are invited for the sacrificer.
12.16.13	The sacrificer follows the Adhvaryu, the wife follows the sacrificer, and the other sons and brothers follow the wife.
12.16.14	Having covered the counsellors with a new cloth, having placed the ladle and the sacrificial grass at the end of the cloth, he offers with the formula, "Thou art the farewell offering to Soma, the creator of the body."
12.16.15	Having offered the second oblation with the formula, “Accepting, he drinks the ghee. Svāhā.”
12.17.1	Having kindled the fire at the mouth of the house, he instructs (the Hotr) to recite the Anushtubh verses to the moving Agni and Soma.
12.17.2	When the first verse is recited thrice, the Agni-priests move forward facing east.
12.17.3	Then they follow him with the sacrificial grass, with the sacrificial grass they follow him, with the kindling wood, with the sprinkling water they follow him, they follow the Agniṣṭoma.
12.17.4	Having placed this kindling wood, the Āgnīdhra priest offers with the verse "May this Agni be favourable to us."
12.17.5	Here only, the Gravas (the Soma-cups) are placed in the wind-direction. The Adhvaryu places the Dronakalaśa (the vessel containing the Soma-juice) in the Agni-dhra (the fire-chamber).
12.17.6	They proceed towards the east with Soma at the head.
12.17.7	Having offered on the Ahavaniya fire, he makes the king enter by the southern door into the Havirdhana (shed) with the verse, "O Soma, thou knowest the path, thou art the leader of the gods." By the eastern door or by the western door.
12.17.8	The sacrificer enters by the eastern door.
12.17.9	If the king has lost his glory, he should be brought in through the eastern door.
12.17.10	On the southern side of the sacrificial post, he places a black antelope skin with its neck towards the east and its hair towards the north, saying, "You are the seat of Aditi."
12.17.11	On that, he places the king, saying, "Sit on the seat of Aditis."
12.18.1	The sacrificer recites over the approaching king, "This is your Soma, O god Savitr. Protect it. May it not harm you. This Soma, O god, has approached the gods."
12.18.2	He turns to the right, saying, "I, a human being, approach humans with offspring and prosperity."
12.18.3	He makes an offering with folded hands, saying, "Salutations to the gods."
12.18.4	"Svadha to the Pitrs" on the right side.
12.18.5	"One goes out, saying, 'This I release from Varuna's noose."
12.18.6	He looks at the resting place, saying, "I go forth to the light of the shining Vaiśvānara."
12.18.7	Then he releases the intermediate initiation.
12.18.8	Standing to the right, he recites over the Ahavaniya fire, "O Agni, lord of vows, you are the lord of vows."
12.18.9	He makes the girdle-string of grass.
12.18.10	Then he releases the handfuls with "Svāhā to the sacrifice in the mind" twice, "Svāhā, to heaven and earth" twice, "Svahā, from the sky" twice, "Swāhā, I begin the sacrifice from the wind" twice.
12.18.11	"Svāhā, the wind releases speech" he releases speech.
12.18.12	The vow is concluded.
12.18.13	On the Sutyah day, he consumes the Soma remnants with "Soma, the remaining oblations."
12.18.14	Then he sprinkles the sacrificial grass and wood with the formula, "For the Darsha-Pūrnamāsa sacrifices."
12.18.15	Some say that one should spread the sacrificial grass on the entire Mahavedi. Others say that one should do so on the northern part of the Mahavedi.
12.18.16	If any grass comes from above, one should spread it in the same way.
12.18.17	Up to the placing of the ladles, it is common.
12.18.18	Having placed the ladles,
12.19.1	he cuts the sacrificial post.
12.19.2	He cuts the sacrificial post at the consecration or at the Upasads.
12.19.3	If the sacrificial post of one who is consecrated is not cut, then having taken the kindling wood and clarified butter, he should kindle fire at the end of the sacrificial post and offer.
12.19.4	If the Soma is bought, he should offer on the Ahavaniya.
12.19.5	The procedure is the same up to the taking up of the animal for Agni-Soma.
12.19.6	One takes up the animal for Agni and Soma.
12.19.7	The procedure is the same upto the Pravara.
12.19.8	Having appointed the Hotṛ with the normal Pravara, having again called out, he appoints the other priests, grasping the names in a low voice, with the Asfya (Sāman).
12.19.9	"He says, "Indra as Hotṛ, this human being." He appoints the Hotṛ;
12.19.10	The human one from the Agnidhra.
12.19.11	The two Asvins from the Adhvaryu. The human one and I from the Pratiprasthātṛ.
12.19.12	Mitra-Varuna from the Praśāstṛ. The human one from Mitra-Varuna.
12.19.13	Indra from the Brahman. The human one is the Brahman-priest.
12.19.14	The Maruts are from Potra, the human one. This is Potra.
12.19.15	The Gnas are from Nestra, the human one.
12.19.16	Then he chooses the sacrificer: "Agni is the leader of the divine hosts, this sacrificer is the leader of human hosts. May their domestic fires not be separated from each other. May there be a hundred winters and two summers. May they be united, not separated, in their bodies."
12.19.17	Some choose at the Savaniya (offering). There he should say, "Sacrificer."
12.19.18	This sacrificer is among men. So says the Agniṣṭoma-rite.
12.20.1	He offers the Pravṛta and Pravṛtahoma with the verses, "May I be acceptable to speech. May I accomplish the Stoma with the Rk."
12.20.2	One says, "He should offer the Pravṛtas and Pravṛtas," while another says, "Only the Adhvaryu should offer."
12.20.3	The offering of the Vapa is common.
12.20.4	When the omentum has been offered, the Subrahmanya invokes the Subrahmanya-saman in the Pitaputriya manner.
12.20.5	In the afternoon, he takes the Vasatavari-saman, standing facing the flowing waters.
12.20.6	He makes the pitcher flow towards him, saying, "These waters are full of oblations."
12.20.7	He should not let the flowing waters go beyond him.
12.20.8	He takes it from the shadow of a tree or from the shadow of his own body, at the junction of the shadow and the sun.
12.20.9	If it were not taken, it would shine forth. He should take it with fire or with gold placed on it.
12.20.10	Or he should take it from the pot of a brahmin who performs many sacrifices.
12.20.11	Some say that one should take it after giving a boon.
12.20.12	Then he places them on the other side of the Garhapatya with the formula, "I place you in the seat of Agni, the lord of the house."
12.20.13	It is similar to the offering of the cake.
12.20.14	He takes the embers from the southern or northern side of the sacrificial post.
12.20.15	Then he instructs, "O Agni, bring the embers for the Upayaj offerings."
12.20.16	The Āgnīdhra, having brought the embers from the Śāmitra or the Āgnīdhriya, pours them into the Hotrīya.
12.20.17	The Pratiprasthātṛ offers.
12.20.18	Here he does not offer the Svara at the end of the Anuyājas. He offers at the Savanīya and Anūbandhyā.
12.20.19	Having placed it on the ground during the day, he places it at night.
12.20.20	It concludes with the Patnīsaṃyājas.
12.20.21	Having performed the Hṛdayaśūla rite, one does not approach the sacrificial post.
12.20.22	Some say that one performs the Hṛdaya-śūla rite at the Savaniya animal sacrifice and the Anūbandhyā animal sacrifice.
12.21.1	While sitting inside the altar at night, they sprinkle the sacrificer and his wife with Vasatīvarī water.
12.21.2	One should not sprinkle an uninitiated person with Vasatīvari water.
12.21.3	Taking the pot, he places it on his left shoulder, and stepping out of the door with his right foot, he goes around the southern end of the altar and places it on the northern edge of the southern altar, saying, "This is your share, O Indra and Agni."
12.21.4	Taking the pot, he places it on his right shoulder. Having returned by the same route by which he went, he comes out by the northern door, and having gone around the northern end of the altar, he places it in the northern part of the northern altar-base, saying, "You are the share of Mitra and Varuna."
12.21.5	Having taken the pot, he places it on his left shoulder, and having returned by the same route by which he had gone, he comes out by the eastern door and places it in the Āgnīdhra chamber, saying, "You are the share of all the gods, awake at the sacrifice."
12.21.6	Here he makes them fast.
12.21.7	The Subrahmaṇya calls the Subrahmaṇyā, the father and son, for the father and son.
12.21.8	Then the milk which is for the sacrificer's vow, the milk which is to be given to the wife, the milk which belongs to the Adhvaryu, the milk which has been heated, the milk which should not be touched, the milk which the Maitrāvaruṇa should heat, the milk which he should heat for the Adityagraha.
12.21.9	They do as they are directed.
12.21.10	Here he milks the evening milking of the cow for the Amikṣā.
12.21.11	The sacrificer is kept awake in the Havirdhāna shed, the wife in the Prāgvamsa shed.
12.21.12	The Adhvaryu and the priests stay in the Agnidhri shed, but no one stays in the Sadas.
12.21.13	It is known that the sacrificer himself protects the king during this night.
13.1.1	They wake up at midnight.
13.1.2	One should touch the Āgnīdhra with the Āgneya (mantra), the Havirdhāna with the Vaishnavya, the ladles with the Āgneye, the Vāyavyāni with the Vāyavya, and the Sadas with the Indri.
13.1.3	Some say that one should touch here only, while others say that the rites are performed in sequence.
13.1.4-5	In the Agni-dhra (fire-chamber) he offers the body of the sacrifice. The Prajapati, with his mind, has seen (the truth). These are the thirty-three (offerings). He offers the sacrifice and the distress of the sacrifice. It is known that one should offer the first one with one (verse), and the second one with two (verses).
13.1.6	He places the vessels on the right shoulder, those of Upāṁśu and Antaryāma, with these mantras as per their respective forms.
13.1.7	He places the vessels of Upāṁshu and Antaryāmas on the right shoulder first, those of Upāmśu first and those of Antaryāma later.
13.1.8	Or, he places those of Upāmshu on the right and those of Antaryāma on the left.
13.1.9	He places the Soma-cups which have been touched by the Upaṁśusavana-cup.
13.1.10	The cups of the two deities Prāñcī are sprinkled. The cup of Indra-Vāyu is of goat-skin, that of Mitra-Varuna is of two layers, and that of the Asvins is of leather.
13.1.11	Then the cup of Sukra is of Bīla wood on the right, and the cup of Manthin is of Vikaṅka wood on the left.
13.1.12	Then, on the other side, the Aśvattha-vessel with the mouth turned towards both sides, the Rtu-vessel, the southern one for the Adhvaryu and the northern one for the Pratiprasthātṛ.
13.1.13	He places the Āgrayana-vessel on the southern thigh, the Ukthya-vessel and the Ukthya vessel on the northern thigh.
13.1.14	They are in between.
13.2.1	He places three Atigrahya vessels.
13.2.2	The vessel for the Soma-juice is placed in front of the southern Havirdhana shed. The vessel for the Adityas and the vessel for the Aditvas are placed in front of northern Havirdhana shed, and the vessel for Dhruva is placed in front.
13.2.3	The vessel for curds is made of Udumbara wood, having four corners, and is placed on the northern shoulder.
13.2.4	The vessel which floats in the middle is like a ladle without a handle.
13.2.5	If there is a Sodashi, then the Khadira wood should be cut into four parts and sixteen pieces.
13.2.6	The upper ends should be of the size of a span and inclined towards the middle, and should be sprinkled with water.
13.2.7	Those which are not mentioned as trees, any tree that is suitable for sacrifice, they should be of that tree, says Ashmarathi. Vaikankata, says Aalekhana.
13.2.8	This explains the use of the wood of the Nyagrodha tree for the cups. The other view is that they should be of Nyagrodha wood only.
13.2.9	There are ten cups with handles or without handles.
13.2.10	There are the ten cups of the Adhvaryu.
13.2.11	The cups of the Hotṛ, Brahman, Udgātṛ, Yajamāna, Maitrāvaruṇa, Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin, Potṛ, Neṣṭṛ, Acchāvāka, Agnīdhra are placed in the cart according to their respective places.
13.2.12	Under the southern Havirdhāna-cart, behind, he places the axle, the Dronakalaśa with the filter, with the formula, "I yoke thee with the light."
13.2.13	On the northern side, the Ādhavanīya vessel, with the formula "I yoke thee together with the wind and the atmosphere."
13.2.14	In the front, the Pūtabhṛt vessel, with the verse, "I yoke thy speech together with the sun."
13.2.15	Here some people mention the purpose of the skin of the Adhiṣavaṇ animal and the Gravaṇs.
13.2.16	They face each other upwards.
13.3.1	Then he touches them with the verse, "The waters are the womb of truth, the guardians of the world, the guests of the mountains, the corners of the sky, the protectors. Call Indra with a loud cry, and drive away the enemies. The yoked ones carry, they carry heaven, they carry the sacrificer."
13.3.2	He commences the procedure of the Savanīya (Soma-cup).
13.3.3	The taking of the Soma-cups is common.
13.3.4	He takes it from the ladle of the worldly butter, first.
13.3.5	He sprinkles the oblations with the fire-brand, which he is going to offer on that day.
13.3.6	If one were to put the oblations of the two oblations, one should put the sprinkled ones.
13.3.7	The sprinkling is common up to the placing of the ladles.
13.3.8	He touches the ladles with the formula, "I unite the three streams of the Sun."
13.3.9	Here some prescribe the purpose of the vessel.
13.3.10	Having offered in the Agnidhra chamber, he makes the king enter the trough with the formula, “Protect me from the curse of any one. O Soma, O king, come and descend."
13.3.11	Then having offered to the Agni-dhri-priest the five Hotr-priests, he instructs the Hotr-priest for the morning Prastara-hymn, saying, "O Brahman, recite the morning hymn to the gods. Control your speech. O Subrahmanya, invite the Subrahmanya. O Pratiprasthata, we shall offer the Savanīya oblations. Milk the cow."
13.3.12	He should speak to the person whom he hates in the words of the hymn.
13.3.13	Subrahmanya calls out to Subrahmanya in the father-daughter relationship.
13.3.14	Here, one should offer the Savaniya oblations and milk the cow for the Amikṣa offering. Some say it should be done above.
13.4.1	Where one knows that the dawn was the animal with tawny skin, one offers at the Pracaraṇa rite, saying, "May Agni listen to the call with the kindling wood."
13.4.2	Having taken another four handfuls, and having taken the darbha-blades, he goes out, and gives the order: "O Hotṛ, do thou run with the Maitrāvaruṇa's goblet, the Adhvaryu with the Adravas, the Ekadhana with the Adravah, the Nestr with the wife, the Udgātṛ with the Hotr's goblet, and the Vasatīvari waters, and attend upon the Catvāla."
13.4.3	The Adravas, Ekadhana, and Adravah are odd in number, and are half the number of the Vasatīvarī waters.
13.4.4	They do as they are told.
13.4.5	"The Adhvaryu says, "Go forth, O Hotr, and recite the morning Sāman."
13.4.6	The Adhvaryyu should take the water when he hears the Hotr reciting the morning Sāma. If he does not hear, he would be deaf or his speech would be cut off.
13.4.7	If they are far away, he should take it after calling them back.
13.4.8	When the waters are flowing, he offers this four-grasped (oblation) with the verse, "The divine waters, from the foot of the waters."
13.4.9	If the grass is already there, he offers on that.
13.4.10	Having sprinkled the oblation with darbha grass, he takes it in the Maitrāvaruṇa goblet smeared with ghee, with the verse, “You are taken with the permission of the ocean, the inexhaustible."
13.4.11	In the same way, he takes up the Soma with the verse, "Thus do I take up the juice of Soma, the lord of wealth."
13.4.12	The wife takes up the Pannijanis with the verse, “I take up the Pannijani for the Vasus, Rudras, Adityas, and all the gods. I take up the Pannajanis for your sacrifice."
13.4.13	They bring water.
13.4.14	The Adhvaryu makes the sacrificer recite the formula, "Do thou rise up." The Nestr makes the sacrificer's wife recite the formula, "Do thou rise up".
13.5.1	The wife of the sacrificer places the Pannijanis on the Dhishniya-bricks to the rear of the Nestr with the formulas, "For Vasus, Rudras, Adityas, for all the gods I place the Pannijanls. For sacrifice I place the Pannijani."
13.5.2	The Adhvaryu, having touched the Hotr's and Maitrāvaruṇa's cups, carries the Vasatīvarī waters to the upper Ātman. "The waters have united with the waters, the plants with the plants, those who follow the vow with those who follow the vows."
13.5.3	Having brought the Hotr's goblet, he fills it from the Maitrāvaruṇa's goblet. From the Maitrāvaruṇas goblet he fills the Hotr' s goblet. From the Hotr' goblet he fills the Maitrāvaruņa's goblet.
13.5.4	Then he anoints them with the Pracaraṇyā verse, "May Varuna, Indra, Brihaspati, Tvashtri, Vishnu, desiring progeny, bestow wealth on the sacrificer." Thus they are anointed according to their respective verses.
13.5.5	The Hotṛ asks the Adhvaryu, "O Adhvaryu! Do you know the Apas?"
13.5.6	He replies, "We know them."
13.5.7	Then he offers the oblation for the performance of the sacrifice with the verse, "O Agni, in the battles, thou art the mortal one." If it is an Agniṣṭoma.
13.5.8	If it is an Ukthya, having offered, he smears the paste on the boundary.
13.5.9	If it be a Sodashin, having offered and smeared the paste on the boundaries, he touches the Dronakalaśa or the Raratī.
13.5.10	He does not offer, does not sprinkle, does not touch water at the Vājapeya and Atiratra sacrifices. This is the mantra that one recites while approaching.
13.5.11	He places the Pracarani ladle on the handle of the southern Havirdhana cart.
13.5.12	One should touch water with the one whom one hates.
13.6.1	One makes the water flow through the southern door of the Havirdhana cart, or through the eastern door. The sacrificer approaches through the eastern door.
13.6.2	Under the northern Havirdhāna-shed, he places the Vasatīvarī vessels, the Maitrāvaruṇa's goblet.
13.6.3	Having placed the Puroḍāśa of the Hotr under the southern Havirdhāna shed, he proceeds to take up curds.
13.6.4	With a pot made of Udumbara wood, having four corners, he takes curd, saying, "You are taken with the Upayāma-graha. I take you, O Prajapati, the luminous one, for the luminous one."
13.6.5	He takes it away, saying, "O Indra, the mind of the enemies."
13.6.6	He offers it, saying, "For your breath." With the remaining portion of the Anuvāka.
13.6.7	He should take the Soma-graha for one desiring Brahmic glory. He should take the curd-graha for the one desiring cattle.
13.6.8	The procedure for the ghee-graha is the same.
13.6.9	One who is about to take the Soma- graha places the king on the skin of an animal killed by a blow, as much as is sufficient for one graha.
13.6.10	Having filled the Hotr's vessel with the Vasatīvarī waters, he makes the sacrificer recite the Nigrābha formula, beginning with "Nigrābha, O divine-knower" and ending with "May the groups not be thirsty for me."
13.6.11	Having sprinkled with the Vasatîvarî waters, he recites the Abhiṣoṣya formula, beginning with “May your mind grow, well-born."
13.6.12	Wherever he sprinkles, he sprinkles with this very (verse).
13.6.13	Then he sprinkles him with a ladle.
13.7.1	The gods made three kindling-sticks for the youthful one, the wise, the immortal, and they placed them in the mortal world. Two of them went to the mortal world.
13.7.2	Wherever he may sprinkle, he should sprinkle with the ladle.
13.7.3	This is the sprinkling-mantra for this (Agni).
13.7.4	If the first drop of the sprinkling falls down, he should recite this mantra over it: "Do not fall down, along with progeny, along with prosperity."
13.7.5	"They should be recited at every sprinkling" is one view. "He who is the first of all" is another view.
13.7.6	"The drops have fallen" should be recited for the drops.
13.7.7	"They should be recited every time" is one view, "He who is at the end of all" is the other view.
13.7.8	Here the sacrificer makes the navel of the ten-stringed filter.
13.7.9	Then, with a hand holding gold, he pours the flowing water through the strainer into the vessel for holding curds, saying, "One should take it with the wind-offering (verse)." This is another (verse).
13.7.10	Then he places it on the ground, saying, "This is your birthplace."
13.7.11	Then, facing east, he offers it with a hand holding a gold coin, saying, "The verses for the offering of curds have been explained.
13.7.12	Or, he is not entitled to the Soma rites, because of the modification of the taking of curd.
13.7.13	There, the taking of the meaning is the sprinkling, because of the connection with the other (Soma rites). And the Soma-making is the sprinkling-mantra.
13.7.14	Herein, this is the extreme limit:
13.8.1	He takes all the Somas with a hand holding gold, and offers them.
13.8.2	He offers all the Soma-offerings facing east.
13.8.3	Having offered, he eats the remainder in the assembly.
13.8.4	The Marjālīya washes the vessel.
13.8.5	From now on, the members of the assembly eat the Soma offerings, and the Agnīdhra eats the oblations.
13.8.6	The Marjalīya washes the vessels of the leftovers.
13.8.7	Then he takes the Ādābhya.
13.8.8	The king of the Soma-juice, having been pressed, is taken out in three streams with these formulas: "May the Vasus take thee out with the Gayatri metre."
13.8.9	Having poured out the curds or milk of the Nigra-cows into a vessel, he takes out the streams with these formulas : "May the Manadas take thee out, O bright one, with the bright (stream).
13.8.10	Some say, he shakes it three times; some say, five times; some say seven times.
13.8.11	Then he takes it in a vessel of curds, with the three verses, "I take thee with thy own essence, Agni, may he protect us at the morning pressing."
13.8.12	The fierce ones have gone away from him.
13.8.13	Soma offers, Soma is the leader of Soma.
13.8.14	Then he sprinkles the rays on the rays, O shining god Soma, with the Gayatri metre. With these mantras, he sprinkles each one.
13.8.15	One says that one should sprinkle after the Soma has been drunk. Another says that one should separately sprinkle each one at that time.
13.8.16	He gives twelve cows as Dakṣiṇā, and the house of the sacrificer.
13.8.17	Then he takes up the Anśu.
13.8.18	He pours the king on the skin of an Adhiṣavaṇa animal, as much as he thinks is sufficient for one libation.
13.9.1	Then he pours it down once without repeating, letting the stream flow through the strainer, and takes it once in the Adābhya vessel.
13.9.2	It is understood that he takes it reciting the Vamadevya hymn mentally.
13.9.3	Some say that one should take the Vamadevyal hymn with the verse "What wonderful thing has come to us?"
13.9.4	It is understood that the breath should be taken as inhalation, exhalation, and suspension.
13.9.5	Taking a hundred-weight of gold, he offers it with the verse, "May our life come back from the yonder world."
13.9.6	Having covered the cup with gold, he touches it with the verse "Indra and Agni may bestow radiance on me."
13.9.7	Then he offers it once without repeating, with the verse, "If he is wealthy, he may give."
13.9.8	If he is unable to offer or take the gift when the gift is given, he should offer it.
13.9.9	Having offered, he eats the remainder in the assembly as before.
13.9.10	He gives twelve cows as Dakṣiṇā, and also the house of the Kriti-adherents.
13.9.11	Then he takes up the stone for the Upāṃśusavana, reciting the formula "By the impulse of the divine Savitr..." and ending with "for the sake of rain."
13.9.12	Having taken it, he restrains his speech until the Āgrayana (offering).
13.9.13	Then he measures it with a palm holding gold, towards the north, with these mantras: "For Indra, the slayer of Vritra..."
13.9.14	There, the same rule applies as in the case of buying, except for the collection.
13.9.15	Then he takes it in a low voice.
13.9.16	On the skin of the Adhiṣavaṇ he puts down the king, as much as he thinks is sufficient for one cup.
13.10.1	He recites the verse "O Soma, you are the protector of the earth" while reciting the Apāyyā mantra.
13.10.2	He recitess the verse "O Dhishana, you are the one who is to be pressed" while reciting the mantra on the Adhiṣaṇaphala.
13.10.3	The stone is above and the portions are below.
13.10.4	Then, sprinkling the Hotr's goblet clockwise, he approaches the Nigraha (cup) with the verse, "May the directions, east, west, north, and south, may the directions, east and west, north and south, may they run towards you, O Amba, may they be restrained."
13.10.5	He takes up six Ansi-cups, which are wet and joined together.
13.10.6	While lifting up the stone for pressing, they say, "Do not be afraid, do not be frightened."
13.10.7-8	Where he sees grass or roots, he sprinkles it with the formula, "We sprinkle thee, the faultless one, sent by Indra. May Vayu be thy share. May Mitra be thy share. May Varuna be thy share. The Soma-king has been struck by me." One should sprinkle with this formula only thereafter.
13.10.9	Having poured eight times, he again goes to the Nigrābha.
13.10.10	Twice from the beginning or from the end, he goes to the Nigrâbha four times.
13.10.11	Having collected three times with the Udakana, it is known as Udakana.
13.10.12	Having placed the Pratiprasthâtri's Upâmsupâtra with two (portions) of the unmixed portions, he takes it up towards the north.
13.10.13	The Adhvaryu, having taken the king in his folded hands, carries the Upamshupātra, reciting, "O Vācaspati, do thou flow forth, O strong one."
13.10.14	Two other sieves are prepared in the same way.
13.10.15	One may sieve the Soma eleven times, the second twelve times, and the third twelve times.
13.11.1	The Pratiprasthātṛ pours the Soma into the vessel with two other Anśus.
13.11.2	Having taken the cup, the Adhvaryu rises, saying, "Thou art consecrated; make the wishes sweet."
13.11.3	He carries it towards the north of the Hotr, saying, "Do thou follow the heaven."
13.11.4	"May Tvashtri be thy mind," they stand facing each other at the junction of the northern enclosing stick.
13.11.5	Standing erect, he offers the oblation facing south, continuously, with "Svāhā to thee, O Sun, the well-born."
13.11.6	Having offered, he smears the paste on the boundary.
13.11.7	If one desires, "May the rain be abundant," one should smear it with the hand facing downwards.
13.11.8	If one wishes, "May the rainfall be scanty," one should smear with the hand facing upwards.
13.11.9	In the Āgrayana vessel, he places the oblation in the place of the earth. In the vessel for the oblation, he places the vessel for the Soma juice, with the verse, "This is your place; for Prāṇa thee."
13.11.10	The Adhvaryu, taking one of the unpressed Soma-stalks, places it in the vessel for the Upāṁshu-cup. It remains till the third pressing.
13.11.11	Then he releases the rays of light, saying, "May your rays be bright." Two by two, he releases them in succession.
13.11.12	If he is to perform an exorcism, he should take it silently and say, "I place you in the breath of so-and-so."
13.11.13	Then, taking it with the Savitrī verse, he carries it.
13.11.14	Up to the offering, it is the same.
13.11.15	He says, "I am going to offer this; then I shall offer you."
13.11.16	If it is far away, he should stand near it.
13.11.17	He offers together, saying, "May the one who is pleased with the intoxication of wine be true. Svāhā."
13.11.18	The rest is similar.
13.12.1	Then the Adhvaryus, having taken the Gravaṇī-vessel, sit down for the great sprinkling, the Adhvaryu in front, the Pratiprasthātṛ on the right, the Nestr on the rear, and the Unnetr on the left.
13.12.2	He pours the king of Soma into the Adhiṣavaṇa-vessel, more in the first pressing and less in the midday pressing.
13.12.3	Having sprinkled (the Soma) with the Vasatīvarī waters, they sprinkle it in the Nigrābha vessel.
13.12.4	They sprinkle in the Nigrābhas vessel.
13.12.5	Having sprinkled the king three times, he pours it into the cup and brings it to the Adhavaniya vessel.
13.12.6	Two other vessels are prepared in the same way.
13.12.7	Having pressed the Rājīṣa on the upper stone,
13.12.8	they make the king well-pressed.
13.12.9	Having wiped it with the purifying stone, he presses it.
13.12.10	Having placed the stones facing each other on the pressing stone, he removes the Rājīsa from the stones and makes them face the Rājīșa.
13.12.11	The Udgātṛ priests pour the Dronakalaśa into the stones facing east.
13.12.12	They extend the Samyāksa.
13.12.13	They spread the Pavitra in the eastern direction of the Drona Kalasha.
13.12.14	Having recited the formula, the sacrificer causes the stream of Soma to flow through the filter from the Hotr's goblet. If he wishes to cause harm to someone, he should break the stream.
13.13.1	The Hotṛ-cup is brought from the Udacana-cup.
13.13.2	He takes the Antaryāma cup from the flowing stream with the strainer in between, with the formula, "Thou art taken with a support; do thou guard me within, O Maghavan."
13.13.3	The procedure of this is explained.
13.13.4	One takes it either to the south or to the north of the Hotṛ.
13.13.5	"He stands to the right of the southern junction of the enclosing sticks, reciting, 'May thy mind be firm.'
13.13.6	Standing straight, facing east, he offers continuously, reciting, 'Svāhā! May the good-natured Sun be thine.'
13.13.7	The smearing, wiping, and pouring down of the Sampātā water have been explained.
13.13.8	He places the Sudavad-Antaryama vessel in the place of offering, reciting, 'This is thy place; for Apāna thee.'
13.13.9	If he is to perform a rite of exorcism, he should take the Antaryāma vessel and place it with the words, "I place you in the breath of so-and-so."
13.13.10	The rest is similar.
13.13.11	He places it touching the Upāṁshusavana vessel with the words, “For your breathing.”
13.13.12	If he is to perform an exorcism, he places the Upāṁshu-savana vessel with the formula, “I place you in so-and- so's breathing.”
13.13.13	Thus they are different till the third pressing.
13.13.14	If one is not in a hurry, one should offer both at sunrise.
13.13.15	If one hurries, one should offer the Upāṁśu offering before sunrise and the Antaryāma offering at sunrise.
13.13.16	Some say that the offerings of Upāṁśhu and Antaryāma are reversed, and both are offered before sunrise.
13.14.1	He takes the Grahas in the stream of the flowing Pavitra.
13.14.2	If the Soma is of the Rathantara Saman, he should take the Grahas beginning with the Indra-Vayu; if of the Brihat Saman, beginning with the Shukra; if of the Jagat Saman, beginning from the Agrayan; if of both the Samans, beginning with the Indra Vayu.
13.14.3	The Grahas should be taken in the order of Indra-Vayu, if one is suffering from a disease. The Grahas are taken in the order desired by the Brahmanas. They should be taken in this order only.
13.14.4	If one takes any other Graha before Indra-Vayu as desired, then one should keep it in this way because of the arrangement of Indra-Vavu.
13.14.5	Having arranged the Indra-Vayu Graha, one should arrange it.
13.14.6	If one were to take the Grahas before the Āgrayaṇa, one should take them in a low voice; if one were to take them after, one should take in a loud voice.
13.14.7	Taking the Āgrayaṇas first, one should take the Manthin first and then release speech. Taking the Ukthyas first, one would take the Upāṃśukthyas first.
13.14.8-9	He takes up the Indra-Vayu cup with the verse, "O Vayu, do thou be adorned with the pure one." Having taken it up, he takes it up again with the verse, “These are the pressed Soma for Indra-Vayu."
13.14.10	Then he places him in his own place, having wiped him with the filter, with the formula, "This is thy place, with the consorts."
13.14.11	In the same way, having taken the other Grahas as per their respective deities, he places them in their own places, in their own receptacles.
13.14.12	If the placing is not mentioned, he should place him with the formula, “This is thy place.”
13.15.1	He takes up the Maitrāvaruṇa cup with the formula, "This is yours, O Mitra-Varuna."
13.15.2	Then he anoints it with hot milk with the verse, "We, O Mitra-Varuṇa, desirous of your favour, shall drink Soma with the juice. The gods with oblations, the cows with grass. That cow, O Mitra- Varuna, you two, the benefactors, bestow on us, not to be shaken."
13.15.3	Having passed over the Ashvina, he takes up the Sukra. This is the Vena verse: "O you of tawny-coloured womb, you are urged."
13.15.4	Then he consecrates it with gold, saying, "I consecrate the Sukra with the Sukra."
13.15.5	Then the churning, saying, "The ancient, the former."
13.15.6	Then he consecrates him with flour, with the verse, "The mind of those who offer sharp libations, running with the help of Śacī, the hero who is strong with his own strength, may he consecrate this pitcher. May he not destroy himself and the other Grahas."
13.15.7	Then he takes up the Āgrayana from two streams.
13.15.8	He pours the second stream into another vessel, saying, "Ye gods in heaven, ye are eleven."
13.15.9	One who has an enemy should take the cup with the verse, "The thirty-three are singing together."
13.15.10	Having taken up the Āgrayana (grasses), he thrice utters the sound "hiṅ" and then releases his speech. Soma flows, Soma flows, Soma is flowing for this Brahman, for this Kshatra, for this Vish, for this Sunvant, for the sacrificer, for food, for energy, for the waters, for the plants, for the trees, for heaven and earth, for good growth, for Brahmic glory, for the sacrificers, for me, for the eldest.
13.15.11	He utters it slowly, then loudly, then very loudly. This is known.
13.16.1	Then he takes three Atigrahya cups with these three Anuvakas: "O Agni, you purify the life-forces."
13.16.2	Then the Ukthya cup is taken with the formula, "Thou art taken with a support; for Indra thee, for Brihaspati, for Vayu."
13.16.3	Then Dhruva, the head, the dislike of heaven, the dislike of earth.
13.16.4	If one wishes that he may live the whole of his life, one should take a full cup for him.
13.16.5	One should place it on gold for one who desires life.
13.16.6	It is known that the prince protects Dhruva.
13.16.7	When Dhruva is taken, the sacrificer does not let it flow away, because of the covering.
13.16.8	The king is sprinkled in the Droṇa-vessel as much as he is considered to have been sprinkled at the morning pressing.
13.16.9	Having pressed the strainer, having spread it on the Pūtabhṛt, the Maitrāvaruṇa-vessel is taken to the Ekadhana-vessels.
13.16.10	The king is sprinkled in one part of the Pūtabṛt from the Avanyādhāvanīya in accordance with the truth.
13.16.11	Here is the extreme limit: wherever and whatever the Pure-bearer would offer, he should offer only in front of the purifying (graha), except the Drona-vessel.
13.16.12	He takes the Pavamāna-grahas. He touches the Drona-kalasa with the formula, "Thou art taken with a support. For Prajapati thee." He touches the Adhavaniya with the formula, "For Indra thee." He touches Putabhrit with the formula, "For all the gods thee."
13.16.13	The Upāṁśus are taken up with the Yajus formula, the Upāṁśu-s with the Rk verse. It is known that the sacrifice is held together.
13.16.14	They offer the oblations of Vāyu with these three verses, "That drop of thine which has fallen down."
13.16.15	Having offered to the seven Hotṛs, they proceed towards the Bahispavamāna with heads bent down.
13.16.16	The Adhvaryu takes up the Prastôtṛ, the Prastôtŕ takes up the Udgâtr, the Udgâtar takes up the Pratihartṛ, the Pratihartar takes up the Brahman, the Brahman takes up the Yajamâna. Some say that the Yajamana takes up the Brahman.
13.16.17	The Adhvaryu, shaking the grass-bunch, goes first, reciting, "The path is Gayatra, the Vasus are the deities. May I go safely by the path which is not beset by wolves." The voice goes first, and may it come to the front.
13.17.1	They sit down to the south of the Cātvāla.
13.17.2	The Adhvaryu, having sat down in front of the Prastôtṛ, gives the Prastôttr a handful of sacrificial grass and begins the Stotra with the verse, "Vayu is the Hinker." The Devas who are the bearers of life have placed the life in me." The Soma is flowing." He concludes with this verse.
13.17.3	He begins all the Stotras with this verse.
13.17.4	They should return, except after the Pavamāna verses.
13.17.5	They praise while looking at the sacrificial ground.
13.17.6	The four priests sing along with the Stotra being sung. They sing along from the directions.
13.17.7	The priests, including the sacrificer, sing along.
13.17.8	It is known that the Adhvaryu does not sing along.
13.17.9	The other priests sing with the syllable "o". The sacrificer sings with the syllable "ho".
13.17.10	The sacrificer recites the verse "You are a hawk, you are the Gayatri metre" while being praised.
13.17.11	He recites the verse, "You are praised, you are praised."
13.17.12	He recites all the praises with this same verse.
13.17.13	Having praised, the Adhvaryu says (to the Agnidhra), "O Agnidhra, do thou spread the fires, spread the sacrificial grass, decorate the sacrificial dishes, and bring the animal."
13.17.14	Having returned, the sacrificer approaches the king with the formula, "O Vishnu, thou art our last refuge."
13.17.15	Having brought the embers from the Agnidhra, the Agnidhra spreads the fires in the places where they are placed.
13.17.16	The Pratiprasthātṛ, seated in front, facing the east, pours down the Dhishnyas.
13.17.17	Taking the king from the Dronakalaśa, he pours down the Āhavanīya, Agnīdhriya, Hotrīya, and other fires with five-fold Soma, and the Mārgālīya with Soma.
13.17.18	The mantras for pouring down are the same as those for pouring down the Soma.
13.17.19	Having washed the vessels meant for the Savanīya offerings, he places them in the prescribed order.
13.17.20	Having purified them, he instructs, "Let the sacrificer control his speech."
13.17.21	Controlling his speech, he touches the vessels.
13.18.1	Then he offers the Savanīya oblations: Dhānā to Indra Harivāhana, Karamba to Indra Pūṣanvata, Parivāpa to Sarasvatī Bhāratī, Purorāśa of eight potfuls to Indra at the morning pressing, of eleven potfuls at the midday pressing, of twelve potfuls at the third pressing. Or everywhere of eleven potfuls.
13.18.2	They call the gruel Karamba and the parched grains Parivāpa.
13.18.3	The pouring of the grains is similar.
13.18.4	Having placed a pot for the purpose of grains, having poured half of the grains in it, he pours them with water that has been purified with the Yajus mantra.
13.18.5	While pouring, he recites the Adhiśramana mantra, and while pouring out, he recites Udvasana mantra.
13.18.6	Having sprinkled the grains, he pours them out.
13.18.7	One decorates at the proper time.
13.18.8	The same is the case with the carrying of the grains.
13.18.9	Having carried the grains with the hands, he makes the husked grains.
13.18.10	Here the mantras for sowing, carrying, sprinkling and spreading are used.
13.18.11	The mantras for the hands, pestle and mortar are used.
13.18.12	Then he grinds the grains for the cake.
13.18.13	Having done that before the pouring of the oblations, having placed the pot for the gruel, he pours half of the barley grains and rice for the gruel into the pot.
13.18.14	The consecration is explained.
13.18.15	The grains are ground and covered.
13.18.16	It is similar up to the placing of the pot.
13.18.17	Having placed the pot for grains, he places the pots for the oblations.
13.18.18	He prepares the gruel.
13.18.19	He pours the oblations into various vessels and pours them out.
13.19.1	He mixes together the gruel and the cake.
13.19.2	Having placed the gruel, he places the cake.
13.19.3	In the same way, having taken down the gruel, one takes down the cake.
13.19.4	The Agnidhra alone spreads the sacrificial grass for the Anupūrva-sāman.
13.19.5	He adorns the cakes.
13.19.6	Then he takes the Āśvina cup from the Dronakalaśa with the verse, "O ye two, the ladle is sweet for you." With this Anuvāka or with the northern one.
13.19.7	From the Dronakalaša onwards, he takes the cups with the Parigraha verse, except in the case of the Dhārāgrahas.
13.19.8	Having taken up the Aśvina (month), having surrounded the sacrificial post with three layers, he offers the animal for Agni, the animal for Savaniya, in the Agniṣṭoma; the animal for Indra-Agni in the Ukthya; the second animal for Indra in the Ṣoḍaśa; the animal for Sarasvati in the form of a sheep in the Atiratra; the fourth.
13.19.9	He makes the altar equal to the Veda.
13.19.10	The offering of the omentum is similar.
13.19.11	When the omentum has been offered, they look at the Grahas, while about to be poured out.
13.19.12	"Two oceans are spread out, without decay," (saying this) they look at the two Drona-kalasa and Adhavaniya jars.
13.19.13	"Two streams," (saying this), they look at the Putabhrita jar.
13.19.14	All (the priests) stand around the king, saying, "The lord Agni, the lord Indra." Having reached the end of the verse, they say, "This is your sprinkling."
13.19.15	For Prāṇa (vital breath) is the Upāṁśu-cup.
13.19.16	For Apāna (vital breath) the Antaryāma.
13.19.17	For Vyāna (vital breath), the Upāṁshu-savaṇa.
13.19.18	For speech, the Indra-Vayu cup.
13.19.19	For Daksha and Kratu, the Maitrāvaruṇa.
13.19.20	For the eyes, the Shukra and Amānthi.
13.20.1	For the ears, the Asvin.
13.20.2	For the self, the Āgrayana.
13.20.3	"For my limbs, O Ukthya."
13.20.4	"For my life, O Dhruva."
13.20.5	"For brilliance, for strength, for radiance, O Atigrahyas."
13.20.6	"For vigour, O Sodasipaatra, if there is a Sodasi."
13.20.7	"You are the belly of Vishnu."
13.20.8	"You art the belly of Indra."
13.20.9	"You are the belly of all the gods."
13.20.10	All the kings stand up to him, recognizing him as "Who are you? Who is your name?" and ending with "This is your name."
13.20.11	It is known that one should look at the sun while desiring brahminical splendor, while desiring freedom from disease, while desiring to conquer.
13.20.12	Then the other substances are placed.
13.20.13	On the mound, the implements for making the altar, the spade, the auspicious, the pile, and the auspicious, with these mantras, as appropriate.
13.20.14	All of them with the mantra, "You are fit for sacrifice, you are made for sacrifice, may you invoke me in this sacrifice."
13.20.15	"May heaven and earth invoke me," for heaven and earth.
13.20.16	"The Upastaus" means the Staus.
13.20.17	"The Kalasa" means the Drona-Kalasa.
13.20.18	"Soma" means Soma.
13.20.19	"Agni" means the Ahavaniya.
13.20.20	"The Devas have approached the sacrifice" means the sacrifice.
13.20.21	"May the Hotrkas call me to the Hotr-ship" means the Hotrkas.
13.20.22	"May they call, may they call, may the Hotrkas be calling" means the Anusangas.
13.20.23	"Salutations to Agni, the destroyer of sacrifices," he says to the Ahavaniya fire.
13.20.24	"Salutations to Rudra, the destroyer of sacrifice," he says to Agnidhra fire.
13.20.25	"Salutation to Indra, the destroyer of the sacrifice," he says of the Hotra fire.
13.20.26	"You are firm, you are loose, you are in accord, protect me from the darkness," he says of heaven and earth.
13.20.27	"May the god Surya protect me from the heavenly darkness," he says to Aditya.
13.21.1	Vayu from the sky, Vayu.
13.21.2	Agni from the earth, Agni.
13.21.3	Yama from the fathers, Yama.
13.21.4	Sarasvati from men, Sarasvati.
13.21.5	The Goddess at the doors, do not burn me. The doors of the assembly hall.
13.21.6	Salutations to the assembly hall. The assembly hall.
13.21.7	Salutation to the lord of the assembly hall, the sacrificer.
13.21.8	"Salutations to the foremost of friends and to the eyes." Thus the priests.
13.21.9	"Salutations to heaven." Thus to heaven.
13.21.10	"Salutlations to earth." Thus to earth.
13.21.11	Having entered, he stands at the place where he is going to sit down, and says, "O Dadhivat, standing here, may I sit in your house, who are more worthy of being cooked than I am."
13.21.12	He sits down in front of the Praśāstṛya, reciting the verse, "May I go to the heaven and to the earth."
13.21.13	"May the heaven and the earth protect me today."
13.21.14	He looks towards the southern half of the Sadas, reciting the verse "May the fathers come, may I be with you, may you be with me, may we beget offspring."
13.21.15	Having obtained the Savanīya oblations, he instructs (the Hotr) in the morning, "Recite the Puronuvākyās for Indra at the morning Savanīya."
13.21.16	Having spread the Juhu, he cuts out portions of all the oblations.
13.21.17	Having cut out portions of the Āmikṣā, he cuts out portion of the Vājinīya or not of the Vājiṇīya.
13.21.18	Having taken it up, having poured clarified butter over it, having stepped across, having called out, he says, "For Indra, the cakes for the morning Savaniya, have been prepared."
13.21.19	Having ordered, he says, “Recite to Agni, order Agni.” For Sviṣṭakṛt.
13.21.20	Here itself one should place the Iḍā, without fault, says one; above, says another.
13.22.1	Then one proceeds with the offerings to two deities.
13.22.2	The Adhvaryu directs the Pratiprasthātṛ to recite the formula, "Do you recite the formula for Vāyu and Indra."
13.22.3	The Pratiprasthātr takes a portion of the Indra-Vāyu offering in the Āditya vessel with the formula, "Thou art taken with a support. Thou art the abode of speech. I take thee for Indra-Vāyus, the overseers of this firm sacrifice, for speech and for the abode of speech."
13.22.4-5	The Adhvaryu takes the Indra-Vayu cup from the Dronakalaśa and offers the Āghāra libation with the formula, "Where the Adhvara is inaudible, may this be a sacrifice. O gods, to the plants."
13.22.6	There, this is the extreme limit: he offers oblations of ghee, oblations of animals, and oblations of rice-cakes in the middle of the fire, and oblations to Soma at the beginning and end of the pouring down (of the oblations).
13.22.7	From where he thinks, "I will offer without advancing," he should invite standing there.
13.22.8	Having advanced beyond (the fire), he should invite, saying, "To Vayu, to Indra and Vayu, let us offer."
13.22.9	He offers at the Vasat-utterance.
13.22.10	Again, when the Vasat-call is made, they offer.
13.22.11	He recites the Anumantrana-verse: "You are the best of rays, the protector of life, protect my life. You are the best of the rays, the protector from exhalation, protect my exhalation."
13.22.12	If his elder brother were to attack him, he should hold the finger with the thumb. If the younger brother were to attack, he should hold his thumb with the finger. "He who does not attack Indra and Vayu."
13.22.13-15	The Pratiprasthātṛ pours the Srasrava into the Adhvaryu's vessel. The Adhvaryu pours the Srasravas into the Pratiprasthātr's vessel. Pratiprasthätṛ pours the Srsravas into the vessel of the Adhvaryus. The Adhvaryu pours the Srasravus into the vessel of Pratiprasthätr. The Pratiprasthatr pours the Srasruvas into the vessel for the gods. The Adhvariu gives the oblation to the Hotri. The Hotri takes the oblation from the Adhvaryui. The Adharyu gives the oblations to the Hotri, saying, "May Vasu be in me, may Vasu be in front, may the Vasu be in the speech, may the Vasus protect my speech." The Hotri takes it with the same formula.
13.23.1	In the same way, he proceeds with the two northern ones, according to the deity.
13.23.2	Thus much is different. He takes up the Soma with the northern formula. There is no Āghāra here. He offers once with each formula. He obstructs with the northern formula, with the northern formula he pours down the drops into the northern Aditya-vessel.
13.23.3	Then he puts it in the same vessel with the formula, "This Soma is for thee, O Viṣṇu of great strides; do thou protect it. May thy ill-looking eye not injure it."
13.23.4	The Adhvaryu gives the portion to be eaten with the formula, “This is thine.” The Hotṛ receives it with the same formula.
13.23.5	The Pūtabhṛt puts down the Ādhavanīya vessel. The Unnetr puts down the Ādhvanīya vessel.
13.23.6	He instructs the Udgātṛs to chant while the Soma is being raised.
13.23.7	He raises the Hotr's goblet and nine other goblets, except the one for the Acchāvāka.
13.23.8	Having placed it on the Dronakalaśa, he raises it from the Pūtabhṛt vessel and pours it back into the Dronakalaša.
13.23.9	Now this is the extreme limit: wherever one may carry the cups, one should carry them in this way. One should carry all the cups. From now on, one carries all the cups.
13.23.10	The hymn is recited while carrying the cups at the Savanamukhiya (cups).
13.23.11	The Adhvaryu takes up the Sukra with the verse, "Thou art praised by the people, the gods, the drinkers of Sukra, may they lead thee." The Pratiprasthātṛ takes up the Manthin with the verse, “Thou art praised by people, the gods the drinkers of Manthin, may they lead you.”
13.23.12	With the Savitrī verse, he places the two pieces of meat, sprinkled from above, on the cake.
13.23.13	The one who is below, shaking off the dust with the two feet not sprinkled,
13.23.14	The Adhvaryu says, "The eunuch is removed along with the enemy," and takes the name of the one he hates.
13.23.15	The Pratiprasthātṛ says, "The hermaphrodite is removed along with his enemy," and takes his name.
13.23.16	Having covered with the hands, they go out facing east, saying, "Scatter the earth."
13.24.1	The Grahas are joined together in front of the Havirdhana. The Brahman is joined together, may it prosper me. The Kshatra is joined together, it may prosper me. The food is joined together, let it prosper me. Energy is joined together, that may prosper me. Wealth is joined together, (may) that prosper me. Nourishment is joined together, nourish me. The progeny is joined together, prosper it for me. The cattle are joined together, prosper them for me.
13.24.2	Having placed the Grahas on the northern half of the altar, they step on the northern half with the formula, "Thou art not to be injured."
13.24.3	They move around the northern half of altar as if they were moving around a fire-altar.
13.24.4	May you go forth, generating progeny, with the bright one, with the bright rays, with the bright light. The Adhvaryu goes forth with the verse. May you go forth generating progeny, with Mantha, with the rays of Mantha, with Mantha's light. The Pratiprasthātṛ goes forth with the above verse.
13.24.5	The sacrificer follows the bright one. We are yoked with Indra, we conquer the enemies.
13.24.6	The Grahas are joined together in front of the northern altar, or they are joined together like two knees, from heaven and earth. May they join together life, may they strengthen it for me. May they join the breath, may they strengthen that for me. May the out-breath be joined, may that be strengthened for me. May in-breath be joined. May that be strengthened for the me. May the eye be joined. May it be strengthened for me, May the ear be joined. May the mind be joined. May speech be joined.
13.24.7	Then the Adhvaryu recites over them: "Be ye life, give me life, give life to the sacrifice, give life to (the) lord of sacrifice. Be ye breath, give me breath, give breath to the sacrifice, (give breath) to the lord of sacrifice. Ye are sight, give me sight, give sight to the sacrifice, to (the) the lord of sacrifice." Be ye hearing, give me hearing, give hearing to the sacrifice, hearing to (the) Lord of sacrifice.
13.25.1	Those two gods, Shukra and Manthin, have created the divine classes; they have created the human classes. They have placed food and strength in us, life in the animals, and offspring in me and the sacrificer.
13.25.2	Having stepped onto the northern altar facing east, they place the two unsprinkled chips outside the altar with that same mantra.
13.25.3	The Adhvaryu and the Pratiprasthātṛ, having touched water, throw the two (pieces of) wood, consecrated, into the fire, with the formulas, "Thou art the kindling wood of Sukra" and "Thou art the churning wood of Manthin."
13.25.4	The Camasādhvaryus stand behind, facing east, with the cups.
13.25.5	Having called out and having been called back, he instructs (the Hotr) to offer the Soma-juice of the Savanīya cup to Indra, which is being pressed in the morning, which is bright, which is sweet, which is flowing like honey, which is being brought forward, which is being offered by the Madhyat-carins, which is being consecrated by the Camasādhvaryus, which is being sprinkled by the Hotr-Kamasādhvaryu, which is being taken up by the Hotr, which is being poured into the Hotr's cup, which is being drunk by the Hotr. Having taken up the Soma-juice from the Hotr' cup, he should return, saying, "Having become one by one, take up the Soma-juices from the bright cup and return."
13.25.6	When the Vasat-call is made, they offer.
13.25.7	The Sukra and Manthin are offered. He is the first, the creator, the all-creator. He is the Mitra, Varuna, Agni. He is the Brihaspati, the healer. To him I offer the Soma, Svāhā. Thus the Adhvaryu offers. To him, the Sun, I offer the Soma. Svāhā. The Pratiprasthātṛ offers.
13.25.8	Some recite the Sukra and Manthin verses with the Anuvshaṭ-karana, some without it, some with one or the other.
13.25.9	When the Anuvshaț-karana is recited, they offer from the cup of the Madhyata-karins and take away the others.
13.25.10	Having placed the embers to the north and east, the Pratiprasthātṛ offers the Savaniya oblation with the verse, "This is your share, O Rudra, which you have sought. Accept it with Svāhā."
13.25.11	Placing the Soma-vessel in the Sudas-vessel in the Āyatanā-vessel, he instructs, "Let the Hotr's vessel go, let the Brahman's go, let the Udgātṛ's go, and let the sacrificer's go."
13.25.12	These are the cups for those who perform the rites in the middle.
13.26.1	Then they proceed with the cups that have been filled again.
13.26.2	They are filled from the Dronakalaśa.
13.26.3	Taking the Maitrāvaruṇa cup, the Adhvaryu steps across and announces, "O Praśāstṛ, do you recite the Yajyā." At the Vaṣaṭ-utterance, he offers.
13.26.4	Thus in due order he directs each one who is to offer, saying, "O Brahman, offer; O Pot-bearer, offer; O Nestr, offer; O Agnid, offer."
13.26.5	These are the cups for them.
13.26.6	In all the Soma-offerings, the Anuvṣaṭkāra is prescribed.
13.26.7	The Hotṛ announces, "O Agnid, come!"
13.26.8	He who will make us drink Soma, he does good. The Hotṛ replies, "Yes."
13.26.9	He invites the eater with the formula, "Do thou eat, do thou enter."
13.26.10	He receives it with the formula, “I receive thee with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of the physicians."
13.26.11	He looks at it with the formula,"O divine Soma, I look at thee with the eyes of men, with the eyes of gods.
13.26.12	Wherever he eats, he should recite these mantras.
13.26.13	Then, having offered this oblation and restraining the vital airs, he eats with the mantra "Mandra-abhi-bhu-ti."
13.26.14	Those who are not Indra or Ararasamsa, at the morning Soma pressing, this is the mantra for their eating.
13.26.15	Some say, "May the goddess of speech be satisfied with Soma." This is a general rule.
13.26.16	One eats twice from the Indra-Vayu cup, once from each of the other two cups. The Maitravaruna cup is eaten for the sake of the eyes, the Asvin cup for the sake of all.
13.27.1	The Hotri eats first, then the Adhvaryu, then the Pratiprasthâtri.
13.27.2	Wherever two or more persons eat from a single vessel, the one who utters the Vasat-call should eat first.
13.27.3	Those who eat at the same time should all call each other by their names and invite each other.
13.27.4	The invitation is "You invite him" and the reply is "Invited".
13.27.5	Having eaten, he touches himself with the words, "Obeisance to the limbs of me, O Hari."
13.27.6	Wherever one may eat, one should touch oneself in the same way.
13.27.7	Having eaten, one does not discard the food, because of the prohibition against discarding.
13.27.8	Having poured the oblations of the two deities into the Hotr's goblet, he puts the portion of the cake into the vessel of Indra-Vayu, the Payasyā into the vessel of Mitra-Varuna and the cooked rice into the vessel of the Asvins.
13.27.9	Then he places these on the northern side of the southern Havirdhāna-shed, with the mouth towards the west.
13.27.10	Thus they remain till the third pressing.
13.27.11	The Hotr places the Idā in the fire without reciting any formula.
13.27.12	The Hotr calls out to the Idā.
13.27.13	The Hotrs take up their cups.
13.27.14	The Hotris hold the Hotr's cup touching it.
13.27.15	Those who are present consume the Idā which has been called out.
13.27.16	The Purorvasi puts a piece of the cake for the Acchavaka.
13.27.17	The Acchavaka consumes the cake. The others consume the cups.
13.27.18	The Soma-god, the lord of wealth, is in the middle of the Vasumat group.
13.27.19	The mantra for consuming the oblation of the other deities is explained only with the exception of Indra.
13.27.20	The Hotṛ consumes the oblation in all the cups.
13.27.21	When all the cups are again raised, the Adhvaryu says, "May the Mandra be subdued."
13.27.22	The Adhvaryu who offers the oblation should consume the oblation together with the Vasat-utterer.
13.27.23	Having eaten, he nourishes (the Soma) with the verse, "May it nourish thee, may it be united with thee."
13.27.24	Wherever one nourishes (the plants), one should nourish them with this (verse).
13.27.25	The Nārāśaṃsa plants sink down below the southern Havirdhāna shed.
13.28.1	The Acchāvāka sinks down in front of his own Dhishnya, outside the assembly hall.
13.28.2	He places a piece of the sacrificial cake (on the fire) and says, "O Adhvaryu, speak what you have to say."
13.28.3	When he knows that the Brahmanas are calling us, then the Adhvaryu says, "This one wants to be invited. O Hotri, invite him."
13.28.4	The Hotri invites him with a verse.
13.28.5	Where he knows that the cows have been called, and they have been called, then when they are being led away, he should say, "Recite."
13.28.6	Having taken the cup of the Acchāvāka, having gone around, having announced, he says, "The Acchāvākas should offer."
13.28.7	He offers at the Vasat-utterance.
13.28.8	He gives a portion of the oblation to the Acchāvakas.
13.28.9	The Acchāvak does not desire an invocation in this (oblation).
13.28.10	One should not partake of it.
13.28.11	If he wishes to offer in this (Agni), he should say, "Eat."
13.28.12	Having eaten, he places the cups of the Acchāvāka and the Hotr between the Hotr and the Agnīdhra.
13.28.13	Here he offers the Homa of grinding and covering with dough of the Savanīya oblations.
13.28.14	He releases the potsherds.
13.28.15	Here some prescribe the Vājinī practice.
13.29.1	Then the Adhvaryu and Pratiprasthātṛ take up the Rtugraha cups.
13.29.2	The Adhvaryu takes up the southern Rtugraha cup, the Pratiprasthātr the northern one.
13.29.3	They take up the first two together, the last two together.
13.29.4	The Advaryu takes up with the formula, "Thou art taken with a support; thou art Madhu." The Pratiprasthätṛ takes up with the verse, "Thou art Madhu; thou art Madhava."
13.29.5	Having gone out, the Adhvaryu, having crossed (the altar), having caused to announce, says (to the Hotṛ), "Do thou invoke."
13.29.6	He offers at the Vasat-utterance.
13.29.7	The Adhvaryu turns back.
13.29.8	Having gone out, the Pratiprasthātṛ, having crossed (his altar), having caused (the Hotṛ) to announce, says, "Do thou invoke".
13.29.9	He offers at Vasat-utteran ce.
13.29.10	They should not approach each other. They should cross the door only.
13.29.11	The Adhvaryu goes to the south, the Pratiprasthātṛ to the north, as is well known.
13.29.12	The Pratiprasthātr embraces the Adhvaryu going towards the west with the cup, the Adhvaryū going towards the east with the vessel.
13.29.13	In the same way, he takes up with the subsequent mantras.
13.29.14	The Adhvaryu with the former, the Pratiprathātṛ with the latter.
13.29.15	The Adhvaryu alone takes up the thirteenth cup, with the formula, "Thou art taken with a support; thou art the serpent; for the lord of the house."
13.29.16	It is known that twelve cups are taken up. Some say that thirteen, others say fourteen.
13.29.17	If thirteen cups are taken up, the first two are offered together.
13.29.18	The first two and the last two are together if there are fourteen.
13.30.1	The remaining ones of the former ones should be taken by the latter ones.
13.30.2	The offerings are not made in the proper order.
13.30.3	The Adhvaryu says three times, "Let the Rtu-offerings be made," and the Pratiprasthātṛ says three times.
13.30.4	Turning around, the Adhvaryu and the Pratiprathātṛ say twice, "Let the offerings be made with the Rtus."
13.30.5	The Adhvaryu says once, "Send the cup around with the Rtu-graha." The Pratiprasthātṛ says once.
13.30.6	When he knows that the Adhvaryus are reciting the Yajya, then the Adhvaryu recites, "O Hotṛ, do thou recite this."
13.30.7	When he knows the householder is reciting, then the sacrificer says, "O Hotır, do thou recite."
13.30.8	The Rtu-grahas are without the Vasat-utterance.
13.30.9	The Pratiprasthātṛ pours the Saṃsrava into the Adhvaryu's vessel.
13.30.10	The Adhvaryu takes the Saṃsravas into the Pratiprasthātr's vessel. The Pratiprasthatṛ takes the Saṃsrāva and offers it to the Adhvaryus.
13.30.11	Thus, in due order, the Hotṛ, the Adhvaryu, the Pratiprasthātṛ, the Nestr, the Adhvaryu, the Agnidh, the Pratiprathātṛ, the Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin, the Adhvaṛyu, the Maitrāvaruṇa, the Pratiprathatṛ, the Hotṛ and the Adhvaryus, the Pratipṛṣṭhātṛ, the Neṣṭṛ, the Adhvṛyu, the Acchāvāka, the Pratipraṣṭhātṝ, the Hotṛ alone, the Adhṛyu, the Hotṛ,
13.31.4	By this very (rite) he equips all the weapons.
13.31.5	Then the Hotṛ addresses him, sitting with his knees raised, facing away.
13.31.6	He turns to the right, saying, "Let us rejoice like the Moon."
13.31.7	Standing upright, he responds in the Sadas enclosure, holding the Rtu-vessel, or bowing down.
13.31.8	In the half-verses, he says, "Let us be joyful like the Moon."
13.31.9	"Oṃtha motha motha" is to be recited in the Praṇavas.
13.31.10	One should not recite the Nābhi (verse). It is not lost due to half a verse.
13.31.11	Wherever the Hotṛ pauses, he should say "Oṃtha, motha, motha".
13.31.12	He performs both the Vyāhāras (recitations) with "Śoṃsa, motha, otha, motha."
13.31.13	He recites the Praṇava along with the last Praṇava of the Paridhānīya.
13.31.14	In the same way, he takes up all the weapons, except the vessel.
13.31.15	He consecrates the weapon with the formula, "Thou art the weapon of the weapon."
13.31.16	He consecrates all the weapons with this formula.
13.31.17	Having taken up the weapon, the Adhvaryu takes up the Graha. The Nārāśamsa-cups are taken up.
13.31.18	Having crossed (the altar) and having been invoked, he says, "O Hotr, recite the Yajus for Soma."
13.31.19	He offers at the Vasat-call.
13.32.1	They shake the Vasat-cry and the Anuvṣat-cry at the Nārāśaṃsa-cups.
13.32.2	The mantra for the drinking of Soma at the Indra-graha has been explained.
13.32.3	They drink the Nārāsaṃsa-cups with the verse, "O Soma, the god, drunk by men."
13.32.4	In the same way, they drink the Nārāsamsa-cups at each pressing with the Nārāṃsa-verse.
13.32.5	Having consumed all (the oblations), they nourish (the gods).
13.32.6	The nourishing (of the gods) has been explained.
13.32.7	He takes the Vaiśvadeva (oblation) in the Sukra vessel with the Anuvāka beginning with "Omasas carṣaṇīdhrita".
13.32.8	Here the praise and benediction are performed.
13.32.9	Having given back the benediction, the Adhvaryu takes the cup. The Nārāśamsa oblations are taken.
13.32.10-16	Having crossed (the altar) and having called out, he offers the Hotr's cup with the formula, "To Soma, the Hotr, I offer." He offers at the Vasat-utterance. The Anuprakamana has been explained. The formula for consuming the cup has been explained. The Nārāśaṃsa verses have been explained. All consume, sprinkle and purify. From now onwards, all the cups are consumed at the morning pressing.
13.32.17	Then he takes up the Ukthya (cup).
13.32.18	He takes up the third (cup) in the Ukthya vessel from the Ukthya pot, with the formula, "Thou art taken with a support; for Mitra-Varuna thee."
13.32.19	He then places it (in the cart), with the formula, "This is thy place; for Mitra-Vāruna thee."
13.32.20	He touches the pot again with the formula, “Thou art the renewed oblation.”
13.32.21	The cups beginning with Maitrāvaruṇa are taken up.
13.32.22	The praise and the invocation are performed here.
13.32.23	Having handed over the cup to the Adhvaryu, the Camasādhvaryus take up the cups.
13.32.24	Having crossed (the altar) and having announced, he says, "Do you recite the Yajus for the Soma-offerings."
13.32.25	At the Vasat-utterance they offer.
13.32.26	The Adhvaryu pours the drops into the Maitrāvaruṇa goblet with the formula, "For the gods thee, for the divine life I pour thee, for the life of the sacrifice."
13.33.1	If one desires, "May the Adhvaryu be united with the fame of the sacrifice," then he should do as prescribed.
13.33.2	The Camasins consume the goblets as prescribed with the verse, "May the Mandra be victorious."
13.33.3	Thus he proceeds, eating, with the two Uthyas, which are the last ones.
13.33.4	He pours the drops of Soma into each of the principal cups.
13.33.5	The principal cup of the Brahman-praiser is the second, and the principal cup of the Acchāvāka is the third.
13.33.6	This explains the order of the sacrificers.
13.33.7	The Brahmana-chanter's taking and placing of the cup is with the formula, "To Indra thee." The formula for consuming is, "To Indra and Agni thee." The formula of the Prastotṛ is, "To the Maruts thee." The formula at consuming is, "The Maruts are the overlords."
13.33.8	Having taken the last cup of the Ukthya-cup, he does not touch the pot.
13.33.9	Having placed the Ukthya vessel, he takes the Sodashin with the verse, "O Indra, do thou mount the chariot, the slayer of Vrtra." Or with the subsequent Anuvaka.
13.33.10	He may take it as the last of the Dhara-grahas.
13.33.11	In this way, at each Savana, he takes the Sodaśin with the subsequent Anukaka.
13.33.12	Having taken up the Sodashin cup, he directs (the Adhvaryu) to bring up the Soma-cups, to bring down the Dronakalaśa, to bring down Pūtabhṛt, to bring down all the Soma-cups in the cups, to press the two Kalasas ten times and to pour down.
13.33.13	Having drunk the Soma at the morning pressing, he says, "O Ukthasas!"
13.33.14	Having offered the oblation with the formula, "May Agni protect us at the morning pressing," he instructs the Prastotar: "Recite."
13.33.15	The Prastotar says, "Let us go."
13.33.16	The morning pressing comes to an end.
14.1.1	We shall explain the Madhyamdina Savana.
14.1.2	Its procedure has been explained in the morning pressing.
14.1.3	We shall now explain the modifications.
14.1.4	Then he instructs the Pratiprasthātṛ to offer the Savanīya oblations.
14.1.5	Having filled the Hotr's vessel with the Vasatīvari waters, he makes the sacrificer recite the Nigrābha verses as in the morning Savanīya.
14.1.6	Having placed the entire royal Soma on the Adhiṣavaṇa skin, he gives the Uṣṇīsa to the Gravastut.
14.1.7	The Gravastut should recite after the Pratiprasthatṛ has been instructed.
14.1.8	They sprinkle the great sprinkling as at the morning pressing.
14.1.9	They sprinkle, saying, "Here is the difference, here is the difference."
14.1.10	At the middle repetition of the great sprinkling they sprinkle, saying, “Brihat.”
14.1.11	Then at the last repetition they sprinkle, saying as if they were giving, "Here is, here is, here is."
14.1.12	In the highest rite, the king is consecrated, the Pratiprasthātṛ is not consecrated. The Gravas praise, saying, "The gods are Gravas, Indra is Indra." They have chosen Indra, the highest, the farthest, from this place of assembly, from the sky, from the heaven, they have sent forth the well-being, the Brahmic lustre. They have sent forth to me. In the battle, he has slain the Rakshas. The Brahman-fee has been removed.
14.1.13	The same as the time of the Grahas.
14.1.14	He takes the Soma first from the Sukra and Manthinī vessels.
14.1.15	He takes from three streams of Soma.
14.1.16	He pours the king of Soma from the Aghamarana vessel into another vessel, and makes a second stream, and a third stream for sprinkling.
14.1.17	Having taken the Avritokthya Soma for the Ukthya sacrifice,
14.2.1	With the two vessels of the seasons he takes the Marutvatīya cups, first with the Adhvaryu's vessel, with the formula, "The bull, the Marutvant, the grown up," and then with the Pratiprasthātṛ's vessel, "O Indra, protect the Soma here, O Marutvant."
14.2.2	He consecrates the king in the Dronakalaśa as much as he thinks fit for the Madhyamdina Savana.
14.2.3	The Pavamāna is common.
14.2.4	The Pratiñca reciters move along the Madhyandina Pavamāna, the Triṣṭubh path, the Rudras as the deity, by the path of the wolf, the one who is not to be overcome. May we go to the Rudras safely. The voice goes first, may it go in front.
14.2.5	Having gone around the Havirdhāna-shed on the north, the Marjālīya on the south, and having entered the Sadas through the eastern door, the Adhvaryu stands in front of the Hotr's seat. Having crossed the Praśāstṛ's seat, he stands in front of it.
14.2.6	He is praised with the Madhyandina Pavamāna hymn.
14.2.7	While being praised, the sacrificer murmurs the Anvarohana formula, "You are Suparna, the Tristubh metre."
14.2.8	Upto the announcement.
14.2.9	Here he does not urge the animal, nor does he stand near the king. He bows down at the end of the instruction, "O Pratiprasthātṛ, come with the Dadhigraha."
14.2.10	Up to the distribution of the Savanīya oblations, it is the same.
14.2.11	One who is going to offer the Savanīya oblations offers the animal-oblation to Agni at the Agniṣṭoma, to Indra-Agni at the Ukthya, the second, to Indra at the Ṣoḍaśin, the third, and to Sarasvati at the Atiratra, the fourth.
14.2.12	Then he offers the Savanīyas.
14.2.13	The Payasyā is not different from this in the two later Savanas.
14.2.14	The offering of the Savanīya oblations, the spreading of the sacrificial grass, the adorning, the placing of the Grahas, the approaching, and the crawling have been explained.
14.2.15	He performs with the Dadhi-gharma.
14.2.16	He takes curd in the Audumbary ladle at the Āgnidhra fire, with the verse, "As much as the heaven and earth are great."
14.3.1	Then he places it on the Āgnīdhra (fire). "May speech and mind unite thee; may breath and out-breath unite thee; may sight and hearing unite thee; may skill and strength unite thee; may vigour and power unite thee; may life and old age unite thee; may the body and the frame unite thee. Thou art united; thou art united for the united; for thee who art united."
14.3.2	Then he instructs the Hotṛ, saying, "Speak what you have to say."
14.3.3	When he knows, he says, "If it is cooked, then offer; if not cooked, then drink." Then he says, "The oblation is cooked."
14.3.4	Having stepped over, he announces, "Offer the Dadhigharma."
14.3.5	When the Vasat-call is made, he offers with the formula, "To that Indra whom they call Varuna, whom they call Mitra, whom they call Satya, who is the deity of deities, born of Tapas, to him thee, to them thee, Svāhā."
14.3.6	Having offered the second oblation at the Anuvṣat-call, he destroys the oblation.
14.3.7	Those who eat the Pravargya eat him. The mantra for eating is in the Aranyaka.
14.3.8	There is no Dadhigharma in the non-Pravargya. This is another view.
14.3.9	Then he prepares the Savanīya oblations.
14.3.10	Having performed with the Pasupurodāsa, he proceeds with the Savanīyas.
14.3.11	"Thus much is the offering of the midday pressing. Recite the Puronuvākyās for Indra at the midday pressing. Send forth the cooked rice for Indra at the mid-day pressing." Thus he instructs.
14.3.12	The Svishtakrit offerings of all the animal-sacrifices and cooked rice are similar. The instruction is similar.
14.3.13	There is no animal-sacrifice at the Savanīya pressing. This is another view.
14.3.14	The Adhvaryu pours down the Ādhavanīya water.
14.3.15	The same as the call.
14.3.16	The call is the same as the call, except that the call for the Madhyamdina Savana is "For the entire portion of the Madhyamdinsavana, for the Sukravat and Manthivat, for the Madhuchuta."
14.3.17	The same as when the Soma is brought back.
14.3.18	The Acchāvāka consecrates before the Agnidhra.
14.3.19	Here the priest does not place a portion of the cake for the Acchāvāka.
14.3.20	The Soma-drinkers drink from the cups as from a cup.
14.3.21	This is the mantra for drinking Soma at the Madhyandina pressing, except for the Nārāśaṃsa verses.
14.3.22	Having drunk all, they make it grow.
14.3.23	The making to grow has been explained. The making to grow is the making to grow.
14.4.1	Having spread the Nārāśaṃsa grass, having gone around to the north of the Havirdhāna, to the north of Agnidhriya, to the north and then to the east of the Sadas, having entered through the eastern door, having sat down facing the eastern door, taking four spoonfuls of clarified butter in the Juhu, having bound a gold piece with Darbha grass, he places it.
14.4.2	The summoning, addressing, and dismissal of the ministers have been explained in the context of the Vaisarjana rites.
14.4.3	Having placed the ladle and the staff at the end of the garments, one offers the Dakshina oblations.
14.4.4	With the two verses "Udu tyam citram" one offers at the Garhapatya.
14.4.5	Taking another four spoonfuls,
14.4.6	"Go to heaven, O lord of wealth!" Having offered gold, he takes it.
14.4.7	Then they stand to the south of the altar with the gifts, viz. a hundred and twelve cows, sesamum, masha-pulse, cooked rice, curds, a goat, a sheep, a garment, gold, a chariot, a horse, an elephant, a man. Some say twenty-one, some twenty-four, some unlimited, some all the Veda, some all the world.
14.4.8	The sacrificer, carrying gold and ghee, approaches with the gifts. "He says, "I approach with your form, with your age."
14.4.9	" "May Tutha, the knower of all, divide you." He enters the middle.
14.4.10	Then having frightened them with a black antelope skin, he takes them away, either having divided them or not having divided them, with the front towards the east, the rear towards the middle of the Sadas, between the Hotṛ and the Agnīdhra.
14.4.11	He releases them between the east and the Catvāla and the Agnīdha.
14.4.12	He recites the verse, "This is your gift, O Agni, that has fallen from Soma." He recites this verse at the end of the verse, "Leading us on the path of the sacrifice, leading us on the path to prosperity."
14.5.1	The Agnidhra offers this clarified butter with the verse, "O Agni, lead us on the good path."
14.5.2	If a chariot, horse, or garment is given, one should offer with the second Varuna offering, "He spread the sky over the forests."
14.5.3	If one is about to give an elephant or a man, one should offer the third Prajapati offering.
14.5.4	To the first Ātreya he gives gold, to the middle one, to the last one, say some; to the last one only, say others. "Today I shall give to the Brahman, to the Rishi, to the son of the Rishi."
14.5.5	If he does not find an Ātreya, he should give to one who is a son of the Rishi and belongs to the collection of verses.
14.5.6	To the Agnidhra he gives the Agroprabaraṇa, the Sarvasutra, and a goat.
14.5.7	Then he should not think too much about the proper Dakṣiṇā to be given to Brahmā. He should give it thus.
14.5.8	Then to the Udgātṛs and Hotṛs.
14.5.9	To the Adhvaryus seated in the Havirdhāna.
14.5.10	At the end, he gives to the Pratihartṛ.
14.5.11	Half to those with half, one-third to those with one-third, one-fourth to those with one fourth. They are explained in the twelve-day (ritual).
14.5.12	Having given to the priests, he gives to the Prasarpaka-carriers.
14.5.13	They sit down inside the Sadas on the southern side of the Prsthya.
14.5.14	He gives to one who knows the meaning of the Veda, not to one who does not know the meaning of the Vedic texts; he gives to one who is a Vedic scholar.
14.5.15	It is known that the gift goes to him to whom it is given, not to Kaṇva or Kaśyapa, not to one who has approached for the sake of knowledge, not to one out of fear, not to one begging, but to one who begs.
14.5.16	One gives a gift to a brahmin who is a student, who is seated within the altar.
14.5.17	Even to a non-brahmin who is ignorant, a gift may be given.
14.6.1	He should give the cow to the person whom he hates, along with other wealth.
14.6.2	From where should one give? From the twelve hundred. Some say from one of the two.
14.6.3	One should look at the assembly, saying, "Look at the sky and the space."
14.6.4	The Adhvaryu, having taken the Dakṣiṇā, recites the verse, "May the gods go to our patrons" (Taitt. Sam. 1. 5. 10. 1), as the remaining part of the Anuvāka.
14.6.5	At the Agnidhra-chamber, he offers five oblations to Viśvakarman with the verses, "The sages have afflicted the lord of sacrifice" (Taitti. Sam. 2. 1.
14.6.6	He places the horns of the black antelope in the sacrificial grass. The remedy for the head of the deer is on the head. The remedy for a disease is in the good field. He has removed the disease. The deer has gone away from you with its four feet. The knot of the horn is here. What is in the heart is in the ankle. What is in its heart is in the ankles. With these two.
14.6.7	Then he instructs the Indra-Maruts, saying, "Recite after me."
14.6.8	When the Indra-Marut has been recited, then it is not given. The Homa of the Anubandhya Avapāyas is performed.
14.6.9	The Adhvaryu takes the previously taken (material), the Pratiprasthātā takes the later (material).
14.6.10	Having transgressed, he announces, "For Indra-Maruts to be sent."
14.6.11	At the Vasat-utterance, they offer.
14.6.12	Some recite the Marutvatīya verses with the Vasat call, some without the Vasat call. Some recite the Maruta verses with the Vasad call, some without it.
14.6.13	They are recited in accordance with the seasons.
14.6.14	They consume the oblation with the Pratiprasthātṛ.
14.6.15	Here only, having placed the vessel, the Adhvaryu takes the Soma with his own vessel, with the verse, "O Indra, the bull, for fighting, O Maruts, the best, the most excellent, the most powerful."
14.6.16	Here the Sastra is recited.
14.6.17	Beginning with the Rtu-vessel, he recites the Sastra.
14.6.18	Having recited the Sastra, the Adhvaryu takes the Soma. The Nārāśamsa-grahas are taken.
14.6.19-25	Having crossed over, he recites the Hotr-sutra, "O Soma, do thou be pressed." He offers at the Vasat-utterance. The Anuprakamana (verse) has been explained. The Graha-offering formula has been explained. The Nārāśaṃsa verses have been explained. Having consumed all (the Soma), they make it swell. The swelling and placing (of the Soma) has been explained.
14.7.1	He takes the Mahendra cup with the verse, "O Indra, the great, who bestows strength." With this Anuvaka or with the next one.
14.7.2	Here the praise and benediction are performed.
14.7.3	Having arranged the praise, he instructs, "The sprinklers sprinkle, the pestles are lifted up, the Agnid is instructed to place the ladle, and the Soma is taken from the Soma-vessel."
14.7.4-6	Here one should sprinkle the Soma for the third pressing, one should offer the Soma for the Savanīya oblations, one should offer Soma for the Sāvitra oblation, one should offer Sāvitra Soma, one should offer Savanīya Soma, one should make the offering of the Savanīyas, one should offer to Savitr, one should offer for Savitr, one who is going to offer should offer to Savitā, one should offer in the Savanīyīya manner, one should offer at the Savanīyā, one should offer with the Savanīyak formulas, one should offer according to the Savanīyokas, one should offer as Savanīya, one should offer what is Savanīya. The Adhvaryu takes up the cup after having taken up the weapon. The Nārāśaṃsa cups are taken up. The Atigrahya cups are taken up.
14.7.7	He offers at the Vasat-utterance.
14.7.8	The Anuprakamana (offering) has been explained.
14.7.9	Then they offer the Atigrahya offerings with these mantras in the proper order, "O Agni, you are lustrous..."
14.7.10	The mantra for consuming the Graha has been explained. Here is the corrected and aligned text:
14.7.11	Then they consume the Atigrahya with these mantras, "In me be wisdom, in me be progeny..." in the proper order.
14.7.12	The Nārāśaṃsa hymns have been explained.
14.7.13	All of them consume.
14.7.14	They nourish and cleanse.
14.7.15	From here onwards, the Madhyandina cups are consumed.
14.7.16	Then he takes up the Ukthya (cup) as in the morning pressing.
14.7.17	The difference is only this much: "Indrāya tvā" is said everywhere.
14.7.18	The Indran mantra is for consuming.
14.7.19	At that time he takes up the Sodashin cup.
14.7.20	Having taken up the Sodashina cup, he instructs (the Hotr) to bring the Soma-cups, the Dronakalaśa, the Puta-cup, the Avakāśa-cup, the Rajana-cup, and the Kalasa-cups. Having pressed the Soma ten times, he says, "Pour out."
14.7.21	Having drunk the Soma at the Madhyandina pressing, he says, "Oktā vācī" (the speech has been uttered).
14.7.22	Having offered the oblation with the verse, "All the gods, Maruts, Indra, etc." he instructs, "O Prasuti, go ahead."
14.7.23	The instructor says, "Go ahead."
14.7.24	The Madhyandina Savana comes to an end.
14.8.1	We shall explain the third Savana.
14.8.2	If there are many inside the altar, then one should take up the Aditya.
14.8.3	If his enemy were to perform a Soma sacrifice, he should stand outside the altar until the sun rises.
14.8.4	If his enemy were to start a Soma sacrifice, then he should take the sun while standing inside the altar.
14.8.5	Having closed the doors of the Havirdhāna and the Sadas, he takes the third portion in the Aditya-vessel from the Aditya-vessel. With these three verses, "Thou art never a thorn."
14.8.6	He first takes Soma, then the curds from the cooked milk, and then Soma. It is understood that he takes curds in the middle with the Tristubh metre.
14.8.7	"He should sprinkle him with the divine rain, saying, 'With the divine rain I sprinkle you.' He should sprinkle him with curd on top, if he desires rain. He should not take curd from the middle."
14.8.8	Having placed the Sudavada vessel containing the Soma in the sacrificial place, he places it in the Soma-pressing house. He places the Upamshu-savan vessel in the Soma-press house. He says, "O Vivasvat Aditya, this is your Soma drink."
14.8.9	If the drop falls immediately after taking up that knowledge, then there will be heavy rain. If it does not rain for a long time, then there will not be heavy rain.
14.8.10	The Adhvaryu stands holding the Soma without placing it, saying, "May the sun god protect me from the gods."
14.8.11	Then he instructs the Adityas, the beloved, the beloved ones, the ones with beloved vows, the lords of the great ocean, the overseers of the sky, to recite.
14.9.1	The sacrificer follows the Adityas with the verse, "I am beyond, I am below."
14.9.2	Having sprinkled with darbha grass, he says, "From the ocean, from the sky."
14.9.3	Having covered with darbha-grass, he comes out, reciting, "The wise one spreads the path of the sacrifice."
14.9.4	Having crossed over, he announces, "To the beloved Adityas, to those who have a beloved abode, to those who follow a beloved vow, to the lords of the great ocean, to the rulers of the sky, to the beloved ones."
14.9.5	He casts the darbha-blades into the fire with the verse, "O Agni, whatever are thy all-embracing oblations."
14.9.6	He offers at the Vasat-utterance, looking elsewhere, and does not utter the Anuvṣat.
14.9.7	He should not look after offering.
14.9.8	One desiring rain should offer with the verse, “Agni, do thou raise up the earth."
14.9.9	Having placed the Sūda-vessel and the Āditya-vessel in the Āyatanas, he instructs the Pratiprasthātṛ to offer the Savanīya oblations.
14.9.10	Having filled the Hotr's vessel with Vasatīvarī water, he makes the sacrificer recite the Nigrābha formula as at the morning pressing.
14.9.11	Having poured out a portion of the Upāṁśu vessel into the Rājīṣa vessel, they pour out the Mahābhīṣa vessel as at the morning pressing.
14.9.12	It is similar till the time of taking up the Grahas.
14.9.13	Here he does not take up the Sukra and Amāthina vessels.
14.9.14	He takes up the Āgrayana from four streams.
14.9.15	Having poured the king of Soma from the Āgrayana vessel into another vessel, he pours the second stream from the Aditya vessel and the third from the Aditya vessel.
14.10.1	He takes the Avritokthya Soma from the Ukthya vessel if it is in the Ukthya state.
14.10.2	The sacrificer and the wife churn the fire in the Agnidhra chamber. Some say that the wife churns the fire in the wife's chamber.
14.10.3	The sacrificer enters through the eastern door, and the wife enters through the western door to churn the fire in her chamber.
14.10.4	The sacrificer, together with his wife, bows down his head to the Pure Servant, having done what was to be done before the Pavamāna cups, with these four verses: "The gods have healed us for beauty."
14.10.5	The same as from the Pavamāna cup.
14.10.6	The Pratiñca priests, bowing down, follow the Pavamāna (chant) in the Ārbhava metre, the path of the Jāgata (chant). The gods are the Ādityas. The path is the one which is not to be crossed. One should go to the Ādityās with welfare. The voice goes first. It should go first.
14.10.7	The Madhyandina Pavamāna is explained as the path of the Ārbhava (chant).
14.10.8	While being praised, the sacrificer recites the Anvarohana verse: "The Jagatī metre is full of food."
14.10.9	The same till the sending forth.
14.10.10	The Pratiprasthātṛ bows down till the sending forth of the animal with the words, "Do thou send forth the animal."
14.10.11	The same till the carrying of the Dhishnyas.
14.10.12	He carries the Dhishnyās with the Śālikās.
14.11.1	We shall explain the sprinkling above.
14.11.2	One may also carry them there only.
14.11.3	The pouring of the Savanīya cups, the spreading of the sacrificial grass, the adorning, the placing of the cups, the moving forward and the moving back have been explained.
14.11.4	One proceeds with the animal sacrifice and the Iḍā-oblation.
14.11.5	He is offered at all the Savanas or at the third Savana.
14.11.6	Having proceeded with the animal sacrifice, one proceeds with the Savanīyas.
14.11.7	"This much is different in the third pressing. Recite the Puronuvākyās for Indra at the third pressing." Having thus instructed, he says, "Send forth the cooked rice for Indra at the Third Pressing."
14.11.8	The Svishtakrit has been explained. So also the Ida.
14.11.9	The Adhavanīya Purohita pours out the Pūtabhṛt.
14.11.10	Up to the instruction, it is common.
14.11.11	Having taken the Hotr's cup, he says, "Having been honoured, having been honoured by the third pressing, by the one who is honoured, by the one honoured by all, by the one honouring, by the one worthy of honour, by the one possessing strength, by Savitr, by Brihaspati, by the All-gods, by the one having fierce blessings, for Indra, the Soma-juices are being sent forth." This is the instruction.
14.11.12	At the Vasat-utterance, they offer, saying, "To the hawk, the one who goes, svāhā."
14.11.13	When the second (offering) is consecrated with the Anuvṣat-formula, he offers it himself with the formula, "Salutations to the self-offered."
14.11.14	In the same way, he offers the subsequent offerings with the subsequent formulas.
14.11.15	When all have been offered, he concludes with the formula, "May they be satisfied with the Homa of honey and ghee."
14.11.16	All eat together.
14.11.17	He places the portions of the sacrificial cake for offering.
14.11.18	As the Camasa-drinkers drink from the Camasa, so the Soma-god, the lord of the assembly, is the sun. This is the mantra for drinking at the third pressing, except for the Nārāśaṃsa hymns.
14.11.19	The deities are indicated again in the offerings that are raised.
14.11.20	Having drunk all, they are nourished.
14.11.21	The offering of the Apāyanas has been explained.
14.12.1	Having placed three pieces of the Purorasa in their respective cups, they offer them.
14.12.2	The mantras beginning with "This is yours" and ending with "Those who follow you" are recited as in the Pindapitryajna.
14.12.3	One should offer to the Pitrs of one's own family. This is one view. The sacrificer alone should recite the mantras. The others should offer silently, placing the oblations. This is another view.
14.12.4	With the Antaryama vessel, he takes Savitr from the Agrayaṇa with the verse, "O Savitr, today..."
14.12.5	He does not place it.
14.12.6	Then he instructs the deity Savitr, saying, "Recite."
14.12.7	Having stepped across and announced, he says, "For Savitr, the deity, to be offered."
14.12.8	At the Vasat-utterance, he offers; one does not offer a second Vasat.
14.12.9	In that vessel with remnants, the Pūtabhṛt priests take the Vaiśvadev offering, saying, "You are taken with a support. You are well-protected, you are well-established."
14.12.10	The Sastra says this.
14.12.11	When he knows that he is one and ten, then the Pratiprasthātṛ, having washed the two-deity vessels, places them on the wooden mortar.
14.12.12	When he comes to know that the heaven and earth are pleased with the sacrifices, then he recites the other-than-the-Moḍa verse, "The heaven and earth are delighted with the sacrifices."
14.12.13	The Adhvaryu takes up the Soma-graha after having given back the weapon. He takes up the Nārāśaṃsa cups.
14.12.14	Having crossed (the altar) and having announced, he says (to the Hotr), "Do thou recite the Yajus for the Hotr-cup."
14.12.15	He offers at the Vasat-utterance.
14.12.16	The Anuprakamana is explained.
14.12.17	He recites the formula for consuming the Soma-grahas taken with the Savitr and Visve Devī verses.
14.12.18	The Nārāsaṃsa cups are explained.
14.12.19	All consume.
14.12.20	They do not sprinkle and sweep.
14.12.21	From now on, the cups are used at the third pressing.
14.13.1	Then he offers a rice-pap to Soma, either together with the Soma-offerings or separately.
14.13.2	Having approached it, having taken up the clarified butter as it was taken, having crossed (the altar), having announced (the offering), he says, "Do you recite the yajus for the clarified butter."
14.13.3	At the Vasat-utterance he makes the offering.
14.13.4	Here only, having sat down, having taken up the sacred thread, he offers the first portion of Soma with his hand and the second portion with the spoon.
14.13.5	Having poured over (the Soma), having gone beyond towards the north, having announced (to the Hotṛ), he says, "Do thou offer Soma."
14.13.6	At the Vasat-utterance, he makes the offering in the southern half.
14.13.7	Having sat down here itself, having put on the sacrificial thread, having touched water, having taken the clarified butter as taken, having gone beyond, having announced, he says, "One should offer clarified butter."
14.13.8	He offers at the Vaṣaṭ-utterance.
14.13.9	Some prescribe the Parijya rite for either of them.
14.13.10	Having filled the rice with clarified butter, they take it to the Udgātṛs.
14.13.11	They look at him, saying, "What is that here?"
14.13.12	If he is not dead, he looks around. If he were dead, he would look around, saying, "Where has my mind gone?" with this verse.
14.13.13	One who has eaten food when one is sick, one who has eaten food out of desire for food, one who is fit to eat food but does not eat it, is known as one who has eaten.
14.13.14	Having taken up the ghee in the ladle from the new pot, he sprinkles the blazing Dhishnyas.
14.13.15	Having placed the Vyāghāraṇa Sampāta, he takes the Pātnīvata from the Āgrayana with the Upāṃśu vessel, saying, "You are taken with a formula for Bṛhaspati's son, O Soma, for Indra, for the one with Indra's power, I take the Pātnîvata cup."
14.13.16	The Adhvaryu, having crossed (the altar) and having recited the Vyāghāraṇa-formula, offers the Pātnīvata-cup with the formula, "Do thou offer the Pātnîvata-cup to Agni."
14.13.17	He offers at the Vasat-utterance with the formula, “O Agni, do thou be united with thy wife."
14.13.18	Some recite the Pātnivata-cup with the Vasat-call, some without the Vasat- call. Some say, "One should recite the Vasat-verse in a low tone."
14.14.1	The Adhvaryu, having taken up the oblations, makes the Nestr to sit down near the fire. The Nestr makes the wife to sit down. The Udgātṛ makes the Hotr's goblet and other goblets to be filled. The Hotr's goblets are placed in the Dhruva. The entire king is placed in the goblets. Having cleansed the two pitchers with ten (verses), the Udgātṛ, having made the wife to sit facing downwards, makes her to be counted. He makes her to be turned towards the east.
14.14.2	They do as they are told.
14.14.3	The Agnidhra, having gone forth without the Nestr and the Dhishniya, eats (the cake) with the formula, "Thou art eaten by Agni."
14.14.4	Having kindled the Dhishniyas, he performs the Stotra of the Yagyayajniya.
14.14.5	The priests and the sacrificer, with their ears covered, show the navel as if it were a fire.
14.14.6	The Udgātṛ recites the Hīṅkāra, and the Prati-Udgātṛ recitess the Pātnīvata upto the three Stotriya verses, saying, "To thee, O all-knowing, O all-seeing, O all-ruling."
14.14.7	Placing the right thigh naked, the wife moves the woollen garment with her thigh upto the three Upasads, saying, "Thou hast gone to the gods," with the Anuvāka, revealing the genitals.
14.14.8	He makes the Prachi and Upaprachi flow towards the east or towards the west, according to some.
14.14.9	When the Stotra is completed, he takes up the Sastra.
14.14.10	When he knows that this is sweet and that is sweet, he recites both of them together, saying "Mada, Mada, like a Madu, Mada, Mada, like Madu" till the end of the recitation.
14.14.11	Where the serpent-born one knows, may he hear in this verse of the Visvedevas, being recited, or in the Pari-dhāniya verse, being recited once, the Pratiprasthātṛ, about to pour the Dhruva into the Hotṛ's goblet, stands up with the formula, "Thou art the past, do thou bestow on me the past."
14.14.12	Then he takes him in his hands, saying, "I take thee in the hands of Heaven and Earth."
14.14.13	He carries him, saying, "May all the gods, the Vaishvanaras, carry thee."
14.15.1	Standing facing east, he pours the Dhruva into the Hotr's goblet, saying, "The Dhruva into Dhruva," with the remainder of the Anuvaka.
14.15.2	Then, sitting facing east, he pours down in the reverse order, according to some.
14.15.3	He pours down a continuous stream until the cutting of the Soma.
14.15.4	Having handed over the Soma, the Adhvaryu takes up the Grahas and the Camasadhvaryus take up the cups.
14.15.5	Having crossed over and having been invoked, he says, "O Hotr, recite the Yagas for the Soma."
14.15.6	At the Vasat-utterance, they offer.
14.15.7	The formula for the consuming of the cup is "As the cup-holders consume the cup, so may I consume the cup that has been drunk by Agni Vaiśvānara."
14.15.8	Then he worships the sun, saying, "You are the best of rays, the most auspicious. Give me life and strength. May I come to you." It is understood that he takes the name of what he desires.
14.15.9	Thus indeed, if it is an Agniṣṭoma.
14.15.10	If it is an Ukthya, then having taken the king into the cups, having churned the two pitchers with ten (cups), one should say, "Pour down." This is omitted in the case of the instruction.
14.15.11	While taking the Agniṣṭoma cups, he takes the king beyond three groups of cups.
14.15.12	Then he takes up the Ukthya cup as at the morning pressing.
14.15.13	"The two cups of Indra-Varuna and Indra-Brhaspati are taken up by the Maitrāvaruṇa and the Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin respectively, and the cup of Indra-Viṣṇu by the Acchāvāka. Thus he recites the formulas for consuming the Soma."
14.15.14	Thus indeed, if it is the Ukthya.
14.15.15	If it is the Sodasin, then when taking up the cups for the Acchāvāka, he pours the Soma over the cup of the king, then at that time he takes up the Sodasin.
14.15.16	Or he should take it here only from the Agrayaṇa, not from the former two pressings.
14.15.17	It is understood that one should take from the Agniṣṭoma cup of the king.
14.15.18	One should take from the cups of the Agniṣṭomahomas immediately after that.
14.15.19	He takes up the cups beginning with the Hotr's cup.
14.15.20	Here the Stomas and Sastras are performed.
14.16.1	When the sun has set, he performs the Stotra of the Sodashin with gold.
14.16.2	They hold a horse in front, reddish-yellow or dark.
14.16.3	He praises with gold.
14.16.4	The praise, the invocation, and the offering are like the horse.
14.16.5	He approaches the Sodashin (oblation) with the verse, "No one is born after him, who has entered all the worlds, the Prajapati, in union with progeny. He moves with the three luminaries, he is the Sodashin."
14.16.6	He recites the verse, "Otha, like a joy, like a joy," in the reverse order.
14.16.7	The Adhvaryu takes up the weapon and the Graha. The Camasadharus take up the cups.
14.16.8	Having crossed (the altar) and having announced, he says, "Do you recite the Yajus for the Soma-offerings."
14.16.9	At the Vasat-utterance they offer.
14.16.10	He offers the sixteen-fold oblation, saying, "Indra is the lord, you are the lord of the gods. Make me the lord, the long-lived, the radiant, among men."
14.16.11	As the Chamasa-drinkers drink the Chamasa, Indra the overlord and Varuna the king, they have made this the first oblation. I eat of their oblation, may the speech be pleased with the Soma.
14.16.12	A reddish-brown horse is the fee. Or a mare.
14.16.13	This is indeed the sixteenth (verse).
14.16.14	Now if the Atiratra is performed with sixteen cups, then when he pours out the king from the group of thirteen cups,
14.16.15	he touches each cup with the formula, "To Indra, to Apisharvaras."
14.16.16	He pours out the Hotr's cup.
14.16.17	Here the praise and eulogy are performed.
14.16.18	The Adhvaryu takes up the weapon and the Graha. The Camasadharus take up the cups.
14.16.19	Having crossed (the altar) and having announced, he says, "Do you recite the Yajus for the Soma-offerings."
14.16.20	At the Vasat-utterance they offer.
14.16.21	They consume the cups as per the rule of the cup.
14.16.22	He recites the formula for consuming, "The Indra-cup is in the Anushtup metre."
14.16.23	Thus is the group of the first cup.
14.17.1	Thus are the other three groups of cups arranged. The second group of cups is headed by the Maitrāvaruṇa cup, the third by the Brāhmaṇācchaṃsa cup, and the fourth by the Āchāvāka cup.
14.17.2	Thus the order of the sacrificial formulas and verses is explained.
14.17.3	Thus ends the first night section.
14.17.4	Thus are the other two arranged.
14.17.5	He places the Hotr's goblet and the other goblets at the junction.
14.17.6	The Stotra is of three verses.
14.17.7	The Asvinya is the last hymn.
14.17.8	It is known that it is placed after the rising of the sun.
14.17.9	He offers the Asvinya cake on two potsherds.
14.17.10	He cooks the cake with water that has been purified with the Yajus.
14.17.11	Having spread the sacrificial grass and smeared it with flour, he places it.
14.17.12	Having taken up the weapon and having placed the sacrificial cake, he instructs (the sacrificer) to recite the formula, "Do you recite the formula for the Soma-juices of the two Asvins."
14.17.13	The Adhvaryu takes up the Soma-cup, the Camasādhvaryus take up the cups, and the Pratiprasthātṛ takes up the sacrificial cake.
14.17.14	Having crossed over the Aśvins, having gone beyond the Soma-draughts of the Tirahīniya day, having sent forth the Soma-draught, he says, "Let it be offered."
14.17.15	When the Vasat-call is uttered, the Pratiprasthātṛ offers the entire cake with the Somas.
14.17.16	He recites the formula for consuming the oblation, "The oblation of the Aśvins is in the form of a Paṅkti."
14.17.17	This indeed is the case if it is an Atiratra.
14.17.18	Now if the Aptoiryāma is to be performed, then while taking up the cups for the Soma-pressing, he takes up the king's cup in excess of the four groups of cups.
14.18.1	Here the four Stotras, four Sastras, the Asvinas with their offerings are prescribed.
14.18.2	The procedure of these is explained by the cups for the union.
14.18.3	The first group of cups is headed by the Hotr's cup, the second by the Maitrāvaruṇa's cup, third by the Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin's cup, and fourth by the Acchāvāka's cup.
14.18.4	Thus the order of the instruments and the verses has been explained.
14.18.5	Having received the third pressing, he says, "The eulogy is for Indra."
14.18.6	The Adhvaryu recites the formula for consuming the oblation, "O Agni, thou art the most excellent, the most excellent among the gods."
14.18.7	Then he instructs, "O Agni-bearer, bring the sacrificial grass and the sacrificial grass-blades."
14.18.8	Upto the taking up of the enclosing sticks, it is common.
14.18.9	Having taken up the enclosing sticks, the Unnetr takes up the Harīyajana grass.
14.18.10	When he is about to take up the Soma-juice in the Droṇa-vessel, he instructs (the Hotṛ) to recite the Dānasomā formula to Indra, the giver of wealth.
14.18.11	He takes it up with the formula, "Thou art taken with a support. Thou art Hari, the giver of Hari."
14.18.12	Having sprinkled it with many Dānas, having stepped across and having called (the Hotṛ), he says, "Do thou recite the Dāṇasomā formulas to Indra, the bestower of wealth, for the Soma-juice that has been started."
14.18.13	Having placed the oblation on the head at the Vasat-utterance, he offers, reciting, "The oblations of the tawny ones are tawny, with Soma, to Indra, svāhā."
14.18.14	The sacrificer recites the formula of offering, "Whatever harm has befallen me, may Agni again heal it," with two verses.
14.18.15	Then all the priests, having offered the invocation to the Udgātṛ, and having broken the Soma, and having made the troughs low, and having eaten the flesh of the animal offered to Agni, they say, "O god Soma, we have offered to thee."
14.19.1	They pour the remaining Soma on the northern altar, saying, "May it be filled; may it fill me."
14.19.2	They throw three pieces each into the fire with the formulas, "Thou art the expiation for the sin committed by the gods."
14.19.3	In the case of those who have only one cow left, having placed a bunch of green grass, having made it sharp, having spread it like a broom, they sniff it towards the east beyond the Cātvāla with the verse, "O Soma, thou art purified in water."
14.19.4	The remaining (bricks) he places within the altar. Some say, "I send you to the sea, go to your own womb. May our heroes be unharmed and superior to others. Do not injure our own."
14.19.5	The Anumantrayiṇī recites the verse, "May the Maruts, the guardians, come to you with the hymn, the one who is sprinkled with the waters, for the sake of progeny. You are the singers, the protectors of life. May you always protect us with blessings."
14.19.6	Having entered the Agnidhra's chamber, they consume the drops of curds with the verse, "I have performed the rite of Dadhikrāvṇa."
14.19.7	Then they release the friendship, those who have come to know the Tānūnaptr. The two young poets are true, they are the lords of truth. O lord of truth, we release the friendships.
14.19.8	Then they perform the marriage of the wives.
14.19.9	The same as the Samitsyayajus.
14.19.10	Having taken up the ghee in the ladle, he offers nine Samīṣṭyajyus, "May Dhātā, Rati, Savitā accept this." The three Yajus of this Anuvāka are offered together in one place.
14.19.11	It is known that one offers continuously.
14.19.12	At the place of the steps of Vishnu, he recites the verses beginning with "I conquer the army with Agni, the god" and ending with "With Vishnu's stride".
14.19.13	Having offered the oblation with the verse "This is the third pressing of the poets", he instructs the Prasuti.
14.19.14	The Prasuti says, "It moves."
14.19.15	The third pressing is concluded.
14.20.1	He commences the rites of the Avabhrtha bath.
14.20.2	Having performed the Veda, having strewn the fires, having washed the hands, having employed the vessels, having spread the Olapāji grass, having made the strainers, he instructs, "The sacrificer should control speech."
14.20.3	He touches the vessels with controlled speech.
14.20.4	He offers a cake on one potsherd to Varuna.
14.20.5	He cooks the cake with water that has been purified with the Yajus.
14.20.6	Having spread the sacrificial grass, he puts the paste of barley-flour.
14.20.7	Having placed the wooden sword, he instructs (the sacrificer), "Do thou bring the Prokṣaṇī water, the spoon and the ladles. Do thou prepare the clarified butter."
14.20.8	Because of the similarity in taking the clarified butter.
14.20.9	He takes all the clarified butter in this very altar, taking four spoonfuls at a time.
14.20.10	Having taken down the sacrificial cake, he offers on the Āhavanīya fire with ghee, reciting, "O Agni, the giver of life, accepting the oblation..."
14.20.11	Having offered, they take the Avabhṛtha-oblation, the wooden sword, the ladle with clarified butter, the Veda, the sacrificial cake, the clarified butter, the flour, the two plates for pressing, the chaff, and whatever is smeared with Soma, except the four vessels containing Soma.
14.20.12	The sacrificer, while digging out the Udumbara (tree), says, "May the mother, while giving milk, may the son, while sucking, may the nourishment of wealth, the food and energy be bestowed on us."
14.20.13	He offers the ghee with the verse, "May the ghee be bestowed on us.
14.21.1	With the Anuvaka, "O Soma, the king, what they have cut with the stone,
14.21.2	Some say that one should offer with three (verses), some say with five, some say with seven.
14.21.3	One places the black antelope skin in the Catvāla with the verse, "O Varuna, I am seeking your protection with salutations."
14.21.4	Or one should sprinkle it together with the Avabhrtha.
14.21.5	Then he instructs, "The Prastotar recites the Sāmans."
14.21.6	Together with his wife, they go to the end of the Saman three times. They go to the end in the first place, in the middle country in the second, and at the edge of the water in the third.
14.21.7	"The king Varuna made a great (place)." They go to the Veda."
14.21.8	The Prañcas, Avabhrathas, and Sthāvaras go towards the east. Some say they go towards the north. Some say they are towards the south. Some say they move towards the west.
14.21.9	The direction in which they go is the eastern direction.
14.21.10	They say, "O king, your hundred physicians and your thousand," and then they speak of the waters.
14.21.11	The water is sprinkled with the formula, "Thou art sprinkled by Varuna's noose." They stand in the water.
14.21.12	Here some prescribe the removal of the pain in the heart.
14.21.13	Having plunged in and stood up, they perform the Avabhrtha rite.
14.21.14	Having poured the spoon-full, he instructs, "O Agni, sprinkle the water thrice."
14.21.15	The Agnidhra sprinkles the fire three times with water, saying, "The waters, the conquerors of strength, are going to conquer strength, are conquering strength, are the strong, the conquerors of the strong, for the conquest of the strong. I sprinkle the waters, the eaters of food, for the eating of food." He sprinkles water.
14.22.1	He pours out the grass, saying, "He has entered the fire's army." He pours out the ladleful of clarified butter.
14.22.2	If it is grass, then he offers on that very (grass).
14.22.3	He offers all the oblations on the sacrificial grass.
14.22.4	The Pravara is the same as the Hotr.
14.22.5	Having called out, he says, "Stand, O Hotr!" This much is the Pravara.
14.22.6	He does not choose an Arsyen or a Hotr.
14.22.7	He offers four Praja offerings on the grass.
14.22.8	Having performed the offerings of clarified butter, he takes up the Puronuvākyā and offers to Varuna.
14.22.9	Having taken up the entire cake, he offers to Agni and Varuna as Sviṣṭakṛt.
14.22.10	Then he instructs, "O Agni, please sprinkle water once."
14.22.11	The Agnidhra sprinkles water once, saying, "O waters, the conquerors of strength, the strong, the desirous of conquering strength, the strong ones, the conquerors of the strong, for the conquest of strength, I sprinkle you. O waters, the eaters of food, for the eating of food." He sprinkles water.
14.22.12	He offers two Anuyājas on the Barhis.
14.22.13	Having first instructed (the Hotr) to recite the Anuyāja-hymn, he instructs him to recite the hymn again.
14.22.14	Having filled the ladle with the Rgīsa-oblation, he offers it in water, saying, "Thy heart is in the sea, in the water."
14.22.15	Wherever the Soma-juice drops like a drop, he should eat it, saying, "O Soma, the god, thou art in the water." Having washed it in water.
14.22.16	Some say that it should be touched.
14.22.17	He scatters Avabhrtha (water) with the verse, "O Avabhrtha, O Nichukuna."
14.22.18	Having plunged into it, the sacrificer and his wife, with their heads together, take a bath.
14.22.19	They run towards each other's back, saying, "May the waters and plants be friendly to us."
14.23.1	They stand by the Avabhrtha water, saying, "These are your embryos, O divine waters."
14.23.2	The sacrificer loosens the girdle of Varuna with the verse, "The noose of Varuna is loosened." The wife loosens the noose of the yoke with the verse, “I loosen this noose of Varunah.”
14.23.3	All the consecrated articles are sprinkled here itself.
14.23.4	The sacrificer and his wife come out from the Avabhṛtha wearing new garments.
14.23.5	The sacrificers puts on the Soma-cloth, the wife puts on the Soma covering.
14.23.6	He gives it to the Adhvaryu who is going to perform the Upavasatha rite.
14.23.7	Then he instructs the Unnetr: "O Unnetr, do you carry the Vasat-utterance. The most sweet-sounding songs of praise are being sung to you. The winners of battles, the possessors of wealth, the immortal ones, the winners of prizes, like chariots, like the Kanvas, like the Bhrigus, like the Sūryas, have brought the entire world to light."
14.23.8	The Udgātṛ recites the Hotr's verses or the Yajamāna's verses. "He says, "May we go forth with the people, with the lustre, with the wealth, with the sacrifices. May we follow the Gāyatrī metre. Then may we be fragrant in the houses."
14.23.9	They go forth to the water's edge and return, saying, "The noose of Varuna is released."
14.23.10	Having made the kindling-sticks, they come forward, with the Soma-bearer in front, reciting the verse, "We have become immortal by the Soma of the waters." They recite the verse, "Those waters are without obstacles. I am without obstacles. I follow Yama's strong offering. May we come here and return to that. May we be alive and free from the living. May I remove this. I am without debt in this world, without debt in the other world, without debt, may we be without debt in the third world. Those who go to the gods and those who go to the fathers, may we be free from all obstacles on the path."
14.23.11	Having placed the kindling-wood on the Ahavaniya (fire) with the formula, "May I be kindled, may we be kindled," they stand up with the formula, “I have followed the waters."
14.23.12	Similarly the wife stands up having placed the kindling wood on the Garhapatya.
14.24.1	He commences the procedure for the Udayaniya (Soma-sacrifice).
14.24.2	The one which is the Prāyaniya (Soma-sacrifice) is the Udayaniya.
14.24.3	The Udayaniya is performed after having poured out the Prāyaniya. Here one does not take out the cooked rice and place it in the pot, nor does one perform the sixfold Hotr-rite.
14.24.4	The Udayaniya is offered with the Śālāmukhiya rite.
14.24.5	He offers the Prāyaniyas as the Udayaniya Yajyās.
14.24.6	He offers Pathyā Svāstī as the last of the Ajyabhaga offerings.
14.24.7	The sacrificer does not partake of it.
14.24.8	The Iṣṭi comes to an end with the Siddha (oblation).
14.24.9	The procedure of the Anūbandhyā is commenced.
14.24.10	It is similar upto the offering of the animal.
14.24.11	The Maitrāvaruṇa offers the Vasa Anūbandhyâ animal.
14.24.12	Some recite three verses: the Maitrāvaruṇa animal is of two forms, the Vaiśvadevī animal is of many forms, the Rohini animal is of the Brhaspati animal. The Vaiśvadevya animal moves in the middle.
14.24.13	The offering of the Vapa is similar to the Homa.
14.24.14	When the Vapa has been offered, the sacrificer shaves his hair and beard on the southern edge of the altar.
14.24.15	He offers the Pasupurodāsa of the Anubandhya, the Devīka-oblations, and the cake on twelve potsherds to the nurse. These are the offerings.
14.24.16	The last one is the offering to Dhātṛ.
14.24.17	In those pots in which Soma is present, they cook these (oats).
14.24.18	The Pasupurodāsa is accompanied by a Prāṣa. He instructs, "Recite! Offer!" to the others.
14.24.19	For all the Pasupurodāsas, the Sviṣṭakṛt is common. The Prāṣa is common. The Ida is common.
14.24.20	The animal sacrifice is accomplished and concluded.
14.25.1	Or, one desiring cattle may perform the Maitrāvaruṇa oblation of milk, as an alternative to the Anūbandhya oblation.
14.25.2	One shaves off the hair and beard before the oblation.
14.25.3	The Hotṛ priest performs the oblation while sitting in front of the Havirdhāna (shed).
14.25.4	Having performed the oblations dedicated to the gods, he performs the oblation dedicated to the deity of the milk.
14.25.5	The oblation concludes with the Ida oblation, starting with the oblation of the gods.
14.25.6	The ritual for the Amāgīṣa and the Devīka oblations is the same as that for the Svishtakrit oblation.
14.25.7	Having loosened the knots made on the sacrificial grass at the Sadas and Havirdhāna, they direct the grass towards the north.
14.25.8	One who is fasting for the Ahāvanīya grass recites, "Whatever is not known to me, that I confess."
14.25.9	If he were to move as if mixed, he should offer the parched grains with the Anjali-offering, saying, "I offer to the one who is all-devouring and all-consuming."
14.25.10	Then he approaches the deities, saying, "This is our city in the sky." He offers to the one who consumes the sky. "You are the lord of the sky." He says to Vayu. "O god, you are the one who shakes." He says to Aditya.
14.25.11	Having placed the sacrificial post, he places the fires separately in the kindling woods, having placed the Dakṣiṇāgni, the Śālāmukhiyāgni, and the Gatasrī Agni.
14.25.12	Between the Cātvāla and the Utkarāvatī, they recite and perform the Upavasatha rite as in the case of the Darśa and Pūrṇamāsa sacrifices.
14.25.13	The Upavasatha rites are performed facing the east or the north. Some say that they are performed facing the north.
14.26.1	One offers the Upavasatha oblation to Agni on five potsherds or on eight potsherds.
14.26.2	The Yajya and Anuvasya verses are in the Pankti metre. If the oblation is on eight potsherd, then the verses are in the Gāyatrī metre. If it is on five potsherd,
14.26.3	A bull is given as Dakṣiṇā.
14.26.4	If the Iṣṭi is not hurried, it is concluded.
14.26.5	If it is hurried, then having taken four spoonfuls of clarified butter in the Juhu, he should offer it in the Āhavanīya with the verse, "O Vishnu, do thou spread out."
14.26.6	Whatever he is able to give there, he should give.
14.26.7	He should offer the evening Agnihotra as long as the night lasts, and the morning Agnihotra at the proper time.
14.26.8	From the Udayaniya onwards, the sacrifice is concluded.
14.26.9	The Sadyasutya is concluded.
14.26.10-11	If the time for the Agnihotra offering in the evening should pass, one should offer the Agnihotra offerings beginning with the evening Agnihotra, either having passed over or not having passed over.
15.1.2	One who knows the Stomabhāgas should perform even if he is not a Vasishtha.
15.1.3	He sits to the south of the king being measured and being made.
15.1.4	He goes to the south of what is being carried.
15.1.5	He sits on the southern side of the great altar being made.
15.1.6	Where the sacrificial posts are to be fixed, having gone around between the Cātvāla and the Utkara, having gone around the northern end of the Vedi, having entered through the eastern door, having gone around to the west of the Āhavanīya, having gone out through the eastern door and having gone around the southern end of the Vedi from the right, one should sit to the north of the Uttaravedi. This is the view of Āśmarathya. Having gone around between the Catvala and the Utkāra, having gone around beyond the Uttaravedi, one should sit on the southern side. This is the opinion of Ālekhana.
15.1.7	He remains here only till the conclusion of the Vaisarjana Homa.
15.1.8	When they are about to offer the Vaisarjana offerings, one should enter the Sadas after going around to the right of the Havirdhana, the Marjalyana, and the Sadas, entering through the eastern door and crossing the eastern end of the Sadas, and then sitting to the right of Shaalamukhiyam. This is the view of Ashmarathi. One should cross the northern altar, go around to the north of the Havirdhāna, the Agnidhriya, and the Sada, enter through the eastern door, cross the western end of the Sada, and then sit to the right of Shalamukhiyam, according to Aalekhana.
15.2.1	Brahma, the priest, makes the king sit down.
15.2.2	When the oblation is offered, one obtains the share of Agni.
15.2.3	Having reached the Agnidhra-chamber, having handed over the king to the Pratiprasthātṛ, having returned by the same route by which he came, having gone out by the eastern door, having gone around the Sadas by the right, having gone around Marjalyana by the right, and having gone around Agnidhra by the right, one should sit down. This is the view of Ashmarathi. Having gone around the Agnidhra from the north, one should sit on the south. This is the opinion of Aalekhana.
15.2.4	The Brahman makes the king sit down.
15.2.5	The former (priest) takes his place at the Vaisarjana (ceremony).
15.2.6	Having reached the Havirdhāna, having given the king to the Pratiprasthātṛ, having gone around by the right side of the Havirdhānā, and having gone around by right side of the Uttaravedi, one should sit down. This is the view of Āśmarathya. Having gone around by the left side of the Havirdhāna, having gone beyond the Uttaravedi by the right side, one should sit on the right side. This is the opinion of Ālekhana.
15.2.7	He remains here only, until the offering of the fat of the animal dedicated to Agni-Soma.
15.2.8	When the fat has been offered, he anoints himself where they anoint themselves.
15.3.1	When they are about to take the Vasatīvari waters, he goes to the south.
15.3.2	He stands to the south of those who are taking them.
15.3.3	When they wake up for the morning recitation, he wakes up.
15.3.4	His own is the same as that of one who is about to offer the Soma-pressing oblations.
15.3.5	He restrains speech at the morning recitation, until the Paridhānīya (hymn).
15.3.6	When they are about to take up the Savanīya waters, he goes to the south.
15.3.7	He sits to the south of the waters being taken up.
15.3.8	He goes to the south of those being carried.
15.3.9-11	When they are about to consecrate the king, he enters the Havirdhāna shed through the eastern door, passes beyond the Khara wood, and sits down to the south. When the king is being consecrated, he sits to the south. When the Grahas are being taken, he restrains his speech from the Āgrayana.
15.3.12	In the same way, when the king is being consecrated in the Savana, he sits to the right of him and restrains his speech when the Grahas are being taken.
15.3.13	When the Bahispavamāna is being chanted, he moves along with it.
15.3.14	When the Stotras are being chanted, he sits to their right.
15.4.1	Where he invites him, saying, "Brahman, we will praise you, O teacher," he gives it to him. "O god Savitar, this is told to you. It is given and offered. O Brihaspati, the Brahman, may I sing the verses of long life. May the true blessings of the hymn be true. May the true intentions be true. Speak truth and reality. You are the ray of the rising of the praised god Savitar. For decay, I invoke you. For decay, you are invoked. Praised."
15.4.2	In the same way, he bestows at every praise.
15.4.3	Thus he places the Stomabhāgas higher and higher.
15.4.4	It is known that there are twelve in the Agnistomas, thirteen in the Atiagnistomas, fifteen in the Ukthyas, sixteen in the Sodashins, seventeen in the Vajapeyas, thirty-one in the Atiratras, and thirty-three in the Aptoryamas.
15.4.5	After the Stuti of the Bahispavamāna, he sits down to the south of the Uttaravedi. He remains there till the Savaniya animal is offered.
15.4.6	When the animal has been offered, he cleanses himself where the sacrificers cleanse themselves.
15.4.7	Where they proceed for the morning pressing, having gone around by the right side of the Havirdhāna, the Marjālīya, and the Sadas, and having entered the Sadas by the western door, and having passed beyond the Praśāstrya, one should sit down to the south. This is the view of Āśmarathya. Having gone beyond the northern altar, and having gone around by north of the Havirdhana, the Marjalyia, and having entered by the eastern door, and having gone beyond the Praśastrya, one should seat oneself to the south. Thus says Ālekhana.
