1.1.1	Now we shall explain the Agnihotra.
1.1.2	A Brahmin should perform it in spring, a king in summer, a Vaishya in autumn, and a chariot-maker in the rainy season.
1.1.3	Some say all in the winter.
1.1.4	One should perform it on the new moon or full moon day in the Rohini, Krittika, Mrigashira, Punarvasu, Uttarashada, Anuradha, Shravana, Hasta, or Vishakha constellation.
1.1.5	The Brāhmaṇa has mentioned the desirable constellations under which one should perform the Agnihotra.
1.1.6	Where these three, season, constellation and festival, are found, that is auspicious.
1.1.7	In case of conflict, the constellation and the season are stronger.
1.1.8	One who is going to perform a Soma sacrifice should perform the Agnihotras under the constellation and season, not under the constellation and festival.
1.1.9	As per availability, the wood of the Ashvattha tree, which has a core of the Sami tree.
1.1.10	If one finds a Sami-core wood, a white sprout, not damaged by lightning or wind, not burnt by fire, not inhabited by many insects, not dry, not fallen, not damaged by the last born, one should go there, recite the Vaisvānara Sūkta, circumambulate it clockwise, and bow down.
1.1.11	Having cut off the eastern or northern branch, he should throw it down with the tip towards the east or north.
1.1.12	Having marked the fallen branch and the root below it as they are known, he should throw away the leaves.
1.1.13	Having cut it into two, he makes the lower one into the lower kindling-wood, having the skin on one side, dried, twenty-four inches long, eight inches wide and four inches high. And with the upper part he makes the upper kindling-wood.
1.1.14	There, the first four are the head, eyes, ears, and mouth.
1.1.15	The second four are the neck, chest, heart, and breasts.
1.1.16	The third four are the belly and so on.
1.1.17	The fourth four are the hips.
1.1.18	The fifth four are the thighs.
1.1.19	The sixth four are the shins.
1.1.20	Some say the feet are the seventh.
1.1.21	Thus, when all the limbs are complete, it becomes the fire-stirring wood.
1.1.22	When one stirs on the head, the sacrificer becomes the head-stirrer.
1.1.23	When one shakes at the neck, it is shaken.
1.1.24	When one does it at the belly, his sacrifice becomes uninitiated.
1.1.25	The thighs are the birthplace of demons, the shanks and feet are the birthplace of ghosts, the hips are the birthplace of the gods.
1.1.26	Therefore, one should first churn in the vagina.
1.1.27	Abandoning eight fingers from the root and twelve fingers from the tip, three fingers on each side, for the first churning.
1.1.28	One should perform this way for procreation.
1.1.29	Having cut the churning-stick of eight fingers in length, he joins it at the root of the churning-stick.
1.1.30	Together with that, the churning-stick becomes twenty-six fingers long.
1.1.31	Similarly, the hole.
1.1.32	The churning-stick is placed with its head towards the east, and the sacrificial altar is also so.
1.2.1	In his own house, he should construct a fire-room, facing west and east, with two doors in the east and south, excluding hair, nails, ashes, chaff, wood, stone, clay, ants, etc., using pure clay.
1.2.2	In the west, having drawn a circle of eighteen inches with a rope, having made a mound eight inches high, and having left four inches on all sides, he digs a hole six inches deep in the middle.
1.2.3	The remaining part should be the upper border.
1.2.4	He makes the lower girdle, which is four fingers wide and high.
1.2.5	Therefore, in the case of a Brahmin, the procedure is eight steps, in the case a Kshatriya, eleven steps, in thecase of a Vaishya, twelve steps. The sacrificial fire-pit is square, thirty-two inches long in the four directions, and eight inches high. Having designated a mound as before, leaving the upper border, he makes the lower border low in the middle.
1.2.6	Having said, "You are the altar between the two," he makes the altar, which is four fingers wide and high, connected to the Garhapatya and Ahavaniya fires, and which is in the south and north, and which is sixteen fingers wide in between.
1.3.1	In the southern part of the altar, in the western direction, he should draw the Anvāhāryapacana fire with twenty-five fingers, making a circle and then making a crescent-shaped mound in the southern half, as before. It should be elevated in the middle and lowered at the edges, with upper and lower borders.
1.3.2	Having divided the Veda-Uttara into three parts, the northern part of the eastern part should be made to rise upwards.
1.3.3	The Sāvitrī fire is to be placed twelve inches to the east of the Āhavanīya fire. The Sāvitri fire is to be twelve inches high and square in shape, like the Āhavanīyī fire. A mound is to be made around it, leaving a space of twelve inches. The middle mound should be twelve inches high, and the three mounds should be five inches wide and twelve inches high.
1.3.4	The place for the fire of the house is triangular, facing east. The altar is forty-five inches long in the west, south and north. It is elevated in the middle and lowered at the edges. There are two borders as before.
1.3.5	Some say that the fire of the household is square.
1.3.6	The Yajamana, the Adhvaryu, or the sacrificer follows the measure of the middle joint of the middle finger of the right hand of all the Yajamana.
1.4.1	Having been duly initiated by the Brahmins, having shaved his hair, beard, and nails according to the prescribed method, having bathed, having recited the Vedic texts beginning with "Iṣe tvā" and "Urje tvā", having performed a hundred Pranayama exercises, meditating on Narayana, having fasted along with his wife, he eats the sacrificial food mixed with ghee and milk.
1.4.2	Having undertaken the prescribed vow, he should offer oblations to the ministers and Kūṣmāṇḍa for purification.
1.4.3	On the day of fasting, having said, "I am going to kindle the fires for all desired purposes," the sacrificer shaves his hair, beard, and body hair.
1.4.4	Some say, "Do not shave."
1.4.5	Then he should perform the auspicious śrāddha.
1.4.6	Everything is like the divine śrāddha.
1.4.7	He chooses two Viśvedevas and four Pitṛs.
1.4.8	The Pitṛs with Nandīmukha and their followers are pleased. Having pleased them, he offers the Arghya.
1.4.9	Having placed the pot of water with Dūrvā grass and unbroken rice, as before, having offered oblations to the gods and ancestors, the sacrificer is sprinkled with water from the pot of water, and the auspicious verses are recited.
1.4.10	May you grant us welfare, may you grant us prosperity. The lord of the Vishvas is the one who grants welfare. Having tied the Pratisara (a thread) with this verse, on that day, having appointed Brahmanas with the mentioned characteristics as the officiating priests, he offers Madhuparka (a drink of honey and water).
1.4.11	The sacrificer and his wife, adorned with new garments, upper garments, flowers, and other things, become so.
1.4.12	The Adhvaryu, having taken the kindling woods from the Aśvattha tree, which is the embryo of the Śamī tree, says, "From the Aśvatthā tree, the carrier of oblations."
1.4.13	Having taken them, he recites, "May it bestow life upon me."
1.4.14	The sacrificer takes up five pots with the verse, "I take up the shining pots from the tree-sun for the sake of life. May life enter me." Having taken them up, he rises up.
1.5.1	Having sprinkled the fire with the Palasha or Shamya twig, having sprinkled it three times and having gone three steps forward, having sprinkled it while being taken up, having sprinkled it after being taken up, he places that fire which is for the Brahmana-student.
1.5.2	Some say that it is the fire for churning, the fire for the Ambareesa sacrifice, the fire for heating.
1.5.3	If the evening worship is not performed, one should offer it in the evening.
1.5.4	At night, after the Brahmauḍanika meal, one should spread a red antelope skin with the neck towards the east and the hair towards the north, and on that one should offer the Brahmauḍana meal in four portions.
1.5.5	Having touched the grains that have been placed (in the vessel) with the formula, "For inspiration thee, for aspiration thee," and having sprinkled them with water, he places the mortar on the skin and grinds the grains.
1.5.6	Having sifted the husks with a winnowing basket, he cleans the pot with the formula, "May the pot be purified." Having cleaned the pot, he pours the grains into it with the formula, "I pour the grains that are dear to Brahman."
1.5.7	He does not pour out the clarified butter.
1.5.8	He cooks in milk.
1.5.9	Having cooked in four vessels, having poured clarified butter over it, having taken it away towards the north, having taken out the Brahmic rice with a ladle, having sprinkled it with plenty of clarified butter, he offers with the verse, "To Praveda, the sage, the wise," and stands up.
1.6.1	Having divided it into four parts, he pours plenty of ghee over it and gives it to the priests.
1.6.2	Having eaten it and sipped water, they praise it, saying, "This is the Brahmaudana."
1.6.3	He gives them a calf.
1.6.4	He brings the remaining ghee in a pot.
1.6.5	Having anointed three fire-sticks of the auspicious Ficus religiosa, the size of a span, with the sap of the Ficus glomerata, and having recited the formula, "From the variegated Ficus religiosa," he offers the fire-sticks to the Agni who is being worshipped. "O Agni, come to the offerings, you are worshipped by the fire-sticks." With three Gāyatrī verses, he places the Brahmanical fire in the Brahmanical fire-place, with the verses, "Agni, the first to be kindled, the most excellent, the most radiant, the most brilliant, the most powerful, the most glorious, the most auspicious, the most auspicious." With three Tristubh verses, he places (the fire) in the Rajanya fire-place, "You, O Agni, the most excellent one, are being kindled." With three Jagatī verses, he places it in the Vaiśya fire-place.
1.6.6	Here, one gives a pair of cows whose semen has not been sown.
1.6.7	They keep this Agni for one day, two days, three days, four days, twelve days, a season, or a year.
1.6.8	The one who follows this Agni at the time of departure and the one who returns, the Brahmanic rice-gruel is thus prescribed.
1.6.9	The sacrificer observes the vow of eating Brahmanic rice-grue
1.6.10	He does not approach a woman, does not eat meat, the fire is not taken from his house, nor is it brought from elsewhere.
1.6.11	If he is unable to perform the rite in a year, then this Brahmoḍana is prescribed again.
1.6.12	When the dog is about to be consecrated, the Adhvaryu cooks the Brahmoḍana and observes this vow on that night.
1.6.13	"O Agni, may the people be united with you," (with these words) he should bind a black goat to the north of the Garhapatya fire.
1.6.14	"One kindles the fire with shells," (with these) words the sacrificer, without sleeping, kindles the fire during that night with shells.
1.7.1	He collects the materials that have been collected on the altar.
1.7.2	The form of Vaishvanara, the sand; what is this of heaven and earth, the sand; the sand-born, the sand-born; the sand-thrown up by the mole, the sand of the anthill; the sand created by Prajapati; the sand whose form is the Sudha; the sand thrown up by the boar; the sand by which he made firm.
1.7.3	Taking these seven pure earth-pieces separately, and having taken them in a pot, he should take them separately. Having made the form of a horse, he should take the ashvattha (tree) of the size of a span with its leaves. "Having risen from the earth of strength, he should take (the tree) called audumbara. "The gods took away the Brahman-speech of him who was being taken away by the Gayatri (verse)." With these two verses, he should take a palasha (tree). "The Agni who was created by you," he should take a shalmali (tree). "What was created by you?" he should take an oak (tree). "Whatever was created by you for him," he should (take) a tree struck by lightning.
1.7.4	Here some collect the kindling wood, saying, "The Ashvattha tree is the embryo of the Shami tree."
1.7.5	The sacrificer again collects all the materials, saying, "You whom I have collected, O Jātavedas."
1.7.6	Some say that the morning Upasad-homa is offered in the Brahmauḍanika fire, which is the Upvyusha fire, and which is the receptacle of all offerings.
1.7.7	"This is the seed of the world, this is your natural place." With these two verses he kindles the fire-sticks on the fire.
1.8.1	"I take Agni in me." With these two he takes Agni in himself. Then he gives the fire-sticks to the sacrificer, saying, "This is your cow and this is your calf."
1.8.2	The sacrificer waits for the kindling-wood being given with the verse, "O Agni, do thou be the protector of this our sacrifice."
1.8.3	Having taken it with the verse, “Do you ascend the ten-fold (kindling-wood)," and having recited the verse, "You are the kindling-woods, you are the kindling woods," he takes Agni into himself with the two verses, "I take Agni in myself, Agni who is ours,
1.8.4	"This is the truth, I am approaching from untruth." Thus he restrains his speech.
1.8.5	The Adhvaryu, reciting the Brāhmaṇaudanika verse, follows him, saying, "The fires drive away the Rakshas."
1.8.6	The sacrificer should visualize the fires in five ways, or in three ways, saying, "This is Vishnu."
1.8.7	"Purify the places of the Garhapatya, Anvähäryapacaniya, Ahavaniya, Sabhya and Aväsathyas." Having smeared with cowdung, he cleanses as before, reciting, "The Rakshas-destroying Indra."
1.8.8	Some recite, "May the goddesses be auspicious to us."
1.8.9	Having placed darbha grass in the four directions with the words "May the gods..." and having dug nine times with a golden or silver instrument, one should dig with the words "Being dug up".
1.8.10	With two verses, "Brahma, the pure, the born, the pure," he draws three lines, beginning from the east, of the size of a span, and three lines beginning from the north. Having sprinkled them with Savitri, having sprinkled the materials with "May the goddesses protect us," having placed gold in the shrines, he offers separately on a separate mound with the verses, "We have come forth from darkness, we have come forth from the gloom."
1.9.1-4	Having divided the sand into two parts, he puts half in the place of the Garhapatya, the other half in the place for the Dakshina Agni. Having divided the other half into three parts, he puts them in the places for the other fires. If the Sabhya and Avashthya fires are not to be kindled, then all (the sand) is put in the place of Ahavaniya. Having done so, he puts the other (sand) in the places of the other fires. The sand is called the ashes of Agni.
1.9.5	"You are the moon." While sowing the seeds, he mentally thinks, "May the dark moon be here."
1.9.6	"Come forth, O Agni!" (with these words) he places the earth-born ant-hill in the place of the Garhapatya; "What is in the sky" (with these words), in the place of Dakshina Agni; "What is immortal in heaven" (with these) in the place of Ahavaniya. Silently in the other two.
1.9.7	"From the oceans" (with these verses) he places the food-born.
1.9.8	"Be thou here, O Agni!" with these words he places the boar-born.
1.9.9	"The goddesses here" (he says) while scattering sand. He meditates on the death of the one he hates.
1.9.10	Iron or oak implements are optional in place of earthen ones.
1.9.11	"I spread truth" (he says), while spreading the materials in the places.
1.9.12	"May they be united" (he says,) while mixing the sand and gravel.
1.9.13	"I mix you together." Having mixed the plants, he should say, "Agni was born first." He should scatter them once on each one.
1.9.14	Some say that this is done with the mantras for collecting the ingredients.
1.10.1	"Those are thy auspicious forms." Having placed a golden piece of gold on the Gārhapatya, having worshipped the fire as the moon, having recited the mantra, he gives away a silver piece of gold to the one who is hated.
1.10.2	If one does not find the one who is to be hated, one should turn away towards that direction.
1.10.3	One should not take it back again.
1.10.4	In this way, having worshipped in all the places, one should turn it away.
1.10.5	May the heaven and earth, by your strength, be united. With these two verses he unites all the collected materials.
1.10.6	Having placed the fires, he should say, "Let no one pass between them." Having placed a guard, at dawn, having collected the ashes of the Brahmauḍanika fire, having spread a bundle of Muñja grass there, having placed the lower kindling wood with its generative end facing downwards, and having placed the kindling wood of the Dashotr with its generative end upwards, having placed the kindler wood with its generative self facing downwards, meditating on himself, Vishnu, the generated Agni, he recites while churning, "With Agni, Agni."
1.10.7	When the horse is being churned, he makes the sacrificer recite the four Hotr-priests.
1.10.8	He recites the verse, "Come down" while the Agni is being born.
1.10.9	The sacrificer releases speech.
1.10.10	When born, he gives a boon.
1.10.11	With the two verses, "I am breathing you with the breath of Prajapati; I am placing you in the immortal breath," he smells the born Agni.
1.10.12	He says, "I am yours."
1.11.1	The Adhvaryu, having generated the fire, says, "You are Agni." Having invoked the fire, he takes it in a cup with the formula, "You are immortal, you are mortal."
1.11.2	Having placed the fire generated from the chaff in a pot, he kindles it with the formula, "You are the king, you are the emperor."
1.11.3	The sacrificer and his wife, having put on a garment of Kṣauma, should give to the Adhvaryu at the conclusion of the Agnihotra.
1.11.4	When the Rathantara is being chanted, having drawn out Agni facing east, he sits down and places the Garhapatya in front of the rising sun with the first two Vyahrtis, "For you the Bhrigus, for you the Angirasas, for you the Adityas, for you other Brahmanas, for you Varuna, for you Indra, for you the Manas, for you Rishis, for you the Rithakaras, for you the earth, for you the sky, for you the heaven, for you the atmosphere, for you the sun, for you the moon, for you the stars, for you the wind, for you the quarters, for you the directions, for you the waters, for you the plants, for you the herbs, for you the trees, for you the grasses, for you the shrubs, for you the creepers, for you the fruits, for you the grains, for you the food, for you the drink, for you the cattle, for you the sheep, for you the goats, for you the horses, for you the asses, for you the camels, for you the birds, for you the beasts, for you the insects, for you the beings, for you the non-beings, for you the gods, for you the ancestors, for you the men, for you the animals, for you the demons, for you the serpents, for you the Gandharvas, for you the Yakshas, for you all beings, for you all creatures, for you all that is, for you all this, for you all the worlds, for you all directions, for you all quarters, for you all regions, for you all spaces, for you all times, for you all seasons, for you all years, for you all months, for you all fortnights, for you all days, for you all nights, for you all twilights, for you all moments, for you all instants, for you all breaths, for you all worlds, for you the first, for you the middle, for you the last, for you the beginning, for you the end, for you the past, for you the future, for you the present, for you the good, for you the bad, for you the auspicious, for you the inauspicious, for you the seen, for you the unseen, for you the heard, for you the unheard, for you the known, for you the unknown, for you the truth, for you the untruth, for you the true, for you the false, for you the real, for you the unreal, for you the right, for you the wrong, for you the correct, for you the incorrect, for you the pure, for you the impure, for you the clean, for you the unclean, for you the bright, for you the dark, for you the light, for you the shadow, for you the day, for you the night, for you the dawn, for you the dusk, for you the morning, for you the evening, for you the east, for you the south, for you the west, for you the north, for you the southeast, for you the southwest, for you the northwest, for you the northeast, for you the above, for you the below, for you the upper, for you the lower, for you the near, for you the far, for you the high, for you the low, for you the great, for you the small, for you the many, for you the few, for you the one, for you the two, for you the three, for you the four, for you the five, for you the six, for you the seven, for you the eight, for you the nine, for you the ten, for you the eleven, for you the twelve, for you the thirteen, for you the fourteen, for you the fifteen, for you the sixteen, for you the seventeen, for you the eighteen, for you the nineteen,
1.11.5	"O Agni, come! You are the overlord, you are the universal lord." With these verses he kindles the fire with chips.
1.11.6	"May the sacrificer have a good Gārhapatya." Having placed the Gārhapaty fire, he worships it with these verses. This is the placing of the fire with the mantras.
1.11.7	The Adhvaryu should offer the seeds of the domestic and wild plants in melted ghee, saying, "That form of thine, O Agni, which is dear to the animals, which is purifying," and should extinguish the fire with the offerings of peace.
1.12.1	"Agni follows the dawns" - having kindled the kindling woods for the carrying of the fire to the Gārhapatya, he places the horse in front.
1.12.2	For strength, for power, for thee, the self that is in heaven and earth, the All-Gods have raised thee up. With these four verses he takes up the Āhavaniya from the Gārhapatya, having filled the pot with sand, and having placed it on the knee.
1.12.3	When the Vāmadevya is being recited, the worldly fire is brought in with the right door, and the Agnīdhra sits down with his knees raised towards the right door. With the second Vyāhṛti, he recites "This cow, the dappled one, has moved in the thirty-fold abode" with the second and third verses of the Serpent Queen, and "Wind is the breath" with the second Gharmashīrṣa verse. "Those auspicious forms of yours, the Vyāna, you alone are the immortal, you are the strength of heaven, Agni, the eater of food, the nourisher" - he places the Anvāhārapacana in the Sambhāra.
1.12.4	Some say that one should bring the fire from the Garhapatya.
1.12.5	The seed-offering and the attendance of the sacrificer have been explained.
1.12.6	"He recites, "O Agni, the horse is your body," at the right ear of the horse, making the sacrificer recite.
1.12.7	"Go forth, O Agni, in the eastern direction!" With these three verses, the horses with Agni in front go towards the east.
1.12.8	He first takes Agni from here, then from the middle, and finally from the mouth.
1.12.9	He does not separate Agni from the sun.
1.12.10	The sacrificer, having come up to the Adhvaryu who is carrying the half of the Soma, should give a boon.
1.12.11	The Adhvaryu, having placed gold at that place, saying, "Thou art heaven," goes beyond.
1.12.12	Brahman, having gone to the right side, says, "O Brihaspati, be surrounded," and turns the chariot or the chariot wheel three times continuously from the Garhapatya to the Ahavaniya.
1.12.13	As long as he turns it three times, so long does it become fixed. With his right foot he steps on the northern side of the horse, the eastern one, which is to be driven first.
1.13.1	The embers of the fire, as placed, should fall on it.
1.13.2	Having turned it round to the right, he again places it in the same way, saying, "What has been cried."
1.13.3	He places the horse in front, facing towards the west.
1.13.4	If there is no horse, then a donkey is to be placed in the horse's place.
1.13.5	Some say that the Kamandalu is to be placed.
1.13.6	Having recited the verse "This is the heaven" and standing facing east with his face turned towards the west, he recites all the Vyahrtis, the verse "The earth is the breath of his life" from the first and last verses of the Serpent Queen, the verse "Arka is the eye" from the last verse of the Hotar-shira, and the verse "Those are your auspicious ones" from the last verses of the Agni-shira. He recites the verse "You are the breath of immortality" from the last of the Agni-shravas, the verse "You from heaven" from the last Agni-shravan, and the verse "Agni, the king, is the king" from the last Agnishtomas. He places the foot of the burning Havirdhana Agni on the embers, reciting the verse "The foot of the one who knows the sacrifice is placed on the great and shining one, and on the one being sung."
1.13.7	When the fire is set up, he sings the Vāravantīya.
1.13.8	Some say that the hymns prescribed for the Agnihotra are to be sung with the Vyāhṛtis.
1.13.9	Having brought the fire produced by churning from the world, or from the Āhavanīya, he sets up the Sabhya and Avāsathya fires in the materials with the fifth and fourth Vyāhṛtis, as in the Rṣya Ādhāna.
1.13.10	The seed-oblation has been explained, and the presence of the sacrificer.
1.13.11	"He stands by the Āhavanīya with the verses, "He ate, he ate all, he ate my life, I am yours, whatever is thy auspicious form, O Agni."
1.14.1	Agni, do thou bestow life; Agni, do thou flow; Agni, O Agni, the purifier. With these three verses he lays down three Samidha twigs of the ashvattha tree, each in the places of the Ahavaniya, Garhapatya, Dakshina, and Sabhya and Avashya fires. Or in all rites, in the order of these.
1.14.2-3	From the ocean, from the ocean, from thee, O Agni, we have come. The three (verses) beginning with "The four peaks of the ocean" are to be recited three times. The three (bricks) made of Sami wood, smeared with ghee, are to be offered. The Udumbara wood is to be offered with the verse, "O Agni, shine forth, well-kindled." The Vaikankata wood is to be dedicated with the verse, "We dedicate thee." The Sami wood is to be consecrated with the verse, "Of Savitar, the desirable one." Then silently he offers the Agnihotra in the morning.
1.14.4	Or, having sanctified the ghee, and filling the ladle with four or eight spoonfuls, he offers, meditating on Narayana.
1.14.5	This is the place of Agnihotra.
1.14.6	The sacrificer, standing to the left of all the fires, worships them with the verses, "O Agni, those auspicious forms of yours," with the verses beginning with "Those auspicious forms of yours."
1.14.7	"O Agni, with those terrible forms of thine, do thou go to the evil one." Having approached with this Yajus, "O Agni, those terrible forms of thee, hunger and thirst." With the terrible forms.
1.14.8	Here he takes the name of the hated one.
1.14.9	He touches the water.
1.14.10	Having wiped the ladle and the spoon as before, having filled the spoon, he offers the full oblation.
1.14.11	Having given a boon to the sacrificer, having again approached with terrible (verses), he approaches with auspicious (verses).
1.14.12	"He says, 'Protect my men, O Atharva; protect my progeny; protect my cattle; protect my cattle with the firstborn; protect my assembly; protect my speech; protect my mantra.' With five Virat steps he attends the five fires, saying, 'The five fires.' All of them.
1.14.13	Then he should offer an oblation of eight potfuls to Agni.
1.14.14	Having placed the oblation in the fire, having sprinkled it, having placed the dice in the middle of the assembly, having placed gold in them, he sits down, having taken the vow. This is for the king.
1.14.15	Having placed gold in the assembly, he offers in it.
1.15.1	The Adhvaryu gives a hundred dice to the sacrificer, having recited the formula, "May the serpent, the knower of the truth, grant us."
1.15.2	The sacrificer, having staked them, having won, and having cooked the food, gives it to the Brahmanas who are seated in the assembly.
1.15.3	They eat in the house.
1.15.4	The two verses, "May heaven and earth be propitious to us," etc., are recited by the sacrificer in accordance with the seasons, while standing near the fires.
1.15.5	He proceeds with the sprinkling of the fires.
1.15.6	The two oblations of clarified butter are offered in the Vartraghna rite.
1.15.7	The Yajus and Anuvakya verses are "Agni is the head of the universe" and "Agni is in the heaven".
1.15.8	Having placed the Anvāhārya (rice) (in the fire), he gives twelve Dakṣiṇās to the one who has performed the Agnihotra.
1.15.9	The gift may be given above this.
1.15.10	The Agnīdhra gives a covering, a universal thread, a goat, a full vessel, and a horse to the Brahman, a cow to the Hotṛ, and an ox to the Adhvaryu.
1.15.11	A pair of cows, garments, and a chariot are the common gifts.
1.15.12	If a poor man gives one cow,
1.15.13	it becomes all the prescribed rites.
1.15.14	The rest is explained.
1.16.1	Now, the twelve-night vows for one who has not established the sacred fire.
1.16.2	He does not eat meat, does not approach a woman, does not speak untruth, drinks water that is like nectar, washes his feet himself, eats food without salt and without pungent spices, except for sesame, and carries his own firewood to the fire-house.
1.16.3	For twelve nights, his fires are permanent.
1.16.4	A brahmin who does not own a horse should not live in his house.
1.16.5	If the twelve nights have passed, one should offer oblations to Pavamāna Agni for a year, a season, a month, half a month, four days, three days, two days, the next day, or immediately.
1.16.6	One should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Pavamāna, a cake to Agni Pāvaka, and a cake to Agni Śuci.
1.16.7	One should mix the three oblations together.
1.16.8	One should mix the oblations together after offering the first one.
1.16.9	Some say that one should mix these oblations together with the Agniyeṣṭākapāla.
1.16.10	The Yajya and Anuvākyā are "O Agni, Pavamāna, O Agni, give us life, O Agni, do thou purify."
1.16.11	The Dakṣiṇā is gold weighing thirty mānas.
1.16.12	"O Agni, the purifying, O Agni, the purifying one, do thou purify us."
1.16.13	"O Agni, the pure, O Agni, most pure in vows, O Agni, thy purities."
1.16.14	The gold of the middle one is of thirty measures, and of the highest one of forty measures.
1.16.15	He offers the cake on eleven potsherds to Indra-Agni, and a rice-pap of ghee to Aditi.
1.16.16-19	The Sāmidhenī verses of the seventeen-fold Aditya. The Ajyabhāga verses are "With Agni, the bestower of wealth, with the bestower of prosperity" and "Indra and Agni have come, the sage with the verses." The verse "O Aditi, you are the great mother" is for the Adityas. The verse "The kindled Agni, the Agni of the sacrifice" is for the Samyājyā. The Seshti Ādhāna comes to an end.
1.17.1	Having mentally followed the ten-hotr Agni, the first Agnihotra, and having offered it in the Ahavaniya with the Grahas, he offers the evening Agnihotra.
1.17.2	He offers the first Agnihotra with the Vyahrtis and at the end of the year.
1.17.3	For twelve nights, from the time of the installation, the sacrificer, clad in unwashed garments, not going away himself, offers Agnihotra with uninterrupted flow of ghee.
1.17.4	The first cow from which milk is drawn for Agnihotra is the fee for Agnihotra.
1.17.5	Having performed the first two sacrifices of Darśa and Pūrṇamāsa, having offered the Homa to the four Hotṛ-priests in the Havaniya fire, having recited the mantra "What the gods have placed for you", having offered the Homam to Sarasvati, he performs the Anvarambhaniya Iṣṭi on the eastern side of the Pūrṇamāsī, offering the Agnāvaiṣṇava cake on eleven potsherds, the cake to Sarasvati, the cake to Sarāsvati on twelve potsherds, and the cake to Agni Bhagini on eight potsherds.
1.17.6	"O Agni-Vishnu, with your consort, O Agni-Vishnu of great power." This is for the Agni-Vishnu offering.
1.17.7	"O goddess, lead us from heaven." This is for Sarasvati.
1.17.8	"The one who drinks, the one who is drunk by Sarasvati, your waves, O Sarasvati." This is for Saravasvati. "As Savitar, may he bring us wealth." This is for Bhagini.
1.17.9	One offers the Jaya oblations before the Svishtakrit offering.
1.17.10	The Dakṣiṇā is a pair of cows.
1.17.11	If one is going to perform the New-Moon sacrifice, one should not perform the Anvārmbhaṇīya.
1.17.12	One should offer an Aṣṭakapāla oblation to Agni.
1.18.1	One who is going to perform Darsa-Pūrṇamāsa and Cāturmāsya sacrifices, collects the oblations with the Vyāhṛti-mantras at the end of the year.
1.18.2	The observances for one who has established the sacred fire.
1.18.3	The guest who arrives at sunrise should not be refused.
1.18.4	If he is refused, the fire should follow him.
1.18.5	One should not eat food that is cooked in a pot that has been used for more than two days.
1.18.6	One should offer oblations to the fire when the fire is wet.
1.18.7	One should eat food that is not cooked in a pot.
1.18.8	One should perform a sacrifice in a place that is self-created, in a ravine or a gorge.
1.18.9	One should have intercourse with a woman after making a hissing sound and with restraint.
1.18.10	One should not eat without having offered the Agnihotra.
1.18.11	One should not give at night, except for food.
1.18.12	One should abstain from eating meat for a year without having performed the animal sacrifice.
1.18.13	But if one is instructed, one eats with the thought, "I am offering to the fires."
1.19.1	The rite of re-establishing the fire has been explained.
1.19.2	If in the course of a year, one who has performed the Agniṣṭoma sacrifices, should be afflicted by a relative or a son, he should not grow or be afflicted by his own body, then he should remove the fires and re-establish them.
1.19.3	One who is about to remove the fire should offer the Agniyeṣṭakapaala and the Vaishvānara dvādaśakapāla oblations at the new and full moon.
1.19.4	Agni is the head, Bhuva. The Vaishvantar was born from the back in heaven. The Vaishvaranara was born from the head in heaven.
1.19.5-6	The Agnihotra is offered in the morning and evening. The Agnihotra is offered at the end of the Agnihotra. The Agnihotri is one who offers the Agnihotra. The Agnihotra is the Agnihotra. Translation: Those of thee, O Agni, that are flowing forth, those that are purifying, those that are shining, those that are pure in the sun, those that are bestowers of desires, those that are divided, those that are collected, those that are thine, O Agni, belonging to the trees, Agni is the name of seven oblations offered before the Svishtakrit. The Siddhești comes to an end.
1.19.7	He releases the burning fires till the Darśa and Pūrṇamāsa sacrifices.
1.19.8	One whose fires have been released becomes so for a year or twelve days.
1.19.9	At that time itself, having sprinkled the fires with water, having cooked the Brahmaudana, he observes fast.
1.19.10	Rohini, Punarvasu, and Anurādha are the stars for rekindling the fires. The seasons are the rainy season and autumn.
1.19.11	The materials are not collected.
1.19.12	Or they are collected.
1.19.13	Some say that the materials are mantras.
1.19.14	Some say there are no yajus verses.
1.19.15	Having spread darbha grass for a year in the fire places, he establishes the Garhapatya with the Serpent Queen verses, "The earth is for the earth." He establishes the other fires at midday.
1.19.16	Or all at midday.
1.19.17	Having taken up the Āhavaniya fire in a pot with the old darbha grass, he places it in the Anvāhāryapacana fire with the verse, "What you have angrily thrown away, I am placing here." He says, "What you were angry with," in the Āhavaniye.
1.19.18	He stands by the Āhita fire with the verse "May the mind and light be agreeable to you."
1.19.19	He rekindles it with two verses, "Again you are the Adityas, the Rudras."
1.19.20	"May the mind enjoy the light," he offers the oblation.
1.19.21	"Seven are your Agni's kindling woods, seven your tongues," he offers the Agnihotra.
1.19.22	That is the full oblation.
1.20.1	He offers an oblation to Agni on eight potsherds or five potsherds.
1.20.2	Before the Anuyaja of the Agni-offering, the Upamshu-offering is made with the formula, "Agni, Agni, Agni." In the four Prayajas, he places four cases.
1.20.3	"The Agni is worshipped with the Samidhs" (is the formula) in the case of the Agni-portion of butter. "Come, I shall tell you" (is the verse) in the case Soma-portion.
1.20.4	"The two verses, "O Agni, today do thou, O Agni, do thou" are the Yajya and Anuvakya. Or, "O Agni today do thou, with these hymns, do thou."
1.20.5	He offers two oblations around the Puronuvakya, with the verses, "Again with energy and wealth."
1.20.6	He offers the Svishtakrit oblation to Agni with the verse, "Today with these rays of thine, do thou."
1.20.7	The two Anuyājas are in Tristubh metre.
1.20.8	The chariot, the garment and the bull are again given away.
1.20.9	In the two Anuyāja offerings to Agni, he places two cases.
1.20.10	He directs the highest Anuyāja loudly.
1.20.11	The verses of the Patnīsaṃyāja offerings should be recited in a low voice.
1.20.12	He should offer the Agni-Varuna oblation on eleven potsherds, with the formulas, "You are Agni, you are Agni" as the Yajya and Anuvakya.
1.20.13	The rekindling of the fire is concluded.
1.20.14	One who kindles the third fire should offer these oblations: "Lekah, Salekah, Sulakeh."
1.20.15	For the sake of wealth, one should transfer the Ahavaniya from the Garhapatya.
2.1.4	In the evening, when the sun has set behind the tree, he takes the fire from the Garhapatya to the Ahavaniya. In the morning, when the dawn has appeared, or before sunrise, he should keep the Ahavaniya fire burning at night.
2.1.5	Having approached the Garhapaty with the two verses, "May the Garhapatys awaken," the sacrificer instructs, "Take it up."
2.1.6	"You are Dhṛṣṭi, you are Brahman." Having taken up the Upaveṣa, the Adhvaryu says, "By your speech, I offer to the Hotṛ." With this, he takes the Anvāhārya from the Garhapatya to the Āhavanīya.
2.1.7	"Here is the Anvāhāryā." He places it in its proper place.
2.1.8	The sacrificer recites the three verses, "Bhūr Bhuvah Suvar" etc., in the evening, "What has been done by day" and in the morning, "What has not been done by night".
2.1.9	He establishes the fire in the place of worship with the verse, "Offering of immortality", in the evening facing the west, "To the fire, svāhā" and in the early morning facing the east, "To the sun, svāhā".
2.1.10	"All the world now brings (the fire) to us." With his own hand holding the kindling wood, the sacrificer approaches the place of rest.
2.1.11	"Whatever fires there are, O Agni," with five verses he places the fires on the kindling wood.
2.1.12	With these five mantras, he adorns the fires with sprinkling, covering, and placing of flowers, in front and above.
2.1.13	He strews the fires with darbha grass, with the tips towards the east and north.
2.2.1	Having washed the Agnihotra-pot, the ladle, and the Agnihotra-tray to the north of the Garhapatya, he places them on the bundle of Kusha-grass and the Palasa-wood.
2.2.2	Having placed the cow to be milked to the south of the resting place, the sacrificer recites the formula, "You are the cow, the bearer of the vow." He touches the altar with the formula, "This is yours."
2.2.3	The Adhvaryu, having placed the calf to the south, and having turned towards the east and north, milks from the cow that has not yet disappeared and has not yet risen, from the cow that is not a Śūdra, into the Agnihotra vessel, with the milking formula.
2.2.4	Having milked, he brings it into the vessel.
2.2.5	He does not touch it.
2.2.6	It has been said that one should milk before the elder and the younger of the two brothers.
2.2.7	The sacrificer touches the water with the formula, "Thou art lightning." Having crossed the Ahavaniya fire, he sits down to the south along with his wife in his own place.
2.2.8	The Homa should be performed at dusk and dawn.
2.2.9	Having seen the stars, one should perform Homa at dusk, when the night is fasting, before sunrise, when the sun is about to rise, or when it has risen.
2.2.10	The time for Homa is from dusk till the end of dusk, and from dawn till the end of dawn.
2.2.11	Having taken it, he should offer four spoonfuls in the evening with the formula, "Salutations to the cloth, svāhā." In the morning, he should offer with the formula, “Salutations to the garment, svāhā.”
2.2.12	Having recited the Vyāhṛtis at both times and given a boon, he should offer.
2.2.13	From the time of the morning offering till the evening offering, from the evening offering till the morning offering - this is the rule for emergencies.
2.2.14	"I sprinkle thee with truth, with truth," he sprinkles with his hand in the evening; "with truth, with truth" in the morning.
2.2.15	"Thou art the continuity of the sacrifice," he causes the stream of water to flow from the Garhapatya to the Ahavaniya.
2.2.16	Having placed the Garhapatya fire-pan, having taken up the Ghṛṣṭi (spoon) with the formula, "Thou art the Ghṛṣți," having placed the embers towards the north, having made them hot, having recited the formula, "The hot ones are standing," having taken up the Homa-offering for the evening with the formula, "I take up the fire of the sun for the day and night," he places it on the embers with the formula, "The place of Ida."
2.3.1	"I take Agni for the sun, for the night, for the day" (thus) one should offer in the morning.
2.3.2	"May Agni bestow your brilliance" (thus) with darbha grass, "You are the nectar" (thus) having poured the milk from the ladle, having washed the milking pot, and having poured it back as before, "May the Rakshas be obstructed" (thus) he performs the fire-offering three times.
2.3.3	"You are the heat, the abode of prosperity." Having made the path, he scatters towards the north.
2.3.4	Having established the sacrificial post here, having placed it near, saying "Give me offspring," he scatters embers on the Garhapatya with firmness, saying "The offspring is turned back, the fear is turned back."
2.3.5	Having taken the ladle with the formula, "For the god thee", and having burnt the Agnihotra ladle with the formula "May it be destroyed", he cleanses the Agnihotra ladle by means of the formula, "Thou art the Suparna."
2.3.6	"May the sacrificer and his wife be free from injury" - having cleansed both, he invites the sacrificer in the evening with the words, "I shall pour out (the oblation)" and in the morning with the words, “I shall pour out.
2.3.7	The sacrificer is the oblation of the gods. Having uttered this in a low voice, he responds loudly with "Oṃ, let it be raised."
2.3.8	From the raising of the oblations onwards, one does not move around.
2.3.9	He restrains speech.
2.3.10	With four formulas, he carries the four full ladles of Agni and earth. With the last one twice, he carries five times.
2.3.11	Having carried, he touches the ladle with the formula, "Thou art the ten-hotr."
2.3.12	"He touches the pot that has been brought forward with the verse, "Together with the gods, with the evening lights." In the morning, he touches it with the verse, "Together with the gods with the morning lights."
2.4.1	Taking the kindling wood, he places it above the ladle handle, and with the verse, "May the gods grant me cattle," he places it on the couch behind the Garhapatya.
2.4.2	The sacrificer bows down to the lord of the fire, the light-bearer.
2.4.3	Having taken the Dashotr, he explains it, saying, "To Agni Vaisvānara," and having held it in the middle region, saying, "For you, O Wind," and having raised it, he places it on the stool behind the Ahavaniya, saying, "Grant me life."
2.4.4	He places the Palāśi kindling wood, saying, "This is your Agni kindling wood."
2.4.5	Having touched the fire with the formula, "Thou art lightning," having performed Prāṇāyāma in the blazing fire, he should offer oblations of milk, ghee, curd, rice, barley and cooked food with Soma with the formulas, "Agni is light, light is Agni, svāhā" in the evening and "Sūrya is light, light, is Sūrya, svāhā " in the morning.
2.4.6	Agni is light, the sun is light, svāhā. In the evening, the sun is the light, the fire is the light, svāha. In the morning. Thus some recite the combined offering.
2.5.1	He again places it on the seat, saying, "Grant me radiance."
2.5.2	Having taken the paste, he anoints the Kūrcā with the verse, "O Agni, lord of the house, I anoint the plants with the plants." He waits for the Garhapatya fire, turning to the right.
2.5.3	Having skipped the first offering, one should offer the subsequent one more abundantly with the verse, “Bhūr Bhuvah Suvar.” Or silently.
2.5.4	One should make it more abundant for consumption.
2.5.5	Having offered oblations, one should meditate on Vishnu.
2.5.6	Taking up the ladle, one says "O Rudra, be pleased." One makes the flame of the ladle blaze three times towards the north.
2.5.7	In the evening, one smears the paste with "For nourishment, for you."
2.5.8	In the morning, one smears upwards with "For energy, for you."
2.5.9	Having placed the ladle in the basket, he says, "For the Pitrs thee, do thou delight the Pitrs." Having wiped the paste with the left hand on the mound to the south, having touched water with the words, "Thou art the rain," and having eaten twice with the little finger, having sipped water, he eats again.
2.5.10	The oblation to Agni is the begetter of offspring. He consumes it with the ladle held with the handle towards the east. The oblation to Surya is the begetter. He cleanses it twice in the morning.
2.5.11	He cleanses the ladle with darbha-blades, fills it with water and releases the water towards the north of the Ahavaniya with the verse, "O you who are purifying, do you purify me."
2.6.1	Having heated the Agnihotra ladle, having cleansed it again with water, having filled it again with water and having recited the verse, "I sprinkle thee for the serpents, may the serpents prosper thee", one should pour it down in the east. "Thou art the sacrificial grass", one should say in the middle of the altar. "I sprinkle thee to the houses, may the houses prosper thee", one says to the wife in the palm.
2.6.2	"Satisfy the seven sages." One should release the remaining water to the north of the Garhapatya.
2.6.3	With the ladle, to Agni Gṛhapati, svāhā. Thus in the Garhapatya fire. To Agni Āditya, svāhā, in the Anvāhārya-pācana fire. To Agni Bhūr Bhuvaḥ Suvaḥ, svāhā in the Sabhya fire. To Agni Annapati, svāha, in the Āvasatya fire. Having offered, to Viṣṇu, svāhā; he offers the second oblation.
2.6.4	Again, he sprinkles as before.
2.6.5	Having washed the ladle etc., having discharged the water towards the north, he should deposit them on the altar.
2.6.6	The body of light, the Self, is within the heart, burning upwards, located in the middle of the flame of fire, and in the middle of that flame is the supreme Self, says the Veda.
2.6.7	Then, at the end of the Homa, having sprinkled oneself everywhere, the performer should take ash from the Garhapatya fire and make a mark on the forehead, heart, abdomen, arms, and throat in the form of a flame, four fingers long, like a lamp, with the tip pointing upwards.
2.6.8	By that, one attains auspiciousness and ultimately attains self-realization.
2.7.1	The sacrificer, having risen from his seat, approaches the Havirdhana fire, as if it were a door, and stands facing it, reciting the Anuvaka, "Adhvaram."
2.7.2	There, in the morning, he recites the Agni-Soma hymn, "O Agni-Soma, do this for me," and the Agni-Soma-Indra hymn, "O both of you, Agni-Indra," in the bright fortnight. In the dark fortnight, he recites in the same place.
2.7.3	He worships with the six subsequent verses, "O Agni, do thou lengthen our life."
2.7.4	He worships the Garhapatya fire in each year with the verses, "O Agnı, do thou lengthen life, O Agni, do thou purify." One should offer oblations to Pavamana.
2.7.5	"O Agni, giver of life, give me life," he says, standing by the Ahavaniya fire. "O Citravasa, may I attain your protection." He stands by the fire at night.
2.7.6	"O Agni, the kindlers, a hundred winters," he says, kindling the fire.
2.7.7	"May you be united with Agni," he says, while standing by the Ahavanīya fire, reciting the remaining verses of the Anuvāka.
2.7.8	"I see the creatures," he says, looking at his house and cattle.
2.7.9	"O water, O water!" (thus) he recites while standing in the cattle-shed.
2.7.10	"May you rejoice!" (thus) reciting, he stands between the two fires.
2.7.11	"May the collection be united!" (thus) touching the calf of the Agnihotra cow or the Agnihotra cow herself.
2.7.12	With three Gāyatrī verses beginning with "O Agni, may you protect me from above" and two verses beginning with "You, O Agni, are the one," he attends the Garhapatya fire.
2.8.1	"I see your energy." (Thus) the houses and cattle.
2.8.2	"The most desirable of Savitar." (Thus) one should offer to the Ahavanīya fire. "The Soma, the sound." (Thus) to the Soma.
2.8.3	"Never do you become old." (Thus) at night.
2.8.4	"We have surrounded thee, O Agni, with thy house." Thus he says to the Gārhapatya fire. "O Agni, the lord of the house," thus he says to the Āśītiṣā fire. "May we obtain the luminous one for our son," thus he says if he has no son. "May we attain the luminous one for his son," thus he (the father) says if he has a son. "For him and for him," thus he says as long as his sons are born. "May we have the luminous one," thus he says at the end.
2.8.5	"You are the world, you are the thousand-nourisher, you are the nourisher." He again embraces the calf. (He does so) for the Agnihotra-cow.
2.8.6	"May there be the greatness of the three worlds." With the Mahitri verse consisting of three feet, he worships the fire-pit.
2.8.7	One who is far away and desires welfare should see him with this verse consisting of three lines.
2.8.8	May he return safely. One who desires prosperity should recite this mantra at any other place except the sacrificial ground.
2.8.9	Or one should stand facing the east in the evening, reciting "May there be prosperity. May I have good offspring."
2.8.10	Or one should recite "From the sky" in the evening and morning, standing facing the east.
2.9.1	One desiring to be liberated should offer with milk, one desiring prosperity with ghee, one desiring brilliance with curd, one desiring control with barley-gruel, one desiring a village with cooked rice, one desiring food with rice, one desiring strength with flour, one desiring to destroy sin or one desiring knowledge with flour, one desirous of brahmic glory with Soma.
2.9.2	The offering of Soma, rice and curds is not to be placed on the fire.
2.9.3	At the time of offering, one should place the fresh Darbha grass and ghee.
2.9.4	The Agnihotra of the king is offered on the new moon day.
2.9.5	Every day, food is given to Brahmins.
2.9.6	This is the Agnihotra offered in between.
2.9.7	Agni should always be attended to.
2.9.8	One who sacrifices to Soma should always offer Agnihotra.
2.9.9	The sacrificer himself or his disciple should offer Agnihotra every day.
2.9.10	He kindles the fires with the mantras, "Let it shine, let it shine, you are shining for me, svāhā."
2.9.11	"O Agni, thou hast come to thy own body. O Heaven and Earth, bestow on us strength." Having smeared the sacrificial grass in the Agnihotra vessel, he strikes it on the Ahavaniya.
2.9.12	For that is the completion of the Agnihotra.
2.9.13	One should not strike the sacrificial grass.
2.9.14	It is known that the Agnihotra is an incomplete sacrifice.
2.10.1	The sacrificer, about to go away, orders the fires to be placed together.
2.10.2	Standing in his own place, pure, he says to the blazing Āhavanīya, "My name is first, O Jātavedas." Having approached it, he should remain silent near it, or he should release (the speech) away from it.
2.10.3	He should sleep below, with three means.
2.10.4	He does not go away beyond the tenth day.
2.10.5	Not on a festival day.
2.10.6	At the time of the vow, he performs the vow.
2.10.7	Facing the dwelling, he stands before the fires, saying, "Here you are, O Agni, there you are, O Agnis."
2.10.8	If he goes away without standing before them, he should recite this facing the dwelling.
2.10.9	Having gone away, carrying the kindling woods, and having seen the roof, he should go to the fires, disregarding any.
2.10.10-14	"He says, 'Now I have brought the world', and having approached the fire-places, he restrains speech near them and releases it near them. Having ordered, 'Arrange the fires', he says, 'May your name and my name be known to Jātavedas.' He approaches the Āhavanīya. He says, 'Salutations to Agni, the invincible.' He approaches the Garhapatya. He recites, 'Your fathers.' He approaches the Anvāhāryapacaniya.
2.10.15	This Agni is the best of all. Thus he says again to the Ahavaniya.
2.10.16	If there is a lapse in the vow, one should offer the oblation with the words, "May the mind and the light be accepted."
2.10.17	Some say that one should approach the fire with the Viraj verses when setting out on a journey or returning from a journey.
2.10.18	Some say that the Adhvaryu should not kindle the fires when setting out on an expedition.
2.10.19-21	Who will awaken the superior one who is asleep? "He who does not kindle the fire, he who is the bestower of fearlessness, may he grant me fearlessness. May I be well. I am going to depart." "He who is going to depart stands up, saying, "He who is the bestowal of fearlessness has granted me fearlessness. I am well. I am departing." When he returns from his absence, he says, "I have returned." Some say that one should bow to the fires silently and then depart.
2.10.22	"Do not be afraid of the house!" He enters the house with five (verses).
2.10.23	They should report any crime committed earlier on that day, and he should not condemn them.
2.10.24	"He enters the house, saying, "I am the house."
2.10.25	He looks at his wife, saying, "All of us together with you"
2.11.1	Now, when one is about to go away with his house, if he has stayed for five, nine or ten nights in a place where the Samhitā is recited, or if he has stayed there for nine nights for some reason, and then returns and stays there for one night, and is about to go again, he should offer this oblation to Vastaṣpati.
2.10.1	If the vessel is not to be carried, he puts it down without reciting any formula. If it is not possible to carry it, they take it up again without offering.
2.10.2	The one yoked to Agni is on the right, the one not yoked is on the left. Then having recited the Anudruta verse "To Vasta and Pat" he offers on the Garhapatya with the northern verse.
2.10.3	He does not offer again.
2.10.4	They do not bring down what is less.
2.10.5	They do not go without sprinkling the fire-places.
2.10.6	"He places the fires separately in the kindling woods with the formula, "This is thy natural place." Or with the formula, "O Agni, that form of thine which is fit for sacrifice," having heated the hand on himself, he brings it to the mouth. Having descended, O Jātavedas," having made the one who has ascended himself descend on the kindling woods, he should churn before sunset.
2.10.7	Or, having said, "Let him descend in the worldly fire," he offers, saying, "This is the best."
3.1.1	The Darsha-Pūrnamāsa are for all desires.
3.1.2	One should desire them simultaneously.
3.1.3	Or, if one desires separately, one should offer separately.
3.1.4	One should perform the Darsha-Paurnamasa sacrifices throughout one's life, or for thirty years, or one should stop when one is old, say some.
3.1.5	It is understood that one attains the highest state through these.
3.1.6	These two are taught together.
3.1.7	They are distinguished by the statement.
3.1.8	The sacrificer himself is the performer of all the rites. The hearing of the desires, the celibacy, the placing of the materials, the giving of Dakṣiṇā, the performance of rites without mantras, and the blessings are directed towards the sacrificer.
3.1.9	Having known the moon to be full, he shaves his hair and beard and observes fast, saying, "I shall perform the sacrifice on the full-moon day of the previous fortnight."
3.1.10	Having ascertained whether the moon is afflicted or not, he observes the fast, saying, "I shall perform the Darśa sacrifice."
3.1.11	Having offered the morning Agnihotra, having followed it, having taken it up, having meditated on Narayana when the sun has risen, having recited "Who knows Vishnu's name?" and having taken the fire from the Garhapatya to the Ahavaniya, having established the fire in the Ahavaniya place, having recited "The gods who know the path," he adds the kindling wood with the verse "O Agni, give me brilliance."
3.2.1	The sacrificer says, "I take Agni, the Vasus, the Rudras, and this energy." He recites these three verses when the Āhavanīya is being carried forward. At the full moon, he says, "The offering of the full moon." At the new moon, he says "The offering of new moon."
3.2.2	"The animals are between the fires," he recites while standing between the fires.
3.2.3	The Adhvaryu places the Garhapatya with the formula, "The gods are mine."
3.2.4	The sacrificer mutters the formula, "Here are the offspring, here are the cattle."
3.2.5	The Adhvaryu puts the Anvähäryapacaniya with the formula, “The gods are in me.”
3.2.6	The sacrificer murmurs the formula, “This is the place of the Pitrs.”
3.2.7	Some put it with the Vyähṛtis.
3.2.8	The Adhvaryu recites the Sabya verse, "You are always the protector of the assembly."
3.2.9	The sacrificer mutters the same.
3.2.10	The Adhvaryu mutters the Avasathyam verse, "Food is the Avasathy."
3.2.11	The sacrificers mutters the same verse.
3.2.12	When the Adhvaryu has recited the verses, he sits down to the north and mutters, "This is for the Agni-Jyesthas."
3.2.13-14	The plants are rich in milk. At the full moon, the couple should eat a mixture of ghee, curd and milk, excluding peas and meat, before the calves. They should eat to their heart's content.
3.2.15	Having touched water with the formula, "Thou art lightning," he moves towards the north of the Ahavaniya and sips water with the formula "The plants are yielding milk."
3.2.16	He attends upon the deities with the formula, “O gods, do you exert among the gods."
3.2.17	He places five kindling woods on the Ahavaniya with the formulas, "O Agni, lord of vows,"
3.2.18-20	Thinking of the ocean in his mind, he says, "O Agni, lord of vows, I shall observe the vow." He approaches the deities according to their respective signs and observes the vow. He approaches the sun, saying, "You are the supreme lord." If one observes the vow after sunset, one approaches the Ahavanīya fire with this.
3.2.21	On the Parvan days, the sacrificer himself offers the Agnihotra. At the New-moon sacrifice, he puts the remnant of the Agnihotra offering in a vessel for the morning Agnihotra.
3.2.22	He who is truthful, has three means, and is waiting for the evening, eats the food of the village, eats the food from the forest, or eats water, or eats nothing.
3.2.23	One should not eat that by which one would be performing the morning Agnihotra.
3.3.1	The Adhvaryu, having taken the twig of Palasa or Sami, with its leaves and branches intact, with its tip not dry, growing towards the east or the north, cuts it with the formula, "For Iṣe thee!" He anoints it with the formula "For Urge thee!" and bends it.
3.3.2	He brings it with the formula,"This is the eastern one."
3.3.3	He drives away the three calves with the formula, "For Vayu thee!"
3.3.4	Some say with the Darbha grass.
3.3.5	"The gods have come" (he says) and then "O mother of calves, go to the pasture."
3.3.6	"The pure waters" (he says), and then he instructs.
3.3.7	"The firm ones are here" (he says). He looks at the sacrificer.
3.3.8	Having taken a branch from the Ahavaniya fire, he places it on the southern side of the Garhapatya fire, saying, "Protect the animals of the sacrificer." He places it on the eastern side of the fire or on the girdle.
3.3.9	"For the god thee." He consecrates the horse-shoe and the axe, saying, "Thou art the sound of the sacrifice." He approaches the Garhapaty fire.
3.3.10	"He sprinkles it with the formula, 'The evil one is repelled.'
3.3.11	He goes to the heaven of the gods with the formula, ‘One goes to the heaven.’ He goes to the Ahavanīya with the formula, “One goes to the sky.”
3.4.1	He looks towards the altar with the formula, "The grass has been spread here."
3.4.2	Having gone to the direction where the sacrificial grass is to be given, having thrown one stalk, saying, "Thou art the mound of Vishnu," and having thrown another, saying, "thou art the enclosure of the gods."
3.4.3	Having released the grass-rope of the animal, he should say, "I release your share of the animals." Having touched the animal that has been released, he should say "This is of the gods." Having touched the released animal, he should hold the animal that has not been released, saying, "For the god." Having wiped upwards, he should say "For the gods." Having placed the animal that has already been released, he says, "For the gods." The cutter should cut the animal at the joints, giving a fistful of flesh with the nails.
3.4.4	That is the Prastara.
3.4.5	He gives three, five or seven handfuls of grass, or bundles of grass, except for the Parisa and the Utsarjana, with this very (verse).
3.4.6	He touches the Avraścana grasses with the verse, "O Devabharis,
3.4.7	Having touched himself with the thousand-streamed, he says, "The sun is my crest-jewel." Having wound the bronze (vessel) clockwise, he places it in the three-layered or five-layered (vessel), saying, "The womb is protected."
3.4.8	He recites the mantra at each layer.
3.4.9	"Protect the union of the earth." Having recited this, he places the bricks in the form of a line, with the tip facing east and the top facing north, reciting the verse, "May there be an abundance of them." He then collects the lumps of clay or the bricks, which have been cut according to the prescribed size, reciting the verse "May you be well-collected."
3.4.10	"The womb is not cut." This is said about the last layer of bricks.
3.4.11	The grass for the sacrificial grass is taken up with the formula, "The pure water is fit for sacrifice." For the Pitrs, it is taken up with "The grass is fit for sacrifice, the root is fit for sacrifice," or with "The grass has been cut once, the root has been cut once." Having taken up the grass for the sacrificial strew, he silently collects it. He also collects the grass for the Parivit.
3.4.12	"The armour for Indra's wife," he ties all (the bundles) together. "Pūṣan has tied them," he ties them together in a clockwise direction.
3.4.13	"May it be firm for you," he covers the knot at the back, facing east.
3.4.14	"You are the water, O Asvins," he touches (the head of the sacrificer).
3.4.15	"For Indra thee," he says while lifting it up; "for Brihaspati," he says while carrying it with the head.
3.4.16	"Follow the broad sky," he says while returning; "with the Adityas," he says while placing it on the other side of the Ahavaniya fire.
3.4.17	"You are going to the gods," he says while reciting this; "The Adityas place you on the back," he says while depositing it in the vicinity of the Garhapatya fire, as if above.
3.5.1	Having made the three-metal-alloy silent, he places it on the fire, saying, "This is the black form." Having collected a bundle of wood consisting of twenty-one pieces of Palāśa, Khadira, or Yāsika wood, he binds it, saying, "The black one is in the pit." Having made a knot clockwise, he places it with the sacrificial grass, saying, "Pūṣan is here."
3.5.2	Having made the sacrificial grass into a three-layered head, he places it on the ground from the tip of the Veda.
3.5.3	The tips of the Veda, along with the scraping of the wood, are placed together.
3.5.4	Here some say, "Having made the altar on the new moon day, one should bring the wood and sacrificial grass."
3.5.5	Having cut off the leaves of the branch from the root, having bound the branch, he says, "You are the Upaveṣa." Having placed the root of the branch near the Garhapatya, he says, "
3.5.6	Taking the third part of the thread, and placing it in a safe place, he says, "You are the sacred thread of the Vasus, with a hundred strands." Having made a three-stranded sacred thread of Darbha grass on the branch, he says, "Three-stranded, Palasha, Darbha." On the branch, he loosens the roots, and the tips are at the front.
3.5.7	He does not make a knot.
3.5.8	In the fire-room, the smearing of the fire-places, and the decorations of the deities, and the couple should be adorned.
3.6.1	Here, on the Upavasatha day, in the afternoon, or when the sun is behind the tree, one performs the Pindapitryajna.
3.6.2	Having offered the evening Agnihotra, he places the Agnihotra-vessel, the pot, the ladle, the strainer, the vessel for pouring, the vessel for churning, the wooden vessel, the iron vessel, the vessels for the Saṁnāyya oblation, having washed them, he covers the Garhapatya with Darbha grass from the north and places the vessels with their mouths turned towards the south.
3.6.3	Having made two darbha-blades, about the size of a span, into a filter, he cuts them with the formula, "You are the filters."
3.6.4	Having recited the formula, "These are the Prāṇa and Apāna," and having wiped them with water with the formula, “You are pure in the mind of Visnu,” he instructs the cow-herder with the formula, "Do the milking with the filter."
3.6.5	Having brought the Agnihotra-vessel with the Pavitras inside, and having sprinkled it three times with the Pavitrathe Gāyatrī verses beginning with "Devā v" and ending with "Uttani" and having sprinkled it with the Pavitrot the Gāyatrī verse beginning with "Devīr" and ending with Uttani, he sprinkles the vessels with the formula, "Purify yourselves."
3.6.6	Having placed the purified and protected (materials) in the Ācārya-vessel, he waits for the coming of the Āyatis. Having heated the Sānāyya-vessels, taking up the Upavesha with the formula, "Thou art Dhṛṣṭi," having spread the embers from the Garhapatya towards the north with the formula, "Thou art the creation of Bhṛgu and Angiras," having placed the pot on them, he encircles it with the embers with the formula, “Thou art the creation
3.7.1	"Thou art the purifying of the Vasus, with a hundred streams," with this formula he places the twig of the purifying grass, with its tip towards the east, in the evening, in the pot. "Thou art the purifier of the Vasus with a thousand streams," with this he places the twig with its tip towards north, in the morning.
3.7.2	Standing near the pot, he holds the purifying grass, restraining speech.
3.7.3	He instructs, "Tell me when the pot is filled."
3.7.4	Having said, "I am letting loose," he takes the rope with the words, "You are the rope of the sun."
3.7.5	He lets loose the calf with the words, “You are Pūṣan.”
3.7.6	He instructs, “Do not let the cow and the calf go between me and the resting place.”
3.7.7	If they go between, he should mutter, “Do not destroy the Saṁnāyya.”
3.7.8	He consecrates with the words, "I am letting loose you with the Yakṣma disease and progeny.
3.7.9	The milker approaches with the verse, "Thou art the stream of milk."
3.7.10	He recites the verse, "The heaven and this earth" while the milk is being milked. "The milkers are milking the pot" when the sound of the stream is heard. "The drop is offered, the particle is offered" when the drops fall. "To the heaven and earth" when the milk is spilled.
3.7.11	The milker asks the one who is taking back the milk with the verse, “Thou art the wish-yielding cow.”
3.7.12	The milker replies, "This one."
3.7.13	The Adhvaryu praises the cow with the verse, "She is the life of the universe."
3.7.14	He brings the milk into the pot with the verse, "May the god Savitr."
3.7.15	He says, "Which one?" It has been said, "The third one."
3.7.16	He praises the second cow with the verse "She is the creator of the universe" and the third cow with the verse "
3.7.17	Thus having milked three times, he says thrice, "For Indra, the lord of cattle, to the gods."
3.7.18	One who sacrifices to Indra should be known as one who sacrifices to Indra, and one who sacrifices to Mahendra should be known as a sacrificer to Mahendra.
3.7.19	Having spoken, without repeating, he silently milks the remaining milk.
3.8.1	Having brought the milk from all the cows, having washed it with the formula, "May heaven and earth unite this sacrifice," having mixed it, having brought it in the pot, having cooked it, having poured clarified butter over it silently, having churned it as if drawing it, he sprinkles it.
3.8.2	Having cooled down the milk of one, two or three cows, which was continuously milked for two or three days, he prepares the Soma-pressing stone with that curd. He presses it with the formula, "I press with Soma and curd."
3.8.3	"Thou art the continuity of the sacrifice" (he says) with the remnant of the Agnihotra, with the words "This is the milk for the evening" he anoints the leaves with grass. With rice grains, with rotten herbs, with Kvala grass or with Darbha grass.
3.8.4	"The waters are the oblations" (he says), having brought it in an iron vessel or a wooden vessel, he places it with the words "Thou art the setting, for Vishnu thee."
3.8.5	If it is made of clay, grass or wood.
3.8.6	Having released these two, namely, leaves and darbha grass, he places the sacred thread of the branches in a safe place, and says, "O Vishnu, protect the oblation." He places it in the vicinity of the Garhapatya fire, covered above.
3.9.1	In the morning, having brought them with the eastern branch, he releases the calves for milking.
3.9.2-8	Having placed the skulls, he should milk in the morning as he would in the evening. One should not wash. One who does not offer Soma should not perform the Soma sacrifice. Some say, one who does not offer the Soma should perform the Soma sacrifice.
3.9.9	The Brāhmaṇas, the Kṣatriyas, the Vaiśyas and the Śūdras should offer oblations to Mahendra.
3.9.10	He strews the fires with Darbha grass.
3.9.11	Having kindled the Āhavanīya and Garhapatya fires, he recites the verse "The two fires are kindled by the sacrificer."
3.9.12	He should sleep below the Āhavanīyī fire or the Garhapatya fire.
3.9.13	One should keep awake at night on the new moon day, or as much as one can.
3.9.14	One should be engaged in the vow.
3.9.15	One should not go beyond the boundary of the hermitage.
3.9.16	All this is to be done on the new moon.
3.9.17	On the full moon day, one should kindle the fire the previous day, and arrange the sacrificial grass and wood. One should also sweep the fire place.
3.9.18	It becomes all at once. It becomes.
4.1.1	The Agnihotra is offered the next day, the day after, or in the morning, when the sun has risen, one begins the procedure of the full moon on the day before sunrise.
4.1.2	There are four priests in the sacrifices of the new and full moon: the Brahman, the Hotri, the Adhvaryu, and the Agnidhra.
4.1.3	Having washed the hand with the formula, "For your action," he spreads the grass-blade from the Garhapatya towards the Ahavaniya with the formula, "Thou art the continuity of the sacrifice." Silently he spreads the grass from the southern to the northern side.
4.1.4	He places the seats of the Brahman and the sacrificer to the south of the Ahavaniya, the former for the Brahman and the latter for the sacrificer.
4.1.5	Having spread darbha-grass to the north of the Garhapatya fire, he places the sacrificial requisites in pairs. The five pairs are: the wooden sword and the potsherds, the Agnihotra ladle and the winnowing basket, the black antelope skin and the pestle, the pestle and the mortar, and the stone and the grinding stone.
4.1.6	The five pairs are: the ladle made of Khadira wood, the Juhu ladle made of Palasa wood, the Upamant ladle made of Ashvattha wood, the Dhruva ladle made of Vaikankata wood, the Veda vessel, the vessel for the Prasitra, the vessel for Idas, the vessel for Priniita and the vessel for Pratiprasthata. The eight wooden vessels which are used in the Homa are: the vessel for ghee, the vessel for Anvahaarya, the stone, the vessel for Sannayyas, the vessel of Kumbi, the Shakhapavitra, the vessel for Abhijani, the vessel for Nidana, the vessel for Dohada. The vessel for Paviitra is prepared on the previous day.
4.1.7	Here the sacrificer, having approached the Brahmanical preceptor, who is the most eminent among Brahmins, and having gone around the Ahavaniya fire on the right side, and having crossed it on the south, sits down facing north.
4.2.1	Having washed his hands and feet, having sipped water, having gone round the Ahavaniya fire from left to right, having stood to the south, having saluted the Brahmasadan, having approached the Brahmasadan saying "O Dadhi-savyas", having removed the grass from the seat, having sat down saying "I go up, I go up, I am going up", having looked at the heaven and earth saying "May heaven and earth protect me", having recited the three verses "Bhuvah, Bhuvah, Suvah, Who is this Brahman?" and "I am the lord of the earth", having recited these two verses,
4.2.2	In the rites involving mantras, he restrains speech.
4.2.3	If he recites the Vedic verse dedicated to Vishnu and then recites the Vyahrtis, he restrains his speech.
4.2.4	Here, the Adhvaryu, having brought the Pavitra, and having said "For Daksha you", takes the cup for the Praṇītā offering and sprinkles it three times with water, saying, "You are of the forest."
4.2.5	With the milking of cows for one desiring cattle, with affection for one desiring food, with a pot made of clay for one desiring food and with a pan for one desiring brahmic glory.
4.2.6	He brings it from the other side of the Garhapatya fire, with the strainer hidden in the vessel, saying, "Who among you will take you? May he take you."
4.2.7	Thinking, "I shall take this earth with this," he fills it with water, and reciting the mantra "The god is the water," as before, he consecrates it.
4.3.1	He instructs, "Brahman, I shall offer the water; the sacrificer should restrain speech."
4.3.2	The sacrificer, having been instructed by the Brahman, restrains speech while offering the oblations, and the sacrificer also restrains speech.
4.3.3	"Who is your friend?" "He who is your friend." Having bound with the Sphyi, he pours down together with the breath, without spilling.
4.3.4	The sacrificer, while being led, recites with two verses, "Those who are in front, and the earth and the sky," and with this verse, "You are purified by Brahman."
4.3.5	The Adhvaryu, having placed the potsherds on the Darbha-grass to the north of the Ahavaniya fire, covers them with Darbha-grass.
4.3.6	The pots are carried forward without being shaken.
4.3.7	Taking the strainers, he touches the pots with his hands holding the strainers, saying, "May they enter together."
4.3.8	Taking the Agnihotra ladle, he says, "For Daksha thee, thou art of the forest." Taking the winnowing basket with the left hand, he says, “For Veshtha thee.” Having roasted the barley grains on the Gārhapatya fire, he says, "I shall offer the oblation for the sacrificer."
4.3.9	"Om! Let it be offered!" Having been urged by the sacrificer, the Agni goes away, saying, "I shall offer the oblation." Having said this, he goes along the sky.
4.4.1	To the west of the Garhapatya, a cart is placed facing east, filled with rice or barley, together with a winnowing basket.
4.4.2	"He touches the right axle of the cart with the formula, "Thou art the axle." "And the left one with the formula, "Thou art the left one of the gods." "Having recited the formula, "Viṣṇu has pressed thee," he places the right foot on the left foot, thinking of himself as Viṣṇu. Or with the formula, “Thou art the step of Viṣṇu.”
4.4.3	He ascends with the formula, "
4.4.4	Having seen the Mitra-svarāṇā and other verses, he should remove the door of the fire with the verse "May the wind blow for your friend." Having seen the Mitra and other verses, and having touched with the verse "Bestow strength," he should remove the grass or chaff with the verse "Remove the evil." Having touched the water, one who is about to offer the oblation should recite the Dashotr verse.
4.4.5	Having placed the ladle in the Pavitra, he fills the fist with the ladle and pours it into the Havani. Having placed the ladle into the Pavitra, having poured four handfuls according to the deity, the fourth one silently, thrice with the mantra.
4.4.6	Having poured, he pours again.
4.4.7	In this way he pours the subsequent cake.
4.4.8	The sacrificer, while offering the oblation, recites the verse, "We invoke Agni, the Hotar, here."
4.4.9	He looks at everything while reciting, "Who yokes you? May he yoke you."
4.5.1	If the cart is not available, then placing the wooden sword to the west of the Garhapatya, placing the vessel in it, pouring the rice-cake into it, touching the eastern half of it with the formula, "This is the wooden sword," reciting all the formulas pertaining to the cart,
4.5.2	he touches the rice-cake which has been placed with the formula, “This is for the gods.”
4.5.3	The place where the rice-cake is placed is called “the place of placing.”
4.5.4	The words "to Sphyati" are already explained.
4.5.5	Taking the Puronuvakya oblations, he goes out with the words, "I am freed from Varuna's noose."
4.5.6	Looking at the entire sacrificial rite with the words, “I am shining towards the heaven.”
4.5.7	The Agniya oblation of eight potfuls, the Upāṃśuyāja, the Ajya oblation, the Prajāpatya, the Viṣṇu, the Agniṣṭoma, the Agniṣomiya, the Ekādaśakapāla Agniṣṭoma oblations are the principal oblations at the Full Moon.
4.5.8	Some say that there is no Agniṣṭoma offering for a non-Soma-sacrificer.
4.5.9	The Agniya eight-spooned oblation and the Saṁnāyya oblation to Indra are offered at the new moon.
4.5.10	If they are not offered, then the Agniya eight-spooned oblation, the Indra-Agni eleven-spooned or twelve-spooned oblations are offered.
4.5.11	These are the other offerings.
4.5.12	At the full moon, one should offer an oblation to Indra-Vṛtra-slayer on eleven or twelve spoons.
4.5.13	If the Vairāja Soma is performed according to the same procedure, then one should offer to Agni-Soma and Indra-Vairāja.
4.5.14	Some say that one should offer to Indra-Vairāja after the full moon has been completed.
4.6.1	He waits for the Āhavanīya fire, saying, "The fire of Vaiśvānara."
4.6.2	He descends, saying, "May the roads be firm."
4.6.3	"Svāhā to heaven and earth." Having recited this, he places the bones on the ground with the verse, "May I find the space between heaven and earth." He then places the bones on a cloth with the verse, "May the sun place you on its lap." He then places them in front of the Garhapatya fire according to the deity, with the verse, "Protect the offering for Agni." He then stands in front of the Gārhapatya fire with the verse,
4.6.4-6	Having sprinkled the fire-places with the sprinkling water, having placed the sacrificial grass and the sacrificial grass-blades, having placed the Prokṣaṇī vessel in the fire-places, having sprinkled the Prokṣani vessel, having sprinkled the fire-place, having sprinkled the sacrificial grass and sacrificial grass-blades in the fire-place with the Prokṣanī vessel, having sprinkled all around, having sprinkled the vessel of clarified butter, having sprinkled the wooden sword, having sprinkled the ladle, having sprinkled the spoon, having sprinkled the potsherd, having sprinkled the strainer, having sprinkled the Iḍā-vessel, having sprinkled the Ājyabhāga-vessel, having placed the wooden sword in the fire-pit, having placed the ladle in the fire-hole, having placed the spoon in the fire-chamber, having placed the potsherd in the fire-house, having placed the strainer in the fire-shed, having placed the Iḍā vessel in the fire shed, having placed the Ājyabhāja vessel in the fire house, having placed the vessel of clarified-butter in the fire-room, having placed the Sruva in the fire-hut, having placed the Dhruva in the house of fire, having placed the Upabhṛt in the house of the fire, having placed all the vessels in the house of Agni, having placed the Veda in the house of Veda, having placed the Brāhmaṇa in the house of Brāhma
4.6.7	"Thou art the wind's garment," taking the black antelope skin, he shakes it three times on the rubbish-heap, with the formula, "Thou art the garment of the wind, thou art the garment of Aditi."
4.6.8	"Thou art the skin of Aditi," he spreads it out in front, with the neck turned towards the west, with the wool uppermost.
4.6.9	"Thou art a support," not letting it go, he places the mortar on it.
4.6.10	"Thou art the body of Agni", saying this, he pours the oblation into the mortar three times with the mantra and once silently.
4.6.11	"Thou art a mountain", taking up the pestle, he strikes three times, saying, "May I strike the enemy of heaven, the Rakshas."
4.6.12	"O Havis-maker, come!" thus he thrice calls the Havis-maker. "O Havis maker, come to the Brahman!" thus he says. "O Havas-maker, come to the king!" thus he says to the king. "O Haviş-maker, come quickly!" thus he says (to the Brahman). "O Havismaker, come quickly to the king!" "O Havis - maker, come quickly!" "O Haviṣ-maker, come running!" thus he says, to the artisan.
4.6.13	Having released speech, the sacrificer yokes the sacrifice with the union of the sacrifice, saying, "Who yokes thee? May he yoke thee!"
4.7.1	When the rice grains have appeared, he orders, "Strike loudly."
4.7.2	The Agnidhra, taking a stone, strikes the pressing stone with the verse, "You are a mountain, the creator of verses." He strikes the pressing stone and the stone with the verse "Vrsarava, strike the pressing stone and strike the stone." He strikes twice on the pressing stone and once on the stone.
4.7.3	Striking three times, he makes nine strokes.
4.7.4	Having made the husks hot, he places the chaff in front of the eighty-year-old (priest) or to the north.
4.7.5	Having touched the cakes with the formula, "You are the cakes of the year," he pours them out with the formula, "May the year accept you."
4.7.6	He pours out the chaff on the heap with the formula, “May the year protect you.”
4.7.7	He scatters the chaff, saying, "Scattered are the demons, puffed up are the enemies." With the skull filled with chaff he scatters it, saying, "This is the share of the demons." With that filled with chaff he throws down the northern and southern parts of the intermediate space below the skin of black antelope with his left hand. He does not look back.
4.7.8	"Scattered are the Demons," he says, and scatters them.
4.7.9	Having performed the rites of Raudrāksa, Sanairiti, Paiṭṛka, Chhedana, Bhedana, Khana, Nirastana, Ghranana and Ātmābhīmarṣaṇa, one should sprinkle everywhere.
4.7.10	Having sprinkled, he places the skull.
4.7.11	He divides with the verse, "Vayu is the wind."
4.7.12	He scatters the rice grains in the vessel with the verse, “Deva is the god.”
4.7.13	"Having looked with an undaunted eye, he says, 'I see the secluded ones.' Having ordered, 'Make the three fruits,' he gives to the Avakshara.
4.7.14	"He purifies for the gods, he purifies for gods, he puries for gods," he makes the three fruits with three (verses).
4.8.1	Having washed the three-seeded ones, he places them on the inner part of the altar, having washed them three times.
4.8.2	The rite of the black antelope skin is explained.
4.8.3	Placing the black antelope skin and the wooden sword with the handle towards the north, he says, "You are the pillar of heaven." He places the wooden sword with its handle towards the east, saying, "You are a mountain." He places the eastern stone in the western half.
4.8.4	"O Dhishana, thou art the daughter of Parvata." Having looked at the rice-grains, he pours them into the pan, as before, without letting them fall.
4.8.5	"The portions are sweet." Having looked at rice-grains, "For thee, O god," he pours the rice-grains into the pan according to the deity, three times with the mantra and once silently.
4.8.6	Having recited the verse, "For Prāṇa thee," he spreads the cloth towards the east. Having recited the verse "For Apāna thee," he spreads it towards the west. Having recited the verses "For Vyāna thee" and "For Anva" in the middle region, he spreads the long cloth towards the east at the end.
4.8.7	Thereafter he spreads the cloth as he pleases.
4.8.8	He should scatter the ground with the verse, "The god is indeed..."
4.8.9	"I look at you with an undaunted eye," (thus) looking, she makes the pestle grind the grains. Having ordered the one who grinds the oblations,
4.8.10	she grinds.
4.8.11	Here she places the grains that are being ground.
4.8.12	He cooks the oblations in the Garhapatya.
4.8.13	Taking up the Upavesha with the formula, "Thou art Dhristi," and having recited the formula, "Do thou remove the Rakshas," he places two coals on the opposite side of the fire. Having placed the right-hand coal with the formula, “From Agni to Agni,” and having touched the water, he places the remaining coal with the formula "Do thou carry the offering to the gods." Having placed the skull on it with the formula, "Thou art Dhruva,"
4.9.1	"He places the embers on it with the verse, "It is burnt." He places the embers on the fire with the verse, "You are the supporter." He places the support first. Therefore, he places the support first."
4.9.2	Of the eight-vessel offering, two are in the middle, three are on the right, and three are on the left. The verse is, "O Dharma, you are the supporter." The verse is, "O Maruts, you are the sharers."
4.9.3	"Thou art the machine," for the northern ones; "Thou art the other," for the western ones; "Thou are the middle," for the eastern ones.
4.9.4	Then in the northern one, he places three in the manner of the eight-vessel, with "Thou art the middle," and the fourth as before, in the intermediate spaces as mentioned.
4.9.5	"Thou art the middle" for the remaining ones.
4.9.6	With the Veda, he places the embers in the skull-bones, saying, "Of the Bhrigus and Angiras."
4.9.7	Having recited the verse, "Those which are hot," he yokes the skull-bones with the verse, "Indra and Vayu, be yoked."
4.9.8	Having roasted the grains in a vessel, having covered them with a sacred thread, having placed them in the vessel, having recited "For the god thee", having sprinkled the grains according to the deity, three times with the mantra, and once silently.
4.9.9	While sprinkling, one should restrain speech, and while covering, one should release.
4.9.10	The deity indeed is this. Having purified the flour with the ladle, having taken it with the ladle, and having bound it with the Veda, he pours it into the flour with the verse, "O Ap, do thou unite with the Ap."
4.9.11	If the Prāṇītas are not available, then having purified water with the mantra, one should pour it with the verse, “O Ap, do you unite with the Ap.” This is the alternative procedure in case of emergency.
4.9.12	"You are born from the waters, you are the Madantīs," he pours the flour.
4.9.13	"You are being poured out with water." He pours it around in a clockwise direction.
4.10.1	"He says, "I am uniting you for the sake of generation," and having made a lump, he says, "You are the head of the sacrifice," and divides it according to the share.
4.10.2	Having made the two lumps equal, he touches the one for Agni, saying, "This is for Agni," and the one for the deity, saying, "this is for so-and-so."
4.10.3	Having removed the embers with the verse, "This I offer to the army," by placing the right skull-cup on the left, he places the right lump with the verse, “Thou art the head of the sacrifice.”
4.10.4	He places the left lump with the verse,“Thou art the heat, the life of the universe.”
4.10.5	So also the left one.
4.10.6	He makes the image like a tortoise, neither too high nor too low.
4.10.7	"Spread out widely." He spreads out the potsherds as far as he can.
4.10.8	Having brought the water into the vessel, he takes the skin, rubbing it clockwise with oil, not too much, not too little.
4.10.9	Having placed the curds, he protects the enclosed (fire) with the fire-stirring stick. He enkindles all the oblations three times with the fire-sticking stick.
4.10.10	"May the god Savitr cook thee." With darbha-blades he cooks the southern cake, sprinkling it.
4.10.11	"O Agni, protect the oblation." He recites this over the Garhapatya fire.
4.10.12	"Be united with the Brahman." With the Veda he sprinkles the cake with ashes along with the embers.
4.10.13	"Do not burn." He releases speech.
4.10.14	Having washed the fingers and rinsed the vessel, having heated it on the fire-brand, having taken it within the altar, having drawn three lines towards the north with the wooden sword, having offered three times with the formula, "For oneness svāhā," he moves the wooden sword in the three lines without touching them.
4.11.1	He makes the altar for the sacrificer towards the west of the Ahavaniya fire, either of unlimited size or as much as is required.
4.11.2	The sacrificer touches the ground with the words, "I am making this hall for him."
4.11.3	The Adhvaryu, having taken the Veda, says, "This is the Veda." Having touched the Veda, he touches the Veda three times in front of the Veda.
4.11.4	The sacrificer, while the Veda is being touched, recites the verse, "With four locks..."
4.11.5	The Adhvaryu takes the Stambayajus from the eastern half of the Veda, from the third part.
4.11.6	Taking up the wooden sword with the formula, "Thou art of the god Indra", and having consecrated it with the formula, “Thou art of Vayu”, he sharpens its tip with a darbha-blade. Having placed the darbha-blade with its tip towards the east or towards the north with the formula, "Thou art the armour of the earth", and having struck it with the wooden sword with "Thou art the earth, the divine altar", he takes up the darbha-blades along with the wooden sword and goes to the village with the formula, "Go to the village."
4.11.7	The sacrificer who is being led away recites, "He who leads me in the heart."
4.11.8	The Adhvaryu looks at the altar, reciting, "May the sky rain for you." The sacrificer also recites, "May Parjanya rain for you."
4.11.9	The Agnidhra moves forward to the north, reciting, "Salutations to the sky." He sits down with his hands stretched out in an undefined space.
4.11.10-13	The Adhvaryu places the two handfuls of Darbha grass on it with the formula, "O god Savitr, do thou bind." The Agnidhra places the handful of Darbha grass which has been placed on the mound with the formula, “The Araru has been removed from the earth." It becomes a heap. So also the second one.
4.11.14	"These waters are auspicious." Having struck with this, he strikes off the Araru. "For the divine sacrifice, for the earth." Having taken it, he strikes off (the Araru) with, "The Yatudhanas are struck off." He takes up the second one with, "For the divine worship."
4.12.1	"May Drapas not be deprived of heaven." With the third blow, he takes away the grass, saying, "May Araru not be deprived of the heaven of the earth, which is not fit for worship." Taking it, he says, "May the one who wishes evil not be deprived."
4.12.2	Silently, he takes away all the grass with the fourth blow. With the fourth blow, he says, "May Araru not he deprived of heaven."
4.12.3	The Adhvaryu, having taken up the Veda first, takes up the Veda in the form of the Veda. With the Sphyi, he draws a line towards the south, towards the east, with the formula, "O Vasus, you are mine."
4.12.4	The sacrificer follows with the formula, “O Yajnas, you are mine.”
4.12.5	The Adhvaryu draws a line towards west, towards the north, with the formula "O Rudras, you are mine". The Adhvaryus draw a line towards the north, towards the east with the formula, "O Adityas, you are mine."
4.12.6	It is said that they conquered the east with Agni.
4.12.7	The Veda-maker raises the two ends of the Veda towards the Ahavaniya, the two buttocks towards the Garhapatya, the middle of the Veda is bent down, the Veda is the altar.
5.1.1	Having ordered, "These men make this," with the formula, "By the impulse of the divine Savitr," he removes the upper skin with the Veda-stick.
5.1.2	The sacrificer recites the formula, "What is being dug out" while the pit is being dug out.
5.1.3	It should be dug out to a depth of two fingers, four fingers, the width of a chariot-wheel, or the size of a palm. One should not dig it out beyond this limit.
5.1.4	It has been said that the pit should be dug out for the Pitrs and the gods.
5.1.5	He makes the altar towards the south, with excreta, sloping towards the east, towards the north, or towards the east and north.
5.1.6	If the root is too high, he cuts it with a wooden wedge, not with a nail.
5.1.7	If the excreta are too high, he carries them to a heap.
5.1.8	He makes the altar with excreta for one desiring cattle.
5.1.9	Having done what was done before digging, he should dig with the mantra.
5.1.10	The sacrificer recites the mantra "May the earth become..." over the altar that has been made.
5.1.11	The Adhvaryu, having addressed the Brahman with the words, "O Brahman, I am going to take up the northern enclosing stick," and having taken up the enclosing stick with the words, “O Brihaspati, do thou take up the Vedi," he takes up the Vedi with three verses in the reverse order, as before.
5.2.1	Some take up the enclosing sticks in the reverse order.
5.2.2	"Thou art the Dhi," he should strike the Vedi with the wooden sword from the west.
5.2.3	Having recited the mantra "O cruel one" and having placed the wooden sword horizontally in the eastern half of the Veda, in the third part, he instructs the Agnidhra to bring the sprinkling water.
5.2.4-7	Having brought the fire-wood to the Havaniya (fire) across the Pavitra, having removed the wooden sword towards the north, having placed the Havaniya fire within the altar, having placed the wooden sword on the path of the wooden sword, he places it on the wooden sword with the verse, "Be firm." He should meditate on the person whom he hates. Having placed the wooden sword in the heap, he says, "You are hundred-spiked." He should contemplate on the person whom he hates.
5.2.8	The sacrificer, having taken up the Prokṣaṇī-water, recites the formula, "Thou art the invoker, thou art the invoker."
5.2.9	The Agnidhra touches the hands of the sacrificer.
5.2.10	He does not touch the vessels without touching them. He does not touch the sacrificial grass before spreading it. He washes the wooden sword, not touching the tip.
5.2.11	He places the kindling wood and the sacrificial grass on the north of the Ahavaniya fire, with the tips towards the east, the kindling wood on the south and the sacrificial grass towards the north.
5.2.12	He cleans the ladle and the spoons with the tips of the Vedas.
5.2.13	Having recited the formula, "You are the destroyers of enemies, not to be checked," and having taken up the ladle, the Juhu and the Upasad, with the right hand, and the Dhruva and the Prastara with the left hand, and having taken the Veda-grasses, he sprinkles the Garhapatya with the formula, "Thou art sprinkled." Having sprinkled the Garhapaty, he sprinkles the Anväharya fire with the formula, "Thou art sprinkled."
5.2.14	The speech is the Prāṇa, the sight is the eye, the hearing is the ear, the offspring is the womb, the silent taking of the Prasitra is the Dhruva.
5.2.15	As before, the taking of the Prasitrā from the ladles and the sprinkling, he places them north of the altar-line.
5.3.1	The art of heaven, he places the sprinkled ladles and the Samṛjyas in the fire.
5.3.2	Having seated the wife facing north, facing the Garhapatya fire, and facing east, with the words "May she be happy", one should bind her with a rope made of Muñja grass, either with a loop or with a noose, while she is sitting with her knees raised, facing east, or standing.
5.3.3	"May Pūṣan tie the knot for you." Having tied the knot of the Niṣṭarkya to the right of the navel, he draws it to the left of the navel.
5.3.4	"The wife, having sipped water, standing at the Gārhapatya with the words, 'O Agni, the householder,' she stands facing north, saying, 'The wives of the gods' and 'The wives of Indra.'
5.3.5	"May we be well-progeny to you." He recites this and also "May we be your sons."
5.3.6	"May Pūṣan open your abode." Having opened the abode of the ladle of clarified butter, having placed it in the Anvāhāryapacan, having taken the ladle of clarified-butter with the verse, "Aditi is the one with flawless leaves," he pours plenty of clarified butter into it with the verse, “The milk of the great ones.”
5.3.7	Having placed it on the southern half of the Garhapatya with the formula, "For Isti thee," and having taken it away with the formula, “For Urja thee,” and having united it with the Veda, he shows the wife with the formula, "Thou art the milk of the great ones."
5.3.8	She, having closed her eyes, looks at it and then looks at it without sucking.
5.3.9	Having placed it in the northern half with the formula, "Thou art brilliance," and having taken it away with the formula, “For brilliance thee,” he says, “Do thou go to brilliance.” Having rushed towards the Āhavaniya fire, he says, “May Agni not deprive thee of brilliance.” Having placed it in Āhavaniya with the formula, "Thou art the ladle of Agni," he places the path of the sacrificial grass with the formula,
5.3.10	The sacrificer, being approached, recites the formula, "Thou art the one to be praised, thou art the one to whom oblations are offered."
5.4.1	If the ghee of the Saṁnāyya or any other oblation falls down from the topmost portion of the sacrificial grass, except from the Prayāja, one should sprinkle it oneself with the formula, "I sprinkle thee together." One should sprinkle the fallen oblation with three formulas, "To the lord of the earth svāhā."
5.4.2	The Adhvaryu and the sacrificer, having closed their eyes and looked at the clarified butter, look at it without sucking.
5.4.3	The Adhvaryu, with three (verses) beginning with "Thou art bright", pours back the clarified butter three times through the strainer held with its mouth towards the north.
5.4.4-5	The Adhvaryu, holding the ladle with the ladle-stand over the fire, and pouring the clarified butter into the ladle, says (to the Hotṛ), "Do thou recite the yājyā for the offering of clarified butter." The Adhvaryū, holding the ladle over the fire, pours the clarified butter into it, saying, "Do thou recite (the yājyā) for the offering of the clarified butter." The Hotṛ recites the yājyä. The Adhvaryü offers the clarified butter, saying, "To Agni svāhā." The Hotr recites the yajus. The Adhvaryu offers the clarified butter. The Hotr recitess the yajus.
5.4.6-7	The Adhvaryu takes up the Valpiṣṭha eight times in the middle region while holding the Upabhṛt ladle, reciting, "You are the light, you are in the light, you belong to the light, you have the light." The sacrificer recites four times, "You are of the five winds."
5.4.8	The sacrificer recites three verses, "For the five seasons", "For the five waters", "For the fives backs" and two verses, "For thee, O Charu, of five holes".
5.4.9	The Adhvaryu recites four verses, "For thy lustre, O lustre", and takes the most of the Dhruva which is placed on the ground five times.
5.4.10	The sacrificer mutters the formula four or five times, "I take thee for good progeny."
5.5.1	Outside the altar, away from the pot, he places the clarified butter and also takes away the clarified butter-holder.
5.5.2-4	Having sprinkled the Prokṣaṇī water, having invoked Brahmā, having released the knots of the fire-wood sprinkled with the formula, "Thou art black," three times, and having sprinkled the altar with the formula, “Thou art the altar,” and the sacrificial grass with the formula, "Thou art the sacrificial grass," he places the fire-wood with the knot at the front within the altar. The sacrificer invokes the sacrificial grass with this formula, "May the sacrificer be well-disposed."
5.5.5	The Adhvaryu sprinkles the tip of the sacrificial grass with the formula, "To you, O heaven," the middle with the formula, “To you, O atmosphere," and the root with the formula, "To you, O earth."
5.5.6	The sacrificer recites the formula, "The sacrificial grass has been sprinkled," while the sacrificial grass is being sprinkled.
5.5.7	The Adhvaryu first sprinkles the tips of the sacrificial grass on the fire-place and then sprinkles the roots.
5.5.8	"For Pūṣan thee" (he says), and throws the knot towards the east, facing the east.
5.5.9	"Svāhā to the Fathers" (he says) and pours the remaining water of the Veda-vessel continuously on the right shoulder, towards the north.
5.5.10	"Pūṣan has loosened thy knot" (he says); and loosens the knot of the sacrificial grass.
5.5.11	"Thou art the mound of Viṣṇu" (he says). Taking the Prastara, he takes it towards the Āhavanīya as if drawing it.
5.5.12	He places the Prāṇa and Apāna in the sacrificer. Having sprinkled the Pavitra on the Prāstara, he says, "I am making you with Prāṇa and Āpāna." He gives it to the Brahman.
5.6.1	The Brahman gives it to the sacrificer.
5.6.2	Having covered the eye with grass, and having placed the gold, he strews the grass with the formula, "I strew thee with grass and gold." Having strewn the Vedi with the sacrificial grass, which is not seen much, and which is turned towards the east or towards the west, he says, "May the grass be soft and the gold be soft."
5.6.3	While the grass is being strewn with the two formulas, "May the gold be soft and the grass be soft" and "May the gold and the grass be very soft," the sacrificer follows it with the formula, "May the gold be very soft and the grass very soft."
5.6.4	The Adhvaryu, covering the roots with the tips, having made it three-layered or five-layered, recites the mantra in each layer.
5.6.5	The sacrificer recites the mantra "May it be auspicious for me" over the spread out altar.
5.6.6	The Adhvaryu, having placed the two embers for the Anuyājas in front, having arranged the Havirdhāna, and holding the Prastara, says (to the sacrificer), "Thou art Gandharva", and places the middle enclosing stick with its top towards the north.
5.6.7	"Be thou present at this sacrifice", "Thou art Dhruva, I am Dhruva", with these two formulas the sacrificer consecrates the middle enclosing stick.
5.6.8	"The Adhvaryu says, 'Thou art the arm of Indra.' Mitra-Varuna say, 'Thou art ours.' The two (Adhvaryu and Pratiprasthātṛ) touch each other with the middle (finger) at the tip, with the right one pointing towards the Āhavanīya and the left one towards the Anvāhārya.
5.6.9	The sacrificer recites, 'Thou art fierce in this sacrifice, thou art the overlord in this sacrifice,' as he touches the middle (finger).
5.6.10	The Adhvaryu places it in front with the formula, "May Surya protect thee from the east."
5.6.11	The sacrificer yokes Agni with the two formulas, "I yoke thee, O Agni, for me."
5.7.1	He places the northern one silently with the formula, "For the life of this (Agni) thee."
5.7.2	The sacrificer recites the formula, "The most brilliant one."
5.7.3	The Adhvaryu places two Darbha-blades with their tips towards the north, with the formula, "O Adhvaryu, the Yantras of the Visas are standing."
5.7.4	The sacrificer recites with the two formulas, "I am cutting off the Yantras which are moving the Visas."
5.7.5	The Adhvaryu places the Prāstara on them with the formula, "This is the Prāstāra of the Vasus and Rudras."
5.7.6	The sacrificer places the Prāstāra being placed with the formula, “This is the Prāsțāra.”
5.7.7	The Adhvaryu puts the Juhu on the Prāstára with the formula, "Thou art Juhu."
5.7.8	The sacrificers places the Juhu being placed with the two formulas, "Thou art Juhu, thou art ascending the path, thou art Gāyatrī, thou art Gharma."
5.7.9	"Thou art the Upabhrī, the Ghata-chi." The Adhvaryu, having placed the Upabhrt below, places it as if a little further away.
5.7.10	Some say that the Prastara is above.
5.7.11	The sacrificer places the Upabṛt which is being placed with two (verses), "I am the Vahā, the Subhṛt, the Upabht."
5.7.12	"Thou art the Dhruva, the Ghata chi." The Adhvaryu places the Dhruva.
5.7.13	The sacrificer places the ladle, which is being pressed down with two verses, "You are the firm earth, the source of wealth."
5.7.14	The Adhvaryu places the spoon with the verse, "You are a bull, belonging to Shakra."
5.8.1	The sacrificer places the spoon with two verses, “May this spoon be auspicious for me.”
5.8.2	The Adhvaryu places the pot with the verse, “This is the pot.”
5.8.3	The sacrificer does the same.
5.8.4	The Adhvaryu recites over the heated ladles, "They have been placed." He recites over the butter, "They are the places of Vishnu."
5.8.5	Then taking the ladle with butter, sitting down to the left of the Veda and to the right of the Garhapatya, he removes the embers from the southern cake in the form of a skull and removes them from the northern one.
5.8.6	Having recited the formula, "Thou art the light of the sun," he pours clarified butter over the cake for Agni. He pours clarified butter over it silently. Having recited the formula "He who is thy Self," he pours clarified butters over the cooked cake.
5.8.7	Having recited the formula, “I make thy abode auspicious,” he places the cake in a vessel and pours clarified butter over him, reciting the formula, “Thou art moist, thou art the firstborn."
5.8.8	Having wiped the ashes with the Veda, he places the cake on the vessel spread with ashes.
5.8.9	Silently, a cake made of barley.
5.8.10	Having poured the potsherds one by one, saying "May the essence of the earth, the prosperity, not escape," he places the curd and the cooked rice, saying "One, two, three" and so on.
5.8.11	May the god Savitr anoint thee with honey. With the ladle he anoints the cake all around.
5.8.12	Having poured clarified butter into the ladle, and having anointed the cake underneath, he adorns it with clarified butter and curds.
5.9.1	Having filled the ladle with clarified butter, having placed it between the two cakes, having collected all the oblations in the vessel, one should place the oblations with the Vyāhṛtis "Bhūr Bhuvah Suvar" on the inner altar to the right of the ladle, first of all.
5.9.2	Then in the year.
5.9.3	At other times, the sacrifice is performed with four oblations; at the full-moon sacrifice, with five oblations; at new-moon sacrifice, the oblations are offered with the name of the deity. The oblations are offered to the deities other than those mentioned above.
5.9.4	The two cakes are placed on the right side of the fire-pan and the curds on the left side.
5.9.5	Having placed the Veda in front of the Dhruva Veda, having spread the Veda-ending (Veda) and having taken the Darbha grass for eating, he prepares the Hotr's seat.
5.9.6	"He touches the Agni-offering with the words, "Thou art the sacrifice.", the Agnisomiya with the words, "Thou art Prajapati.", the morning-milk with the words, "This is the immortal power of Indra.", the curd with the words, “That which moved over the earth.”, the Indra-Agni with the words, ”He who is our younger brother.”, all the offerings with the words, „This is the sacrifice.”, and the full-moon offering with the words," "This is mine, O Agni.", at the Vihavya sacrifice. At the new-moon offering he touches the four-hotr and the five-hotr.
5.9.7	The Adhvaryu, having addressed the Hotṛ with the formula, "O Hotṛ, do thou come," directs him with the formula, "Do thou recite to Agni being kindled."
6.1.1	Then the Adhvaryu sitting down takes up one kindling wood at a time and puts it on the fire with each Prastara formula till the fifteenth.
6.1.2	He puts down one kindling wood for the Anuyāja offerings.
6.1.3	The sacrificer should recite the Dashahotar verse in front of or above the Samidheni verses.
6.1.4	"The Angirasas are the Hotras of this sacrifice." In the middle, he recites "Uchchhushi Agni" while reciting the verse "Agni is being kindled." "Agni is kindled, Agni is offered."
6.1.5	When the Adhvaryu is told to offer, he throws the remaining wood into the fire, touches the Āhavanīya three times with the Veda, and having taken clarified butter from the Dhruvā vessel with the spoon, touching the northern end of the enclosing sticks with the Veda, he offers the Prājayapti oblation with the mind, saying "Svāhā to Prajapati."
6.2.1	The sacrificer recites the formula, "You are the mind, belonging to Prajapati."
6.2.2	The Adhvaryu, having taken clarified butter from the vessel of clarified butter with the spoon, pours it over the Dhruva.
6.2.3	In all cases it is done thus.
6.2.4	He instructs, "Do you touch the fires and the enclosing sticks and the fire three times each."
6.2.5	Having taken up the kindling woods and the wooden sword, the Agnidhra priest, moving around the sacrificial posts clockwise, cleanses them, the middle one towards the east, the other two towards the east.
6.2.6	He cleanses the fire three times with the verse, "O Agni, may I win the prize."
6.2.7	In all the offerings, he takes up the Juhu in the Upabhu, without making any sound, having taken it from the mouth and having placed it in the Upabhṛt.
6.2.8	About to offer, he takes it back with the same (Upabṛt) and holds it at the navel in the ladle.
6.2.9	Some say, "Equally with the vital airs."
6.3.1	When about to pour the libation with the ladle, he offers the libation with "Thou art the world" in the Juhu and Upasthala, facing east, to the gods. With "Svāhā to the Pitrs" he offers to the Pitrs, facing south.
6.3.2	He crosses the Havanīya fire from the west, with the right foot, and goes north with the left.
6.3.3	He takes up the Juhu with "Come, O Juhu" and the Upasthala with "Come, Upasthala".
6.3.4	Having placed the Juhu on the Upabhu, having gone around along the southern side of the fire, having touched the place of Vishnu, having placed the right foot within the altar, having touched the right foot with the left foot, standing upright, when the sacrificer has begun, having touched the junction of the southern enclosing stick, beginning from the eastern end, he offers the Iindra offering as before, saying, "To the upright."
6.3.5	Having offered, he breathes upon it.
6.3.6	"He takes up the ladle with the verse, "The great rays..."
6.3.7	The sacrificer follows with the verse, "This is his speech, belonging to Indra."
6.3.8	The Adhvaryu, without touching the ladles, moves back facing north, reciting, "Protect me, O Agni."
6.3.9	These are the verses to be recited at the stepping forward and stepping back.
6.4.3	The Adhvaryu, having taken the grass from the northern side of the fire-place, and having placed it on the northern side of it, stands in front of the Pravara (the first layer of bricks) and recites, "Who will be the Adhvaryu?"
6.4.4	The Agnidhra, having taken them, stands behind the Adhvaryus and recites, “Who will be the Agnidhra?”
6.4.5	The Adhvaryu, having addressed the Brahman with the words, "O Brahman, I shall proclaim to the Pravara," and having been permitted by him with the words, “O lord of speech, do thou proclaim the speech," he proclaims with the words, "Do thou proclaim, do thou proclaim."
6.4.6	The Agnid responds with the words, "Let it be heard," standing towards the south on the Uttaravedi, facing the east, holding the wooden sword.
6.4.7	In all cases, the Hotr and the Prati-Hotr are not heard.
6.4.8	The Adhvaryu, sitting with knees raised, addresses the Hotr, "O Agni, the deity, be the Hotr." The Hotr replies, "So be it, so be it." The Adhvaryu says, "May the Hotr be as the Yajamana's preceptor, with the best." The Hotr says, "Three times in succession."
6.4.9	The Adhvaryu chooses the priests from among those who are above him, and the Hotṛ from among those who belong to him. This is known.
6.4.10	One may choose one, two, three or five.
6.4.11	One does not choose four or more than five.
6.5.1	One chooses with the best of the Purohita.
6.5.2	One chooses according to the Manu, even with the best of a teacher who is not known to be related.
6.5.3	The two-gotra should be known from each of the two gotras.
6.5.4	The remaining Pravara is "Brahmanvaddha and Vaksad".
6.5.5	The Hotr silently takes the name "Asau" and loudly "Manush".
6.5.6	The Hota sits down.
6.5.7	He scatters grass on the altar.
6.5.8	The sacrificer mutters the formula, "May the Adhvaryu and Pravara invoke me among the gods for long life and lustre." The Adhvaryu-Pravara says,
6.5.9	In the case of the Ajyabhāga, the Prādhānasvīṣṭakṛt, the Patnīsaṃyājas, the Yājyā and Anuvākyā, the Yāgyā alone, in the case of all these, the Yāgya and the Samprāśa are heard and unheard.
6.5.10	Those who are mentioned here should perform their own rites without mentioning them.
6.6.1	Having recited the Puronuvākyā in accordance with the deity, he says, "Do you recite the Anuvākyā for the one who is reciting the Anuvāka."
6.6.2	Having stepped towards the south and having been responded to, he says, “Do you offer to the one who is being responded to,” reciting the Yājyā in accordance with deity.
6.6.3	At the Vasat-utterance or when the Vasat is being uttered, he offers four or five times.
6.6.4	The oblations of the Jamadagnis are five Avattas, and of the others four Avattas.
6.6.5	The oblations of the gods are of the size of the joint of the thumb, and the oblations of the others are larger than that, and are of the same size as those of the Sauvishtas and the Idans, and also of the Caturdhakarani.
6.6.6	O Adhvaryu, the ladle full of ghee. When the Hotṛ knows this, having taken up the Juhū and Upamūhvī ladles, having gone around once along the right, he offers the five Prayāja offerings towards the east or in the directions.
6.7.1	Having called out and being called out, he instructs the first Prayāja offering, saying "Offer the Samidh." He instructs the subsequent ones with "Offer, offer."
6.7.2	The sacrificer, having explained the four Hotr-priests, recites the verse, "I gratify the spring among the seasons" and thus consecrates each of the oblations offered.
6.7.3	The Adhvaryu should offer the Samidhs in front, the Tanunapat in the south, the Idas in the west.
6.7.4	Having brought half of the clarified butter from the Upabhṛt vessel to the Juhu, and having placed the sacrificial grass in the north, he offers the Svāhā-utterance in the middle.
6.7.5	Having gone beyond the fire, he pours the oblations with the remaining portion of the Prayāja.
6.7.6	Having poured the Dhruva, he pours the Agniya, the Upabṛt last.
6.7.7	The two portions of clarified butter are offered with clarified butter. The Agniya is in the northern half, Soma in the southern half.
6.7.8	Between these two he offers the other oblations.
6.8.1	The sacrificer recites the formula, "To Agni and Soma" while the Adhvaryu recites the formula "To Agni and Indra."
6.8.2	Having returned, the Adhvaryyu places the Juhu on the ground and touches the cake with the formula, "Do not be afraid, do not be frightened."
6.8.3	The sacrificer should recite the formula, "Obeisance to the five Hotras."
6.8.4	The Adhvaryu offers the cake from the middle of the cake, cutting it with the thumb, the ring finger and the middle finger, and cutting it at right angles to the middle of the thumb.
6.8.5	The second is cut from the eastern half, having four cuts, and is offered in the reverse direction.
6.8.6	Similarly, the third is cut from the western half, having five cuts.
6.8.7-8	Having poured the oblations, having filled up the Dhruva vessel, having poured the oblations again, having gone around along the south, having offered the Ajya with the Vasat-call, having placed the Prāstara and the Barhi with the ladle, having sprinkled the Purorasa oblation, he sprinkles with the Ajya at the end.
6.8.9	With the mouth he pours out the other oblations from the sacrificial cake.
6.8.10	He offers the oblations in the order of the Sāṃhitā.
6.8.11	He offers an oblation with the ladle.
6.8.12	The sacrificer recites the formula, "I am Agni."
6.9.1	He performs the Upāṃśuyāja with the oblation of ghee.
6.9.2	The Yajya and Puronuvakya, the Sampreṣa, the Praṇava, the Vasat-kāra, and the Āgūḥ, are pronounced loudly; all else is pronounced in a low voice.
6.9.3	The oblations of ghee and Sāmnāyya are offered with the ladle; those of rice with the spoon.
6.9.4	The sacrificer offers the Upāṃśuyāja silently, saying, "Thou art the ladle."
6.9.5	The Adhvaryu proceeds with the Puronuvākyās pertaining to the respective deities.
6.9.6	"Having offered the oblation to Agni-Soma, the sacrificer recites the Anumantrana formula, "May I be the slayer of Vrtra by offering to Agni-Soma." Having offered the oblation pertaining to Indra-Agni, he recites the Anumantrayana formula, "May I be the eater of food by offering to Indra-Agna."
6.9.7	The Adhvaryu proceeds with the Saṁnāyya offerings.
6.9.8	He offers twice from the cooked rice, thrice from the curds, five times from the five-times-cooked rice.
6.9.9	The sacrificer recites the formula, "For Indra I have offered" for the Saṁnāya of Indra, "For Mahendra I have offered" (for the Saṁnāja of Mahendra), "For Indra Vaimṛdha I have offered" 
6.9.10	The Adhvaryu offers the two Homa-offerings of the Parvan-rites with the ladle, after having divided the bull, the horse, and the auspicious New-moon, according to their respective names.
6.10.1	He offers the last Homa-offer with six verses beginning with "Your ten forms at the sacrifice."
6.10.2	Some say that this is before the Samitsti-yajus.
6.10.3	Having placed the Juhu on the ground, he offers the Svishtakrit oblation once from the northern half of all the oblations. The oblations are offered twice in the five-fold manner.
6.10.4	He pours twice. The remaining oblations.
6.10.5	He does not pour back.
6.10.6	He offers in the northern half of the eastern half of the fire, without mixing with the other oblations.
6.10.7	The sacrificer, having offered the Svishtakrit oblation, recites the formula, "I am the Svishtakrt of Agni." He then recites the formula "May Agni protect me from evil."
6.10.8	The Adhvaryu steps forward towards the north, takes the ladle, and sprinkles the middle enclosing stick clockwise, reciting the formula, "This oblation is offered to Vaisvānara."
6.10.9	Some say that one should take it inside the enclosing sticks.
6.10.10	Having placed the two ladles, he cuts off a piece of the cake, lengthwise, with the spoon, and arranges it with the thumb and the ring finger, and then cuts off a piece from the middle, the size of a pepper or a barley grain, or more than a barley grain, and offers it in the oblation for the cake.
6.10.11	In the same way, having cut off a piece from a cake that has not been cut before, he pours clarified butter over it.
6.10.12	Some say that one should offer from the Agniya vessel.
6.10.13	The Brahman looks at the offering being made to Mitra.
6.11.1	Having placed the ladle for the Idā-oblation to the side of the fire, having spread it with the formula, "Thou art seen," he cuts out four or five portions of the Idā- oblation from all the oblations like Sviṣṭakṛt. Having cut out the first portion from the southern half of the cake, he cuts out the second portion from the junction.
6.11.2	Having cut out the portion for the sacrificer from the eastern half of the cake in the form of a long thin line.
6.11.3	Having anointed it with clarified butter, he places it in front of the Dhruva vessel and pours clarified butter over it.
6.11.4	From the posterior half, the third portion is poured five times.
6.11.5	In this way, for all the oblations.
6.11.6	When the portion for the sacrificer is being taken out, the sacrificer mutters, "He who is far from me."
6.11.7	Having poured clarified butter once on the Iḍa, the Adhvaryu gives it to the Hotṛ.
6.11.8	The sacrificer, standing to the south of the Hotr, awaits the Iḍa being brought.
6.11.9	The Adhvaryu passes beyond the Hotr without letting go.
6.11.10	The Hotr embraces the Adhvaryu with the Iḍa.
6.11.11	Sitting to the rear facing east, he anoints the two edges of the Hotr's ladle with the spoon.
6.11.12	Having smelt it, he sprinkles himself.
6.12.1	Having returned by the same route by which he had gone, sitting to the rear with his face towards the east, he offers the Idā in the hollow of the Hotr's right hand.
6.12.2	Having spread the Idā-lepa, the Adhvaryu first offers with the lepa, beginning with the thumb and ending with the little finger, the Hotr takes the second (lepa) between the left hand and the lepa. The Adhvaryu pours over it with the lepa.
6.12.3	The two are to be repeated five times.
6.12.4	Having made a fist by contracting the thumb, and holding the mouth-sized ladle, the Hotṛ, the Adhvaryu, the Agnīdh and the sacrificer join together in reciting the Ida-offering.
6.12.5	The sacrificer recites the seven verses of the Devagavī at the Upāṃśu offering, saying "O Ida, come! O Aditi, come!"
6.12.6	"Thou art the mind, the highest," thus one should invoke the seven human cows.
6.12.7	"Thou art all," thus one should recite the Iḍā being invoked.
6.12.8	"O Vāyu, Iḍā is thy mother," thus looking at the Hotṛ, one should meditate on Vāyu mentally.
6.12.9	When the Adhvaryu is called out, "This is the sacrificer," and when the Adhvaryus and the sacrificers are called out, "May I be possessed of cattle," and when he mutters the formula in order, then the invocation of the sacrificer is true. When the Idā is being brought for eating, he recites the formula, "I am the sacrificer for the worship of the gods."
6.12.10	The Adhvaryu, having taken the Prastara, offers it in front of the Ahavaniya. Having taken the Prastāra, the Adhvaryu offers it in front (of the Ahavaniya).
7.1.1	"Go along the path of truth." Having recited this, he should gaze at the sun. "For thee, O Agni, for the eye of the sun," he says while waiting for the sun to be carried. "For thee the divine," he says while receiving it. "For thee on the earth," he says while placing it on the earth. "For thee of the Garutman bird," he says while gazing at it. "For the mouth of Agni," he says while holding it with the thumb and ring finger. "For the teeth of Agni," he eats it by placing it at the tip of the tongue. "For the water and the belly of the Brahman," he says while eating it with water. "For thee in the belly of Indra," he says while mixing it with water.
7.1.2	"The gods in the waters," having eaten the water, having sipped, having touched the navel with the words "May my belly be," having touched the organs according to their respective parts with the words "Let my speech be," having touched all the limbs with the words "All the worlds are free from disease," having taken the remnants of the food, having washed it, having filled it, he sends it away with the words "Do thou delight the directions."
7.1.3	Then, having filled it again with water, he says, "You are the one who makes me prosper." He offers it to himself.
7.1.4	When it is eaten, the Hotṛ eats the Avanteḍa, saying, "I eat what has been offered to you, O lord of speech, I eat what has been sacrificed to you, O Sadasipa."
7.1.5	While being eaten, the sacrificer recites, "You are what is pleasing."
7.2.1	"The Iḍā has a share," (thus) they eat the Iḍā, with the exception of the scraping, in accordance with the injunctions.
7.2.2	"The mind is light," (thus) in the place of the purifying grass within the altar, they scrape.
7.2.3	Having divided the Agniya into four parts, he makes it sit on the sacrificial grass.
7.2.4	"Then the sacrificer, having recited the formula, "Do thou swell the Brahman," and having divided the grass into four parts in each direction, he directs them in order, saying, "This is for the Brahman, this is for the Hotṛ, this is for Adhvaryu, this is for Agnīdhra."
7.2.5	The Adhvaryu, having indicated the share of the sacrificer, makes the Agnidhra take the largest of the prescribed portions, with six Avantas.
7.2.6	Having spread it once, he pours it once.
7.2.7	Having spread again, and having poured once, he pours twice over both.
7.2.8	The Agnidhra eats, saying, "Thou art the share of heaven."
7.2.9	The sacrificer, having been invoked, offers the portion of the Agnidhra with two verses, "The heaven has been invoked as the father."
7.2.10	The Adhvaryu, having taken the portions of the Brahman and the sacrificer in two wooden vessels, carries them around with the Veda, and with another wooden vessel to the Hotṛ.
7.3.1	With another to the Adhvaryu.
7.3.2	The Hotṛ pours it with the formula, "Thou art the share of Pṛthivī." The Adhvaryu with the formula, “Thou art the share for the atmosphere." The Brahman with the formula, "Thou art the share in heaven." He pours it when the oblation is settled.
7.3.3	Having poured over the cooked oblation of great size and unlimited quantity in the southern fire, having taken it up towards the north, he places it within the altar.
7.3.4	"O Brahman, you are Brahman." The Brahman touches the Brahman-image. "O Brahman, expand yourself." The sacrificer says, "This is the pot."
7.3.5	The Adhvaryu instructs, "To be offered to those seated towards the south." The sacrificer responds, "They are towards the south."
7.3.6	The Brahmanas say, "This is the rice." Having divided the food into four parts, he gives the Dakshina to the Brahmanas.
7.3.7	When the Dakshina has been accepted, the Adhvaryu instructs, "The Brahmanas are seated to the north."
7.3.8	Having placed the remnants of the oblations, having placed the two coals for the Anuyājas, having placed the kindling woods, having placed the enclosing sticks, having placed the fire, having said, "O Brahman, we shall proceed", having said, "May the Brahman and the Agnidhra touch the fire and the enclosing sticks each time", the Brahman says, "O Brahman and Agnidhra, may you touch the fire and enclosing sticks each time."
7.3.9	"O God Savitar, this is yours." Having been initiated by the Brahman, the Agnidhra places the Anuyaja kindling wood with the words, "This is yours, O Agni."
7.3.10	The sacrificer, while being sprinkled with this (water), recites the formula, "Which one I am sprinkling thee, O Agni." With three (formulas) he sprinkles the Agni which is kindled.
7.4.1	The Agnidhra, having released the fire from the shovel, and moving around it with the bundles of grass, cleanses the enclosing sticks and the fire once each, as before.
7.4.2	He recites the verse, "O Agni, the winner of prizes, the flowing one, I offer to you."
7.4.3	Having touched the kindling woods with water, he strikes the fire with the verse, "He who is the lord of beings."
7.4.4	The sacrificer mutters the verse, "The altar, the sacrificial grass, the cooked oblation."
7.4.5	He should recite the verse, "Seven Hotars" before the Anuyajas.
7.4.6	The Adhvaryu, having brought the remaining clarified butter from the Upabhṛt vessel to the Juhu ladle, and having gone around along the southern side of the Ahavaniya once, offers three Anuyājas.
7.4.7	He directs the first Anuyāja thus: "Offer to the gods who are heard and not heard." He directs the two subsequent Anuyājas thus: "Offer, offer."
7.4.8	He offers the first Anuyāja in the eastern half, the second in the middle, and the third facing east.
7.4.9	The Adhvaryu breaks the two Anuyājas of the northern and eastern directions.
7.4.10	The sacrificer recites the mantras beginning with "I am of the sacrificial grass" after each Anuyāja that has been offered.
7.5.1	Having stepped towards the north, the Adhvaryu places the ladles in their respective places and arranges them with the two Anushtubh verses beginning with "By the impulse of Vāja".
7.5.2	With the formula, "By the impulse of Vāj, the divine steed," he takes up the Juhu ladle with the right hand stretched out.
7.5.3	Then with the formula, "Indra, the lord of seven rivers," he takes up with the left hand the Upamantjuhu.
7.5.4	Having taken up the Juhu with the formula, “Udgṛhītaṃ ca," he takes up Upamantjuhus with the formula, "Nigṛhīta ca."
7.5.5	The Brahmans and the gods have increased. Thus he offers the ladle towards the east.
7.5.6	Then, O Indra-Agni, my enemies. Thus he offers towards the west the Upabhṛt ladle.
7.5.7	The sacrificer recites these two verses to the two ladles.
7.5.8	The Adhvaryu, having sprinkled the Upabhṛt, takes it up and offers it with the three formulas beginning with "For the Vasus thee" and anoints the enclosing sticks on the Juhu as per their respective positions.
7.5.9	The sacrificer anoints them with the three formulas, "I desire the Vasus with the sacrifice."
7.5.10	Having placed the Juhu ladle on the stone, the Adhvaryu, having taken the stone with the two wooden supports, and having placed it on the sacrificial grass, anoints the stone with the ladle.
7.5.11	"Let the ends of the Juhu be anointed." "Let the middle ones of the Upamant be anointed." "Do not injure the womb of offspring," (thus) at the Dhruva.
7.5.12	Thus again he anoints.
7.5.13	At the third Dhruva, the roots first, the middle ones at the Upamant, and the ends at the Juhu.
7.6.1	The sacrificer recites the formula, "The one who is being anointed."
7.6.2	The Adhvaryu, having taken the grass of the anointed one, places it in a safe place.
7.6.3	The sacrificer recites, "May it be safe."
7.6.4	The Adhvaryu, having taken up the Prastara with the right and left hands, having placed it on the Juhu, having seated himself after having called out, and having been called out in return, he directs (the Hotṛ) to recite the Yajus, saying, "The divine Hotṛ is invoked."
7.6.5	"May this heaven and earth be auspicious," (saying this) the Hotṛ recites the Sūktavāka. The Adhvaryus, reciting together with the Hotṛ, strike the Prastara into the Āhavanīya with the branch.
7.6.6	He should not strike too high, nor should he strike in front. He should strike upwards.
7.6.7	He should move the fire-wood as if pulling it, and then turn it around, saying, "Agni, lead!"
7.6.8	Agni, holding the fire-wood in his hands, strikes it three times upwards.
7.6.9	When the Hotṛ recites the Sūktavāka, the sacrificer recites the same deity with the formula, "I follow the prosperity of Agni."
7.6.10	When the Hotṛ takes up the name of the sacrificer, he should say, "These have come for the sake of milking the blessings."
7.6.11	The Adhvaryu instructs, "Strike in succession."
7.6.12	The Agni-bearer strikes the grass of the Prastara with the formula, "From our own bodies."
7.6.13	He points to it three times with the finger, saying, "This is this."
7.6.14	The sacrificer recites the formula, "The peg of heaven is stretched down."
7.7.1	"O Agni, you are the life-force," says the Adhvaryu, touching the places of the vital airs in accordance with the form. "You are the firm one," he says, touching the altar. "O Agni," he says, looking at the Agnidhra.
7.7.2	"Do you respond," says the Agnidhra in return.
7.7.3	"Have you gone, O Agni?" says the Adhvaryu.
7.7.4	"I have gone," says the Agnidhra.
7.7.5	The Adhvaryu, beginning with the middle Paridhi, says, "Listen!"
7.7.6	The Agnidhra says, "Let it be heard."
7.7.7	He instructs, "Tell the auspicious to the divine Hotṛs and the auspicious to the human beings."
7.7.8	When the Shamyuvāka is being recited by the Hotṛ, he releases the middle Paridhi and strikes it into the fire.
7.7.9	The sacrificer releases you.
7.7.10	The Adhvaryu, striking the southern and northern enclosing sticks simultaneously with both hands, places the tip of the northern one on the embers below the middle one and the tip of the southern one above.
7.7.11	The sacrificer recites the Shamyuvake verse, "For the sake of Vishnu's peace, I offer to the gods."
7.7.12	The Adhvaryu, having recited the formula, "May the sacrificer prosper," and having recited the formula over the Paridhi stakes that have been thrown, having placed the tip of the Juhu ladle in the Upabhṛt ladle, he pours the remnant of clarified butter from the two ladles into the fire, saying, "The shares of the Srasravana are placed."
7.7.13	The sacrificer recites the mantras to the gods who receive the remnants of the oblations: "May the sacrifice be auspicious for me, salutations to you, O sacrifice! The sacrifice is worshipped by the Bhrigus."
7.7.14	He pronounces whatever he desires.
7.7.15	He eats the remnants of the offerings.
7.8.1	"Thou art the Veda, thou art the Veda." The sacrificer touches the Veda, the Veda within, the Veda in front. Whatever he may desire to injure his enemy, he should take the name of that thing and then he will destroy all that belongs to him.
7.8.2	The Agnidhra takes the ladle with the melted butter. The Hotri takes the Veda. The Adhvaryu takes the Juhu and the Upbhuj.
7.8.3	Those who are going to offer oblations to their wives, go in the opposite direction.
7.8.4	The Adhvaryu, having gone around along the east of the Garhapatya and having gone around along its south, releases the two ladles on the yoke-pin with the formula, "To you, O Agni, the house-holder."
7.8.5	If he pours out in a vessel, he releases it with the same formula on the wooden sword.
7.8.6	Having sat down to the south of the Garhapatya, he makes the wives offer with the Sruva and the Upabhṛt ladle, reciting loudly. When the Veda has been recited, the Adhvaryu, having begun, sits down to the south, the Agnidhra to the north, and the Hotṛ in the middle.
7.8.7	Having taken four spoonfuls with the spoon from the vessel of clarified butter, having sent forth (the Hotṛ) with "Recite the Somasamandhi to Soma", having caused the invocation, having caused the invocation in return, having sent forth with "Recite to Soma", having uttered the Vasat at the northern half, he murmurs the Somasammandhi.
7.9.1	With this very (verse) he recites to the southern half, Tvashtar in between, the wives of gods, either in the enclosed or unenclosed (space).
7.9.2	One desiring a son should offer oblations to Raka with four spoonfuls of ghee, to Sinivali one desiring cattle, to Kuhū one desiring prosperity.
7.9.3	Having instructed, he says, "Recite for the wives of the gods."
7.9.4	Having called out and responded, having offered oblations to the wives of the deities, he offers to Agni, the householder.
7.9.5	The sacrificer offers the Sampatnīya oblation with the ladle on the Garhapatya fire, with the ladle which has been used for the Sampatnī oblation.
7.9.6	The sacrificer recites the formula "I offer to Soma in the sacrifice" after each of the Patnīsaṃyāja oblations.
7.9.7	The Adhvaryu anoints the tip of the thumb of the Hotṛ as before.
7.9.8	Having smelt it, the Hotṛ touches water.
7.9.9	The Adhvaryu pours four drops of clarified butter on the right hand of the Hotṛ, and the Agnīdhra six.
7.9.10	The Adhvaryu, while calling out the Idā, is followed by the Hotṛ, the Agnīdhara and the wife.
7.9.11	While being called out, the wife mutters, "This is being called out for the sacrificer."
7.10.1	The Adhvaryu eats the Upāṁśu-offering of clarified butter, having invoked the sky as the father.
7.10.2	The sacrificer recites the formula, "May the Upāṁshu-offering follow us" when the Upāṁsu-offering of clarified butte is being invoked.
7.10.3	Having eaten the Upāṁshus, the priests rinse their mouths and sprinkle themselves with water silently.
7.10.4	The Iḍā-ending is to be offered in the Āhavanīya, the Śamyūvant in the Garhapatya, the Viparyata in the opposite direction.
7.10.5	If the Śamyūvan is offered in the western direction, then taking a grass, one should anoint the tip of the grass with the ladle, the middle with the Sruva, and the root with the Ajyasthālya.
7.10.6	This has been explained in the Prastara.
7.10.7	Having placed the Anvāhāryapacana and the Idhmaprāvargya, having taken four spoonfuls of clarified butter, having put the Phalīkaraṇa in the Juhū ladle, he offers with the formula, "To Agni, the uninjured."
7.10.8	Having taken another four spoonfuls, having put the flour-paste in the Ulukha, having taken the Musala, he offers the flour-paste with the formula,
7.10.9	Some do it in the reverse order.
7.10.10	"To Sarasvati who is the bestower of beauty, to her be salutations. To Sarasvati who is bestower of grace, to her be salutation." The sacrificer chooses between the two.
7.11.1	"The Hotri recites the Veda, saying, 'Thou art the Veda, thou art the Veda.' Having given the Veda to the wife, he recites."
7.11.2	"He says, 'I am binding this.' While binding the yoke-halter."
7.11.3	He brings a full vessel in the palm of the yoke-halter.
7.11.4	"For life" (he says) when it is being brought. She mutters this.
7.11.5	Having brought it, having wiped the mouth, having risen, she goes as appropriate, saying, "For prosperity, for cattle."
7.11.6	The Hotṛ, taking the Veda, "Having ghee, having a nest," goes on spreading it continuously from the Garhapatya to the Āhavanīya.
7.11.7	"Thou art the Veda; bring me the Veda." The sacrificer follows the Veda being spread with the formula, "Thou art the one who knows the Veda."
7.11.8	The Adhvaryu, having gone to the Ahavaniya, offers the oblations with the Juhu or the Sruva, saying, "To the Brahman, to the established one." This is the Anuvaka. "Whatever I have done, whatever I have neglected, whatever I have done in this sacrifice, may Agni, the giver of welfare, be pleased with me." Having offered oblations for all expiations with these (verses), having filled the Dhruva vessel as before, standing above the altar, he offers three Samitsya verses continuously at the Ahavaniya with the Dhruva verse, "The gods who know the path..."
7.11.9	At the middle (of the altar) he strikes with the formula "Svāhā" and having struck, he should offer.
7.12.1	When the sacrificer departs, he should offer the sacrificer's portion along with the Samīṣṭyajū.
7.12.2	The sacrificer recites the formula "O Agni, the unvanquished" while being offered, and "The peg of heaven is being stretched out" while the sacrificial grass is being struck.
7.12.3	"May the lord of sacrifice bless us." The sacrificer eats the portion of the sacrificer. "May this oblation be for my progeny." "I have done the curds of Dadhikra." The curds.
7.12.4	The Vaishya and the Rajanya do not eat the Saṁnāyya.
7.12.5	Having taken the Soma-pressers' portions around in front of the Āhavanīya, the Adhvaryu releases them within the altar, saying, "Who will yoke you?"
7.12.6	He brings the stream of water in a continuous flow.
7.12.7	When the stream is brought, the sacrificer mutters, "May I be in the assembly."
7.12.8	Having sprinkled with these mantras according to their respective directions, he says, "I am sending you to the ocean." Having brought it inside the altar, he cleanses the mouth with the two verses, "What is in the water, that is Sarasvati."
7.12.9	The Adhvaryu, having taken the Upavesa (the garment) of the sacrificer, should throw it on the heap of ashes, saying, "This is the Upavesa of the gods among men."
7.13.1	One should drive him away with these (verses).
7.13.2	The Adhvaryu and the sacrificer recite the Viśvasṛṣṭi verse, "Which are the potsherds in the fire."
7.13.3	The sacrificer, having risen, with the right foot, steps on the step of Vishnu, saying, "Thou art the step of Vishnu; thou art the repeller of foes." With three steps he goes three steps of Vishnu towards the east. Standing on the third step, he does not go beyond the Ahavaniya.
7.13.4	He murmurs, "Thou art Vishnu's step; thou art the destroyer of foes."
7.13.5	"We have attained the good" (he says) while standing near the Ahavaniya fire. "Rising today, O Mitra-Varuna" (he says), while standing near the Adityas.
7.13.6	"I follow the covering of Indra" (he says while) turning to the right.
7.13.7	"I am united with the progeny" (he says, while) returning to the Ahavaniya. "The Agni is kindled" (he says,) while kindling it.
7.13.8	"The sacrifice is endowed with wealth" (he says,), while standing near.
7.13.9	"Agne vahni" (O Agni, the bearer) is for the Anvāhāryapacani fire. "Agne Ayus" (O Agni the life-giver) and "Agne Pavasa" (O Agni who purifies) are for the Garhapatya fire. "Agni Gṛhapati" (O Agni lord of the house) is for the Āhavanīya fire. "I seek that blessing for him, the one with light" one should say if his son is not born. "I seek this blessing for him, for the one with light." The one whose son is born.
7.13.10	Bahuputra (having many sons) recites the names of all his sons and then says "Jyotishmati" (having light).
7.14.1	Placing the Veda-grass at the feet, he sits within the altar and recites the Ati-moksha verses, saying "Those gods who are the destroyers of sacrifice."
7.14.2	"Who yokes you? May he release you." He releases the sacrifice.
7.14.3	He examines everything.
7.14.4	Having returned as he came, having sat down in the place of the sacrificer, having sipped water with the verse, "The plants are rich in milk," having placed five kindling woods on the Āhavanīya fire with the five verses, "O Agni, lord of vows, I have observed the vow," and having released the vow with the same (verses), he murmurs, "The sacrifice became, it became again."
7.14.5	Having stepped forward reciting "O Agni, the cow," he recites.
7.14.6	Having satisfied the Brahmins, he should feed eight or ten Brahmins, a hundred in a sacrifice involving cattle, and a thousand in a Soma sacrifice.
7.14.7	Touching the water, he says, "You are the rain."
7.14.8	Facing the Havishmat Agni, the sacrificer recites the entire Yajamana-mantra.
7.14.9	Having eaten the portion of Brahman, having placed the kindling wood and having offered, having approached, he goes beyond towards the north.
7.14.10	The Darsha-Pūrnamāsa sacrifices are concluded.
8.1.1	Now the Agrayana-Iṣṭi.
8.1.2	One does not eat new grain without performing this.
8.1.3	As many beings as there are, they were destroyed by eating the unoffered plants.
8.1.4	It is said that the Aggrayan sacrifice is performed for the sake of the sacrificer who has not offered the oblations.
8.1.5	One performs the sacrifice at the time of the ripening of the plants.
8.1.6	One should perform the sacrifice in autumn with barley.
8.1.7	First he should offer the Agniya oblation in eight potsherds with old grains, and the other oblations with new grains. The Indra-Agni oblation in twelve potsherds, the Visvedeva oblation in rice-gruel, and the Dyava-Pritbvi oblation in one potsherd.
8.1.8	Its procedure is like that of the Visvedeva offering in one potshard.
8.1.9	One may also perform the Dyava-Prithvi oblation silently, as an Upamshu-yaja, with ghee.
8.1.10	The oblation of Shyamaka rice is gentle.
8.1.11	The Yajya and Anu-yajya verses for the Indra-Agni offering are "Indra and Agni, the bright ones, have loosened the cloud."
8.1.12	The Yajyas and Anu-yajas for the Visvedeva offering are "All the gods, the righteous ones, all the gods, listen."
8.1.13	The verses for the Dyava-Pritvi offering are "May heaven and earth protect us, the firstborn." The firstborn calf is the Dakshina.
8.2.1	One should offer oblations to Agni in the spring with barley.
8.2.2	The procedure is like that of offering oblations to Agni with rice.
8.2.3	There are no oblations to Agni and Śyāmāka.
8.2.4	Having offered oblations with rice, one should offer oblations with rice alone. The New and Full Moon sacrifices are for barley.
8.2.5	Having offered with barley, one should offer with barley alone. For rice.
8.2.6	In the rainy season, one offers a rice cake to Śyāmā.
8.2.7	He has seventeen Sāmidhenī verses.
8.2.8	"The two Ajyabhāga verses ending with the word "sada". "O Agni, thou art the bestower of wealth; O Soma, thou art the giver of wealth; thou art the giver to us of wealth." "O Agni! O Agni! O Agni, thou art worshipped by us." "Thou art worshipped by us. " "O Soma! O Soma! O Soma, thou are worshipped by us." " "O Agni thou art worshipped by me." "May I be worshipped by thee." "Do thou be worshipped by me." " "Thou art the bestower, thou art the worshipper." "I am the bestower, I am the worshipper." " "Do thou worship me." ". "Do thou, O Agni, be worshipped by me." " "Do I worship thee." ". " "Do we worship thee." The Samyajya verses.
8.2.9	One should offer the seasonal offerings of bamboo, Priyangu and Nīvāra grains, as in the case of Śyāmāka grains.
8.2.10	Having performed that which is to be done before the sprinkling, he offers five oblations of ghee with the formula, "To Shatayudha."
8.2.11	He eats the share of the sacrificer of Shyamaka grains with the formula, "May Agni eat first."
8.2.12	With the formula, "For good food, for welfare," he eats the Vrihi grains. With the formula, "This is that honey," he eats barley grains.
8.2.13	Or, on the full-moon day or the new-moon day, one may perform the Agrayana-sacrifice.
8.2.14	Or, one may perform a sacrifice on the full- moon day or the new moon day with only nine (officiating priests), or offer Agnihotra with only nine (priests).
8.2.15	Having cooked a meal of rice in the Gārhapatya fire, or in the fire of the Upavasatha rite, for all the domestic and wild plants, one should offer it to the deities of the Āgrayaṇa rite and to the Svishtakrit, or should feed four Brahmins.
8.2.16	Even if the Āgrayaṇeṣṭi is not performed, the offering to the Brahmins is made.
8.3.1	Now the Cāturmāsya rites.
8.3.2	The merit of the Cāturmāsya sacrifices is inexhaustible.
8.3.3	One who is going to perform them should offer the Vaiśvadeva sacrifice in the spring season on a ground sloping towards the east.
8.3.4	One should perform it on the full moon day of Phālguna or Caitra, or on an auspicious day in the increasing fortnight of the summer solstice.
8.3.5	On the previous day he should offer the Ārambhaṇīya oblations in the Āhavanīya fire, reciting the Anuvāka beginning with "Agni is the Hotṛ" in his mind, namely, the Vaiśvānara oblation on twelve potsherds, and the Pārvana oblation to Parjanya.
8.3.6	The Yajyā and Anuvākyā verses for Vaiśvānaran are "Vaiśvānara with his own power, praised in heaven" and "Sing to Parjanya, O Śaśa, with your songs." The Yajyā and Anu-vākyā verses for Pārvana are "Sing to Parganya, O Śaṃsa, with your songs.
8.3.7	The fee for the Vaiśvānara rite is gold, for the Pārvana rite a cow.
8.3.8	Other than these, the rites are accomplished with the prescribed fees.
8.3.9	In the rites of the Cāturmāsya sacrifices, the Pratiprasthātṛ priest is additional to the five priests.
8.3.10	As for this, some say that one who is about to offer the oblations to Visve Devā on this day, having taken the fire from the Garhapatya in the manner of animal sacrifice, and having established the fire in the fire-place in the same manner, offers the oblations to the Visve Devā.
8.3.11	Having deposited the fires, he releases the calves for the oblations to Aṅgiras and Visvedevas.
8.3.12	Seventeen kindling verses.
8.3.13	The sacrificial grass is spread in three ways.
8.3.14	It is again spread in one way.
8.3.15	So also the kindling wood.
8.3.16	The mantra is used in spreading both again.
8.3.17	After offering the Agnihotra in the evening, one milks the Saṁnāyya (cow).
8.3.18	One anoints it with curd.
8.4.1	After offering Agnihotra in the morning, one performs the rites such as washing the hands.
8.4.2	At the time of preparing the vessels, two Upabhṛt ladles, a vessel for clarified butter, a second one, two vessels for clarified butter, curd, a second vessel, a Palāśa vessel, a cup.
8.4.3	At the time of offering, he offers five oblations: an oblation to Agni on eight potsherds, a cooked oblation to Soma, an oblation to Savitr on twelve potsherds, cooked oblation to Sarasvati, and cooked oblation to Pusan. These are the five oblations.
8.4.4	The Marut-offering with seven potfuls of cooked rice, the Visvedeva-offering with milk-rice, the offering to Dyāvāpṛthivi with one potful of cooked rice.
8.4.5	Having divided the three portions of the cooked rice according to the respective mantras, having mixed the flour with the cooked rice of Soma and Sarasvati, and having divided the cooked rice of Pusan, having placed the potsherds and having placed the cooked rice, having milked in the morning as in the morning milking, he brings the evening milk in heated milk.
8.4.6	The evening milk is mixed with flour.
8.4.7	What flows is the Vājinī. Having poured it into another vessel, he places it.
8.5.1	Having made the northern enclosing stick, he gives the instruction, "With ghee and curds."
8.5.2	Having offered ghee, he offers curds for Pṛṣadājya.
8.5.3	Its rite should be that of ghee.
8.5.4	He does not place it.
8.5.5	At the taking of the clarified butter, having taken four spoonfuls of the Juhu and Upasthya, he takes the third part of the clarified butter that has been poured out, and having brought the curds that have been poured out, he takes five spoonfuls of the fresh clarified butter in the second Upasthya vessel, saying, "Thou art the milk of the earth."
8.5.6	At the removal of the oblations, having taken out the cooked rice from two vessels, he sprinkles it with the Vājinī portion.
8.5.7	Some say that one should pour the ghee into a vessel after removing the single-spoonful and perform the Viṣṭa-hymn.
8.5.8	One who is beginning the first Cāturmāsya sacrifices offers the oblations with the Vyāhṛti-mantras, and so also at the end of the year.
8.5.9	One offers the Vājinī oblation on the heap.
8.5.10	"Agni is the Hotri" - the sacrificer touches the oblations which are near, and the horse.
8.5.11	Taking up the fire-kindling wood, saying, "Thou art the womb of Agni," and placing it on the east side of the sacrificial grass, beyond the Āhavanīya fire, and saying, "The testicles are here," and placing the two pieces of wood on the east side, and saying, "Thou art the Urvaśī," and taking up the lower kindling-stick, and saying, "Purūravas," and the upper kindling-stick and saying, "Anointed with ghee," and placing the ghee-vessel in the hole, and saying, “Thou art life,” he puts them together.
8.5.12	Having sent forth with the formula, "Do thou recite to Agni being churned," and having recited thrice the formula, "To thee, O divine Savitr," to the Hotr who has recited thrice, he says, "Do thou beget the Gayatri metre." Having churned the churn three times in a clockwise direction with the three formulas pertaining to begetting, he churns as he pleases.
8.5.13	Having sent forth with the verse, "Do thou (Agni) recite to the born," he says to the born one.
8.6.1	"Recite when being carried away." Recite when being carried.
8.6.2	"May you be of one mind with us." Having recited the northern boundary, he offers the fire-stirring wood in the Āhavanīya.
8.6.3	He offers the Agnihotra with the verse, "Agni in Agni."
8.6.4	He instructs with the verse, "Recite when being offered to Agni being kindled."
8.6.5	The four deities, namely, the Dawn, Night, and the three goddesses, are worshipped in the order of their natural sequence. The fourth and eighth oblations are offered in the same order.
8.6.6	In the fourth oblation, half of the oblation is offered, and in the eighth, the entire oblation is offered.
8.6.7	The sacrificer recites four mantras beginning with the word 'dura' in the order of the four oblations. The Adhvaryu recites the fifth mantra for the fifth oblation and the ninth mantra for the ninth oblation.
8.6.8	The Adhvaryu offers the oblations of Savitri and Ekakapala facing towards the north.
8.6.9	Having placed the unbroken one-spoon-full oblation in the fire, he offers it without turning away, so that it does not fall into the directions.
8.6.10	If it falls, having given a boon, one should establish it with the tip of the ladle or again having taken it, one should establish. Some say, not with the hand.
8.6.11	He offers the one-spoon-ful oblation with the names of the four months Madhu and Madhava.
8.6.12	The first-born calf is the Dakṣiṇā. Or a pair of cows.
8.6.13	The clarified butter in the Upabhṛt ladle is brought to the Juhū ladle and the Anuyājas are offered with that.
8.7.1	The sacrificer recites the eight Anumantrana verses beginning with the verse for the animal and ending with the last one.
8.7.2	The Hotṛ recites the benediction of the Sūktavāka, "May there be welfare to those who are a year old; may there be the divine abode."
8.7.3	Having struck the enclosing sticks and having offered the Saṃsrava oblation, having placed the Vājinapātra on the sacrificial grass, he pours the Vājinī-oblation into that vessel.
8.7.4	He does not pour the melted butter over it.
8.7.5	He instructs, "Recite the Vājinīmantra."
8.7.6	Having called out, he instructs the sacrificer to say "Let the horses be sacrificed" when the response is given.
8.7.7	The Hotr recites the Yajya verse without the Anvanam.
8.7.8	At the Vasat-call, the Adhvaryu offers with the spoon, pouring down.
8.7.9	The Hotris says "O Agni, do thou offer to the horses."
8.7.10	He sprinkles in the four directions with the formula, "To the directions svāhā." In the east, "To the quarters svāhā." in the south, "To the sub-quarters svāhā."in the west, "To the intermediate directions svāhā" in the north, "To the upper directions svāhā," in the middle, "To the sky svāhā." He sprinkles clockwise with the formula, “To the directions svāhà.” He stands up with the formula, ”Salutations to the directions.
8.7.11	Having called out the remaining (animals) within the altar, one should say to each other, "Do you call out?" and in reply, "I am called." All eat the flesh of the horse, saying, "May we eat the horse." The first Hotṛ and the sacrificer eat last.
8.8.1	The Samitsti-yajus are like those of the animal sacrifice.
8.8.2	From here onwards, the Iṣṭi is concluded.
8.8.3	Having performed the Full-moon sacrifice, the sacrificer sits down in his own house and says, "May they be sprinkled with water." Having sprinkled the head with water, he divides the hair with a three-stringed string or a sugarcane string, saying, "The supreme lord." He arranges the hair in each direction.
8.8.4	He first shaves the beard, or he shaves the whole beard.
8.8.5	The sacrificer mutters the verse, "That is the truth," and the Brahmana recites the Anuvaka, "The Brahman is the sole officiating priest."
8.8.6	On these Parvas, there are observances such as fasting and abstaining from meat.
8.8.7	One who performs sacrifices in four months is called a Caturmaasyayaji.
8.8.8	One who offers sacrifices in the spring with the Vaishvadev, in the rainy season with the Varunapraghasa, and in the autumn with the Saakamedha is called a Rituyaji.
8.9.1	He performs the Varuna-prastha-sastra sacrifice on the full moon day of Asadha or Sravanas.
8.9.2	The procedure is as in the Visvadevya sacrifice.
8.9.3	Having made the two altars equal to the Garhapatya, the Pratiprasthata makes the southern altar for the Darsa and the Adhvaryu makes the northern altar for the Pasu. The northern altar for the pasu is made there.
8.9.4	The altar is to be made of four or eight angulas, without any gap between the hips and the shoulders.
8.9.5	The Adhvaryu and the Pratiprasthātṛ instruct the Brahman.
8.9.6	Two Brahmans sprinkle.
8.9.7	The Pratiprasthātr moves between the altars.
8.9.8	Taking the Stambayajus, he moves around the Adhvaryu on the other side of the northern altar.
8.9.9	He pours it on the northern heap.
8.9.10	Whatever the Adhvaryu does, the Pratiprasthātṛ does the same.
8.9.11	Having made the northern enclosing sticks, having gone to the northern shoulder of the southern Vedi, having gone to its northern shoulder, he cuts off a piece with the wooden sword from the southern shoulder.
8.9.12	Both the Āhavanīya and the Garhapatya are carried forward like the animal sacrifice. They install the fires in the northern part of the sacrificial ground.
8.9.13	Having installed the fires, they release the calves of the two kinds of milk-rice offerings dedicated to Maruts and Varuna. They prepare separate curds for the evening milking.
8.10.1	Some say that the Varuna-grahas are offered on the same day.
8.10.2	Having offered the Agnihotra in the morning, having taken up the washing of the hands etc., he employs separate vessels.
8.10.3	The ladles are made of Sami wood or gold.
8.10.4	The Adhvaryu offers five oblations to Indra-Agni in eleven potsherds.
8.10.5	The Pratiprasthātṛ pours out barley for the Marutī Amikṣā for the Marutīs, the Adhvaryu pours out barley for Vāruṇī Amikṣa for the Vāruṇīs. Having poured out barley for the Vārunī Amikṣã for the Vārus, he pours out a cake on one potsherd.
8.10.6	The male sheep has male characteristics, the female sheep has female characteristics.
8.10.7	They sprinkle the barley with the remaining Prokṣaṇī water.
8.10.8	The Adhvaryu places the sheep for Varuna and the Pratiprasthātṛ places the ewe for Maruts on eleven or twelve potsherds.
8.10.9	Some say, "Having taken the fires from the Apas, arrange them."
8.10.10	Having taken the northern enclosing stick with the fire, and having touched the ladle and the spoon, and having bound the wife, and having instructed with ghee and curds, the instruction is given.
8.11.1	One should take the clarified butter like in the Vaisvadeva.
8.11.2	When the oblations are being removed, they make the two (sacrificial) animals out of wool with the Anēḍaki verses.
8.11.3	If they do not find them, then with the tips of Kuśa grass.
8.11.4	Having placed the Vājinī grass in the vessel, having taken out the cooked rice, he places the ram in it, and similarly the ewe in the Vāruṇī vessel.
8.11.5	They scatter the chaff of Śamī leaves and barley grains over them.
8.11.6	The Adhvaryu places the other oblations, beginning with those to Agni, in the southern half of the altar, in the vessels of Karambha. The Pratiprasthātṛ places the vessels of Karamba in the northern half of the altar.
8.11.7	The sheep are exchanged, the sheep of Maruts in the southern half and the sheep of Varuṇa in the northern half.
8.11.8	The Adhvaryu alone places the oblations for Vayu on the mound.
8.11.9	Having performed the churning, having deposited the Veda, he instructs (the Hotr) to recite the verse, "Agni is being kindled."
8.11.10	When the Sāmidhenī verses have been recited, the Adhvaryu makes the Āhavanīya fire blaze thrice with the Veda.
8.11.11	When the northern (fire) has been rubbed, and the southern one not yet rubbed, the Pratiprasthātṛ, having made the sacrificer's wife recite the verse, “We invoke the Prāghāsyas," brings her.
8.12.1	"How many husbands do you have?" she is asked.
8.12.2	"May Varuna seize those whom she mentions," she points out.
8.12.3	If she does not mention a husband who exists, she should point out, "This is my husband."
8.12.4	The questions about bringing are the opposite.
8.12.5	Having placed the pot of curds and the pot of buttermilk on the head of the wife, having gone between the altar and the fire, he stands facing the fire with his face towards the south. The sacrificer also stands facing the fire.
8.12.6	The wife gives them to the sacrificer.
8.12.7	The Adhvaryu recites the Puronuvākyā verse "O Indra, thou art the foremost, the best, the most excellent." The sacrificer and the wife recite the Yājyā verse "The village, the city, the country."
8.12.8	The Adhvaryu or the Pratiprasthātṛ offers the ladle and the chaff.
8.12.9	The Adhvaryu or the Prati-prasthātṛ makes the offering, the other two assist him.
8.12.10	The Advaryu or the sacrificer murmurs the verse "The deed has been done, the deed has been accomplished" as they turn back.
8.13.1	The Pratiprasthātṛ priest sprinkles the southern fire.
8.13.2	When the rite has been performed up to the Indra-Agni deities, the Pratiprasthātr, with the first portion of the Amikṣā oblation, offers all the sheep together.
8.13.3	With the second portion, he offers the Śamī-leaf cakes and barley-flour balls, having instructed (the Hotr) to recite the yajus for the Maruts.
8.13.4	The Adhvaryu cooks the entire sheep together with the first portion of the Varuni offering.
8.13.5	Having directed the Adhvaryu to recite the Varuṇānuvākyā while offering the Śamī-leaf-cakes and barley-gruel, and having uttered the Vasat-call, he offers the Ekakapāla oblation. Having directed the Advaryu to recite Kâyânuvâkyâ, and having offered as before, he offers the oblation with the four names of the months, Nabhas, Nabhasya, etc.
8.13.6	Having cut off the Idā from the seven Varuṇa-sticks, he gives it to the Pratiprasthātṛ.
8.13.7	The Pratiprasthātr puts it in after cutting off from the Marutīya (sticks).
8.13.8	They eat the Upāhuta (Idā) together with the sacrificer.
8.13.9	A milch cow is the Dakṣiṇā.
8.13.10	The Hotr recites the Āśīrvādas as before, saying, "May there be welfare for those having calves."
8.13.11	Having struck the two enclosing sticks, he says, "Recite the yajus for the horses." As before, they move.
8.13.12	"May the drops enter me." All consume the horse.
8.13.13	Except for the full vessel, the rest is the Iṣṭi of success.
8.14.1	In place of the full vessel, there is the Avabhṛtha.
8.14.2	Four spoonfuls of clarified butter.
8.14.3	Having taken out the husks and chaff with the Varuṇa-formula, having gone beyond the two mounds of the Cātvāla, towards the north, where there is water, they enter the Sauma-abhith.
8.14.4	No Āyuṣṭad-verse is recited, nor is the Sāman sung.
8.14.5	The husks are used in place of the Rījiṣa.
8.14.6	One offers the Niskāsa in water, as in the Varuṇa rite.
8.14.7	The sacrificer and his wife, having risen from the Avabhṛtha, give garments to the mind-pleasing (priests).
8.14.8	The Avabhṛtha is not (performed) at all.
8.14.9	Some say that one should pour out the chaff silently.
8.14.10	"One who is bound with the yoke-rope says, "I am binding this."
8.14.11	"The divine waters." Like the Sauma sacrifice.
8.14.12	Having placed the fires, having gone out, having churned, on the next day, having performed the Full-moon sacrifice, the return and the disposal have been explained.
8.14.13	Here, the mantra "yad dharmo" is the return mantra.
9.1.1	And as before, in the four months, on the full moon of Kartika or Margashirsha, on the previous Parvan day, on the day of fasting, he performs for two days with the Soma-offerings of the Sākamedhas.
9.1.2	He offers a cake on eight potsherds to Agni, the leader of the army, when the sun rises. The three Iṣṭis are mentioned in the same order as they are mentioned in the text.
9.1.3	The sacrificial grass of the one who leads the army is that of the one who protects from heat and the one who performs the Gṛhamedha sacrifice.
9.1.4	The sacrificial grass is spread out, but not the sacrificial grass and fuel. There are no Prayāja and Anūyāja offerings.
9.1.5	Silently he takes away the calves of the householder's cow. The milk is milked like the evening milking, and there is a cooked rice offering.
9.1.6	Having offered the Agnihotra in the evening, having placed the fires in their proper places, having performed the rites of spreading the grass and so on, and having arranged the vessels, he arranges the pot and three vessels at the time of arranging the vessels.
9.1.7	At the time of offering, having offered four handfuls to Maruts and Grahas, he offers plenty of rice along with milk that has been purified and recited the Yajus.
9.1.8	At the place of the skull, he recites the mantra "You are Dhruva" and places the cooked rice.
9.1.9	At the location of sifting the flour, he sifts the rice grains.
9.1.10	"Bring the sprinkling water, the ladle, and the ladles. Prepare the wife. Bring the ghee."
9.2.1-3	Having taken up the clarified butter in the Dhruva vessel, having invited the Brahman, having sprinkled the altar, having taken the remaining clarified butter and having deposited the Pavitra in the middle of the altar, having placed the Prastara and having deposited the Dhruva and the ladle, he says, "This is the place." This is the invocation. "You are Vishnu" is the invocation of the clarified butter.
9.2.4	Having taken out the oblation from the vessel in which it was cooked, having taken up the ladle, having placed it in a safe place, having wiped it, having placed it on the vessels, he takes out the rice for each person in those vessels.
9.2.5	Some say three.
9.2.6	He places the emptied pot.
9.2.7	Having placed the unhusked grains in the ladle, having taken out the cooked rice, having sprinkled them, having boiled them, having decorated them, he places them within the altar.
9.2.8	He cooks rice for his wife and the young men in the Anvāhāryapacana vessel.
9.2.9	Having taken out the two vessels, having taken out the two portions of cooked rice, having placed them in the pit, having poured plenty of ghee over them, he places them within the altar.
9.2.10	After the Hotr has performed the Hotr's rites, having offered the Ajyabhāga offerings, having placed the spoon, having taken twice from all the cooked rice, having poured clarified butter over it, having tasted it, having directed, "Do you recite the yajus for the Maruts, the householders", having gone around along the south, having called out, having responded to the call, he directs, "Do you offer to the Maruts, householders".
9.2.11	Having offered to the Vasat-call, having stepped over towards the north, having taken each of the northern portions of all (the oblations) once, he offers to Agni Sviṣṭakṛt.
9.2.12	The Grīhīmaṇḍala rite comes to an end.
9.3.1	He offers cooked rice for the consumption of the oblations.
9.3.2	The cooked rice in the pot is eaten by the wives, women and boys, while other Brahmanas eat the cooked rice in the other pots.
9.3.3	All the calves are brought in, and they are rubbed and anointed, and they are made to graze.
9.3.4	They spend the night in peace.
9.3.5	The full-pot is used for the evening meal, and the pot is put away.
9.3.6	At the end of the night, having tied the calf of the Agnihotra cow that has calved, and having placed it on the Darbha grass before the morning Agnihotra, having placed the entire sacrificial grass and the unburnt wood on the Darbha, and having placed the Darbha grass and the wood on the Darvi, he pours twice with clarified butter.
9.3.7	When the bull roars, one should recite the verse "The ladle is full" and then offer it to the Garhapatya fire, saying "Give me!"
9.3.8	If the bull does not roar, the Brahman should make a hissing sound.
9.3.9	The one who roars is the Dakṣiṇā.
9.3.10	After offering the Agnihotra with milk in the morning, one should offer a cake on seven potsherds to the Maruts, the playful ones, at sunrise.
9.3.11	Some say, "To the Maruts, to the self-shining ones."
9.3.12	Then he prepares five kinds of oblations, namely, the eleven-vessel oblation to Indra-Agni, the oblation to Indra, the one-vessel oblation for Visvakarman, and the other eight great oblations, as in the Varuna-prastha-satra, in the reverse order.
9.3.13	Having carried the oblation to the common Indra-Agni separately, he places the husks in a safe place.
9.3.14	"O Agni, the Hotr, the Dūta," he offers the Sruva-spoonful.
9.3.15	The sacrificer recites, "This is the speech of Agni."
9.3.16	With four verses, "Sahas and Sahasya," he offers the Ekakapala.
9.3.17	A cow is the fee.
9.3.18	"May there be welfare for those who are now born," the Hotṛ recites in the Āśiṣa verses.
9.3.19	They perform the Avabhṛtha rite with the Iḍā, Agni and Tuṣa offerings.
9.4.1	Then comes the great Paitṛyajña.
9.4.2	Having made the altar, in the southeast direction of the Anvāhāryapacana, he should make a square altar with four corners, the size of the sacrificer, or a square altar without digging.
9.4.3	In the divine tradition, the word "father" is used in place of "god" everywhere, as in "For the gods and fathers, pleasing, for the gods and fathers it is spread, for the gods, fathers, and sacrificial grass."
9.4.4	Having spread it all around, he makes the door in the northern corner.
9.4.5	Having taken out the embers from the Anvāhāryapacani fire, he places them in the middle of the altar, not taking up the fire.
9.4.6	This is the Ahavanīya fire here.
9.4.7	Having placed the Ahavanīyīya, Gārhapatya and Anvāhāryapachana fires, he brings the sacrificial grass as in the Pindapitryajña.
9.4.8	The kindling wood is larger than the kindling wood.
9.4.9	The two middle and the last are the boundaries.
9.4.10	In the case of the distribution of the vessels, he should use each of them separately, namely, half a vessel, a vessel for sprinkling, a sugarcane stalk, a vessel for holding water, or a pot.
9.4.11	At the time of offering, he offers a cake on six potsherds to Soma, the father, as per the prescribed three oblations.
9.4.12	To the right, facing east, he pours out the barley.
9.4.13	It is understood that one should pour out facing north.
9.4.14	Having brought the barley together with the sprinkling water and divided it into three parts, and having divided it into six parts according to the mantra, he covers it.
9.5.1	Having placed six potsherds on the right side, he places the potsherd for Dhruva in the Anvāhāryapacana with the first mantra, saying, "You are the head of the sacrifice." Having placed the six potsherds, he says with the same mantra, "You are warm, you are the life of the universe." Having pressed down, he pours the Dhānas. They lie down while being cooked, and while being cooked they become of many forms.
9.5.2	If the wife is not present, the husband should give her share to someone else.
9.5.3	It is understood that the wife does not attend or perform the sacrifice.
9.5.4	He takes four spoonfuls of clarified butter from the northern side of the Garhapatya fire and puts it twice in the Upabṛttha vessel.
9.5.5	Having taken the sacrificial grass in the eastern direction, he spreads the Vedi, shaking it three times towards the east.
9.5.6	Having spread the remaining sacrificial grass, he wears the girdle and shakes it three times, spreading it and moving around in a clockwise direction.
9.5.7	He places two or three enclosing sticks.
9.5.8	If it is said that one should spread the three enclosing sticks at the invocation, then one should place the right enclosing stick on the middle enclosing stick.
9.6.1	Having left the holding sticks, one places the Prastara silently.
9.6.2	Having divided the oblations according to the respective mantras, and having ground half of them and made them into cakes, having brought milk from a cow with a calf, having mixed the cakes in that (milk), and having churned it with a sugarcane-stick, facing south, facing the southern direction, without beginning, he churns three times.
9.6.3	Taking the one-pronged ladle from the Anvāhārya-pacaṇa, he takes it to the east of the Garhapatya, carries it around to the west of the Ahavaniya, and places it within the altar to the south of the Ahavaniye.
9.6.4	Having arranged the oblations, the sacrificial dishes, the rice-cake, the cooked rice, and the gruel, they recite the oblations one by one. The rice-cake is placed on the right side, the cooked rice in the middle, and the gruels on the left side.
9.6.5	He places on the right side the sprinkling, the anointing, the unguent, the sprinkling of the grass, the ten-spoked wooden sword, and the water pot.
9.6.6	Brahma and the sacrificer are on the right side, the Hotṛ, Adhvaryu and Agnīdhra on the left side.
9.6.7	The Adhvaryu, having placed the Veda, instructs, "Recite for Agni, the god, the ancestors, and the kindling."
9.6.8	The Hotṛ recites the Sāmidhenī verses three times, beginning with "We invoke you, O Ushanas."
9.6.9	The Adhvaryu divides the oblation into three parts, leaving aside the kindling wood for the Anuyājas. He places it in the Prāṇave ladle in three parts.
9.7.1	When the fire is well-kindled, he does not choose the Nārīśeya or the Hotṛ.
9.7.2	Having called out and having been called out, he should say, "Sit down, O Hotṛ," this much is the extent of the Prāvargya.
9.7.3	The Prajās are without the sacrificial grass.
9.7.4	Having taken half of the Upabhṛt ladle, he offers the Ajyabhāgas with the verses, "O Agni, with thy good auspice, O Soma, for great prosperity."
9.7.5	All move towards the east, carrying the Ajya and Havis towards the north. The Brahman and the Yajamana move towards the south.
9.7.6	He places the Juhu and Upamant to the right of the Dhruva. He places the Dhruva to the right of them. He places the Puronuvayu to the right of it. He places the Dhana to the right of that. He places the Mantha to the right of those.
9.7.7	The one with six parts is for those with five parts, the one with five parts is for those having four parts.
9.7.8	They perform the Pitryajna silently.
9.7.9	Having collected together the three oblations, he offers to each deity.
9.7.10	First he should offer the oblations of the respective deities, twice for those with five portions, once for those with four portions.
9.7.11	Having placed the ladle on the ground, having taken from the cake, and having taken once from the cooked rice and the gruel, he offers once, once, and once, and then pours over it, for those with four parts.
9.7.12	Having instructed, "To Soma, the father, according to one's own nature,"
9.7.13	O Soma, thou art the knower of our thoughts. For by thee our fathers have been called to the Soma. The Hotri recites the two Puronuvākyās with the Prāṇava.
9.7.14	Then the Adhvaryu, having taken the oblation from the right side, and having gone forward towards the north, announces (the offering) with the words "Svāhā, svāhā."
9.7.15	He responds with the words "May there be svāhā, svāhā."
9.8.1	He instructs (the Hotṛ) with the words, "The Soma is for the fathers, svāhā," or "Svāhā is for the performance."
9.8.2	Those who have come to their own abode.
9.8.3	The Hotṛ priest offers with the verse, "O Soma, you are in accord with the fathers."
9.8.4	He makes the Vasat call with the words, "Svāhā, salutations."
9.8.5	He offers to the deities with the same verse, repeating it twice, in accordance with the deity.
9.8.6	Even if they are heard and unheard.
9.8.7	Some say there is no Svāhā sound.
9.8.8	Having taken the cakes from the pot of cooked grains and the pot of curds, he directs to the ancestors seated on the sacrificial grass, "Do you offer to the ancestors seated in heaven." He says twice, "The ancestors seated on the grass, I am offering to the ancestors."
9.8.9	Having gone beyond to the north and announced, when it is announced back, he directs, "Do you perform the offering to the ancestors seated with heaven."
9.8.10	The invocation is, "Those who are the ancestors of heaven."
9.8.11	He offers with the formula, "The Pitrs have been invoked."
9.8.12	He makes the offering with the formula, Svāhā Namah.
9.8.13	Having gone to the north, having taken up the cake from the pot of boiling, and the cooked rice, he directs them to the Pitrs, the Agniṣvāttas, with the formula, Anu svadhā.
9.8.14	The Agniṣvāttas are the Pitrs who are Agniṣvāttā, and those who are not Agniṣvāttās. This is the Puronuvākyā.
9.8.15	He instructs (the Hotr) with the words, "Do you offer the Agniṣvāttan Pitrs with Svāhā."
9.8.16	The verse becomes, "Those who are Svāhāmah." He offers with the words, “Milk for another."
9.8.17	He pronounces the Vasat with the words, Svāhā Namah.
9.8.18	Having placed the Juhu on the southern half of the three oblations, having poured twice, he instructs, "To Agni Kavya-vahana, Svishtakrit, with Svāhā."
9.8.19	"O Agni, you are the carrier of Kavya. O Agni, you are praised." These are two verses.
9.8.20	He instructs, "Agni, the carrier of Kavva, Svishtakrita, Svāhā, Svāhā."
9.9.1	"Those who have their own abode" is recited.
9.9.2	One offers with "O Matali, with the oblations."
9.9.3	One makes the Vasat-call with "Svāhā to Svāhā."
9.9.4	One offers the remaining oblations in the southeast corner, not touching each other.
9.9.5	One strikes the ladle and the sugarcane stalk.
9.9.6-9	All the priests, wearing the sacrificial thread, move around. The oblations of ghee and other offerings are moved around. The Brahmanas and the Yajamana move around to the right of the Ahavaniya fire. The Juhu ladle is moved around to the north of the Upabhrti ladle, the Dhruva ladle, and the Puronuvakya ladle. The Dhrana ladle and the Antha ladle are moved around to the south of the Juhu ladle. No Prashitra Avadana is performed. The Ida is offered from the Antha ladle.
9.9.10	Having called the Idā, he smells a little and places the paste on the sacrificial grass.
9.9.11	Having placed the remnants of the oblation in a vessel, having made three balls, and having given the balls in the three directions, east, south and west, in accordance with the texts, "This is yours, and those who follow you," he mentions the ancestors, the father, grandfather and great-grandfather, in the first ball, the fifth, in the second, the fourth, and in the third, the sixth.
9.9.12	On the northern line he smears the paste.
9.9.13	Here they go out, saying, "O Fathers, do you distribute according to your share."
9.9.14	They approach the Havirdhana with the verse, "We approach you, O well-seeing one," ending with Praṇava, and the Garhapatya with the verse, “They have seen, they have not seen."
9.9.15	They enter the enclosure, saying, "The Fathers have seen."
9.10.1	Taking the water-pot, the sacrificer goes around the altar thrice sprinkling water with the formula, "May the Pitrs be purified."
9.10.2	Placing the pot, he goes back thrice sprinkling water with "The offspring of the womb is born."
9.10.3-4	Having performed the Āñjana-abhyañjana etc. like the Piṇḍapitryajña, having released the Parisṛtas, having placed the Paridhīs as before, having put on the Yajñopavīta, having instructed the Brahman with the words "We shall proceed", having instructed with the Anūyājās with the words "Obeisance to the gods" and "Obeisance" respectively, having placed the two ladles, he arranges with the Vājavatī verses.
9.10.5	The Hotṛ recites the Sūktavāka.
9.10.6	The wives do not offer the Samit-offering.
9.10.7	The vessels are recited in pairs.
9.10.8	Everything else is accomplished.
9.10.9	For each person, he offers the Traiyambaka oblations to Rudra on one potsherd, one extra, for those who are the advisers of the sacrificer, along with their wives.
9.10.10	The sacrificer mutters the formula, "As many grains as there are in the house," while the grains are being counted.
9.10.11	The cakes are without formulas.
9.10.12	Having heaped up embers towards the north of the Garhapatya fire, and having placed them there, he pours clarified butter over them.
9.10.13	Having placed the oblations on the fire, having approached the interior of the altar, having poured down the fat of the animals with the formula, "Thou art the fat of the cattle," having taken up the ladle from the Anvāhāryapacana, having gone to the west of the Garhapatya, they proceed towards the north-east corner of the cross-roads.
9.10.14	"Thou art the rat, O Rudra, of the cattle," he pours down a cake on the rat-hole.
9.11.1	He should point out the animal to be sacrificed to Rudra, if he wishes to do so.
9.11.2	Having drawn a mound at a cross-roads, having placed a single fire-brand, having kindled it, having spread it, having taken the southern half of all the cakes one by one, he offers it in that fire, saying, "This is thy share, O Rudra."
9.11.3	This leaf is for him whom one hates. One should place the animals of his enemy in this leaf.
9.11.4	With the two verses, "O Agni, O Agni, O Agni," they approach Agni. The sacrificer mutters, "O Agni! O Agni! O Agni!"
9.11.5	The priests, each taking a cake, circumambulate the fire, reciting the verse, "We worship Tryambaka," and touching the right thighs of the sacrificer.
9.11.6	Placing the cakes on the ground, they stand facing north and offer them to the sacrificer in his hands, reciting the verse "May Bhaga be with you, may Bhaga be yours."
9.11.7	Thus the second and third.
9.11.8	In the third round, they do not accept.
9.11.9	They say, "I unite you with Bhaga, like Sura with the month of Magha." They unite.
9.11.10	Taking it, he ties it to a tree.
9.11.11	They stand near it, saying, "This is your share, O Rudra," at the end of the Praṇava.
9.11.12	Having sprinkled water around, they go without waiting.
9.11.13	Having washed his hands and feet, he returns to the cattle-pen and cleanses himself.
9.12.1	Having placed the kindling woods on the Ahavaniya fire, he says, "May it be kindled! May we kindle it!" and then moves around the water with the verse, "May I stand with the protection of the gods." The wife stands at the Garhapatya fire.
9.12.2	He offers a cake baked on eight potsherds to Agni, a cake baked on eleven potsherds to Indra, a cake baked in ghee to Aditya, and a cake to Vishnu.
9.12.3	It is known that the sacrifice is Vishnu, and that one stands at the end of the sacrifice.
9.12.4	A white horse or a cow is the Dakshina.
9.12.5	The Uddana and other rites have been explained in the morning after performing the Full-Moon sacrifice.
9.12.6	Here, the turning back is mentioned in the verse "Who is this earth?"
9.12.7	What remains is accomplished.
9.12.8	The oblations of the Soma-sacrifices are concluded.
9.12.9	Then, after four days, three days, two days, or four months, he performs with the offerings of Shunahshepa as in the Visvadevya sacrifice.
9.12.10	Five wandering (sacrifices) - the Iandragna with twelve potfuls, the Visvadevy with rice-pap, the Indra-Shunahshepa with a cake on twelve potfuls, Vayu with milk, and Surya with a cake on one potful.
9.12.11	Twelve-headed cattle are the Dakshina for Surya.
9.12.12	If there is an Uttaravedi, then as in the case of the Uttaravedi in the Varuna-prastha-sutra.
9.12.13	He offers a cake on one potsherd to Anhaspati with the last month's name, reciting the verse, "Sarpant, I offer to Anhaspati."
9.12.14	He prays for the welfare of the calves of the cows of the present year or of the cows of last year.
9.12.15	In the latter half of the month, having performed these rites together, he performs the Pautrnamasika rite at its proper time.
9.12.16	The Uddantamantra has been explained.
9.12.17	The Nivartana mantra is "One month has passed."
9.12.18	The Caturmasya rites are concluded.
10.1.1	One who is going to perform a sacrifice after a year should offer it on the full moon day or new moon day, or on the waxing moon, or on an auspicious constellation.
10.1.2	One who offers a sacrifice to the gods, frees himself from death and attains all desires.
10.1.3	The sacrificial rites of the animal sacrifice are performed by six priests: the Agnidhra, the Brahma, the Hotr, the Maitravaruna, the Adhvaryu, and the Pratiprasthātṛ.
10.1.4	Having offered the oblation with the Anuvāka beginning with "Sūryaṃ te", he offers the oblation to Agni-Viṣṇu in eleven potsherds at the beginning of the rite, and also offers the oblation with a verse to Agni-Vişnu in four spoonfuls in the Ahavaniya.
10.1.5	Having made the remaining oblations and placed them in the Ahavani ya, he offers an oblation with the ladle in the Ahavaniye with the verse "O Viṣṇu, expand yourself."
10.1.6	Having taken the ladle with the remaining oblations, and having given the sacrificial knife to the sacrificer, they go away.
10.1.7	Palāśa, Bilva, Rohitika, Khadira are the sacrificial posts.
10.1.8	Palāsa is for the sacrifice of a matured animal; others are for the sacrifice of Soma.
10.1.9	Having gone beyond those three and a half, he stands saying, "He who has grown from the sweet womb of the earth, straight, upright, with many leaves, many branches, with fresh tips, without wounds, leaning towards the east, I have gone beyond others to him." Having touched him, saying, "I am devoted to you," and having anointed him with a ladleful of honey, saying, "May the god Savitar anoint you with honey," and having covered the tip of the grass with the ladle, saying, "Protect him," and having placed it on the right side, saying, "Do not injure him," and having sprinkled it in a clockwise direction, saying, "Let there be no contact with the stars."
10.2.1	He should also take the first piece that falls down.
10.2.2	He should throw it towards the east or north, saying, "May it go to heaven first."
10.2.3	Having placed gold in the enclosing sticks and spread them around, he offers with the verse, "O Vanaspati, grow with a hundred shoots."
10.2.4	He touches himself with the verse, "May I grow with a thousand shoots."
10.2.5	He who is this, he cuts off the branches from the root to the tip.
10.2.6	He cuts off the tip of the five-knotted pole, or of the four-knotted or three-knotted pole.
10.2.7	One should measure the pole together with the base.
10.2.8	He cuts the sacrificial post with eight corners, not too thick, not too thin, tapering gradually towards the top, with the best corner towards the fire, and of the height of eight times the span of the thumb and the forefinger.
10.2.9	He makes the cuttings of these posts into a lump and also into a piece for pounding.
10.2.10	Having taken it from the top of the sacrificial post, he makes a cup, eight-cornered, of the size of the palm, sloping in the middle, and extending above the cup by two or three fingers.
10.2.11	Having joined the excess to the cup, he exposes the excess.
10.3.1	Having made the altar in front of the Ahavaniya fire, he makes the altar for the animal sacrifice with six cubits towards the east, four towards the west, three towards the north, and three towards the south. The altar is not joined together. It is like the altar for the Darsa-Pūrnamāsa sacrifices.
10.3.2	Having marked out the place for the Uttaravedi, which is not enclosed, in front of the Vedi, he measures the Uttaravedi with the Samyu.
10.3.3	Having placed the Samyu with its point towards the north in each direction, and having said, "Thou art the Vittāyani," he draws lines towards the north and east with the Sphyi, within, with each formula.
10.3.4	He draws the line towards the north of the two or three lines drawn towards the north. He draws the line around the Cātvāla silently.
10.3.5	Taking up the spade with the formula, "For the god thee", he draws the line thrice turning towards the right. Having dug the pit three times the depth of a span, he says, "Agni is in the sky."
10.4.1	Having placed the ladle with the formula, "O Agni, O Angiras," and having taken up the dust with the formula, “You are in this earth,” and having carried it with the formula, “(May) your life be with your name," he pours it on the northern altar with the formula, "Your name which is not violated, which is fit for sacrifice."
10.4.2-6	Having placed the second one, having placed the second one with the formula, "O Agni, thou art the Angiras," having taken the third one with the formula "Thou art the second one," he sows it as before. So also the third one. The difference is that it is sown in the third one. The fourth one is sown silently. Having made the Uttaravedi with the formulas, "Thou art the lioness, thou art the she-buffalo," he spreads it with the formula, “Be thou extended.”
10.4.7	He sprinkles with the Sphyikā or the Samīkṣā.
10.4.8	Having sprinkled with water with the formula, "Purify for the gods", and having scattered sand with the formula, “Purify for the deities”, he carries the Prokṣaṇī water towards the northern end of the northern altar with the formula, "Whatever is cruel in you, whatever is settled down in you." Some say that one should sprinkle again with the same water.
10.4.9	"The waters carry away the evil." Having drawn a line with the wooden sword either from north to south or from south to north, he should pour the remaining water of sprinkling on the northern altar.
10.4.10	"The waters carry away evil." Having arranged the corners of the northern altar, he simultaneously touches the northern altar and the altar with the verse, "The young girl with four locks of hair."
10.4.11	In the middle of the northern altar, he should imagine a navel-like mark, four fingers in size, rising to the height of the middle finger, in the four directions.
10.5.1	"He sprinkles the northern altar in the respective directions, moving clockwise, with the verses, "Indraghosha may protect you from the east with the Vasus..." and so on."
10.5.2	He should then move the sprinkling water towards the northern altar, as before, towards the south.
10.5.3	If the animal is to be sacrificed on the second day, one should prepare the Uttaravedi covered with branches of the Udumbara tree.
10.5.4	Having set fire to the kindling woods to be taken to the Ahavaniya fire, having ordered, "Recite to the Agni being taken to the Ahavanīya fire," having taken up the burning kindling woods in a pot filled with sand, having raised the kindling woods, while the Agni is being held at the knee, he offers the Homa with the raised kindling woods with the verse, "What is yours, O Agni, in the fire, what is yours, O Pavaka, in the forest."
10.5.5	Having taken the gold, he places it on the northern altar and pours it with five spoonfuls of clarified butter, reciting the verse, "Thou art the lioness, the conqueror of foes, svāhā." On the right shoulder, "Thou art lioness, the bestower of good progeny, svāhā," on the left hip, "Thou art a lioness, the giver of wealth and nourishment, svāhā" on the right hip, "Thou are a lioness, giver of the sun, svāhā", on the left shoulder, "Thou are the lioness, bring the gods, svāhā, for the sacrificer who worships." In the middle.
10.5.6	"He takes up the ladle with the formula, "To the beings thee." and gold.
10.5.7	Taking the enclosing sticks of Pautrīdara wood, he lays down the northern altar with three formulas beginning with "Thou art the life of the universe."
10.6.1	Having placed the woolen cloth, fragrant with guggula, inside the horns, and having placed the woolen cloth on the upper navel, saying "The hairs of those who have gathered the fuel are ashes," he places the woolen cloth on it. When it is said, "The woolen cloth is at the end," he says, "O Agni, obstruct the sacrifice and stand firm." With these two verses, he places the burning Agni in the fuel.
10.6.2	"This is the nest of Agni." He puts down sand at the southern end.
10.6.3	"Having offered four Ati-mukti oblations with the verse, "May I obtain thee as Manu did," and the verse, "May Agni, the knower, lead the sacrifice," he offers the Pūrṇāhuti with the verse, "These seven are the oblations."
10.6.4	This is the Ahavaniya here, from where this (fire) is carried forward. That is the Garhapatya.
10.6.5	Having placed the Āhavaniya, Gārhapatya and Anvāhārya-pācana fires, he places the kindling woods and sacrificial grass.
10.6.6	There are seventeen kindling verses.
10.6.7	The Prastara is of Aśvaval wood, the Vidhṛti of Ekṣa wood, and the enclosing sticks of Karṣmarya wood.
10.6.8	Having arranged the fires, he places in the vessel-stand the vessels as in the case of the Vaiśvadeva rite.
10.7.1	The ladle, the ladle-stand, the Veda-vessel, the vessel for pouring the Soma, the two ropes, the two stakes, the two wooden pins, the two wooden spoons, the two wooden ladles, the pot, the heart-pin, the fig-wood, the Suvarṇa-wood, the Maitrāvaruṇa-stick, the piece of wood cut off at the nose or chin, the two pieces of wood for kindling fire, the gold pieces of wood, and the purpose for which they are used.
10.7.2	Having purified the oblations, the sacrificer is directed to restrain his speech. Having touched the vessels with restrained speech, he releases his speech over the sprinkled (vessels).
10.7.3	Having taken up the ladle, he directs, "Take up the ladle and the spoon with clarified butter and curds." Having directed, he sprinkles.
10.7.4	At the time of touching the vessels, after the ladle, he touches the spoon like the ladle.
10.7.5	Having performed the offering of clarified butter as in the case of the Vaiśvadeva rite, taking up the wooden sword with the formula, "For the deity thee," he inscribes the pit for the sacrificial post three times, measuring a span all around, within the altar and outside the altar.
10.7.6	The Adhvaryu, having placed the sacrificial post with its tip towards the east, in front of the pit, says (to the Agnidhra), "Do you dig out the pit for the sacrificial post, of the size of the post, by two fingers, three fingers or four fingers."
10.7.7	The Agnidhra digs it out as per the instructions.
10.8.1	The Adhvaryu having placed the sacrificialpost with its tip towards east in front of the hole, says (to Agnidhra), “Do you wash the post with the formula, ‘Whatever thorns thou hast, I remove them.”
10.8.2	Having brought the sprinkling water from the Yavamatī river, having placed the cup on the top of the sacrificial post, he sprinkles the root of the sacrificial post with the three mantras "For you, O Earth" and the upper parts.
10.8.3	Having sprinkled the sprinkling water in the sacrificial post hole with the verse "May the world be purified, the abode of the ancestors", having scattered the barley with the verse "You are barley", he spreads the sacrificial grass with the tip towards the east in the hole with the verse, "You are the abode of the Ancestors".
10.8.4	Having placed the first piece of wood, which has been thrown down, below the skin, and having placed the gold, he offers with the ladle, saying, "O heaven and earth, be ye filled with ghee. Svāhā!"
10.8.5	"May Savitr, the god, anoint thee with honey." The sacrificer, standing towards the east with his face towards the west, anoints the tip of the sacrificial post with the unmelted clarified butter in front of the Āhavanīya fire.
10.8.6	Having released the cup, he anoints the tip with the same formula.
10.8.7	Having anointed the Indra-cup with the formula, "Thou art Indra," and having released it with the formula, “For Supapala,” having ordered, “Do thou recite after the offering of clarified butter to the sacrificial post,” with the formula, “(May) the god Savitr anoint thee with honey,” he pours clarified butter into the eastern trough with the ladle, continuously, as long as it is not overflowing.
10.8.8	It does not overflow.
10.8.9	Some say, it does not flow.
10.8.10	At the place of the girdle, he touches the sacrificial post three times all around.
10.8.11	The sacrificer does not release the sacrificial post from the time of anointing it with ointment till the time of its disposal.
10.9.1	While raising the sacrificial post, he instructs, "Recite the Anuvāka for the sacrificial post being raised."
10.9.2	He places the sacrificial post in the hole, saying, "Those are your abodes."
10.9.3	With two verses, "The deeds of Vishnu," he makes the altar of Agni, facing the Havaniya fire.
10.9.4	With the verse, "You are the abode of Brahman," having covered the ground with soil, he presses it around with the Maitravaruna staff, saying, "Press the Brahman."
10.9.5	With the verse "Raise the earth," he sprinkles water around.
10.9.6	Taking the three-fold rope with the formula, "For the god thee", he cleanses the sacrificial post three times with the rope along with the hand, reciting the verse, "This Vishnu has wandered".
10.9.7	He should look at the tip of the sacrificial post with the verse, "That is the supreme abode of Vishnu".
10.9.8	Having sprinkled the girdle with water, having eaten it three times with the middle finger, having placed it in the middle of the navel, or having placed the sacrificial post, having instructed the one who is going to place the post, "Recite for the post being placed," having placed it three times in a clockwise direction, he places the larger one in the smaller one.
10.9.9	"Thou art the son of heaven" (he says), taking up the piece of gold; "Thou art of the atmosphere" (he says) on the highest quality. He covers the Agniṣṭha with the northern (brick). On the middle (brick) of two.
10.9.10	Having taken the animal, which is without horns, with ears turned back, with a broken ear, lame, with a broken limb, with seven hooves, with teeth, belonging to a herd, having a mother, father, brother, and friend, well-flayed, brought on a cloth, and having taken it through the middle of the sacrificial post and the mound, having placed the sacrificial post in front, facing the east, having taken the two sacrificial grass blades, having taken the Palasha branch, having recited the Yajus "For the gods", having touched the animal with the two verses "For Prajapati's offspring, this animal" and the Yajus, he offers it according to the deity.
10.10.1	Having placed the sacrificial grass in a safe place and having taken up the branch of the fig tree, knowing that they are to be taken up, he offers five times.
10.10.2	He churns the fire.
10.10.3	Some say that one should churn and then take it up.
10.10.4	Having taken the remaining piece of wood with the formula, "Thou art the womb of Agni," and having placed it on the Barhis to the right of the Ahavaniya, he places the Darbha grass in it as in the case of the Visvedevā deities. Having taken the kindling wood and the vessel of clarified butter, he anoints it with clarified butter with the formula, "Thou art life." Having joined the kindling wood with the Prajanana (kindling) formula, he directs with the formula, "Do thou recite to Agni being churned." He churns with the verse, "O Agni, do thou be born for us, O god, for long life, for wealth, for strength, for offspring, for progeny, for happiness, for happiness of the mind, for happiness of cattle, for happiness of men, for happiness of all beings." He churls with the verse, "O Agni, do you be born for us."
10.10.5-6	If the fire does not blaze while being churned, then he should offer gold at that place with the Vyāhṛtis.
10.10.7	Having struck the fire with the formula, "In the fire, the fire," and having offered the oblation with the formula, “For thee, O god," having taken up the rope doubled, having wiped the right arm of the animal in front of it with the formula, "I bind thee with the noose of the divine oblation of truth," having tied it to the right forefoot and the half-head, he ties the animal to the stake facing east or north with the formula, "Thou art the lord of men."
10.10.8-10	"With water I sprinkle thee from the plants." Having sprinkled, he says, "Thou art the edge of the waters." Having made the animal drink water, he sprinkles below with the formula, "Thou art that which is below." It is understood that he makes it pure everywhere.
10.10.11	Having taken up the spoon, having gone beyond the southern half of the head of the animal, having recited the verse, "May thy breath be united," having tied the ladle to the head of the sacrificial animal, having recited, "May the limbs be united with the sacrifice," having recited, "The lord of sacrifice is for the benediction," having recited, "Thou art the head of the sacrifice," having turned towards the Hotr, having caused to announce, having been announced in return, he chooses the Maitrāvaruṇa with the verse, "Mitra and Varuna are the rulers; the ruler is the Maitrāvaruṇā."
10.11.1	He takes the name of this man.
10.11.2	He should give him a stick.
10.11.3	He takes it, saying, "May I be without crookedness and without distress."
10.11.4	If the animal is alive, he offers eleven Prayāja offerings.
10.11.5	Having called out, and having been called back, the Adhvaryu sends forth the Maitrāvaruṇa for the first Prayāja, saying, "Send forth," to the Samit-sticks. He sends forth the subsequent ones, saying, "Do send."
10.11.6	"The Hotr should invoke," he says, urging the Hotr.
10.11.7	When the fourth Prayāja has been reached, he brings half of the oblation. At the eighth Prayāja, he brings the entire oblation.
10.11.8	When the tenth Prayāja has been offered, he pours down the remaining portion of the oblation.
10.11.9	Having thus offered the oblations, the sacrificer, having caused the four (priests) to recite the Anumantrana-formulas, offers the Duras with the Anumantranas of the Duras.
10.11.10	Having gone northwards, the Adhvaryu anoints the Juhu and the Svastika with ghee, saying, "Thou art the Ankta." He anoints the Svastika three times and the Svastikati one time.
10.12.3	The Adhvaryu, having taken up the fire-brand from the Āhavaniya, goes around the animal three times, keeping it to his right, and also the place for the animal, the Cātvāla, the sacrificial post, the Āhavani ya, and the clarified butter.
10.12.4	He offers three times with the Apāvya verses, "Those who follow the one being bound."
10.12.5	Having released the fire-brand at the Āhavaniye, he goes back three times in the same way.
10.13.2	When the Agni is being taken out, the Āgnīdhra takes up the fire-brand again and goes out between the Cātvāla and the Utkara. The animal is led out facing the north between the Cātwāla and the Utikara.
10.13.3	Some say that the Āgnīdhrā takes up the firebrand from the Prajahitis and goes out.
10.13.4	To the north of the Ātala is the place for the Shamitra.
10.13.5	Having placed the torch there, one crosses the Shamitra to the north.
10.13.6	When it is said, "May his foot be towards the north," one places the Shamitra with its tip towards the east or the west, either to the right or left of the sacrificial grass, saying, "May he be with his body."
10.13.7	When he is told, "Dig the pit for the Upavasatha," he digs the pit for the Upvasatha.
10.13.8	On that sacrificial grass they bind the animal with its head towards the west and feet towards the east.
10.13.9	Having ordered, "Bind the animal which is dying," they turn back as they came.
10.13.10-12	May the creatures here enjoy themselves in various forms. Looking at the clarified butter, they sit facing away. If the Adhvaryu recites, "Indra's share, in the place of good fortune," the sacrificer recites the mantra, "You are the knower of heaven." Having recited the four mantras, the Adhvaryus recites, "The breath is different."
10.13.13	When the animal is made to be known by the words, "He has done what was to be done," he offers the Homa of making known.
10.14.1	When approaching the animal with the words, "The pacifiers have approached," and "Aditi has released the animal," he releases the noose from the animal.
10.14.2	Taking it with one end of the noose, he says, "I am making the lower one go away to that direction."
10.14.3	"Salutations to the sun, the extender of light," thus the wife worships the sun.
10.14.4	"Go without delay," thus the Pratiprasthātṛ, with the full vessel, leads the wife.
10.14.5	Between the Cātvāla and the Udakara, he makes the wife go out towards the north.
10.14.6	"The divine waters," thus the Adhvaryu makes the wife touch the waters when she has gone out.
10.14.7	The wife, in accordance with the sequence of the verses, thus "May your speech be nourished" etc., nourishes the life-breaths of the animal. The Adhvaryu sprinkles (the animal).
10.14.8	"Those are your life-breaths" - he touches the heart.
10.14.9	Some say that he again touches those life-breaths.
10.14.10-11	The navel has been nourished. The penis has been nourished. The anus has been nourished. May the activities be pure. Having grasped the four feet, he washes them. He takes the remaining water behind the back and pours it down, either to the right or to the left.
10.14.12	Having turned the animal upside down, he cuts it at two or three fingers' distance from the navel on the right side. He puts down the grass for the covering of the animal with its tip towards the east, saying, "O herb, protect him."
10.14.13	"Do not injure him," he says, and cuts it across with the Svadhita (knife).
10.14.14	Taking the foremost end, he places it, having smeared the root with blood, saying, "This is the share of the Rakshas." He should push this direction, saying, "I am leading this lowest darkness of the Rakshasa." He should stand with his left foot.
10.15.1	Having washed the hands and feet, having sipped water, having taken out the Vapa, having sprinkled the Dyaus and Pṛthivī with ghee, he sprinkles the Vapa with two-pronged Vapa-stirrer.
10.15.2	Having sprinkled with the formula, "For strength to thee", he sprinkles the Vāpa with one-pronged Vāpa-stirrer, so that the Vāpa becomes spread out.
10.15.3	Having sprinkled her with the formula, "Purify for the gods," having wiped off the fat with the formula, “Purify for the deities," having recited the formula, "Be suitable for the deities," and having placed it below with the formula, "The severed one is the wealth of good heroes," he places the fat in the ladle.
10.15.4	The removal of the fat is concluded. One should cover it with the fist until the fat is offered.
10.15.5	Having sprinkled the omentum with water, having heated it on the fire with the formula, "Thou art heated," having saluted the sun with the formula, “Salutation to the sight of the sun," the Agnidhra goes first with the torch from the fire-chamber, followed by the Adhvaryu carrying the omentum in the omentum-holder with the formula, "He goes over the heaven."
10.15.6	The sacrificer, the ladle and the spoon should be taken back.
10.15.7	The Adhvaryu, the Agnidhra and the sacrificer take up the Havirdhana with three verses, "O Agni, I come to you, to the heaven, to the heaven."
10.15.8	Then having thrown the torch, having placed the Vapa in the embers at the end of the Ahavaniya, he says, "O Vayu, do thou remove the drops." Having cut the tip of the Vapa, he places it below the embers at the tip of the Ahavaniva.
10.15.9	The Pratiprasthātṛ, having brought the Vapa between the sacrificial post and the Ahavaniya fires, cooks the Vapa facing north with his face towards the south.
10.15.10	Then he offers the Vapa with the ladle, reciting, "Thee, O Agni, they have made the bearer of oblations."
10.15.11	When the Stokas have appeared, he instructs, "Recite after the Stokas."
10.15.12	The Hotṛ responds, "Accept the most excellent."
10.16.1	Having placed the Syeeni (cow) with well-flowing milk as the oblation, and having made the plants well-growing, he places the branches of the Plaksha tree on the southern part of the sacrificial grass on the northern part of the altar, saying, "I have given up my enemies." He takes out the two ladles for pouring the oblation.
10.16.2	When the Adhvaryu says, "O Soma-presser, take up the ladle full of ghee," he takes up the Juhu and Upamant, steps back, calls out, and when the response is given, he instructs, "Let the one who is to be sent go."
10.16.3	Having offered at the Vasat-call, he steps back, pours the remaining Prayāja-oblation once each over the Dhruva and the Pṛṣadājya, and pours over the Vapa, not over the Upamant.
10.16.4	Having offered the Pasu and the Ajya-shares, having spread the Juhu, having placed a piece of gold, he offers the entire Vapa.
10.16.5	Having placed the gold above and having poured over it, he instructs, "Recite the Anubrūhi for the fat of the goat's Vapa to Indra and Agni."
10.16.6	Having called out and having been called back, he instructs the Indrāgnis to send the goat's fat, which has been prepared, to the Pratiprasthātṛ.
10.16.7	The Maitrāvaruṇa instructs the Hotṛ.
10.16.8	Having offered the Vapahoma before the offering of the Vapahoma, he says, "Svāhā to the gods." Having offered the Vāṣaṭkāra, he says, “Jātavedas, go to the gods with the Vapahoma." Having offered the northern Vapahoma, having returned, he pours clarified butter over the Vapahoma.
10.16.9	He says, "Svāhākordhvanabhasam." He places the two Vapahoma ladles on the Āhavaniya fire.
10.16.10	Having sprinkled with the Srasrava-cup, he places the two ladles elsewhere.
10.16.11	Here the sacrificer gives a gift of three cows.
10.17.1	"With the three verses, "The waters are firm, the waters are mighty," and with the two verses, "O waters, do you carry this, release me from all sins," all the wives sprinkle themselves with water in the Catvāla.
10.17.2	Then the Adhvaryu, having ordered the Agnidh to offer the Pasupurodāsa, says (to him), "Do thou offer the animal to the Pratiprasthātṛ."
10.17.3	The Agnidh offers a cake on eleven potshards to the same deity as the animal, made of Vrihi-grains.
10.17.4	The Pratiprasthātr prepares the animal.
10.17.5	The heart, tongue, chest, throat, neck, left arm, both sides, right hip, anus, and the third part of the buttocks are the eleven deities.
10.17.6	The right arm, left hip, and the third portion of the anus are the Sauvīṣṭakṛtāni.
10.17.7	The spleen, liver, intestines, lungs, kidneys, fat, and the buttocks are removed.
10.17.8	"Do not let the anus be burnt, do not let the anus of the cow be burnt."
10.17.9	Whatever he thinks is pure.
10.17.10	Having bound the animal in a pot, he cooks it in the fire.
10.17.11	Having pierced the heart on a stake, he heats it.
10.17.12	He pierces the dung in the Upabharta vessel and removes the blood.
10.17.13	When the animal is cooked, one should proceed with the cake.
10.17.14-16	Having placed the Juhu and Upasthala on the fire, having poured the Avasatha-oblations, he directs the Hotṛ to recite the Anubrūhi formula for the cake to Indra and Agni. Having called out and having been responded to, he directs the Hotr to recite the Prāṣaṇī formula for the cake for Indra and Agni. The Maitrāvaruṇa directs the Hotṛ.
10.17.17	Having placed the Upāṃśu-cup on the Juhu, he directs (the Hotr) to recite the Yajus for Agni in the Svishtakṛt offering.
10.17.18	Having called out and having been responded, he directs (Hotr) to recite Yajus for Agnī.
10.17.19	Maitrāvaruṇa directs the Hotr to recite Yajuş.
10.18.1	Having offered at the Vasat-utterance, having separated, he offers the Praiṣṭṛ-cup and the Iḍā-cup, the portion of the sacrificer.
10.18.2	The Pasupuroḍāśa is concluded with the Iḍā.
10.18.3	The Maitrāvaruṇa and the sixth priests eat the Iḍa which has been invoked.
10.18.4	They sprinkle themselves on the stone.
10.18.5	Some say that they sprinkle themselves when the Kṛtsna-sāman is being chanted.
10.18.6	Having taken up the five-fold portion in the Juhu, having taken up the clarified butter, having taken the spoon and the clarified butter, and having approached the cooked oblation, he asks thrice, "Is it cooked?"
10.18.7	"He has been cooked" (is said) three times in reply.
10.18.8	Having gone around on the northern side, having taken out the heart from the stake, having placed it in the pot, having recited the verse, "May your mind be united with my mind," he anoints the heart with clarified butter.
10.18.9	Having recited the Anumantrī verses, "He who is that Self in the animals," having sprinkled the animal with clarified butter, having placed the pot on the ground with the verse "Firm the cows," having taken the animal across between the sacrificial post and the Ahavaniya fire, the Pasu-sādaka (animal-slayer) makes the animal face the Hotr priest, either five or six times.
10.18.10	He places the heart-spike, well-guarded.
10.18.11	He sprinkles the Juhu, the Upabhṛt, the Vasā, the Avabhṛt, and the four corners with clarified butter.
10.18.12	He places a piece of gold on the Juhu and on the Upabhrit.
10.18.13	While cutting the oblations with a ladle made of a Palāsha branch smeared with oil, he instructs the Hotṛ to recite the Anuvāka while the oblations are being cut for Manotā.
10.18.14	He offers on the heart, then on the tongue, then on the chest.
10.18.15	This is the order of the animal.
10.18.16	He offers on the remaining parts as he pleases.
10.18.17	Some say, he offers on the parts as they are taken out.
10.18.18	He offers twice on the middle of the anus.
10.18.19	Having offered twice, he offers to the deities with the ladle.
10.18.20	Having taken the Sauviṣṭakā portions one by one and having placed them in the Upabhṛt, he places the remaining ones in the Samavarttadhānī.
10.18.21	Having divided the Guḍa into two, he places the larger one in the Upabṛt.
10.19.1	Having divided into three the smaller one, having divided the middle one into two, having placed the Juhu, he places the other of the remaining two in the Upabrīt and the other in the Samavarttādhānī.
10.19.2	Having divided the fat into three parts, having set aside the third part, he pours the ladle with the third part and the cup with the third part.
10.19.3	Having made the fat of the heart, tongue, lungs, intestines, omentum, anus, and kidneys into three parts, and having made the fat of bones the sixth part, and having made a seventh part, he increases the Idā with the bones.
10.19.4	Having determined the spleen, the intestines, and the stomach, he sprinkles them with hot water.
10.19.5	Having placed the head, shoulders, bones, and thighs in a vessel, he touches them with the verse, "Indra is the breath."
10.19.6	Having spread out the Vasah-havaniya grass with the verse, “Thou art the water, thou art the plants," he takes the Vasah-grass.
10.19.7	"Thou art prosperity." Having taken up the flowing stream with the ladle, he cuts it twice with the sacrificial grass. The five-fold offering is made.
10.19.8	"The waters have united." Having placed the Vasahom on the side, he offers it.
10.19.9	Having placed the piece of gold sprinkled with ghee on the fire, having poured ghee over it, he instructs (the Maitrāvaruṇa) to recite the yajyā-verse, saying, "Recite the yajyā for the offering of the goat to Indra and Agni."
10.19.10	Having called out and being called back, he instructs (Maitrāvaruṇa) by saying, "Send forth the offering of the meat of the goat to Agni and Indra."
10.19.11	The Maitrāvaruṇa instructs the Hotṛ to send forth.
10.19.12	At the end of the half-verse of the Yajya, standing to the north of the Pratiprasthātṛ, he offers the Vasahomas with the formula, "O Agni, the purifier of ghee."
10.19.13	With the remnant of the Vasahomas, he makes offerings to the directions in the manner of the Vājina.
10.19.14	Standing here itself, having spread the Juhu, taking up once with the spoon from the Pṛṣadājya, having placed it on the Juhu, he offers twice.
10.19.15	Having ordered, "Do you recite to Vanaspati," he says.
10.19.16	Having called out and having been called out, he says, "Do you send Vanaspati."
10.20.1	The Maitrāvaruṇa sends the Hotṛ.
10.20.2	Having omitted the Vasat-utterance in the northern half and the eastern half, he offers the preceding oblations.
10.20.3	Having inverted the Upabhṛt ladles on the Juhu, he orders, "Do you (recite) to Agni Sviṣṭakṛt."
10.20.4	Having called out and having been called back, he instructs the Maitrāvaruṇa to send the Hotṛ to Agni Sviṣṭakṛt.
10.20.5	Having offered to Vanaspati at the Vasat-utterance, having returned to his place, he places the two ladles in their places.
10.20.6	He offers the Medasvinī cake in the middle.
10.20.7	Having spread clarified butter, having taken up the Iḍā in the Hotṛ's hand as prescribed, he pours clarified butter over it.
10.20.8	The Hotṛ takes the benediction, the Agnīdhra takes the meaty part, the Brahman takes the breast.
10.20.9	The Brahman eats it, saying, "We are in your vow, O Soma."
10.20.10	Having eaten and sipped water, they cleanse themselves within the altar.
10.20.11	Agni, bring the sacrificial grass and wood. O Upāyashṭa, sit down. O Brahman, we are about to depart. Having placed the kindling wood, O Agnīd, touch the enclosing sticks and the fire each time.
10.20.12	The Agnidhra, having brought the embers from the Samitra, having spread the sacrificial grass on the northern part of the Vedi-cord, having placed the wooden sword, having deposited the wooden sword, and having cut the wooden sword into eleven pieces across the direction of the grass, the Pratiprasthātṛ, having offered the Anuyāja offerings, and having turned back each offering, offers with the formula, "Go to the ocean, svāhā." He offers with the Vasa-offering formula and with his hand.
10.21.1	The clarified butter in the Upabhṛt ladle is brought to the Juhū ladle and is offered in the Upabṛt ladle. Having gone around once along the right side, he offers eleven Anuyājas with the clarified butter.
10.21.2	Having called out and having been called back, he instructs the first Anuyāja to be offered to the gods with the words "Send forth." He instructs the subsequent ones with the words "send forth, send forth."
10.21.3	The sacrificer recites the first four Anuyājas with the first Anuvāka, and the tenth Anuyāja with the fifth Anuvāka. The last Anuvāka is recited for the ninth and eleventh Anuyājas.
10.21.4	The Adhvaryu and Maitrāvaruṇa recite the fifth Anuyāja and so on. The Hotr is sent to recite the tenth Anuyāja.
10.21.5	Having offered to all the deities, he wipes off the smear to the north with the verse, "Do thou protect my mind in my heart." He touches the heart.
10.21.6	Looking at the smoke, he says, "Do thou guard my body, my skin."
10.21.7	The Adhvaryu, having returned, having poured the Svara three times into the Juhu, standing facing the east in front of the Ahavaniya, with the words "May your smoke go to heaven," he offers the Svara with the Juhu at the end of the Anuyajas.
10.21.8	The sacrificer stands by the offered Svara with the words "Like the horns of those with horns."
10.21.9	The Adhvaryu, having performed the spreading of the spoon etc., having caused to announce, and having been announced in return, directs the reciting of the Sūkta in the Sūktavāka.
10.21.10	He directs the Hotṛ to recite the verse "Agniṃ dadyād" etc.
10.21.11	Having placed the Juhu and the Upabhṛt on the fire-places, he sprinkles the Paridhi-sticks which have been thrown down, with the formula, "Thou art the share of the dripping."
10.21.12	The Pratyans go to the wives and offer sacrifices.
10.21.13	Having brought the thigh-bone to the right of the house, he offers sacrifices to the wives and Agni, the householder.
10.21.14	The Hotr offers on the upper part of the thigh-bone placed to the east, and the Agnidhra offers on the lower part of the thigh bone placed to the north. The offerings are made in order, six times each.
10.21.15	When the thigh is eaten, he gives the remaining to his wife.
10.21.16	To the good wife.
10.21.17	If a brahmin is at the elbow, to the friend.
10.22.1	Having gratified the Dhruva, he offers three Samitsya-formulas, saying, "May the sacrifice go to the sacrifice."
10.22.2	He moves with a heart-piercing pain.
10.22.3	Without touching the pain in his heart, he goes northwards between the two mounds of chaff, reciting, "You are the curse, I lament you." Meditating on the hateful one mentally, he scatters the ashes of Sukra and Ardra.
10.22.4	Having sprinkled water, they stand at the place of the altar, reciting, "The place of the altar." They cleanse themselves with water, reciting, "May Mitra be friendly."
10.22.5	Having come without waiting, he says, "May I be blessed, may I be blessed." Having placed the kindling woods in the Ahavaniya fire, he follows the water. They stand up.
10.22.6	Similarly, in the Garhapatya fire, the wife also.
10.22.7	This is the procedure for all animal sacrifices.
10.22.8	Obeisance to the friends, the Sannas. May I, desiring good prosperity, approach the Yupa. The sacrificer approaches the Yupa when it is set up. He approaches it.
11.1.1	Then the Sautrāmaṇī.
11.1.2	One who desires prosperity should perform this sacrifice. The king who has drunk Soma, the king who has drunk the Soma twice, the king who is attacked, the attacker, the one being attacked, and in all consecrations.
11.1.3	When one is going to perform the Sautrāmaṇī sacrifice, he buys barley grains and other grains from a eunuch for three nights in advance.
11.1.4	Having placed them in a linen cloth, he covers them.
11.1.5	Having performed the rites up to the spreading of the fire, and having taken up the rites beginning with the washing of the hands, he places the pot in the place of the skull.
11.1.6	He offers plenty of rice-grains to the Asvins, Sarasvati and Indra, the holder of the yoke.
11.1.7	Having taken half of them, he cooks them in the manner of gruel. He fries the other half on the Garhapatya fire.
11.1.8	Having dug a pit in front of the Garhapaty, he prepares surā in it in the manner of surā, so that it may flow.
11.1.9	"He sprinkles the grass with the formula, "Thou art sweet."
11.2.1	He touches the sprinkled grass with the formula "Soma is with the Asvins."
11.2.2	On the third day after the moon has risen, the animal-sacrifice is performed. It is Sautrāmaṇī.
11.2.3	Its procedure is like that of the animal-sacrifice with the Soma-juice.
11.2.4	It is known that one performs it on the third day after Soma has been consumed.
11.2.5	On the previous day he cuts down only one sacrificial post.
11.2.6	Some say, three.
11.2.7	He performs the rite according to the earlier Veda.
11.2.8	If the time is for two days, then the space measured out for the later Veda is spread out to the south.
11.2.9	When the Adhvaryu makes the Uttaravedi, then the Pratiprasthātṛ, having brought the soil from the Cātvāla, makes the Uttaravedī quadrangular, two fingers high, to the south of the Kharo, with its front towards the Anvāhāryapacana. He makes a second Kharo.
11.2.10	When the Adhvaryu carries the fire, then the Pratiprasthātṛ, having brought the embers from the Anvāhārya-pācana, places them on the eastern mound.
11.2.11	Here the hands are not washed.
11.2.12	The three vessels of Vikaṅka, the golden pot, the pot with a hundred holes, the golden pot with a stream of wool, and the hawk-leafed vessels, are placed on the other axle.
11.2.13	At the time of the consecration of the animal, he purifies the Soma by means of a woolen filter, reciting the verse, "May it be purified by the filter, may it be purified by thee, may it be pure, may it be well purified."
11.3.1	"Soma is purified by the filter" is recited by the Soma-vamins. "Soma is purified by Soma" is recited by those who are purifying the Soma.
11.3.2	The pure liquor is poured on the head of the Brahman. The animals are brought near the sacrificial post.
11.3.3	The sacrificial post and the Soma juice are equal.
11.3.4	One offers a black goat to Asvins, a ram to Sarasvati, a bull or a ram to Indra.
11.3.5	One offers an animal to Brhaspati as the fourth, and one to Soma-vamins.
11.3.6	Having placed the Paśuka vessels, he sprinkles the Urdhvapātra vessels.
11.3.7	When the Vapas are offered, the bull, the cow and the heifer are given as Dakṣiṇā.
11.3.8	Having sprinkled in the Cātvāla, with the Urdhva-pātra vessels, having recited the Puroruc verse "Kuvid ange" and having taken the Suragrahas on the other Khara.
11.3.9	The two verses of invocation and response are addressed to the three deities, namely, the two Aśvins and Indra.
11.3.10	The Adhvaryu takes up the Aśvin cup with the formula, "Thou art taken with a support. I take thee, the unpierced one, the agreeable one, for the Aśvins."
11.3.11	The Pratiprasthātṛ takes up the Sārasvata cup with the formula, "Thou art taken up with a support; thee with the unpierced for the unpierced Sarasvatī."
11.3.12	The sacrificer takes up the Vāindra cup with the formula "Thou art taken with a support; thou with the unpierce for the unpierce Indra Sutrāmaṇ."
11.4.1	In the month of Asvina, he offers barley-cakes with the hair of lions, in the month of Saradvara, barley-cakes with hair of tigers, and in the month of Caitra, barley-cakes and hair of wolves.
11.4.2	Or the Adhvaryu should mentally meditate on lions, the Pratiprasthâtri on tigers, and the sacrificer on wolves.
11.4.3	Having wiped the Grahas with the Syena-leaf, the Adhvaryu places them in their respective places with the formula, "This is thy birth-place; for thee belonging to the Asvins." The Pratiprasthātṛ places them with the formula, “This is thy birth place; for thee belongingto Sarasvati." The sacrificer places them with the verse, "This is thine birth-place;for thee belonging to Indra Sutradamana."
11.4.4	Some say that one takes up the Payograhas and not the Suragrahas.
11.4.5	Having offered the sacrificial cakes, he offers the Indra-cake on eleven potsherds, the Savitr-cake on twelve potsherds, and the Varuna-cake on ten potsherds.
11.4.6	Having approached them, they proceed with those Grahas.
11.4.7	The Adhvaryu instructs, "Recite the Savana for the Soma of the Asvins, Sarasvati, Indra, and Sutradamana."
11.4.8	Having called out, and having been called back, he sends the Soma-drains, which have been started, to the Asvins, Sarasvati, Indra, Sutradaman, and Soma, by saying, "Send." The Maitrāvaruṇa sends the Hotṛ.
11.4.9	At the Vasat-utterance, they offer.
11.4.10	He makes the offering with the formula, "O Agni, do thou offer Soma."
11.4.11	The sacrificer recites the two verses, "O Agni, the oblation is in your mouth, in which are the horses."
11.5.1	He should buy a Brahman as the eater of the leftovers of the Brahman sacrificer.
11.5.2	If he does not find a Brahman, he should offer it into a termite mound. This is the Brahmanical instruction.
11.5.3	The two of you have different divine gifts, the place of sacrifice is limited. Whatever is left here, drink it as a remnant, with two verses.
11.5.4	One should offer the entire oblation with the two verses, "I have heard two declarations of the Pitrs."
11.5.5	In the southern fire, in a pot held by a sling, having spread out the filter with the ten edges pointing towards the east, he says, "Whatever my mind has gone astray." He holds a golden earring, three or two Niskas, or a hundred-man coin, not less, and says, "The fathers who are like Soma are satisfied." He puts the remaining Soma juice together.
11.5.6	The Adhvaryu, with the three verses addressed to the Pitrs and Soma, beginning with "Thou art the one who is to be sought," stands in front of the flowing (Soma). The Hotr, with the three subsequent verses, stands to the south. The Brahman, with the three following verses, stands to his rear.
11.5.7	The Adhvaryu places the hundred-strewn oblations in the southern fire with the formula, "O Agni, thou art the carrier of oblations."
11.5.8	The Rajanya and the Vaishya should drink the remaining Soma themselves.
11.6.1	Having performed with the sacrificial paps, one performs with the animals.
11.6.2	One performs with the sacrificial pap of Indra-Savitr-Varuna.
11.6.3	The Svishtakrit offering is common to the animal-sacrifices and the cakes.
11.6.4	Having placed the heart-splinters, they go to the Avabhrtha-rite with the vessels of the month.
11.6.5	The month is distributed according to the method of Rijiṣa.
11.6.6	"He inserts the Āṣāḍha vessel in the Avabhrtha rite with the verse, "O Varuna, thy Gayatri metre." He inserts the Sarasvata vessel with the verse, "O Varuna, Thy Tristubh metre." He places the Indra vessel with the verse "O Varun, thy Jagati metre." He puts the Satatrinna vessel with the verse "O Varuna thy Anushtubh metre." The heart-needle is put with the verse "O Varuna, thou art the Pankti metre.
11.6.7	They go back silently.
11.6.8	The Sautrāmaṇī is concluded.
11.7.1	The dimensions of the four ladles, such as the Juhu, are twenty-four fingers, or the length of the arm.
11.7.2	The base should be made with the base, the tip with the tip, the skin with the side and the upper hole. The length of the staff should be twelve fingers, the base should be eight fingers, the tip should be six fingers, above that twelve fingers, in that three fingers thick, six fingers wide, the tip should resemble the lip of an elephant, or the hole should be low, the tip should reach the end, and a canal should be made for pouring ghee.
11.7.3	The staff of Dhruva is four fingers thick and two fingers deep in the middle. This is the special feature.
11.7.4	The two ladles for the Darsha-Pūrnamāsa and Agnihotra sacrifices are of the shape of a ladle. The handle is of the shape of two fingers, twenty-one angulas in length. The base is as before. The top is three angulas above the handle, round, two angulas thick, like a nose, with two holes.
11.7.5	The width, thickness and depth of these holes are one angula each.
11.7.6-9	The length of the stick is to be one cubit. The length of the stick should be two cubits. The length and thickness of the stick should each be two inches. The base should be like the mouth of a swan, and the tip should be sharp like a blade of grass.
11.8.1	The handle of the ladle should be of the same length as the handle of the ladle, and the tip of the stick should be of the length of four fingers.
11.8.2	The stick should be twenty fingers long, with a tip of four fingers, resembling the bud of a lotus. The handle should be of the size of the arm.
11.8.3	Thus, the remaining part of the handle should be made of the length of the stick.
11.8.4	The ladle is to be made eight fingers long and four fingers wide, with a depth of six fingers in the middle, and three fingers deep, square in shape, filled with water up to half a prastha, or round in shape. The milking pot is to be filled with a prastha of milk.
11.8.5	The ladle is to be thick, one or two fingers in diameter.
11.8.6	The mouth of the vessel for the Prasitra should be four fingers wide and twelve fingers long.
11.8.7	Its base should be three fingers high and four fingers above that, nine fingers long and six fingers wide.
11.8.8	In the middle, it should be twelve fingers long and four fingers wide, with a depth of three fingers. The two hands should be of that size, or like the ears of a cow.
11.8.9	The vessel for the Idā is twenty-four fingers long, elevated above that, and one span in diameter at the base. The wall is half a span wide, and one finger wide all around. The remaining width is ten fingers, and it is lowered by ten fingers. The vessel should be filled with a prastha measure of ghee, well-rounded or square.
11.8.10	The mortar is to be one cubit high, and its wall is to be two inches thick, and the hole is to be eight inches wide and long.
11.8.11	Its depth is to be sixteen inches.
11.9.1	The pestle is to be four cubits long, or as long as the sacrificer, and its base is to be bound with iron.
11.9.2	These two are of the size of the sacrificial material that can be pounded.
11.9.3	In bamboo, reed and dung, a winnowing basket is made one cubit long, circular at the base, twenty fingers wide, or eighteen fingers wide, gradually decreasing to two fingers at the tip.
11.9.4	Any wood used in sacrifices, two cubits long, is called a dhrishti.
11.9.5	The lower stone and the upper stone are two grinding stones, capable of grinding.
11.9.6	Similarly, two stones are suitable as mentioned.
11.9.7	A pot made of clay, filled with ghee, is a ladle.
11.9.8	Some say it is made of copper or other metals.
11.9.9	The vessel for the paste of barley should be twenty fingers in length and breadth, well-rounded, filled with four prasthas of water, and filled with milk for churning. It should be connected with two vessels filled with ghee and curd for the purpose of keeping the sacrificial cakes. The number of potsherds should be as mentioned, and their size should be two fingers in length and width. The standard size of all is half an angula.
11.9.10	The vessel for the cooked rice should be of two prasthas, or half a prastha, or one-fourth of a prastha.
11.9.11	It should have a channel for draining the liquid.
11.9.12	The vessel for the Agnihotra should have a round upper lip.
11.9.13	The vessel to be offered to the guests should be cooked with half a drona of rice.
11.9.14	The vessel should be filled with a prastha or half a prasth
11.10.1	And in the case of a rite requiring more than one vessel, the vessels required for the rite should be thrown in.
11.10.2	He takes up the kuśa grass, which is two cubits long and spread out at the end, and the bowl to be placed near, with the kuśa grasses of two cubits length and spread out at both ends.
11.10.3	The span, the span and a half, the span and two spans, the span and three spans, the span, the span, and a half, and the span and two, are the names of the hand, the cubit, and the span, respectively.
11.10.4	The dry sand is to be taken from the sand-bags.
11.10.5	In it, one should remove the wet grass, wood, stone, clay, hair, etc.
11.10.6	If the grass is not available, then one should use the grass of sugarcane, barley, wheat, or other grasses.
11.10.7	One should avoid using grass that has been damaged by frost, hail, or wind, or grass that has been trampled by cattle.
11.10.8	One should also avoid using grass that is too long or too short, or grass that is too thick or too thin.
11.10.9	The branches of Palāśa, Khadira, Bilva, Aśvattha, and Śamī are the principal kindling woods and boundary-sticks.
11.10.10	The branches of Vikankata, Udumbara, Nyagrodha, Plakṣa, Kārṣmarya, Pauṭadrava, Rohitika, and other trees mentioned in the Yajña are the middle kindling woods and boundaries.
11.10.11	The branches from other trees are the inferior kindling woods and borders.
11.10.12	Those which are naturally dry should not be taken.
11.11.1	All of them have three leaves, resembling Palāśa.
11.11.2	If the prescribed substances are not available anywhere, one should take a substitute.
11.11.3	The principal ones are those with the middle finger, the inferior ones are those with lesser fingers.
11.11.4	Some say that the Samyu and Udumbara are the boundaries.
11.11.5	The sacrificial twigs should be known at the root and offered with the tip facing east.
11.11.6	He should avoid the twigs of neem, śleṣmātaka, nipa, tilva, vrīhi, vibhītaka, śalmali, kovidāra, karñja, bādhaka, nirguṇḍi, palandu, and jīva.
11.11.7	The grains for the oblation are barley, nīvara, bamboo, śyāmāka, vrīhi rice, priyangu, and dhānya.
11.11.8	If these are not available, then the roots, tubers, and fruits of these plants can be used.
11.11.9	All grains except the best, the coarse, and the Kodo grass are to be avoided.
11.11.10	In the case of ghee, cow's ghee is the best.
11.11.11	In its absence, ghee from cow or buffalo is acceptable.
11.11.12	In its further absence, milk or sesame oil is the substitute.
11.11.13	The oil of Kusumbha, Tasi, and Narikel trees, and other oily substances that are edible, and also water mixed with paste, are suitable for Homa.
11.11.14	What is inedible and has a bad smell and taste should be avoided.
11.11.15	Among all of them, the earlier ones are the best.
11.11.16	If the earlier ones are not available, one should take the later ones.
12.1.1	Now we shall explain the Agniṣṭoma.
12.1.2	One who is about to perform a sacrifice, being endowed with faith, wisdom, purity, and means of livelihood obtained through his own efforts, and knowing the sequence of the requirements, diligently collects the requisites.
12.1.3	He chooses the sixteen priests, the foremost among the Brahmanas, the foremost among those who have not renounced their Vedic studies, the foremost among them who are pure in food, endowed with characteristics, the foremost among Hotr priests, the foremost of Adhvaryu priests, and the foremost of Udgata priests.
12.1.4	Or four foremost priests.
12.1.5	The other one, who is skilled in the rites, and who has been permitted by the sacrificer, announces to them, "So-and-so's Soma will be performed."
12.1.6	The priests ask him thus, knowing whether the priests are competent, who are the sacrificers, whether there is no deficiency, whether the priestly duties have not been abandoned, and whether the Dakṣiṇās are good.
12.1.7	Then these priests perform the sacrifice. The Agniṣṭoma is not deficient, the priestly duties are not neglected, the Dakṣiṇās are auspicious. He replies to them:
12.1.8	"Bhūr Bhuvaḥ Suvaḥ, may my life be spoken." The one who is going to perform the sacrifice recites this.
12.1.9	The one who is not going to perform the rite should say, "Salutations to King Soma," and having approached King Soma, he should announce.
12.1.10	The deity approaches the deity.
12.1.11	"He goes forth, saying, 'The path is named.' Having resorted to the path, he thrice recites the Pitrs, saying, 'Earth.'
12.1.12	The Brahman priests are the Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin and the Potā.
12.1.13	The Hotṛ priests are the Acchavāka and the Gravastut.
12.1.14	The Adhvaryu priests are the Neṣṭa and the Unneṭa.
12.1.15	The Udgātṛ, Prastôtṛ, Pratihârin and Subrahmaṇya are the Udgātṛs.
12.1.16	The Abhigaro, Dhruvagop, Saṃsrava and Sadasy are the four Sadasyas.
12.1.17	The Vasīṣṭhas, Bhārgavas, Aṅgirasas and Āsyas are the chief priests in order.
12.1.18	The others are Kaśyapas, Bhāradvājas, Bhārgavās or Aṅgiras.
12.1.19	Some say that Vaiśvâmitra is the Hotṛ.
12.1.20	Or, the source of all, the conduct, and knowledge are the authority.
12.1.21	There are ten or eleven Adhvaryus of the Soma-cups.
12.1.22	He chooses them one by one.
12.2.1	The moon-god is the divine deity, the Brahman. Thus, in accordance with the signs, the priests, having approached the gods in a low voice, and the men in a loud voice, saying, "This is a man," and the divine waters, the Hotr-singers, the Maitravaruna, the Brahmasachsin, the Hotar, the Neshtar, the Acchhavasaka, the Agnidhra - thus the Hotrakas, the rays are the divine gods, thus the Camasadharus, having adorned them according to their respective positions, and having given them Madhuparka, he initiates on the new moon or the full moon.
12.2.2	The rites of initiation are unlimited for less than a year.
12.2.3	Having performed the Darśa and Pūrṇamāsa sacrifices, one should offer the Agniṣṭoma.
12.2.4	Some say that this is the first Soma sacrifice, the Atiratra.
12.2.5	The Agniṣṭoma is for all desires.
12.2.6	One should desire them simultaneously.
12.2.7	Or, if one desires separately, one should offer separately.
12.3.1	One should offer a Soma sacrifice in the spring every year.
12.3.2	It is known that there are three Dakṣiṇās (gifts to the priests).
12.3.3	The Soma sacrifice is either with Rathantara or Brihat Sāman.
12.3.4	One should offer the Rathantara Sāman first, and then as one wishes.
12.3.5	The day of the full moon or new moon becomes the day of the Soma sacrifice. One consecrates oneself.
12.3.6	There is one consecration or three.
12.3.7	Then he should be given on the fifth or seventh day.
12.3.8	He should request the king for a divine sacrifice.
12.3.9	If he does not give, he should request another king.
12.3.10	If he gives, he should rejoice, saying, "May he have a divine sacrifice."
12.3.11	If he does not give, then the sacrificer and the priests address him with these (words) according to the respective signs: "I know the divine sacrifice, I am cutting you off from that divine sacrifice."
12.3.12	If the king is the sacrificer and Agni is the Hotṛ, then the priests request the divine sacrifice with these (words), according to the respective sign: "You are my Hotṛ."
12.3.13	Or, if all do not beg, then the deity herself would approach him, saying, “Look at this!”
12.4.1	The ground should be firm, clean, high, without holes, without anthills, without mud, without stones, even, well-established, sloping towards the east or the north, with clean herbs and substances, with water flowing clockwise, with white soil or yellow soil, frequented by gods and Brahmins, not frequented by demons, and marked by good friends.
12.4.2	The Devyajanam is the only one left out of the sacrifices. They call it Devyajanam.
12.4.3	The Kalyani is the measure of Dakshina in the Devyajanam sacrifice.
12.4.4	"Having decided upon the Devyajan sacrifice, he says, "We have come to this Devyajan sacrifice on the earth."
12.4.5	One should perform the Purohvishi sacrifice at the Devyajan. The desired sacrifices at the Devyajana are as stated in the Brahmana.
12.4.6	Here they make the hall with the door in the east, with the door in all directions, with the door towards the north, with the door to the west, with the door on the south, with the door at the back, with the door facing the front, with the door above, with the door below, with the door of the door, with the door without the door, with five doors in front, with the doors in the intermediate directions, with the doors on the doors, with the doors without the doors, with doors in the doors, with a door in the door, with a door without the door.
12.4.7	The doors are in the intermediate directions.
12.4.8	The doors on the doors.
12.4.9	The wife's hall is in the back with the door in front.
12.4.10	Then, before the Diksaniyā (rite), having offered the Sambhāraya-formulas on the Āhavanīya fire with the Yajus formulas, he offers with the Anuvāka formula, reciting "O Agni, O Agni, O Agni" in his mind.
12.4.11	Those who are initiated do not eat the food meant for the Agnisomiya rite, except when the purpose of the sacrifice has been divided and they may eat the remaining food, or when the king has been bought.
12.4.12	Soma, the king, is offered rice-gruel and fried grains in the hall.
12.5.1	The sacrificer is initiated in the afternoon or in the morning.
12.5.2	Then the Adhvaryu performs the Isti of Initiation, offering to Agni-Vishnu on eleven potsherds, or rice cooked in ghee.
12.5.3	There are seventeen kindling verses.
12.5.4	No share for the sacrificer is given.
12.5.5	He does not offer the oblation on the sacrificial grass.
12.5.6	No Dakṣiṇā.
12.5.7	It ends with the Patnīsaṃyājas.
12.5.8	Having consumed the oblations of clarified butter, they desist.
12.5.9	He prepares the Dhruva vessel.
12.5.10	He places the Ahavanīya fire.
12.5.11	Here some prescribe a hall with the ridge facing east.
12.5.12	Whatever is done before the Agniṣṭoma is done in a low voice.
12.5.13	Some say that the initiation is done with the Mandra and the Vāgaṅta.
12.5.14	Then, more and more softly.
12.5.15	Some say that it is done with the Mandratara and the Mandratara.
12.5.16	In the Upāṃśu and Upaṣats.
12.5.17	Loudly in the Agniṣṭoma.
12.5.18	Then, having gone out by the eastern gate and the northern gate, the sacrificer shaves his hair and beard in the enclosure of the hall.
12.6.2	Thus having sown the Uttaragodan, the sacrificer murmurs, "O herb, protect him" when the Darbha grass is being hidden, "O fire, do not injure me" when the razor is being put down, "May the later (days) be auspicious" when the hair is being cut.
12.6.3	He does not give the razor to one who has not been shaved.
12.6.4	He shaves the beard first, then the cheeks, then the hair.
12.6.5	First he cuts the nails of the right hand, beginning with the thumb, and then of the left hand, and then of his feet.
12.6.6	"He should hide the water-pot with hair at the root of the Udumbara tree or at the root of Darbha grass, saying, "This belongs to so and so, the son of so and so."
12.6.7	"He should rub his teeth with a piece of Udumbara wood, saying, "Prepare food for me."
12.6.8	At the Lomaśa Tīrtha, at the Avakāvila Tīrtha and at the Sthāvarā Tīrtha he bathes after placing gold.
12.6.9	If the Tīrtha is far away, he bathes after putting gold in a water pot.
12.6.10	He enters the water after reciting the Mahāvyāhṛti and reciting "These waters are auspicious."
12.6.11	"The golden-coloured, pure, shining ones, the four waters, may the mothers purify us." Having recited this, he bathes.
12.6.12	"Having emerged from them, pure and purified, the waters are rich in milk." Having emerged, he eats the water.
12.6.13	"Thou art the body of Soma," (with these words) he puts on the new garment, having turned it round to the right. "Thou art the garment of the sun," (with these) he puts on his girdle.
12.7.1	"For strength thee!" (with these words), he eats the food which is agreeable to the mind, mixed with clarified butter and sprinkled with curds.
12.7.2	From now onwards he observes the vows in a more and more reduced form.
12.7.3	Some say that one should shave the hair after eating.
12.7.4	He places the ghee in a vessel of water along with Darbha grass.
12.7.5	Then he anoints him with the words, "Thou art the milk of the earth." With both hands he anoints him, beginning from the mouth and going upwards to the feet three times, all the limbs.
12.7.6	Another person anoints his back.
12.7.7	"He anoints the eye of Vritra with Trikakuda-paste or with other paste, with a tuft of grass, with a bundle of Darbha grass, or with a running stream, three times the right eye and twice the left eye."
12.7.8	Or two times five times.
12.7.9	Outside the hall, to the north, the front-beam is divided into three parts with twenty-one darbha-blades. Having wiped twice with each verse beginning with "May the lord of the house purify you" and then once in a clockwise direction, he wipes downwards.
12.7.10	"With the spotless purifier" is added everywhere.
12.7.11	In the Rajasuya, with one hundred blades.
12.7.12	The lord of mind, may Pavamāna purify me. The one who is being wiped off recites this Anuvāka: "Whatever the gods do to deceive the gods," and "O lord of purification, with the purifying (verse),
12.7.13	The Pratiprasthātṛ performs these rites silently on the other side of the Parishirta for the wife.
12.7.14	Some say that one should not perform the rites up to the Undanādivana.
12.7.15	"O ye Gods, we invoke you." Having entered the hall by the eastern door, having touched the water with the formula, "Thou art lightning," and having crossed the Ahavaniya by the western door, standing to the south, he says, "Thou art the lord of the consecrated ones." He attends upon the Ahavaniya.
12.7.16	This is his procedure till the Soma-pressing.
12.8.1	The Adhvaryu offers five oblations beginning with the Dhruva-residue with the mantras, "To Akriti, to Pratiti, to Prajña, to Prajna, to Agni, Svāhā." The first four with the ladle and the fifth with the spoon.
12.8.2	These are the oblations at the time of consecration.
12.8.3	The sacrificer, while reciting these mantras, recites the following mantras in accordance with the Adhvaryu, while the oblations are being offered.
12.8.4	The Adhvaryu fills the ladle with twelve spoonfuls of clarified butter and offers the sixth full oblation with the verse, "All the gods are the leaders."
12.8.5	The sacrificer follows it with the verse, “Vata is the breath.”
12.8.6	Then he consecrates himself with a black antelope skin.
12.8.7	He makes the right foot outside, the skin inside, and the flesh sewn together.
12.8.8	"He places the skin on the right side of the sacrificial fire, with the neck facing east and the fur towards the north, with the verse, "O Indra, the Gāyatrī of Śakvara."
12.8.9	"He touches the junction of the white and black (parts) with the verse, "In the art of Ṛk and Sāman," touching the white with the thumb and the black with the fingers.
12.8.10	"This is the mind," he says, stepping on the right knee, and ascending the altar. "I ascend this good boat."
12.8.11	Having ascended, he mutters, "I am initiated."
12.8.12	Then he is initiated with the girdle.
12.8.13	It is a braid of three strands, mixed with grass and wool, with a single noose.
12.8.14	Between the two, he makes the sacrificer go around him, reciting, "These are the Angirasas."
12.9.4	The sacrificer puts on his head a new garment along with a fee, saying, "May I be the protector of Vishnu."
12.9.5	"Thou art the womb of Indra," he says, and binds the garment of the sacrificer to the black-horned (animal) which is tied with a rope of Shamya or Mauñja grass, having three or five folds.
12.9.6	"For thee, O agriculture, for thy abundant harvest," he says, while taking up a clod of earth from the altar.
12.9.7	The one who is scratching the head with the blades of grass from the well-grown plants, says, "May the plants be well-grown."
12.9.8	In other parts of the body, he says, "May it be scratched."
12.9.9	The Adhvaryu binds a stake of six fingers' length for the scratching of the head.
12.9.10	It is made of birch or palāśa or any other sacrificial tree.
12.9.11	Then he gives to the sacrificer the Udumbara staff, measuring the height of the face, with the fist, saying, "The upper end is above the altar," and with the upper end.
12.9.12	Having received it with the formula, "The divine tree is well-established," he places it on the right side.
12.10.1	The sacrificer, with the first verse, "The sacrificer, with Svāhā, to the sacrifice in the mind," makes the two little fingers of the right hand touch the two little fingers (of the left hand). With the second verse, "Svāhā to heaven and earth," he makes the two ring fingers touch. With the third verse, "Svāhākāra to the sky," he makes the middle fingers touch. With fourth verse, "Svähākāra to the sacrifice from the wind," he makes the fists.
12.10.2	The Adhvaryu makes him recite the verses of collection.
12.10.3	Then the sacrificer restrains speech.
12.10.4	He remains silent, devoted to Narayana, until the rising of the stars.
12.10.5	If he accidentally utters speech, he should repeat the Vyahrtis dedicated to Vishnu and then restrain speech again.
12.10.6	If he releases his fists, he should say, "O Agni, you are the protector of vows."
12.10.7	This Brahman was initiated. He is the son of so and so, the grandson of so and so and the great-grandson of so and so. He is the grandson of so-and-so, the great-grand-son of so-and so and the great great-grandson. He is the great great-great-grandson of such and such. He is the descendant of such and such a family. He is the descendent of such and such family. He is thrice told in a low voice to the gods and thrice aloud to men.
12.10.8	The Kṣatriya and the Vaiśya also, if not initiated, are to be addressed as Brāhmaṇa, according to their respective castes.
12.10.9	These are his observances:
12.10.10	He should not approach a woman.
12.10.11	He should not speak untruth.
12.10.12	He should eat no meat.
12.10.13	He should brush his teeth.
12.10.14	He should show.
12.10.15	He should smile.
12.10.16	He should even smile while holding something.
12.10.17	He should spit.
12.10.18	He should not lie above.
12.10.19	He should not sleep.
12.11.1	If he sleeps, he should sleep below, facing east or south, with his head towards the fire, either lying on his back or facing the fire.
12.11.2	He should be angry with no one.
12.11.3	He speaks words of the initiated, not speaking words of the world that are foolish and unwise.
12.11.4	He speaks to a brahmin who is wise, to a kshatriya or vaishya who is wise.
12.11.5	If you speak otherwise, O Agni, you are the guardian of vows."
12.11.6	Going to sleep, he recites this mantra over the Āhavanīya fire.
12.11.7	Having slept and awakened, he recites the mantra up to "May all the gods protect me" while reciting "O Agni, you are well awake."
12.11.8	Or, while going to sleep, he says "O Agni, may you be well awake."
12.11.9	"He who is growing, he who is increasing, he who is holding the strength, he who is not bound, the mind, having seen the unclean,
12.11.10	The mantra "In the night, Agni is the best of lights" is recited.
12.11.11	If the sun shines on him or rises on him other than when he is initiated and measured, if it shines on him, he recites the Varuni mantra, if it rises, he recites Surya mantra.
12.11.12	Having placed the skin of black antelope and the staff, he should do urination and defecation at night. During the day, in the shade.
12.11.13	When about to urinate, having taken a stone or some grass from the middle of the altar, saying "Your sacrificial body is black-horned," he urinates, saying "I am releasing water."
12.11.14	Then he rinses his mouth.
12.11.15	He places the water that has been taken back, saying "From the earth."
12.12.1	Brahmanas, Kshatriyas and Vaishyas should approach him in this way. He should speak to them.
12.12.2	If a conversation with a Shudra becomes necessary, he should say to one of them, "Tell him thus."
12.12.3	He should not speak to a woman.
12.12.4	He should not be separated from his staff or his black antelope skin.
12.12.5	He should neither sit nor sleep apart from his black antelope skin.
12.12.6-12	If he were to sit elsewhere, he would have gone away from the gods and the people. He recites this mantra: "May the gods not go away from me." One should not loosen the Soma before the purchase. One dwells in the house of initiation. One may or may not greet anyone. One may or may not rise to greet someone. Everyone greets him. One does not offer except at the Soma rites. One does not give.
12.12.13	He does not cook.
12.12.14	He emaciates himself.
12.12.15	They say that when his eyes become dark and the part of his body that is to be sacrificed is measured, he should offer it.
12.12.16	If he turns back, he turns back, saying, "All the gods have turned towards me."
12.12.17	He does not go out through a door facing west.
12.12.18	He does not touch it.
12.12.19	He does not take his name.
12.12.20	He does not proclaim his sin.
12.12.21	Then these are for the wife, except for the mantra.
12.12.22	She goes to her own abode.
12.12.23	Then in the daily routine,
12.12.24	Before the sun rises, or before the stars rise, he who is giving the vow should make the fires of Jyotishmati, or the initiated one should restrain speech. Standing to the north of the Ahavaniya fire, he instructs, "O wife, restrain speech."
12.12.25	Then going out through the eastern gate, he makes the cow give milk to the calf, leaving one teat, and milks the others for the vow.
12.12.26	Having cooked the vow-milk in the Garhapatya fire according to the Agnihotra rite, he places it in a well-guarded place.
12.12.27	Having recited the verse "When the stars have risen..." and "Bhūr Bhuvah Suvar" three times, he releases his speech.
12.12.28	He releases four fingers, the little finger and the ring finger.
12.12.29	He performs as he wishes with them.
12.12.30	He gives the vow at midnight.
12.12.31	Some say at the last part of the night.
12.13.1	Others say, having brought the vow near the Ahavaniya fire, having sprinkled at the time of giving the vow, he gives to the initiated one, saying, "Give the vow, take the vow."
12.13.2	"May I obtain the divine mind." Having sipped water, he gives the vow to the one who is going to be initiated, saying, "Those gods who are born of mind, who are united with mind." He gives the vow in his own place, facing east.
12.13.3	Those who are not initiated do not see the one who is being initiated giving the vow.
12.13.4	Having given the vow, he sips water, saying, "May you be auspicious and tawny."
12.13.5	Thus in the past, he used to restrain speech at sunset, and to release it at sunrise.
12.13.6	At midday, he restrains speech.
12.13.7	Or else, he restrains it before sunrise, and releases it at sunrise. At midday, he restrai
12.13.8	In the afternoon, he restrains.
12.13.9	The expiation for the Agnihotra that has been spilled is the same as for the vow.
12.13.10	The vow for a Kṣatriya is barley-gruel, for a Vaiśya it is milk-rice, and for a Brāhmaṇa it is milk.
12.13.11	These are the vows for all at the time of initiation. At the Upavasatha rites, there is the division of the breasts.
12.13.12	If there is no milk, one should perform the vow with the vow of a Kṣatriy.
12.13.13	If he thinks that the oblations are too small, he should offer them in the form of rice, barley, or ghee. This is what the text says.
12.13.14	One should not break the vow, for the sake of uninterrupted Agnihotra.
12.13.15	The Adhvaryu, having gone out through the southern door, having milked the vow, and having cooked it in the vow-cooking house, places it in a well-guarded place.
12.13.16	Then he gives it to his wife in her own house.
12.13.17	She also observes the vow of silence here.
12.13.18	On the day on which he is initiated, he keeps awake at night.
12.13.19	He cuts down the sacrificial post of the initiated one or when the king has been bought.
12.13.20	That has been explained.
12.13.21	The sacrificial post, the Ahavaniya fire, and the Svara are common for the Agniṣṭoma, the Savaniya and the Anūbandhyā sacrifices.
12.14.1	When he is seeking wages for twelve nights, Pūṣan goes with the sun. He gives away the cows with the sun.
12.14.2	With the verses beginning with "The moon" one should accept gold etc. as per the form.
12.14.3	"The god Savitar, the giver of wealth, gives wealth." The other cows are unlimited. One cow each.
12.14.4	He directs the lost ones to Vayu with the verse "To Vayu".
12.14.5	One who dies in water, to Varuna thee.
12.14.6	One who dies of consumption, to Nirriti thee.
12.14.7	One struck by lightning, to the Maruts thee.
12.14.8	One killed by fever, to Rudra thee.
12.14.9	One seized by an army, to Indra thee, the conqueror.
12.14.10	One who has died of an unknown disease, to Yama thee.
12.14.11-13	If he goes quickly by himself, having separately placed the fires in the kindling woods, he goes together. The Adhvaryu follows him with the verse, "From the good may we go to the better."
12.14.14	The sacrificer, having placed the kindling woods on the right side, kindles them.
12.14.15	If there is water, he enters saying, "O divine waters!" and having rubbed the unbroken thread with his hand, he crosses like one building a dam from the bank, saying, "Following the earth."
12.14.16	He places the remaining earth, saying, "From the earth."
12.14.17	Then, when about to go, he recites this verse: "I have chosen this boon from the earth."
12.14.18	He recites this verse when the sun rises: "O most heroic one, destroy all enemies."
12.15.1	At the end of the consecration, the Pratiprasthātṛ, having taken the king to the place for the Soma purchase, places him on a red hide on a bull and instructs the Soma seller: "Purify the Soma."
12.15.2	The Kautsa or the Śūdra who has bought it should purify it and worship it.
12.15.3	Then he offers a cake on milk to Aditi.
12.15.4	In the Prāyaṇīya (rite) there is no offering of the Oḍavaśānīya, the animal sacrifice, the Anvādhāna, the Vrata, the Upāyana, the Jagaraṇa, the Aranya, the Patnīsaṃnaha, and the Brahmavāraṇa.
12.15.5	In place of the skulls, there is a pot.
12.15.6	The Pravargya rite is performed without the Anuyāja offerings; the Udayanīya rite is performed without them.
12.15.7	At the time of taking up the clarified butter, he takes four spoonfuls in the Juhu and four in the Upabhṛt for the purpose of equalizing.
12.15.8	At the Udayanlya rite, he takes four in the Upahṛt and not in the Juhu for the purpose of Anuyāja offerings.
12.15.9	The Pravargya rice-pap is prepared with six spoonfuls.
12.15.10	The two portions of clarified butter have been explained.
12.15.11	He offers to the four deities with clarified butter.
12.16.1	In the eastern half, he should offer Agni, in the southern half, Soma, in the northern half, Savitar, and in the middle, Aditi.
12.16.2	Having offered to Aditi, he recites the Marutī verse: "What is yours in heaven, O Maruts."
12.16.3	The Pravargya rite concludes with the Samyuva rite.
12.16.4	He places the pot with the cooked rice, the ladle, the grass, and the Veda for the Udayanīya (rite) in a safe place.
12.16.5	He holds the Dhruva vessel of ghee.
12.16.6	Having taken eight or four spoonfuls from it, he places the gold of the Niṣṭarkya rite on the Darbha grass, and then puts it on the Juhu ladle, saying, "This is your bright body."
12.16.7	When the Adhvaryu has begun to recite the Anvārabdhas, the sacrificer looks at the Soma-purchasing cow, which is of the colour of a ripe fruit, with one-coloured eyes, and offers it with the formula, "This is the ghee, this is the ghee, held in the mind."
12.16.8	Taking another four spoonfuls, he says, "This is Sukra," and taking the gold out of the ghee, he places it in a well-guarded place. He takes four spoonfuls.
12.16.9	Having recited the mantra "This is the oblation for Visvedevas" over the clarified butter, he stands facing the sun with a golden coin in his hand, reciting the mantra "The eye of the sun has arisen."
12.16.10	Having placed the Soma-purchasing cow in front of the hut facing west, he instructs her, saying "You are the Soma-purchaser, you are the mind."
12.16.11	"May Mitra bind thee to the place." Having bound him on the right side, on the eastern foot, he sends him to the place where Soma is, saying, "Pusha, lead to the path."
12.16.12	He goes along the six right feet with the verses beginning with "Thou art Vasu, thou art Rudra."
12.16.13	The sacrificer follows the steps as they are taken with the verses, "One for the sake of food, may Vishnu follow thee."
12.16.14	The Adhvaryu recites the seventh step with the verse, "O friends."
12.16.15	The Advaryu recites with the verse, “O Bṛhaspati, may thou be pleased with thee in thy good wishes."
12.16.16	Having placed that gold in it, and having spread it, he says, "I am seeking the head of the earth." He offers it with four spoonfuls.
12.17.1	Having removed the gold, he writes with a wooden sword, "Rakshas is written, enemies are written." He writes the right foot three times up to the extent of the ghee.
12.17.2	Then, having mixed the Soma with the ladle, he gives it to the sacrificer with the verse, "May we be united with your wealth."
12.17.3	The sacrificer gives it to his wife with the verse, “May we be united in your wealth.”
12.17.4	The wife looks at the Soma-purchasing wife with the verse "O goddess, look at the goddess who is under your control."
12.17.5	The wife looks back at the sacrificer with "May Tvashtri be your companion."
12.17.6	"May I not be separated from the prosperity of wealth." The sacrificer recites this verse while taking possession of the Soma.
12.17.7	Then, having washed the gold, he ties it to the ring finger for the purpose of nourishing, strengthening, and prosperity.
12.17.8	Having sprinkled the Soma-purchasing cow with water, he releases her, reciting, "From where you have come, raise up the earth."
12.17.9	The wife places the foot in the protected place.
12.17.10	Then he worships the sun with the verse, "The eye of the sun has arisen..."
12.17.11	He asks the Soma seller, "Is your Soma pure?"
12.17.12	The other replies, "It is pure."
12.17.13	He worships the king with the verse, "This is your share in the Gayatri metre."
12.17.14	Having placed on the northern half of the skin a garment of wool, doubled and with the edges towards the east, and having touched the king with the hand holding gold, reciting the verse "May your thread be released", he spreads the wool on the Atichandas verse "The divine Savitar" recited by the king. Having taken up the threads one by one, starting from the little finger, with the thumb stretched out, he spreads them.
12.17.15	The fifth (finger) is not to be used.
12.17.16	The tenth (finger) is to be used. The fifth (finger).
12.17.17	One should measure five times with the Yajus, five times silently.
12.17.18	Thus twice, thrice, or an unlimited number of times.
12.18.1-4	Having placed the remaining king (of Soma) on the lap of the Prajas, having tied the ends of the garment, having put on the turban twice-folded, he puts on the garment, saying, "For Prāṇa thee!" He puts on the garment by turning to the right. He puts on it, saying, "To Vyāna thee!" He looks at the king and the sacrificer, saying, "May the Prajas follow thee! May the Prajas follow you!" He places him on the skin.
12.18.5	The seller of Soma, having approached the sun, says, "We shall buy Soma from the god Sun." The buyer of Soma takes the skin from the king.
12.18.6	The buyer of Soma asks the seller of Soma, "Is Soma for sale?"
12.18.7	The other replies, "It is for sale."
12.18.8	Having said, "I buy Soma from you," and thinking that the cow's greatness is great, he offers three times each, saying, "I buy with a calf, I buy with a blemish, I buy with the hoof, I buy with your foot."
12.18.9	Having rejected the cow's three feet that were offered, he offers the cow itself, saying, "Buy the cow from me."
12.18.10	"The seller of Soma, having been asked by the Adhvaryu, 'Is Soma fit for the king?' replies, 'It is fit for the king.'
12.18.11	The Adhvaryu having accepted it, says, 'I buy your Soma with gold.' He offers gold.
12.18.12	Having bought it, he takes it.
12.18.13	'Thou art the body of Tapas,' (he says) to the goat.
12.18.14	'I buy thee with a garment,' (he says to the garment).
12.19.5	Having performed the prescribed number of rites, he gives the gold to the Soma-seller, saying, "May the Moon be yours." The Soma-seller gives it back to the sacrificer, saying, "Let it be yours." He also gives a white woolen cloth.
12.19.6	The sacrificer makes the navel of the ten-stringed filter with that.
12.19.7	"This is the neck of the serpents, the venomous ones," thus he ties up a black woollen thread.
12.19.8	"O Soma-seller, this is your sin," thus he strikes the Soma-seller on the forehead with water and the thread.
12.19.9	"The cows, the shining ones, the Angharas," thus he directs the Soma-sellers from the end of the Anuvaka.
12.19.10	"Come, O friend, to the good friend!" Thus he takes the king from the Soma-sellers. "He enters Indra's thigh," thus he places the sacrificer's right thigh. The sacrificer receives him. "The good-winged one," thus (he says).
12.19.11	He gives the sprinkled turban to the attendant.
12.19.12	"I give thee to Mitra-Varuna, the rulers, in accordance with their command. May I be without crookedness and without injury." The sacrificer gives the staff to the Maitrāvaruṇa priest.
12.19.13	"May Rudra turn thee." Having circumambulated the Soma-purchasing cow, he buys it with another cow and releases it in the cattle-pen of the sacrificer.
12.19.14	Then the sacrificer, taking the king (of Soma) in his hands, places it on his head and rises up with the words, "For a long life."
12.19.15	The Soma-bearing horse stands to the south, facing east.
12.19.16	He proceeds forward with the words, “Follow the extended sky.”
12.19.17	The Adhvaryu spreads the skin of a black antelope with its neck towards the east and with the hairy side upwards, saying, "Thou art the seat of Aditi." He places the king on the skin of a antelope, saying, "Sit on the seat of Adity."
12.19.18	He stands by him, saying, "The bull has supported the heaven."
12.19.19	He wraps him with a cloth, saying, "He has spread the sky in the forests."
12.19.20	He brings back the black antelope skin with the Sūrya-verse. "He cuts it open with the verse, "The rising Jatavedas..." with the head pointing upwards and the opening facing outside.
12.19.21	"Thou art the yoke," (saying this) he touches the yoke. "Thou art the Varuna," (saying this), he puts down the chariot. "May Varuna support thee," (saying this,) he supports it. "Thou art Varuna's support," (saying this, he) throws down the dice. "Thou art Soma's support," saying this, he throws down the dice.
12.20.1	"Thou art Varuna's prop." With these words he first yokes the right (horse).
12.20.2	"Thou art Varuna, the releaser of the prop." Holding the dice, he says, "Varuna's noose is turned back." He turns back the yoke-noose.
12.20.3	With the same (verse) he yokes the bullock in the opposite direction.
12.20.4	Bearing a Palasa branch, Subrahmanya approaches between (the horses).
12.20.5	The Adhvaryu, having taken up the reins on the right side, says (to the Brahman) "O Brahman, restrain speech; O Subrahmanya, I call you to the Subrahmanya-rite."
12.20.6	"Oṃ, Bhūḥ, Sasi, Subrahmaṇya, may your foot be on the earth. Thus, the sacrificer, following Subrahmaṇyā, recites the invoked Subrahmaṇyās in all (the verses).
12.20.7	The Adhvaryu and the sacrificer, when the first verse is uttered thrice, recite, 'O Lord of Bhuvaḥ, move away.' They move away the king.
12.20.8	All the priests, having gone forward, circumambulate.
12.20.9	The Adhvaryu recites over the king, "Become a hawk and fly away."
12.20.10	The Adhvaryu and the sacrificer approach the king in a straight line, saying, "For the well-being of the sacrificer."
12.20.11	Standing in front of the hall, the sacrificer, while the king is being pushed forward, thinks of the king as the sacrificial animal, and with the Agnisomiya animal held by the ear, he waits for the king, saying "Salutations to Mitra".
12.20.12	He is either a black antelope or a red antelope, with the characteristics of a well-grown sacrificial animal, having a beard, thick, and tawny.
12.21.1	When the king is being borne across, the Adhvaryu and the Pratiprasthātṛ take up the wooden stool in front of the hall.
12.21.2	It is made of Udumbara wood, its height is upto the navel, its length is upto the elbow, it has a head, is bound with Muñja grass.
12.21.3	Then they kindle the fires.
12.21.4	Having placed the Soma-carrying (cart) in front of the eastern beam, he says, "It is Varuna's."
12.21.5-9	Varuna has released thee. He releases the southern bull. "He says, "Thou art Varuna's yoke." He draws the yoke. " "He says, "Varuna's post-releasing is thine." He throws the dice. " "Varuna's noose is released." He releases the noose of the yoke."
12.21.10	Thus he releases the animal for the Uttaravedi. It is released or not released.
12.21.11	Then in Atithiya, seventeen kindling verses.
12.21.12	The bamboo-stick is the support.
12.21.13	He places the enclosing sticks made of Karṣmarya wood, the kindling wood, the Asvalayana grass, and the sacrificial grass on the sacrificial grass.
12.21.14	"With the words, 'By the impulse of the divine Savitr', and 'You are the guest of Agni', he offers five times with each verse.
12.21.15	He offers the Navakapala oblation to Vishnu, connected with his wife, as a guest.
12.21.16	Having made the oblations, he releases the speech and the northern bull.
12.21.17	"Thou art Varuna's," says the sacrificer, taking off his garment. "Those abodes of thine where they worship with oblations, may all of them be thy possession." Thus he takes the king from the nest.
12.21.18	"Thou art the heaven, thou art the earth," he says, and goes forth.
12.21.19	Having taken the seat, he enters the hall through the eastern door, and having moved it towards the east of the Ahavaniya, he places the seat on the southern side of the Ahavani ya, saying, "You are the seat of Varuna."
12.22.1	On it he spreads the black antelope skin, saying, "This is the seat of Aditi."
12.22.2	He makes the king sit on the black antelope skin with the formula, "You sit on the seat of Aditis.
12.22.3	"Thou art Varuna, the firm-vowed; thou art the king of Varuna." Thus he approaches the king.
12.22.4	"Thou art the king of Varuṇa." Thus he puts on the garment.
12.22.5	"I approach thee with the Brahman, bowing." Thus he serves the king everywhere with the Varuna hymn.
12.22.6	"Do not pass between Agni and the king." Thus he gives the order.
12.22.7	Here also they offer rice cooked in milk, food, argha, fried grains, and cakes.
12.22.8	Here he undertakes the rites of carrying (the oblations) etc.
12.22.9	At the time of burning, he places the Madanti (cakes) along with the sacrificial cake.
12.22.10	He takes four spoonfuls of clarified butter.
12.22.11	He performs the rites of the four Hotr priests.
12.22.12	Here he explains the Jātasūtras related to the collection of materials.
12.22.13	He moves like an animal, with the churning-stick.
12.22.14	Having placed the Veda, he instructs the Samidheni verses.
12.22.15	He offers five Prayāja offerings.
12.22.16	He brings all the Upabṛt offerings to the fourth Juhu.
12.22.17	He moves silently.
12.22.18	"He says, "Recite to Vishnu," "Offer to Vishnu," and "To the guests who end with Ida."
12.22.19	Having melted the ghee of the Dhruva ladle, having placed the ladle within the altar, and having taken the Tānūnaptrā-cup in it with the five formulas beginning with "I take thee for Apatyā", he takes it five times with each formula.
12.22.20	Having placed it on the southern shoulder, all the priests and the sacrificer touch it with the formula, "Thou art not to be touched".
12.22.21	He makes the sacrificer recite, "May my consecration be successful."
12.23.1	Having made the priests recite the Upāhvā, he is invited by them. The sacrificer himself thrice inhales the Samāvasmṛṣṭa, reciting, "I offer thee in Prajapati, in the mind."
12.23.2	Having poured water into it, he sprinkles it towards the north.
12.23.3	Then the Adhvaryu asks, "Are the fires burning?"
12.23.4	The goddesses drink this, immortal, growing in truth. The Agnidhra replies, "They drink with them."
12.23.5	He instructs them to drink.
12.23.6	Having washed their hands with the Soma that has been brought and is being drunk, they make it grow, saying, "The Soma that has been drunk by the Tānūnaptrins, the golden-handed, the king, the flowing, the flowing, may that god Soma grow for you."
12.23.7	The Adhvaryu makes the sacrificer recite the verse, "May the friends be nourished."
12.23.8	Having placed the Prastara on the southern half of the altar, with the right hands stretched out and the left hands below, they recite, "O Indra, O Agni, O Soma, O Varuna, O Mitra, O Aryaman, O Bhaga, O Savitar, O Sarasvati, O Pusan, O Rudra, O Dhruva, O Viśve Devāḥ, O Vasus, O Rudras, O Sadhyas, O Maruts, O Indra, O Agni."
12.23.9	The Adhvaryu leads the sacrificer to the intermediate consecration.
12.23.10	"O Agni, lord of vows, thou art," he says, placing the Ahavaniya (fire) near.
12.24.1	The sacrificer puts on a tighter girdle, makes a tighter fist.
12.24.2	The wife puts on the yoke.
12.24.3	He becomes one who has undergone the ordeal.
12.24.4	He cleanses himself with the Madanti (verses).
12.24.5	He abandons the former vow.
12.24.6	"That Rudra form of thine, O Agni," with this (verse) he gives the vow.
12.24.7	This is the extent of the vow for the day of the consecration.
12.24.8	The vow is undertaken from here onwards.
12.24.9	There are three consecrations, six, twelve or twenty-four.
12.24.10	One should observe the vow for four nights, three nights in the middle day, two nights and one night in the last day and night.
12.24.11	The Brāhmaṇas have prescribed the rites of the Avagraha and Antardīkṣā.
12.24.12	They perform the rites as they wish, and then perform the Pravargya rite.
13.1.1	One who is going to perform the Pravargya rite, on the new moon day or on the full moon day or on an auspicious day of the bright fortnight, having performed the Shanti rite with the Anuvaka "Salutations to Speech", having placed the sacrificial twigs of Butea monosperma, Khadira or bamboo, offers the four-fold oblation with the verse "I yoke the mind".
13.1.2	One should not offer oblations for one who is initiated.
13.1.3	One should offer this as a sacrificial twig or recite this.
13.1.4	Taking a wooden stick of Khadira, Udumbara, Vaikaṅkata, Veṇa, or of the size of a Vyāyāma or an Aratni, or of the colour of a cloud, with two ends, and taking the Avīr-stick, he recites, "You are a woman, you are a woman," and rising, he addresses the Brahman with the words, "Rise, O Brahmanaspati."
13.1.5	The Brahman rises.
13.1.6	"May both of us approach." They recite the second half of the verse.
13.1.7	They take up the black antelope skin.
13.1.8	Having dug up some clay from anywhere, they bring it. There they recite, "May Brahmaṇaspati come." Those who are at the head of the horses proceed towards the east. Or the materials may be arranged on the ground.
13.1.9	The clay for the fire altar is dug up in front of the fire altar. The earlier one is higher and the later one is lower.
13.1.10	Having placed the skin of a black antelope with its neck towards the east and with the hairy side upwards on the darbha-blades with their tips towards the east and having dug out the earth with the wooden sword towards the north, he says, "O divine heaven and earth!" Having placed the heaven and earth, he says, “May I prosper today.” Having struck the wooden sword into the earth, he says “The head of the sacrifice.” Having taken it up, he says, “(For) thee, O sacrifice.” Having taken (the earth), he says, “For thee, O sacrifice, on the head of the sacrifice,” and pours it on the skin of a
13.1.11	black antelope.
13.1.12	Having thus taken the second and third (portions), he pours them down.
13.1.13	He pours down the fourth silently, as much as the earth may have been taken from the Prāvargya vessels.
13.1.14	He destroys the remaining (earth) for atonement.
13.1.15	So also of the other materials.
13.2.1	He stands by the boar-struck (earth) with the verse, "This much was the height."
13.2.2	The goddesses are the worms. Thus (he offers) the worms in the anthill.
13.2.3	"You are Indra's strength." Thus (he offers to) the putrid ones.
13.2.4	"You belong to Agni, you are the semen of Prajapati." Thus (he makes offerings) to the black antelope hair mixed with goat hair. Having placed separately, having struck and having taken up, he offers into the black antelope skin.
13.2.5	Having made the horse smell the five kinds of materials, he says, "May the honey make you sweet." Having placed the materials, he milks a ewe with a male lamb around it.
13.2.6	All the priests take up the Pravargya, having taken it up from the north of the resting place, having sprinkled it, having placed sand, they place it.
13.2.7	Having first placed the Madanti-cups on the Garhapatya fire, he sprinkles him with the formula, "May the sweet one make thee sweet." With these he sprinkles him.
13.3.1	He also sprinkles him with other things like the Ukhā-saws, the Armakala-sticks, the powder of sand and salt, for the purpose of firmness.
13.3.2	Whatever water-rituals are performed in this Pravargya, they are performed by the Madantīs after placing it.
13.3.3	A woman does not look at it, nor a Śūdra.
13.3.4	One should not make the vessels facing oneself.
13.3.5	Having put aside the mouth, one makes it without facing oneself, with a flute.
13.3.6	One should neither go between the Pravargya and the sun.
13.3.7	If the sun sets while the Pravargya rite is in progress, then he should desist and complete the remaining part on the next day.
13.3.8	Having kneaded the clay, he makes a ball with the words, "Thou art the head of the sacrifice." Having restrained it with the words, “Thou art in the place of the sacrifice,” by means of the thumb and the fingers which are in accordance with their meaning, he cuts it into three parts and makes three balls. He gives the first to the maker with the words, "Thou art Gāyatrī." The second with the words, "Thou art Tristubh." The third with the words,"Thou art Jagat."
13.3.9	With the Gayatri metre I make thee. With the three metres he makes three great heroes, of the form of Vayu, three-headed, five-headed, or of unlimited heads, of the size of a span, with upward-pointing tips, with upper parts resembling a stream of water, and bent in the middle.
13.3.10	Having made a hole with the grass of the sacrificial post, he says, "May Aditi take hold of the hole." He makes a hole with the reed-stalk.
13.4.1	As much as is sufficient for the hole for the deity, for the Agnihotra, and for the oblations.
13.4.2	Having placed them on the sand to the north, he says, "May the heat of the sun dry them up." He heats them individually in the sun.
13.4.3	"He looks at it with the formula, 'Thou art a sacrifice.'
13.4.4	He pours silently the other (liquids) without sprinkling.
13.4.5	The two (officiating priests) called Hastya and Usthya pour the Soma into the mouth of the Adhvaryu. The two Dhoghras pour it with the formula 'Thou art Soma, thou art the Soma.' The Adhvaryu pours it with the formula beginning with 'Thou art the Soma.' He pours it into the ladle and the wooden cup as into the Adhvaryupot and the Dhoghra respectively. The Adhvaryupotra pours the Soma from the wooden cup into the Adhvarupotra pours the soma from the wooden cup to the Adhvaryupautra pours the soma from wooden cup into the wooden cup. The Adhvarupautra pours the Soma from wooden cup into wooden cup. The Dhoghra pours the Soma from Dhoghra into the wooden cup.
13.4.6	If the sacrifice is with fire-kindling, then the bricks for the summer season and the bricks for the house are placed.
13.4.7	Having smeared them with the remaining clay, he removes them from the wind.
13.4.8	In the windless places, they make them smooth with smoothers.
13.4.9	Having kindled the fire on the Garhapatya with the dung of a bull and a horse, he takes the first great hero by the horns and fumigates it within and without, saying, "Thou art the bull and the horse."
13.4.10	So also the other two.
13.4.11	The others silently.
13.4.12	From now on he should take the great heroes only by the horns.
13.5.1	He digs a hole in front of the Garhapaty.
13.5.2	Having sprinkled the oblations in that (fire), having performed the Purāścaraṇa rite, he offers the Mahāvīra oblations in order, towards the east and towards the north.
13.5.3	Having placed the vessel of ghee and curd in front, and the vessel of clarified butter and curd behind, and having covered them with those cooking vessels, he smears them with clay.
13.5.4	He makes the four-finger-long (sticks) for each direction for the purpose of offering.
13.5.5	Having kindled the Muñja-grass sticks in the Garhapatya fire, he offers them in each direction with the mantras beginning with "In the flame..."
13.5.6	Or with all (the mantras) in all directions.
13.5.7	They are cooked during the day or night.
13.5.8	If he offers in the evening, he offers in the morning. If in the morning, in the evening.
13.5.9	He attends to them while being cooked with the two verses beginning with "O Agni, do thou cook the oblations."
13.5.10	Having taken up the embers with the two verses, "Having been cooked, may you be successful" and "Having been cooked," he removes the embers.
13.5.11	"May the god Savitr cook thee" - he places the first great hero on the skin with the two verses.
13.5.12	"Expanding on the earth, I fill the directions and the quarters" - he places it on the sand in the north.
13.5.13	So also the other two.
13.5.14	The other (rites) are silent.
13.5.15	He looks at it with the eyes of the sun, saying, "I look at thee."
13.6.1	He encloses it with sand, saying, "This Brahman, I enclose with Brahmanic lustre." He encloses it clockwise.
13.6.2	He encloses (it) with the people, saying, "Enclose (it) with people." The king encloses (it).
13.6.3	With cattle, says the Vaishya.
13.6.4	Taking each of the great heroes by the horns, he binds them with a rope and says, "I am listening to you with the Gayatri meter." With these three mantras, he listens to the abundant milk. He listens from within and outside.
13.6.5	He lets the milk flow with the milk of the cows.
13.6.6	The milk-pail, the ladle for pouring clarified butter, and the vessel for curds are silent.
13.6.7	If a boil or a carbuncle appears, one should take some of the remaining (food), grind it, sprinkle it on the ground, and smear the boil or carbuncle with it, reciting twice, "Whatever is lacking, I sprinkle with this." One should fast.
13.6.8	If all the potsherds are broken, then he should grind them, mix them with the remaining clay, and perform the Upavasatha rite.
13.6.9	Placing the Pravargya vessels on a black antelope skin, he should go to the north of the hall, reciting the Purāścarya hymn. Having tied the sling, he should place it in such a way that the wife does not see it until the time of use.
13.6.10	They perform the northern Sānti with the verse, "May Vāta be auspicious to us."
13.7.1	At the time of proceeding, they proceed with the Pravargya and Upasad, or having proceeded with the Upasad, they proceed with Pravargya.
13.7.2	Those who are going to perform it, close the doors so that women do not see, and cover the paths of the wives.
13.7.3	The Adhvaryu sits down in front, the Hotṛ behind him, the Prastôtṛ behind him on the right, the Brahman on the right, and the sacrificer on the left, the Pratiprasthâtr and the Agnidh on the left.
13.7.4	Having sipped water, having recited the Sāntī verse "Obeisance to speech", having spread Muñja grass on the front of the Garhapatya fire, he first takes up the Mahāvīra mantra, saying "O Devapuruṣa, you are the most excellent one", silently he takes up the other two mantras.
13.7.5	Here itself he arranges the requisites for the Pravargya rite.
13.7.6	The Soma-pressing stone is the largest, the Emperor's stone is the smallest.
13.7.7	There are four ladles, of which two are for pouring the oblations, and are without holes.
13.7.8	The other two have holes.
13.7.9	Of these two, the larger one is the pouring ladle, the smaller one is the sprinkling ladle.
13.7.10	There are two ladles and two spoons.
13.7.11	The two sides of the cow are cut off and joined together at one end, and are called the two horns.
13.7.12	The thick post for milking is for the purpose of milking, the three thin posts are for the calf and others. These are called the posts for the calf. The six-edged posts are made of Udumbara wood.
13.7.13	The sacrificial grass is of the Vaikankata variety. The sacrificial grass is to be collected in bundles of thirteen. The sacrificial grass may be of Palasa, Vema, Vaikankata, Khadira, Arka, Udumbara, or Sami wood.
13.7.14	The sacrificial grass is to have white and black hair. The sacrificial grass should be of the Krsnajiva variety. The sacrificial implements are to be of three kinds, each having a handle of the length of the arm.
13.7.15	The handles may be of Vema or Udumbara wood.
13.7.16	One hundred of silver and gold.
13.7.17	Two Vedas, the Aghamarṣaṇa and the Śikṣā, two Nidānas, and three Visākha-strings.
13.7.18	These are made of Muñja grass.
13.7.19	The seeds of the Rauhiṇya plant, when ground, become flour.
13.7.20	There are many Muñja grass seeds.
13.7.21	Sand is from sand dunes.
13.7.22	A Muñja grass or Darbha grass filter.
13.7.23	Having taken out the sand with the wooden spade to the north of the Garhapatya, having sprinkled it, having made a circular mound the size of a span, one should make it to the north of Āhavanīya. Having made three mounds in this way, the remaining sand should be placed in the northern half.
13.7.24	Then having purified the Prokṣaṇī water, he instructs the Brahman, the Hotṛ, the Adhvaryu, the Pratiprasthātṛ and the Prastôtṛ, saying, "O Brahman, we shall proceed with the Pravargya rite. O Hotṛ, chant the Gharma. O Adhvaryu place the two Rāuhiṇa cakes. O Pratiprasthätṛ, perform the Pravargya. O Prastôtṛ chant the Sâmans."
13.8.1	Then the Brahman recites softly, "The Yajus is connected," and then loudly, "Those who are connected with Indra proceed."
13.8.2	The Adhvaryu, having been initiated, sprinkles all the Parivarya materials three times each, with the formulas, "For Yama thee, for the sacrifice thee," so that he may reach the remaining materials.
13.8.3	Having sprinkled, he arranges them.
13.8.4	The Hotṛ, having been sent forth, should recite the verse, "Brahmā, the knower of Brahman, has been sent forth."
13.8.5	Having bowed to the Rgveda, one should resolve.
13.8.6	The Agnīdhra places two balls of dough for Agni and Rohiṇī.
13.8.7	The Pratiprasthātṛ, having performed the Homa with the ladle, places curds after consecrating the clarified butter.
13.8.8	Having moved the royal couch in front of the Āhavanīya, the king places it either in front of the royal couch or to the north.
13.8.9	On that he spreads the skin of a black antelope with the hairy side up.
13.8.10	On that he places the two great heroes, the pillows, to the north.
13.8.11	They are not to be used.
13.8.12	Having taken the thick pegs, the pegs for the calves, and the pegs for the Visakha-cord, he goes forward, passing to the south of the Hotr, and having taken the southern door, he strikes the peg for the Hotr's review at the southern door.
13.8.13	On the right side of the eastern door, the cow is milked. On the right side of western door, the goat is milked. Inside, on the northern side, a peg is fixed for the sow. The ropes of Visakha are stretched there for the purpose of driving away.
13.8.14	At this time, they are milked.
13.8.15	Having placed three sharp-edged stones to the north of the Ahavaniya fire, he places the curd-balls and the twig of the Vaikankati tree.
13.9.1	Then the Adhvaryu, having taken the Devapurscara grass, says, "Proceed." Having taken the Mahāvīra grass with its tips towards himself, and having held it between the two teeth, he places it in his left hand and strokes it from above with the tip.
13.9.2	With the ladle of the ghee-vessel, he offers seven oblations to Prāṇa, with ghee taken once, continuously, with the formula, "To Prāṇa svāhā." He offers eleven oblations.
13.9.3	Then with the remaining ghee of the ladle, he anoints him with the formula, "May god Savitr anoint thee with honey."
13.9.4	At this time the Pratiprasthātṛ puts the golden coin of a hundred māṇas in the hole of the earth, saying, "Protect the earth by penance."
13.9.5	Taking the Muñja grass, he lights the tips of the southern ones with the formula, "Thou art light." With the tips of those, he lights the roots of the northern ones with the formula "Thou art radiance." With the roots of those, he burns the roots of the southern ones, with the formula "thou art heat." With the roots, he burns the tips of the northern ones, with the verse "Thou art Tapas."
13.9.6	Having placed them on the upper scale, he places the Mahāvīra on them, saying, "May you be settled."
13.9.7	He anoints him with ghee, saying, "They anoint him."
13.9.8	With these (verses), the sacrificer, without touching the Mahāvīras, establishes the directions with his hand.
13.9.9	"May the earth be for thee, O son of Bhuri, the horse of Manu." He touches the earth towards the north.
13.9.10	Having taken the Dhristis, the Adhvaryu and the Pratiprasthâtri having placed the embers from the Garhapatya towards the north, and having placed him (the fire) around, he places thirteen enclosing sticks around him with the formula, "Thou art the enclosing stick, thou art the enclosing stick."
13.10.1	"Thou art the east" says the Adhvaryu, placing the two (bricks) towards the east.
13.10.2	"Thou art the west" says the Pratiprasthātṛ, placing the two towards the west.
13.10.3	Thus two by two, the Adhvaryus places the bricks with the former mantras, the Pratiprasthatṛ with the latter mantras.
13.10.4	"Thou are the covering of the atmosphere" says the Adhvaryu alone, placing the thirteenth brick towards the south.
13.10.5	"Protect heaven by your austerities" - having covered it from above with a golden plate, he worships it with three verses.
13.10.6	"You are the Gayatri" - with these (verses) he takes up the wool-combs one by one.
13.10.7	Having placed the head towards the east, he shakes it three times upwards with the words, "Honey, honey."
13.10.8	Having taken the first himself, he gives the middle one to the Pratiprasthātṛ and the remaining one to the Agnīdhra.
13.10.9	The Agnīdhras, holding the Madhu-grass, shake it upwards and go around the Mahāvīra three times in a clockwise direction.
13.10.10	They settle down according to space and sit down, reciting the Pranava. Those who are engaged in reciting the Veda sit down, reciting.
13.10.11	When the fire is burning, he takes a hundred gold coins.
13.10.12	When the fire has consumed the wick, the Adhvaryu recites the Anuvaka beginning with "The ones who released the wick" and then recites the Mahavir verse beginning with "Ten in the east, ten in the south."
13.10.13	When they know that the fire has consumed all the wood, they take up the churning sticks, reciting the verse beginning with "May the Asvins grant us speech."
13.10.14-15	The Adhvaryu, having taken the Dhiṣṇiyas, having gone around along the front of the Ahavanīya, having placed them in the rear of the Gārhapatya, having recited the formula, "Thou art the Adhvaryu," having recited the formula "Thou art the Hotṛ," having recited the formulas, "Thou art Prajapati," "Thou art the Brahman," having recited the verse, "Pṛśni shines forth among the stars," having recited the words, "The Gharma is known," and having gone back thrice, Having taken the Dhişniyas, the Adhvaryū goes around along the front side of the Ahavanîya, places them behind the Garhapatya, recites the formula, "You are the Adhvaryus," recites the formula "You are the Hotṛs," recites the formulas, "You are Prajapati," and "You are the Brahman," recites the verse, "Prśni shines forth among stars," recites the words, "Gharma is known," then goes back thrice. The Adhvaryu places the Dhiṣṭiyas in front of the Ahavaniya, recites, "You are Adhvaryus", recites, "you are Hotṛs", recites, "You are Prajapatis", recites, "You are Brahmans", recites the verse "Pṛśni shone forth among the stars", recites the words "Gharma is recognized", and then goes back thrice.
13.10.16	As they were in their places, I saw the Gopa (the cowherd) and all the priests and the sacrificer, reciting the mantras, looked at the great hero.
13.10.17	The Adhvaryu approaches the Garhapatya fire with the verse, "You are the lord of the house, O Agni."
13.10.18	When the Adhvaryu has disappeared, the Pratiprasthātṛ makes the wife recite the verse, "May Tvashtri be your companion."
13.10.19	He instructs the Agnidhra to place the two Rohiṇī cakes.
13.11.1	The two Rāuṇḍa cakes, which are not depressed, are placed on the Āgnīdhra mound, sprinkled with water, and placed in the morning with the ladles facing east, with the joining of the southern and northern enclosing sticks. Some say that they are placed in the evening with the ladles turned towards the west.
13.11.2	Having taken up the girdle with the formula, "For the deity thee", and having recited the formula, "Thou art the girdle of Aditi", the Adhvaryu comes out through the eastern door and calls the Gharma-milker with the formula, “O Iḍa, come; O Aditi, come; O Sarasvati, come”. He calls him three times in a low tone and three times loudly as per the Sama.
13.11.3	The Adhvaryu, the Agnidhra and the Pratiprasthâtri having taken the pot of milk, having brought it out by the southern door, and having tied the Uṣṇīsa of the Adityas round the neck of the pot of milk with the formula, "Thou art the Uṣṇisa of the Adityan, thou art the pot of milk," the Adhvaryu ties it with the formula, "Thou art the wind, thou art the calf."
13.11.4	"Pūṣan has let loose thee," (thus) he lets loose the calf.
13.11.5	"Which is thy teat that gives milk?" Having recited this formula over the cow that yields hot milk, and having taken the calf, and having directed it, he says, "May Brhaspati approach thee." He approaches.
13.11.6	"The Dānava is your protector." He touches the teats.
13.11.7	"From the ten fingers of Vivasvat" (he says), knowing this, he makes the two breasts swell for the Asvins. With these (verses) he makes the youngest milker swell.
13.11.8	At this time the Pratiprasthātṛ, having given the milk of a black goat to the Agnīdhra, returns by the same way and says, "Thou art Gāyatrī, thou art Tristubh." The Adhvaryu takes the two-edged knife. "Thou art Jagat," says the Pratiprasthatṛ, taking the milk-vessel.
13.11.9	The Agnidhra responds, "The milk-stealer is a calamity."
13.11.10	The Adhvaryu waits for the milk being milked with the verse, "May Indra and Agni, the two mighty ones, come to us with their share of strength."
13.12.1	"Indra and Ashvins," says (the Adhvaryu) while the milk is being milked.
13.12.2	"The rays of the sun," says (the Udgātṛ) while standing near the rising sun.
13.12.3	"Thou art the honey-offering," says the Pratiprasthātṛ while milking the goat.
13.12.4	"The heat of the sun," he says while standing near the sun rising.
13.12.5	The Adhvaryu takes up the Mahāvīra with the Samdanśa-formula, "I take thee with heaven and earth."
13.12.6	The Pratiprasthātṛ takes it up with the Upayamana-formula, "With the Veda I wipe thee, with the atmosphere I take thee up."
13.12.7	Having taken it up with the formula, "For the gods thee," he rises.
13.12.8	He takes it up towards the east with the formula, "Thou art brilliance; do thou take up brilliance."
13.12.9	"Having recited, "May Agni protect me from the earth, Vayu from the atmosphere, Surya from the sky," and "May you not harm me," he recites the five names of Vayu while going, "For Vayu, svāhā," and "For Vayu," and "For the ocean, svāhā." He recites the seven names of Vayu.
13.12.10	"Having recited, "For Agni, for the Vasus, svāhā," he recites the remaining five names of Agni.
13.12.11	The remaining names are for optional purposes.
13.12.12	At this time the Pratiprasthātṛ offers in the morning with the formula, "The day, the light, the banner" and in the evening with the formula, “The night”. Having gone around along the south of the Ahavaniya, he looks at the Brahman with the formula, "All the quarters are seated towards the south." He has approached all the gods." Looking at the Hotṛ seated behind, he looks at Gharmā with the formula, "Svāhā to the Gharmā." Having caused to announce, he instructs with the formula,"Let him offer to Gharmā."
13.12.13	He recites with the highest speech.
13.12.14	He offers with "O Asvins, drink the hot offering" at the Vasat-utterance and with "O Indra and Agni" at the Anuvṣat-utterance.
13.12.15	He attends the offered hot offering with "O Asvin, you have drunk the hot offering."
13.12.16	The sacrificer attends the great hero being held above the Āhavanīya with the remaining portion of the recitation, "Salutations to heaven, salutations to earth."
13.12.17	The Pratiprasthātṛ fills it with curds and milk.
13.13.1	The sacrificer recites the verse, "Do thou, O Agni, pour down the oblation for me" while the milk is being poured.
13.13.2	Then he directs it towards the directions, saying, "For Tvashtri thee" towards the east, "For Dyumna thee" towards the south, "For Indra thee" towards the west, "For Bhuti thee" towards the north.
13.13.3	Having returned, he takes the remaining milk of the great hero and places a silver coin in the place for the Udvāsaniya pot. Having placed it there, he says, "May the great hero not be scattered by the wind." Having touched the water while performing the rite of injuring the enemy, he takes six pieces of wood from the Udumbara tree and strikes each one of the Upāmantadravya with the formula, "To Pūṣan, the sharer, svāhā." Having sprinkled it, he places it between the two eyes on the middle enclosing stick.
13.13.4	Thus he sprinkles from the second part towards the Gravas with "Svāhā."
13.13.5	He places it as before.
13.13.6	Similarly with the third towards the middle, with "Svāha" and with the fourth towards the sky and earth with "Svāhã."
13.13.7	Then he covers it with ashes from above.
13.13.8	Thus with the fifth (oblation) in the southern half (of the fire-place) to the Pitrs, the drinkers of Gharma, Svāhā.
13.13.9	He places it on the southern enclosing stick, touching it outside.
13.13.10	Then with the sixth (oblation) on all the smeared parts, having first applied the yoke, and having offered at the end, in the northern half (of the fireplace) to Rudra, the Rudra-priest, Svāhā.
13.13.11	Then, having gone beyond the northern side of the hall, without looking at him, he says, "Go without purpose with this one," and having dismissed him, he touches water and sprinkles the remaining pieces with water and puts them into the Ahavaniya fire.
13.13.12	The Pratiprasthātṛ offers the northern Rauhiṇa oblation as before.
13.13.13	"May I not be deprived of the night." The Adhvaryu should place the Vikaṅkatī kindling wood in the morning, saying, "May I not he deprived of the day." In the evening, he should say, "May I be not deprived of the night.
13.14.1	He offers the Agnihotra with the remnant by means of the Upayamana formula, "Agni is light, light is Agni, svāhā." In the evening, "The sun is light, light the sun, svāhā," in the morning. With the Vyāhṛti formulas or silently in both cases.
13.14.2	Having offered the remnant, the sacrificer himself eats the offered oblation directly, saying, "Honey oblation." The Hotṛ and others eat it by smelling.
13.14.3	The Adhvaryu, having sprinkled the Upavyāma in the heap of ashes, places it within the altar with its mouth towards the east.
13.14.4	Having placed therein a hundred Suvarṇa and Rajata coins, they sprinkle them with the Madanti and Hiranyavatī verses. Then, with the four verses beginning with "The pure ones, golden-coloured, six in number, the sacrificer and the others," they sprinkle them.
13.14.5	Having taken ghee in the ladle, having offered the expiations of Pravargya with the two Anuvākas, "to Praṇa svāhā, to Pūṣan svāhā", having poured out water from the Upayamana vessel, having placed the Gharmā vessel in it and having mixed it, having made it agreeable to Gharmā, he directs, "Recite".
13.14.6	"Having known that, he places the Upayamanī ladle to the right of the Āhavanīya fire, on a black antelope skin with the mouth towards the east, with the formula, "Svāhā to thee from the rays of the sun." In the morning, he places it with the mouth towards east, with the verse, "Svāhākṛti to thee from the stars." In the evening, with the mouth towards west.
13.14.7	Having recognized the cow, one should release the cow that yields hot milk, saying, "Give grass, O cow, that gives everything." At this time, they perform the Shanti rite with the last Anuvaka, saying, "May the wind blow for our welfare."
13.14.8	Thus, they perform the three-day, six-day, or twelve-day rites in the evening and morning, following the Pravargya and Upasads.
13.15.1	Having eaten the Pravargya oblation, one should not eat meat for a year or four months. One should not approach one's wife, should not drink in a clay vessel, and one's wife should not drink the leftovers of one's food.
13.15.2	This is indeed the Brahmanical text that says, "One's own brilliance diminishes."
13.15.3	He should not perform the Pravargya rite at the Agniṣṭoma. He should not perform it at the Ukthya. He should perform it at the Viśvajit and the Sarvapṛṣṭha. He should not perforin it at the Prāthamaya sacrifice. He should perform the Pravarg ya rite.
13.15.4	He should perform the Pravṛjya rite for a student of the Veda, for a bad brahmin, and for one desiring brahmic glory.
13.15.5	The sacrificer, about to consign the Pravargya vessel, gives a goat to the Agnidhra, a sheep to the Brahman, a cow to the Hotri, and a hundred measures of grain to the Adhvaryu.
13.15.6	Then having approached the eastern peace, having strewn grass in front of the Ahavaniya, he places the entire Pravargya vessel on the seat of the Samraḍ, the evening.
13.15.7	Then the Agnidhra, having brought the two Khara-carts to be used in the Pravargya and Udvatsa rites, places them northwards, the one with the ashes on it at the southern door, and the other at the northern door. Having brought them to the Marjalis, he places them there.
13.15.8	Having returned as he came, he sprinkles the eyes of his wife with the northern end of the garment.
13.15.9	The Pratiprasthātṛ, having melted the clarified butter over the Garhapatya fire, having purified it, having taken four spoonfuls in the Uduṃbara ladle, having taken three bundles of grass and a handful of grass, lights the Āhavanīya fire with one of them and holds it near the mouth.
13.15.10	The Adhvaryu offers the first oblation in that fire with the verse, "That heat of thine which is in heaven."
13.15.11	Having kindled another fire in the Āhavanīya, he offers the first oblation with the verse, "O Gharma, that which is in the sky," and the second oblation to the navel-burner with the verse, “O Gharma, what is on the earth." The third oblation to the knee-burner with the same verse.
13.15.12	Or, having discarded the handfuls, one offers three oblations in the Āhavaneya as per the prescribed place.
13.15.13	The Adhvaryu, having taken the Pravargya vessel through the door, goes out with the formula, "May the Anumati follow us today. May you follow us, O Anumati." The Adhvaryus go out through the eastern door with the two formulas.
13.15.14	The Pratiprasthātṛ leads the sacrificer's wife with a garment.
13.15.15	Having ascended the great altar, the Prastôtṛ instructs, "Sing the Sâman."
13.16.1	The sacrificer with his wife, all the priests chant the Sâman three times at the end.
13.16.2	It is known that every man meets his death.
13.16.3	"The first (verse) is recited, 'From the highest heaven', and the second is recited in the middle country, 'Thy death is the last'.
13.16.4	They cross towards the east.
13.16.5	"Thou art the supreme protector of Brahman." Having thus gone to the second step, they reach the place of the Uparava and perform the third Nidhana. "Thou art the Supreme Protector of the Prāṇa." Having thus gone for the third time,
13.16.6	having reached the place of Udvasana to the north of the Uttaravedi, having placed the Samrāḍāsandī, he instructs the Prastôtṛ to sing the Vārṣāhara Sâman and the Iṣṭahotra Sâman.
13.16.7	The Iṣṭahotra-priest takes up the Nidhana-cup as before, but not the Vārṣahāra-priest.
13.16.8	Taking up a pot of water, he sprinkles the entire altar with a continuous stream of water, saying, "You are charming."
13.16.9	Placing the pot down, he sprinkles three times, saying, "May there be peace."
13.16.10	"The navel of the four-cornered (altar) is the navel of truth," he touches the northern navel.
13.16.11	"The eternal life of the universe," he places the two Kharas on the northern side of the navel.
13.16.12	"Then, having washed his hands in the water in which the oblations have been offered, he places the gold on the skin of a black antelope spread out on the northern altar, and scatters over it the flour of barley mixed with clarified butter, the Muñja grass, and sand. Then he takes up the great hero, reciting the Pracaraṇīya hymn, "O god, may I be able to perform the Purāṇa rite."
13.16.13	"This is the milk of the earth," he fills it with curds mixed with honey.
13.16.14	So also the other two, the eastern and western, or the southern and northern.
13.16.15	The other ones silently.
13.16.16	It becomes like the orb of the sun.
13.16.17	Or else, "Thou art the milk of the earth," for the offering of clarified butter; "Thou art the light of the plants, the juice of the herbs," for honey; "We, the strong, lead thee, the strong," for curds. So also for the other two.
13.16.18	Or else, clarified butter in the first, honey in the second, and curds in the third.
13.16.19	This is your food, this is your excrement. He fills those which have holes with honey mixed with curds.
13.16.20	It is known as the non-emptying.
13.17.1	Or he may make it in the shape of a man.
13.17.2	One who desires to do that should do it before the carrying of the Pracaraṇīya.
13.17.3	That becomes the head.
13.17.4	Above that, he places the entire Veda, facing east.
13.17.5	That is the crest.
13.17.6	The two ears are on both sides of the head.
13.17.7	The Prokṣaṇī vessels are the mouth.
13.17.8	The two ladles are the nostrils.
13.17.9	The two golden pieces on both sides are the eyes.
13.17.10	The ladle for melted butter is the neck.
13.17.11	The two Dhṛṣṭīs are the joints.
13.17.12	The two sheaths are the shoulders.
13.17.13	The two arms are the two Rohini stars.
13.17.14	The back is the constellation of Prishthya.
13.17.15	The two Dhavitra stars are the two sides.
13.17.16	The third Dhavitra star is the chest.
13.17.17	The middle Upayamana is the belly.
13.17.18	The two Abhiti stars are the two hips.
13.17.19	The two Shankus are the two thighs.
13.17.20	The third in the middle is the penis.
13.17.21	The two Rohini and Kapala stars are the two heels.
13.17.22	In that (pit) he places everything made of rope. Those are the intestines.
13.17.23	He destroys all the flour of the goat's flesh. Those are the marrow.
13.17.24	Having released the Veda, he scatters it. Those are the sinews.
13.17.25	He covers with Avaka and grass. Those are the veins.
13.17.26	This is your food, this is your excrement. Having smeared it with curd mixed with honey, he puts it between the thighs. That is meat.
13.17.27	He sprinkles it all around with curd mixed with ghee. That is blood.
13.17.28	He anoints it with a black antelope skin with its neck towards the east and with its hair towards the north. That is skin and hair.
13.17.29	Having spread the royal seat, he places it above.
13.17.30	One becomes a king.
13.18.1	On the northern altar, they always recite the Kalpa.
13.18.2	One should consign the fire on the northern altar for one who desires brilliance. As stated in the Brāhmaṇa, one should do as one wishes.
13.18.3	The birds do not peck at the fire that is not consigned, because of the carrying of the fire.
13.18.4	Here some recite the sprinkling with water.
13.18.5	"He stands up to him, saying, 'You are Ranti, the divine Gandharva.'
13.18.6	The sacrificer says, 'The bull has roared.'
13.18.7	The Adhvaryu, having recited the formula, "This is thy divine heat," and having turned around to the right, having sprinkled the ashes in the fire-place, having looked back, and having returned, having stood facing the sun with the formula, "Thou art risen above the darkness," he offers on the Garhapatya with the two formulas, "Thou art the rising light" and "Thou art the bright one."
13.18.8	Some say, "One should stand facing."
13.18.9	"He stands by the Ahavaniya with the formula, "This is the one who is to be worshipped." He stands by the Garhapatya.
13.18.10	They perform the final peace with the formula, "May the wind blow for our welfare."
14.1.1	Now the rite of Upasads.
14.1.2	As in the Upamshu-yaja.
14.1.3	The sacrificial grass, enclosing sticks and the Prastara are common to the Atithya and the Upasads and the Agniṣṭoma.
14.1.4	The sacrificial grass and the enclosing sticks are spread out at the Upavasatha rite.
14.1.5	Having tied the sixteen-knotted wooden stick, the sacrificial grass, the ladle for Agnihotra, the Juhu, the Upabhṛt, the Dhruva, the Veda, the vessel for melted butter, having used the dvandva form, having ordered the sacrificer to be silent, having placed the Praṇītā vessels, having touched the vessels while remaining silent, having purified the Madantī vessels, having invited the Brahman, having sprinkled the vessels, having released speech, having poured the melted butter, having placed the wooden stick, he carries the Stambayajus on the Veda spread out.
14.1.6	Having taken up the northern enclosing stick, he makes the Madantīs take up the kindling woods and the ladle and the potsherd. Having instructed them to smear them with clarified butter, he says,
14.2.1	Having taken up the clarified butter that has been poured, having recited the Madantī verses, having sprinkled the Brahman, the kindling wood, and the altar, having poured down the remaining Madantī verses and having placed the Pavitra on the Prastara, having recited the Sūryas tvā verse, having placed the clarified butter and the kindling wood on the fire, having placed the Prastara of Aśvālā on the Prastāra, having placed the Dhruvā and the ladle on that sacrificial grass.
14.2.2	Having recited the mantra "These two are not true," and having recited the mantra "You are Vishnu, you are the abode of Vishnu, you are Prajapati," over the clarified butter, he divides the kindling wood into nine parts and adds it all.
14.2.3	Having offered the Agnihotra to the gods who have been arranged, one should not offer any other oblation before it.
14.2.4	He offers the oblation with the ladle.
14.2.5	At the places where they are rubbed, he offers the Pravaras, as at the Mahapitryajna.
14.2.6	Having taken eight spoonfuls in the Juhu and four in the Upasthala, he should offer them in the Juhu.
14.2.7	Some say that it should be done in the ghee vessel.
14.3.1	Having taken the Juhu and Upasthala from the Hotri, who knows the ghee-filled vessel, he should offer three times, moving to the right once, as in the Upamshuyaza.
14.3.2	He offers the first oblation to Agni on the northern side, the second to Soma on the southern side, and the third to Vishnu in the middle.
14.3.3	He offers the half of the ghee in the Juhu in the eastern half to Agni, the other half in the middle to Soma. Having brought that half from the Upamant to the Juhu, he offers the third oblation to Vishnu in the western half.
14.3.4	Having turned towards the north, having placed the two ladles in their places, having placed the Prastara, having taken it in the left hand, having offered with the Sruva from the vessel of clarified butter, he should offer the first Upaṣad oblation to the Āhavanīya with the verse, "O Agni, that form of yours which is not consumed," the second with the verse, "O Agni, that which is not consumed by the Rājas," and the third with the verse, "O Agni, that is not consumed by Hara."
14.3.5	Those who would fight should offer these oblations connected with the sacrifice. First, he should offer oblations with iron, then with silver, and finally with copper.
14.3.6	"The beginning of this is "Agni is the most powerful," and the end is "Nihnvana." This has been explained."
14.3.7	In the morning, they perform the Nihnvana ritual with the right arm stretched out, and in the afternoon with the left arm stretched out.
14.3.8	Agni-d, do thou proclaim the wives of the gods. O Subrahmanya, do thou invite the Subrahmanya. Thus he gives the order.
14.3.9	Sitting down to the rear of the Garhapatya, the Agnidhra proclaims the wives of the Gods, saying, "To the army of Indra."
14.3.10	Subrahmanya invites the Subrahmanya.
14.3.11	The sacrificer recites the formula, "Thou art the good Brahmanaspati" as before.
14.3.12	These rites are performed in the evening.
14.3.13	Thus the rites of Pravargya and Upasad are to be performed for three nights in the evening and morning.
14.3.14	The formulas which are to be recited in the morning should be recited in the evening and the formulas which are to recited in the evening should be recited in morning.
14.3.15	It has been said that there are three Upasads for the Sahna and twelve for the Aahina.
14.3.16	On the middle day, having fixed the peg in the three courses with the Prāgvaṃśa in front of the Pracaryā, and having cut it down, he measures the Vedi with a spade or an axe, except the bending down as in the Darsa.
14.4.1	The post which is in the west of the Veda is the middle one. From that, in the east, there are thirty-six posts. The eastern post is the one.
14.4.2	From the western post, there are fifteen posts in the south and fifteen in the north. Those two are the hips. From the eastern post, there are twelve posts in the south, and twelve in the north. They are the shoulders.
14.4.3	Having made the entire (ground) to be measured by the Akshnas, he measures the Veda in the direction of the Sakti, turning to the right, with the verse, "I measure thee, O Veda, with the Veda, with the verse," "I measure thee who art full of milk."
14.4.4	He makes the Prāg-graha in the middle.
14.4.5	"This is for him, with the Veda" and "I measure the Veda" are the two verses for touching and sweeping.
14.4.6	The eastern end of the Uttaravedi is the western end of the southern altar. The eastern end of this is the western end. The eastern end is the western end, and the western end is the eastern end. The eastern and western ends of the Uttaravedī are the eastern and western ends. The eastern end being the western end, the western end being the eastern end, the eastern end being the eastern and the western end being western, the eastern and western end of the Uttaravēdi are the eastern and the eastern end of the southern alter.
14.4.7	From the sixth step to the south, the seventh step is the place for the Uparava.
14.4.8	From that the Stambayajus is taken.
14.4.9	From the northern shoulder, twelve steps to the west, the place of the heap, he sits down with folded hands, saying, "Salutations to the sky."
14.4.10	The Stambayajus is explained in the folded hands.
14.4.11	That is the heap.
14.4.12	The sacrificial ground is to the north of that shoulder and twelve steps.
14.4.13	The men come here and make this sacrificial ground.
14.4.14	The digging is explained.
14.4.15	The young woman with four locks of hair, well-formed, resembling ghee, in the middle of the world,
14.4.16	On her are the two Suparnas settled, for them is the share of the gods. Having recited the Veda, he makes the northern altar covered by the northern altar, smaller in front, with ten steps.
14.4.17	Having covered it with branches of the Udumbara tree or with branches of the Śatāhvā tree, one should perform the Apārāṇika rites in the evening and the Prātaḥsāman rites in the morning.
14.4.18	One should give half of the Vrata or the entire Vrata.
14.4.19	Similarly, having combined the Apārāņika rites, one should perform Upasad if the Pravargya is performed earlier.
14.4.20	The Agniprāṇayana rite at the Pashubandha has been explained.
14.5.1	This is the same as the Sāumika Āhavanīya.
14.5.2	On the northern part of the altar with the Agni-mantra, he encloses the northern enclosure. The animals are not moved about until the covering of the altar.
14.5.3	The Pratiprasthātṛ removes the calves of the Payasyā and the Maitrāvaruṇa cows for the evening milking, and the calf of the Gharmādhughā for the Dadhikrāvan.
14.5.4	The wood for the Sutyā and the sacrificial grass for the altar are collected.
14.5.5-6	Having sprinkled the wood, the altar and the sacrificial grass three times each, he spreads the altar towards the east and the sacrificial grass towards the west. Having placed the wooden sword, the wooden ladle, the wooden spoon, the wooden tongs, the wooden ladle for clarified butter, the wooden ladle with a long handle, the wooden ladle used for pouring clarified butter, the two wooden ladles, the wooden ladle called "the one with a mouth", the wooden ladle called the "one with a mouth", and the wooden ladle called the "one with a nose", he places them in the middle of the altar. Having placed the wooden sword and the wooden ladle in the middle of the altar, he places the wooden spoon and the wooden tongs on the right side of the altar. He places the wooden ladle for pouring clarified butter and the wooden ladle with the long handle on the left side of the altar.
14.5.7	Thus they perform the rites for the future.
14.5.8	Of these two, the southern one is the younger, with the fruit-bearing tree removed, and the northern one.
14.5.9	He loosens the binding of the dice, which have become entangled, and again binds them securely.
14.5.10	He sprinkles the oblation-holder with "O Vishnu, may you be purified."
14.5.11	Having melted the clarified butter in the mouth of the cauldron and having taken four spoonfuls in the ladle, he offers with the Savitrī verse, "One yokes the mind..." on the northern altar.
14.5.12	Taking a portion of the third foot of the Devashruta verse, he anoints the southern axle of the southern Havirdhana cart with that ghee, with his right hand stretched out, turning clockwise three times.
14.5.13	Similarly, the northern one.
14.5.14	He anoints the foot with ghee.
14.5.15	The Adhvaryu, having made the Havirdhana-carriers move forward, instructs them to recite.
14.5.16	Having understood the three times recitation of the verse "We yoke you with the ancient Brahman," they should make the Havirdhana carriers move forward towards the east.
14.5.17	If there is the sound of the wheels, he mutters "May there be good speech."
14.5.18	When he steps on the altar in the Havirdhana shed, then having placed gold within the altar on the northern side of the southern Havirdhana shed and having spread it, he offers with the verse, "Vishnu has stepped forth."
14.5.19	In this way, the Pratiprasthātṛ offers the cow facing towards the north and having a calf.
14.5.20	The Veda, in the second half of the third section, removes the fear of the unborn. The Brahman or the Adhvaryu removes the dust or clods outside the altar with his foot.
14.6.1	Having placed it on the Havirdhana cart standing beyond the Ahavaniya fire in three stages, he recites, "May you enjoy here."
14.6.2	The distance between these two is as much as is required.
14.6.3	"They support the two at the neck, saying, "Thou art the Vishnu-weapon; Vishnu supports thee."
14.6.4	"He strikes the southern sacrificial post with the verse, "O Vishnu, of the heaven," and the northern one silently.
14.6.5	"With the verse, "Who is the protector of Vishnu?" he strikes the northern one.
14.6.6	"Thou art the firm of Vishnu." With the Spandyā (a kind of grass) they bind them together, saying, "Thou art the firmly of Vishnu." They make a knot.
14.6.7	Having bound them together, they throw up the upper ends of the grass, and hold them above.
14.6.8	Having measured out a span towards the east of the southern Havirdhāna, he places three posts with their tops towards the east and their ears towards the north.
14.6.9	The Pratiprasthātṛ does the same with the northern Havirdhāna.
14.6.10	They place six more posts in the same way.
14.6.11	Two bamboo poles are placed towards the east.
14.6.12-15	"Thou art the royal banner of Vishnu," thus he binds the royal banner in front. So also on all sides. "Thou art the back of Vishnu," thus having placed the middle roof, nine cubits in length and three cubits in width, towards the east or north, he says, "Thou art the garment of Vishnu," and then the roofs on all sides. Then he says, "O thou who art worshipped by the Givers," and covers it on all sides.
14.6.16	Having placed the two door-posts on the ground, they should make the door on the eastern side first and then on the western side.
14.6.17	Having bound the door-posts with darbha grass, they should say, "You are the thread of Vishnu."
14.6.18	Having made knots, they should say "You are the firm of Vishnu."
14.6.19	Those two are well protected.
14.6.20	In the same way, the other door-posts.
14.6.21	Having touched them, they should say: "This is the Vaishnava (post). For Vishnu." The eastern side is raised and the western side is lowered.
14.7.1	Then, with the verse "That is Vishnu," they exit through the eastern gate.
14.7.2	Or through another gate dedicated to Vishnu.
14.7.3	The right eye is said to be the ritual of Uparava.
14.7.4	Having taken the spade with the formula, "For the god thee", having recited the formula, "Thou art the Avīra", having sprinkled it four times with the formula, "May the eyes be sprinkled", having drawn lines of the size of a span, having drawn lines in the middle of the span, having drawn three lines around with the formula, “For the destruction of Rakshas, for the destruction of Valgas”, having dug lines of the size ofthe arm below, having joined them together above, he places the spade with the verse, "Thou art great.
14.7.5	Having taken up the dung of these animals, he makes a mound to the east of the southern axle. With that he makes a mound in the shape of a square, sufficient for the Soma-cups.
14.7.6	He makes a mound in front.
14.7.7	"Having dug again with the formula, "I dig out the Vaisnava demons, the destroyers of demons," having taken up the arm in the southernmost of the two pits with the formula, "Thou art Viraj, the destroyer of enemies," taking up the dust with the formula, "I am removing this demon," and placing it in the pit with the formula, “He who is our equal, he who is not equal, he who approaches us with enmity," having removed the dust, he takes it away with the formula,"The demon has been removed." Having taken it away, he places it with the Gayatri metre with the formula, ","The demon has thus been removed." He places the dust at the feet of the sacrificer with the formula, 
14.7.8	"Thou art the overlord, O brother's foe." Having drawn the right arm of the opponent towards himself, he takes it, binds it, and carries it away as before.
14.7.9	"Having been strengthened by the Tristubh metre, I am the Vala." He thus scatters (the grass).
14.7.10	"Thou art the lord of the self, O foe of the enemy." Having drawn the left arm of the opponent to himself, he takes, binds, and carries it as before.
14.8.5	The sacrificer is on the south-east, the Adhvaryu on the north-west. Having touched them with the Yajus, they touch them with the verse, "These are the life-giving ones." They touch them with their arms below.
14.8.6	The Adhvaryu asks the sacrificer, "What is this?"
14.8.7	He replies, "Good."
14.8.8	The Adhvaryu says, "That for both of us."
14.8.9	The sacrificer stands to the south, the Adhvaryu to the north. Having touched, they touch again.
14.8.10	What is this? The sacrificer asks the Adhvaryus.
14.8.11	He replies, "Good."
14.8.12	The sacrificer says, "That is mine."
14.8.13	The Adhvaryu sprinkles the sacrificial grass as it is laid down, with the formula, "I sprinkle the Vaisnava (grass) for the destruction of Rakshas and Valagas." He sprinkles it three times with barley-grains.
14.8.14	With the northern formulas, he sprinkles, lays down, scatters, covers, and offers oblations with the spoon, after having concealed the gold.
14.9.1	If the Adhiṣavaṇa fruit is not attached, he should attach it to the long Soma-stalk, either of Udumbara, Palāśa or Kārṣmarya wood, silently sprinkling it. He places the Rakṣohaṇa and Valagahana twigs, saying, "This is Vaishnavī." With these, he also places the Uparava twigs.
14.9.2	Two on the right, two in between.
14.9.3	He strikes the sparks around.
14.9.4	"The two destroyers of Rakshas and Valagas, I spread (the grass) for Vishnu." He spreads the grass in a clockwise direction.
14.9.5	"The two destroyers of Rākshasas and Valagas I strew with grass for Vishnu." He strews with grass.
14.9.6	"The destroyers of Rākasas and Valagas for Vishnu." He touches or recites with this.
14.9.7	The red ox is placed on the skin of the Adhiṣavaṇasava, as if it were being sprinkled. Having sprinkled silently, he places the sacrificial post on the two planks, saying, "The sacrifice stands firm." He spreads the grass with the tips towards the east and the tips downwards.
14.9.8	Five furrows are made in it, one in each direction and one in the middle. The middle one is large. He places them facing each other.
14.9.9	The middle one is large.
14.9.10	"I sprinkle you, the destroyers of Rakshas, the destroyers of Valas, the Vaishvanaras." He sprinkles them.
14.10.1	Outside the rubbish-heap, six steps, outside the half, outside the altar, half inside the altar, having four pillars, six steps all round, with the southern door, with the eastern beam, enclosed, he makes the Agnidhra-shed.
14.10.2	"Thou art the universal (offering). For the universal gods thee." He touches it with the formula.
14.10.3	The Sadas should be made to extend from the eastern end of the Prāgvāṭa to the western end of the Aparavāṭa, or to an unlimited distance. It should be nine cubits wide and eighteen cubits long, with the eastern end towards the north and the western end towards the south. It should be made to slope towards the east, and should be made to be lower than the Adhvaryu, the Prasarpakas and the Dhiṣṇyas.
14.10.4	In the middle of that, having gone to the south, having placed the post, which is of the height of the sacrificer, which is well-shaped, which is washed like the sacrificial post, which is made of Udumbara wood, with its top towards the east, having tied it in the pit, having sprinkled it with the formula, "For thee, O heaven," he sprinkles it towards the east.
14.10.5	"May the worlds be purified. Thou art barley. Thou art the abode of the manes." The bringing of water into the pit and other rites have been mentioned.
14.10.6-7	"He raises the Udumbara post with the Udgâtri priest, with the formula, "Thou art raised to heaven." "He makes it touch the sky." "May the Maruts, the sky-wanderers, fix thee." "He fixes it in the hole as the post and the Sadas and the Havirdhâna are of the same appearance.
14.11.1	The verses beginning with "O Brahman, thou art Brahman, thou art the Brahman, thou art firm, thou art the firm one, thou art the earth" are recited while the Uddumbara pot is being filled.
14.11.2	He offers with the ladle, placing gold on the Visakha pot and reciting, "O heaven and earth, be filled with ghee."
14.11.3	He pours down to the bottom.
14.11.4	When he reaches the ground, he should say "Svaha".
14.11.5	Having wiped it all around, he places the Udumbara (post) at the head of the Sadas. Having placed the posts of the Havirdhana shed in a pit, having placed the posts of Udumbara (tree) at the head, having placed the Indra's post at the head, he places the three posts towards the north, having placed the three posts towards south, having placed the shade of the Visvajan (post) towards the north, he places the posts of the Udumbara tree at the head.
14.11.6	He makes the southern ones to be the northern ones.
14.11.7	The rites beginning with the eleven-layered (altar) are as prescribed by the Brahmanas.
14.11.8	Having surrounded the Havirdhana, having made the door, having surrounded (the altar) with the formula, "Thou art the thread of Indra," having tied the knots with the formula, “Thou art the firm one of Indra,” he makes them secure.
14.11.9	Having touched the altar with the formula, "Thou art of Indra, for Indra thee."
14.11.10	Before Soma is placed, the Adhvaryu, having entered through the eastern door, should not go beyond the Havirdhana.
14.11.11	If he goes beyond, he should recite, "This is Vishnu's stride."
14.11.12	Having entered through the western door, he should not go beyond towards the east.
14.12.1	If he does go beyond, he should say, "Rising with strength."
14.12.2	He should not go beyond in the opposite direction between the Sadas and Havirdhana.
14.12.3	He should not step over the Dhishnyas and the Hotar.
14.12.4	If he does step over, he should recite the Aindra verse.
14.12.5	It has been said that the Adhvaryu should not sing.
14.12.6	Here is the procedure for the Uparava.
14.12.7	Having taken up the soil from the Catvāla with the wooden sword, he lays down the Dhishnyias in the form of a square or a circle.
14.12.8	In the Agni-dhra house, you are the lord; in the Raudra array, you are the leader. Protect me, O Agni, increase me, do not injure me. He pours down the Agni-dhrīya (grasses) as one would move towards the north within the altar.
14.12.9	In the assembly hall, facing the six directions, at the door of the assembly hall, on the eastern side of the sacrificial grass, he recites, "You are the fire, the bearer of oblations, with Rudra's boat." This is for the Hotṛ.
14.12.10	"You are the guardian, the intelligent one, with Rudra." This is for Maitrāvaruṇa, on the southern side of the Hotṛ, on the eastern part of the Udumbara (tree).
14.12.11	With the verse, "Thou art the Tutha, the knower of all, with Rudra, thou art the Oshig, the poet, with Rudra; thou art the Anghari, the Bambhari, with Rudra. Thou art the Avasyu, the Duvasvan, with Rudra." With these verses he offers the pot-full of cooked rice to the Brahman-priest, the Potri-priest, the Nestr-priest and the Shavaka-priest.
14.12.12	He sprinkles it with the formula, "Thou art purified; thou art Marjalyi; thou art Rudra." Outside the Sadas, at the southern end of the Vedi, he places the Marjalyi grass facing the south, in accordance with the Agni-dhri. So that the moving about may be towards the south within the Vedi.
14.13.1	The sacrificer worships the Dhishnyas with the formulas as prescribed.
14.13.2	"He recites the formula, 'O lord of paths, salutations to thee. Do not injure me.' approaching each one.
14.13.3	'Thou art the sovereign, thou art the fire, with Rudra.' He says this to the Havirdhana.
14.13.4	'Thou are the assembly, thou art Pavamana, with Rudra,' to the place of the Bahispavamana.
14.13.5	'Thou, art the shining, thou art the bright, with Rudra' to the place of Cātvāla.
14.13.6	"You are not mixed with the oblation-eater, with Rudra." (Thus) the Shamitra.
14.13.7	"You are gathered, with all burdens, with Rudra," (thus) the heap of ashes.
14.13.8	"You have truth and light, with gold, with Rudra" (thus) the Udumbara.
14.13.9	"You art the light of Brahman, with gold, having light, with Rudra". (Thus) the Brahman-house.
14.13.10	You are a member of the Raudra sacrifice. Thus one becomes a member.
14.13.11	You are the goat with one foot of the Raudra. Thus one becomes the doorkeeper.
14.13.12	You are a serpent, the supporter of the Raudra, thus one becomes the Prajha-offerer.
14.13.13	You are food, the carrier of food, of the Raudra; thus one becomes the Anvähäryapacana.
14.13.14	Here one spreads the altar.
14.13.15	He does not spread the Dhishnyas, the Uparavas, the Khara and the Uttaravedi.
14.14.1	The animal to be offered to Agni-Soma is to be offered to the initiated.
14.14.2	Its rite is like that of the animal sacrifice in the Nirudha sacrifice.
14.14.3	There is no offering of the six-fold Hotr in the rites of the Angas.
14.14.4	Silently he binds the Atithya grass and the Paridhis to the kindling wood.
14.14.5	Having performed the rites of spreading the altar, covering it, washing the hands, and spreading the grass, and having used the wooden vessels such as the ladle, etc., and the Pracaraṇī ladle, having taken the clarified butter, and having taken the wooden sacrificial substances such as the ladle and others from the Garhapatya fire using the Pracaraṇi ladle, he takes the wooden sacrificial substances from the Garhapathya fire using the wooden ladle. The Neṣṭṛ priest leads the wife to the altar with the verse, "May the wife of Brahman come."
14.14.6	Then the wife, reciting the verse "I am not desirous of anything else," sits down in front of the house and recites the verse "May we be blessed with good offspring."
14.14.7	The Brahman instructs the king to bow down to the king.
14.14.8	He orders, "Call those who have taken the vow of fasting."
14.14.9	The ministers of the sacrificer are summoned.
14.14.10	The sacrificer follows the Adhvaryu, the wife follows the sacrificer, the ministers follow the wife.
14.14.11	Having covered them with a garment, having bound gold in ten places, having poured clarified butter, having bound the end of the ladle to the end of the handle, having recited the two verses, "O Soma, thou art the nourisher of the ten, thou art the consumer of the ten," he offers at the dismissal of the Pracaraṇīya ladle at the door of the hall.
14.14.12	The half of the clarified butter is specified.
14.15.1	Taking the Soma, the Vāyavya offerings, the Prasitra-shaped, the large Dronakalaśa, the cups, the Dhīmabari, and the clarified butter, they take up what is prescribed here.
14.15.2	They bring in the animal for Agni-Soma.
14.15.3	Having kindled the fire to be taken out in the Śālāmukhi rite, having deposited the fire to be carried out in the Upāmantrīka rite, having taken up the fire to be brought out in the Upāmantrika rite, having placed it in the Upāmantrika rite, having taken it up and placed it in the Upayamani rite, having taken the fire to be placed in the Upayamani rite, having placed the fire to be deposited in the Upayamanī rite, having taken out the fire to be put in the Upayamananī rite, having placed in the Upavyāmanī rite, having deposited in the Upaviśāmanī rite,
14.15.4	"O Agni, thou art the god of the sacrifice, the father of the sacrifice." When this is recited three times, those who go forward with Agni at their head go silently, or those who go forward, with Soma at their head.
14.15.5	They follow as they are told.
14.15.6	They direct the cattle to follow, they follow the Agni-Soma (sacrifice), the advisers follow.
14.15.7	Having installed the fire in the Agnidhra chamber, he offers the remnant of clarified butter with the verse, "O Agni, lead us." Having offered the remnant of clarified butte in the fire, he again offers the remnant of clarifed butter.
14.15.8	The Adhvaryu places the Vayu-bricks in the trough, and the Adhvaryu puts the pot filled with water and the cups for Soma-juice in the Agnidhr chamber.
14.15.9	Having gone around along the northern side of the Agnidhra-chamber, they bring the sacrificial grass, sacrificial posts, sacrificial grass, sacrificial grass, clarified butter etc.
14.15.10	Having reached the northern altar, he offers the entire remaining clarified butter on the northern altar, reciting, "O Vishnu, extend your mighty stride."
14.16.1	Having offered, the ministers circumambulate and return as they came.
14.16.2	The priest, knowing the path of Soma, enters the sacrificial hall through the eastern door and leads the king to the sacrificial hall, reciting the verse, "Soma moves, knowing the path."
14.16.3	The king who has lost his glory goes out through the eastern door.
14.16.4	The Adhvaryu and the sacrificer enter by the eastern door, saying, "O heaven, O earth, O atmosphere."
14.16.5	The covering of black antelope skin is placed on the seat of the southern Havirdhāna, and the king is seated on it. This has been mentioned.
14.16.6	The sacrificer hands over the king to the deities, saying, "This is your divine Savitr, Soma."
14.16.7-8	Having recited this, "Thou art Soma," and having circumambulated clockwise, reciting, "I am a human being among humans," he makes an offering towards the east, saying, "Salutations to the gods." "Svāhā to the gods," he offers towards the east. "Svadhā to the ancestors," he offers towards south.
14.16.9	"This I have released from Varuna's noose," having come out through the eastern door, "I seek the light," he looks at the entire sacrifice. "The fire of Vaisvānara," he says, looking at the Āhavanīya.
14.16.10	Here the intermediate consecration is released.
14.16.11	"O Agni, lord of vows, you are the lord of vows." Having approached the Ahavaniya fire, having placed the kindling wood with the same (fire), he releases the girdle, and makes the fist loose.
14.17.1	"Svāhā to the sacrifice, mentally, verbally, from heaven and earth, svāhā to the sky, svāhā from the wind, svāhā." Having released the sacrifice, he releases speech and wind, saying, "Svāhā."
14.17.2	Having completed the milk vow, he dedicates the remaining oblations to the Vratas.
14.17.3	The Adhvaryu, having placed the Pasukāni to the north of the Ahavaniya as before, consecrates them as in the Darsa, recites the Abhimantran, and pours the clarified butter as in the Pasu. The Yūpa-samanā and other rites are well-known. The mantra is "I offer you to Agni-Soma, what is agreeable."
14.17.4	Having called the Hotṛ, the Pratiprasthātṛ, the Agnīdhra, the Adhvaryu, the Prati-sthātṛ, the Maitrāvaruṇa, the Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin, the Potr, the Neṣṭṛ, and the sacrificer, the Adhvaryu recites the names of these Sāumanas priests. Having spread grass on the altar, he takes up the sacrificial grass and the sacrificial implements. The Agnīdhra and others are called by their names in a low voice, while the Adhvaryus are called in a loud voice.
14.17.5	May I be acceptable to speech, by the verse, by the praise. With two (verses) he offers what is offered.
14.17.6	After the Prajās, etc., have been offered, having sprinkled, he instructs, "O Subrahmanya, call the father-son Subrahmanya."
14.17.7	From the father-son onwards, it is Subrahmanya.
14.17.8	The Pasupurodāsa is of the same deity as the animal.
14.18.1	In the afternoon, having gone out by the ford between the mound and the Cātvāla, to the place where the waters flow, standing facing them, he takes the Vasatīvarī waters, saying, "These waters are full of oblations."
14.18.2	It has been said that one should not go beyond the waters.
14.18.3	If there is no one who has performed many sacrifices, then one should take from the house of a brahmin who has performed many sacrificial rites.
14.18.4	If there is no one with many sacrifices, then carrying the fire above and placing gold in the flowing waters, having given a boon, one takes from the house of those who are pure.
14.18.5	Having returned in the same manner, he places the Vāsativarī waters on the altar, with the verse, "May the auspicious ones bestow auspiciousness on me." The sacrificer mutters this while placing the Vāsativari waters.
14.18.6	From the east onwards, the Pasupurodāsa is offered till the end of the Eḍa. After sunset, the rites proceed with the Samvāda (reciprocal recitation).
14.18.7	The animal sacrifice to Agni-Soma concludes with the Patnīsaṃyājas.
14.19.1	The Adhvaryu, while moving around the Vasatīvarī waters at night, should not step out in front (of the fire). Having said, "May I not have hurt you," he moves around them without making any sound.
14.19.2	The sacrificer and his wife sit within the altar.
14.19.3	Having taken the pot, he places it on his left shoulder, and having gone around by the right side, he comes out by the southern door, and having gone by the southern side of the Sadas and the Marjalyan, he places it in the southern half of the northern altar-platform, saying, "This is the share of Indra and Agni."
14.19.4	The sacrificer has been mentioned.
14.19.5	Taking the pot, he places it on his right shoulder, and returns as before. Having gone out by the northern door, and having gone to the northern side of the altar, and having gone around the southern side of the Āgnīdhra mound, he places it in the portion of Mitra-Varuṇa on the northern side of northern altar-line, with the formula, "Thou art placed in the portion of Mitrā-Varuṇa."
14.20.1	Having taken the pot, he places it on his left shoulder, and having returned as before, he places it near the Agni-dhriya with the verse, "You are the share of all the gods."
14.20.2	He recites the verse, "Awake at the sacrifice," while placing the Vasativari vessels.
14.20.3	He instructs with the verse, "O Subrahmanya, I invite you to the Subrahmanya ceremony."
14.20.4	The father-son relationship is the most sacred. The priest performs the evening milking for the milk offering to Subrahmanya.
14.20.5-6	The one that is for the sacrificer, that he gives to the one who is observing the vow. The one that is of the wife, that he gives for the curds. The one that belongs to the Hotṛ, that he gives away for the hotṛ-oblation. The one that has been heated, that he gives as the hotṛ-offering. The one that was not heated, that he should give to the Maitrāvaruṇa. The one that had been heated, that should be given to the one who offers the hotṛ- oblation. The Adhvaryu instructs, "Give the curds." The Agnīdhra, having adorned the priests, spends the night with them.
14.20.7	The wife of the eastern house is awake, the sacrificer is awake in the Havirdhāna house, protecting the king.
14.20.8	They should wake up at midnight, as they did before, from the report of the omens. The morning recitation takes place.
