1.1.1	Then the Brahman, knowing the rites of the canopy, sits properly to the right, with restraint of speech.
1.1.2	He recites the prescribed offerings.
1.1.3	Bhaga-li says that the mantras should be recited according to the signs. Yuva Kausika says, "These are not yours, O Prajapati." Matha-ra says, "According to the deity." The teachers say, "Om, Bhu, Bhuva, Sva, Janat, Om."
1.1.4	Some people pour the principal oblations in the oblations arranged in the eastern direction.
1.1.5	He recites the Yajamana, who is well-versed in the Vedas of Bhrigu and Angiras.
1.1.6	Agni is the Ahavaniya.
1.1.7	Let the Brahmanas move around for the sake of the Yajamanas.
1.1.8	The oblations to the deities and the Dakshina are from the Yajur Veda.
1.1.9	The Adhvaryu, holding the wooden sword in his hand, stands facing south, to the north of the Āgnīdhra.
1.1.10	"Let it be as one's own voice." This is the response.
1.1.11	The sacrificer who is going to observe fast on the day before the new moon eats his meal in the afternoon.
1.1.12	He places the kindling woods on the Āhavaniya, Gārhapatya and Dakṣiṇāgni with the verse, "O Agni, may I have lustre."
1.1.13	He undertakes the vow with the verse, "Thou art the lord of vows, I undertake the vow." He fasts and so on.
1.1.14	With the four verses, "O Agni," he takes up the deities. The verse beginning with "O Sinīvālī" is as prescribed in the mantra.
1.1.15	"Today, O Agni, do thou be with us." At the full moon.
1.1.16	"Having offered the Agnihotra in the morning, one should recite, 'The goddess Kuhu, the gods have praised thee.' At the new moon, 'I, Raka, am full, afterwards.' At the full moon."
1.1.17	Then he chooses the Brahman, saying, "O Lord of the Earth, O Lord of the World, O Lord of all, O Lord of Great Being, I choose you as Brahman."
1.1.18	"I am the lord of the earth, I am the lord of all, I am the master of the great being, I tell that to the mind. Mind to speech, speech to the Gāyatrī, the Gāyatrī to the Uṣṇīṣa, the Uṣṇigh to the Anushtubh, the Anushtubha to the Brihatī, the Brihatī to the Paṅkti, the Paṅkti to the Tristubh, the Tristubh to the Jagatī, the Jagatī to Prajāpati, Prajāpati to the All-gods, Om Bhūr Bhuvaḥ Svaḥ Janad Om. And the chariot that cannot be conquered."
1.1.19	Having sipped water with the formulas beginning with "Jīvābhiḥ" and ending with "Prapa-dya".
1.1.20	Having gone to the south of the fire, having looked at the fire, having said "Dai-dhishavyah" and ending with the sight of the heaven and earth.
1.2.1	Where he knows, O Brahman, I am going to offer water, there offer the sacrifice, and may the deities prosper. May the sacrificer be in the world of heaven, on the back of the sky, where is the world of the seven sages and the well-done. There place this sacrifice and the sacrificer. Om, earth, atmosphere, heaven, Janat, Om, offer. Thus, in accordance with the sound, he permits. In all cases, the word 'permit' is at the beginning and end.
1.2.2	He restrains his speech until the offering of oblations and the scraping (of the Soma).
1.2.3	If he speaks, he should recite the Vaisnawi mantra.
1.2.4	The Agnidhra places the Veda in the place of the heap after scraping the Anvahaarya, and then places it in the place of a heap. When the second portion of the Stambayajus is thrown, he supports it with the words, "May it not fall down to heaven."
1.2.5	"O Brihaspati, do thou take hold of the altar." So he says when the altar is being taken hold of.
1.2.6	"May we be happy and prosperous." So he says to the wife when she is being harnessed.
1.2.7	"O Agni, may thy ghee be poured." So he says at the pouring of ghee. "Do thou strew the altar." So when the altar is strewn.
1.2.8	"On which the trees are." So he says, when the enclosing sticks are being placed.
1.2.9	"Thou art the heap of the Rsis," he says, taking up the Prastara.
1.2.10	Having placed the oblations, he offers the oblations mentioned before in the case of exorcisms and the oblations at the end of the rite in the case of sorcery.
1.2.11	"O Agni, the mind of Manu," he recites while reciting the Samidheni verses.
1.2.12	"O Prajapati, none other than you," he says while offering the Prajapati-oblation.
1.2.13	The Āgnīdhra, having been sent, having placed the wooden sword between the enclosing sticks and the fire, three times each, he smears the enclosing sticks, the middle one, the southern and the northern ones, with the formula, "O Agni, the winner of the race, I am rubbing you who are going to win the race, the winner of race." Having placed the fire facing east, he says, "O Agni the winner of the prize, I am rubbing thee who art going to win the prize, I win the prize."
1.2.14	"Indra-me" is the Indra-offering.
1.2.15	One should recite "Devas, Pitrs" three times when the Pravara is being offered.
1.2.16	"Summer, winter" are the Prajaas.
1.2.17	"I was born" are the Ajyabhaga offerings.
1.3.1	"By whom to Indra" is the Agniya offering.
1.3.2	"My speech, my utterance" is the Indra Agni offering.
1.3.3	The Sāṁnāyya is offered to Indra, or to Mahendra, or to Indra-Mahendra, with the formulas, "Thou art Indra, thou art Mahendra."
1.3.4	At the Full Moon, the offerings to Agni and Soma are made, and the Antaropaṁshu offering to Agni-Soma. At the New Moon, the offerings are made to Agni and Soma, and the Antaropāṁshu offering to Indra-Agni, with the formula, "To Indra-Agni."
1.3.5	The Sauvitrakṛt offering is made with the formula, “To the gods.”
1.3.6	The Adhvaryu, having offered the Iṣṭi and Svishṭi offerings, restrains speech until the Anuyājas.
1.3.7	The Prasitrā is sprinkled with barley-grains below or above, and is taken away by the Adhvaryu with its tip towards him.
1.3.8	He waits for it with the words, "I wait for thee with the eye of the sun."
1.3.9	"He receives it with the formula, "At the impulse of the divine Savitr, with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of Pūṣan, I receive thee with the permission (of the owner).
1.3.10	Having arranged the grass, he places the staff on the mound with the formula, "I place thee in the navel of the earth."
1.3.11	With the formula, "May my self be in thy mouth, may thy self be in my self. Do not injure me. Svāhā." He eats with the thumb and the ring finger, without touching the teeth.
1.3.12	He concludes the eating with the formula, "This is well-offered oblation in the Agni named Nṛman, who has entered the Brahmanas. May it not injure me in the highest heaven."
1.3.13	Having sprinkled with water from Māṭalī, he touches the vital airs.
1.3.14	"The speech is in the nose, the vital air is in the eyes, the hearing is in the ears, the strength is in the arms, the energy is in the thighs, the speed is in the shanks, the support is in the feet, may all my limbs be without disease. May my body be strong." He touches the navel.
1.3.15	The Iḍā is invoked with the formula, "Do thou be for us." The Iḍā, being invoked, is praised.
1.3.16	The Agnīdhra eats six mouthfuls of the oblation with the formula, “I eat thee with the permission of the earth, with the permission of heaven.”
1.3.17	They eat the portion of Iḍā with the formula, "The god has approached thee."
1.3.18	They sprinkle themselves with the three formulas, "The divine waters," "The divine waters."
1.3.19	The sacrificer recites the Anvāhārya-verse within the altar.
1.3.20	May this be the share of Prajapati, nourishing, full of sap, inexhaustible, for the inexhaustible. May it not be lost to me, here and in the other world. Protect my Prāṇa and Apāna, protect my Samāna and Vyāna, protect my Udāna and Rūpa, give me strength, give me nourishment. May it not fail me when I give. May I prosper with you, O Prajapati, in the presence of the sacrificer. Having recited this, he gives the Dakṣiṇā to the priests.
1.3.21	Having taken it, he says, "Who is this?"
1.3.22	The Agnidhra is sent forth.
1.4.1	Having placed the kindling-wood with the verse, "Thou art the kindler," he smears the enclosing sticks one by one with the verse, "O Agni, knowing the strength, I smear thee, the winner of strength, the giver of strength."
1.4.2	I anoint Agni, the leader, the steed, the conqueror, the steed, not conquered.
1.4.3	May the mind-light enjoy the ghee, may Brihaspati spread this uninjured sacrifice. May all the gods here accept it and be pleased. Thus one offers the Anuyājas.
1.4.4	Those gods who are in heaven. Thus one offers Anuvṣṭakāra.
1.4.5	When the two ladles are being removed, he makes the Anumantrī recite, "Do thou remove the lusts."
1.4.6	When the Prastara is being taken away, he makes him recite, "The Barhis is sprinkled."
1.4.7	When the Sansrava is being taken away.
1.4.8	When the Patnisaṃyājas are being offered, he makes him say, "The Gods have not heated themselves; the wives of the Gods have been well-cared for."
1.4.9	When the Dakṣiṇāgnihotrās are being offered, the third (Anumantrī) makes him recite, "The mortar and pestle."
1.4.10	The Agnidhra throws the Sammārga into the fire with the verse, "He who is in the fire."
1.4.11	He follows the wife being released with the yoke with the verse, “I release you from your bondage. I release you for good.”
1.4.12	He releases the Veda with the verse, "May there be welfare."
1.4.13	With the six verses beginning with "O Agni, do thou bring" he offers the settled oblations. The last one is "O Mind-lord".
1.4.14	He instructs with the verse "The flowing streams are being released".
1.4.15	He instructs the sacrificer with the verse "Those who have the Prayājas".
1.4.16	Having eaten the portion called "food", O god Savitar, he says this to you. Do thou bestow it. Do thou bestow the sacrifice. Brihaspati is the Brahman. Do thou protect the sacrifice. Do thou protect him who is the lord of the sacrifice. Do you protect me. Do thou protect me in my duties."
1.4.17	The sacrificer anoints his mouth with water in a vessel, with the formula, "May we be united with splendour."
1.4.18	Having gone around the Garhapatya fire by the right, he stands facing the fire, reciting the Viṣṇukramakas.
1.4.19	He stands facing the Garhapaty fire, reciting, "O Agni, the householder."
1.4.20	Having gone around the Ahavanīya fire, reciting, “In whose strength,” he recites, “You are Ojas.”
1.4.21	Having stood facing the fire with two verses, he eats his share, reciting, "This is our Agni."
1.4.22	The Vratas are the lords of the Vratas. Thus he places the Vratavisarjani (the dismissal of the Vrata).
1.4.23	If this is omitted, there is failure. The two verses say: The Pravargya, the Yajamana rites, and the Mantras for the wife, these three are the limbs in the sacrifice, and if omitted, there is a failure. One attains prosperity through the Pravargya, blessings through the Yajamāna rites, offspring and longevity through the Mantras for wife. Therefore, one succeeds through them alone.
1.4.24	Darsha-Paurnamasa, Trimsat, Varna, Panchdasa, Dakshayanya-yajna.
1.4.25	On the full moon day, the full moon sacrifice is performed, and on the next day, the new moon sacrifice is performed.
1.4.26	Or for a year.
1.4.27	The Istis beginning with Saakam Prasthaya have been explained.
2.1.1	Now, the Agni-adhyeya.
2.1.2	The three seasons, spring, summer and rainy season, have been mentioned as the seasons for the Brāhmaṇa, the Kṣatriya and the Vaiśya respectively.
2.1.3	If one were to perform the rite at any time, one should not transgress the faith.
2.1.4	The rite of Brahmaudana has been mentioned.
2.1.5	The officiating priests are invited.
2.1.6	One should perform the rite after reciting the mantra.
2.1.7	The one who has ascended the Ashvattha tree, the embryo of the Shami, with your consent, I bring him to you with the Brahman and the sacrificial banners. O Jātavedas, whatever seed of the universe you sprinkle here, and what will be born from that Tapas, the Agni from the Ashvattha, the embryo of Shami, generating the one who is born of Maya, the mantra says this. The one who is taking the kindling woods or is about to install them, he recites this.
2.1.8	The one who is restrained in speech should spend the night awake or the other night.
2.1.9	One should awaken the sleeping one with the words "Brihaspati, Savita."
2.1.10	In the morning he performs the Sāntyuka rite with the Atharvaṇa verses beginning with Citti, with the verses of Kapurvi, Viparvarī, Audakā, Vrkka, Nāḍa, and Nirdaha, with the verses belonging to the Angirasas, with the verses beginning with Cātanai, with the verses addressed to the mothers, with the verses pertaining to Vastospati, and with the verses pertaining
2.1.11	He who bathes and sprinkles the horse at the Agni-place, pacifies it before sunrise or after sunrise.
2.1.12	From "The shape of a lump of clay" to "the worship of the fire".
2.1.13	The teachers recite the verses beginning with "What angered you" up to the description of the characteristics of the Ahavaniya and Dakshina fires.
2.1.14	Thou art the purifier, thou art the bearer of all burdens. Atharvan first churned thee out, Agni, from the lotus, Agni, Atharvan churned thee out from the head of all beings. The sage Dadhyan, son of Atharvan, worshipped thee, the slayer of Vritra, the destroyer of cities. The bull Pathya worshipped thee, the destroyer of Dasyus, the winner of wealth in battle, in battle. Thus he praises thee while being churned.
2.1.15-18	Born, well-born, born of knowledge. Having disappeared in the form of birth, one should offer oblations with the breath of the nose or the mouth, reciting, "May I be at the forefront." Placing the horse's foot in the characteristic, one recites, "For the sacrifice." When the chariot is being taken to the fire, one recites the following on the horse: "O Agni, may you be pleased with this horse."
2.2.1	The first cry of the horse when born, whether from the sea or from the dung, the wings of the hawk and the arms of the deer, the praiseworthy greatness of thee, O horse, is born. The horse, the strong, the swift, the powerful, the strong, was born in the water, the first cry of him. They placed him as a share for Brahman. The Atharva Veda, the Yajus, the Rig, the pure, was brought by Prajapati to the Atharvan. He brought the horse first. In its place he placed the first light. May it carry me to the world of the righteous. Stand firm against the foe. Give me offspring and life, O swift one. By thee may I slay my enemies and foes. Give me the heavenly world to the sacrificer. Stand firm against foes. Stand firm against armies. As I may be the overlord of all those who are oppressed by the burden of men.
2.2.2	The two fires, the Āhavaniya and the Dakṣiṇāgni, are carried together with the Garhapatya. He says, "I am going to describe them." He is permitted thus.
2.2.3	He stands up with the words, "The Āhavaniya has been placed, the cow has come."
2.2.4	The Dakṣiṇya Agni is to be churned and brought.
2.2.5	The Āhavani ya is to be used in the Sabhya and Avāsathya fires. The Sabhya is to be used from the Avāsathya. The Sabhya belongs to the Sabhya. The Avāsathya belongs to the Avāsathā.
2.2.6	He gives the Agni-place, horse, chariot, four-wheeled cart, and gold to the Brahman.
2.2.7	They call Agni Vaiśvānara, the one who burns down houses. You have gone away. O god, do tell us. May we not be harmed by you. Having pacified the horse, he says, "What is the cry?"
2.2.8-10	Having offered the Rathantara Sāman with the verse, "The strength of Indra, the array of Maruts," he stands with the verse, "O lord of plants, thou art the sprout." Having sat down, he offers the Pūrṇāhuti with the verse, "I bow to thee." Having sat down, he makes the offering with the verse, “This is for the fierce one." He gives the dice to the Adhvaryu for divination.
2.2.11	In the Agni-adheya-sacrifices, the Agni-pāvamāna, Agni-pāvaka, Agni-śuci, and Agni-Aditi are the Agni-pāvaka, Agni-pāvamanas, Agni-śucis, and Agni-Aditī.
2.2.12	It is said that the sacrificer should observe a twelve-night fast.
2.2.13	The student should sleep below the fires while observing the vow.
2.3.1	The Agnihotra is offered in the evening and morning.
2.3.2	Having milked the cow, one places the Agnihotra.
2.3.3	Having kindled it, having poured water over it, one pours it out towards the north.
2.3.4	One sprinkles the Agnihotra-fire with the formula, "Thou art truth."
2.3.5	One carries the stream of water from the Garhapatya to the Ahavanīya with the formula, “This is nectar, that is nectar. Do thou unite nectar with nectar.”
2.3.6	The ladle and the spoon, having been washed, are heated, saying, "They are heated."
2.3.7	With the ladle he takes up the cups.
2.3.8	Taking up the spoon with the fire-wood, measuring up to the mouth, he advances towards the Ahavaniya, saying, "I am taking up the sacrificer to heaven."
2.3.9	Having placed the kindling wood on the sacrificial grass, he places it with the formula, "I place thee in the Agni-light, in the wind-pervaded, in the life-pervaded, leading to heaven, shining."
2.3.10	In the morning with the formula, "In the Surya-light."
2.3.11	He offers with the formula, "May Agni accept this offering along with Savitr, along with the dawn, along with Indra and with the night, accepting (the offering). Svāhā." "Along with the dawn" (he offers) in the morning. "Accepting (the offering) along with the sun" (he offers).
2.3.12	Looking at the Garhapatya, he offers with the formula "May this world follow me." "O Prajapati, none other than you" (he offers), mentally offering more than the full measure.
2.3.13	He raises the ladle three times towards the north, saying, "I gratify the Rudras."
2.3.14	Having placed it on the sacrificial grass and having wiped it, he wipes his hands towards the north, (saying), "I gratify the plants and trees."
2.3.15	Having wiped it a second time, having tied the sacred thread in the manner of the fathers, he says towards the south, "I offer the oblation to the fathers."
2.3.16	The teachers say that the Agnihotra is optional in the other fires, but obligatory in the Gārhapatya.
2.3.17	Having placed a fire-stick in the Gārhaptya, one offers with the ladle of the pot, saying, "May the lord of nourishment bestow nourishment here, may Prajapati delight in progeny here. To Agni, the lord of the house, the lord of wealth, the lord of nourishment, svāhā."
2.3.18	The Uttara (verse) has been stated.
2.3.19	In the southern fire, he offers with "Svāhā to Agni, the eater of food, the lord of food." This is the eastern offering.
2.3.20	Having sprinkled the ladle, the spoon, and the sacrificial grass with the formula, "Truth is your friend," he places them north of the fire.
2.3.21	He eats the remaining ladleful.
2.3.22	Having touched water with the formula, "I gratify the vital airs", he carries the water in the ladle without washing it, with the formula, "The serpents and the people". Having washed it on the sacrificial grass with the formula, “The serpents and the virtuous people”, he carries it with the formula, ”The Gandharvas and the Apsarases”
2.3.23	He touches the ladle and the spoon, saying, "The seven sages."
2.3.24	He cleans the ladle-handle, saying, "I am leading to the south." He cleans it in the morning.
2.3.25	The Agnihotra offering is as prescribed in the Brāhmaṇa.
2.3.26	If there is a shortage of the Gavīdūka or other materials, one should offer to that particular deity.
2.4.1	If one is about to perform the Darśa and Pūrṇamāsa sacrifices, one should offer a cake on eleven potsherds to Agni-Viṣṇu. The Agni-Viṣņu is the first.
2.4.2	If one is about to begin the Pūrṇamāsī sacrifice, one should offer rice-gruel to Sarasvatī and a cake on twelve potsherds to Sarasvata. The Sarasvatī is the first. The Sarasvata is the first.
2.4.3	If there is growth before a year, one should abandon the Agnihotra on Rohini and again perform it on Punarvasu. "Oṃ, Bhūr, Bhuvaḥ, Svaḥ, Janat."
2.4.4	The Āgrayana offering is performed when the herbs are ripe.
2.4.5	One should offer the oblations before the Agnihotra offerings, saying, "For this year."
2.4.6	"O Agni, O Indra" is for Agni-Indra, "O Indra-Agni, O Indra-Agni" is for Indra-Agni. "O Indra-Agnis, protect us" is for Indra and Agni.
2.4.7	"Those who know, O heaven and earth, having heard" is for the Viśvedevas, heaven and earth, and Soma.
2.4.8	One should perform the Cāturmāsya rites on the full moon day of Phālguna.
2.4.9	The Vaiśvānara-Pārjany sacrifice is performed on the previous day. The mantra is "O Agni, Vaiśvānaran, cry out, roar!"
2.4.10	One recites the mantra "May our minds be united" while offering the Nirmathya oblation in the Vaishvadev rite.
2.4.11	The Homa is performed with the mantra "Agni in Agni."
2.4.12	This is the Nirmanthanam (kindling of fire).
2.4.13	Agni is the lord of trees, Soma of herbs, Savitar of births, Sarasvati of vows, the Maruts of mountains, the All-gods of the sky and earth, the waters of the sky and the earth.
2.4.14	The one who knows the wealth of the horse is the one who is behind.
2.4.15	The Hotr, Adhvaryu, Brahman, Agnidhra and the Yajamana consume the Pranabhakṣa offerings, calling each other.
2.4.16	Whatever semen is shed, whatever goes away from me, whatever is born again, may that be auspicious to me. May it make me strong. May it make (me) very prolific. I consume the Pranabhaka offering of that which is strong and drunk.
2.4.17	At the time of the Agnihotra offerings in the month of Āṣāḍha, he goes reciting the verse, "O Agni, do thou lead me."
2.4.18	He sits down to the right of the fire.
2.4.19	Having gone beyond the fire in front, he offers in the northern fire and then offers in the southern fire.
2.4.20	They sprinkle the wife who has been questioned about the Atichara, saying, "These waters are flowing."
2.4.21	The five ending with Pūṣan.
2.4.22	Indra-Agni, Varuna, Maruts, Varuna, the giver of life to the waters.
2.4.23	Avabhrtha from Soma.
2.5.1	In Kartika, the Saakamedhas.
2.5.2	On the previous day, at midday, the Agni-anika-vatas, at evening, the Tigma-anika of the Grhamedi-Maruts.
2.5.3	From the Ajyabhāga, the Iḍānta.
2.5.4	On the next day, the Pūrṇadārvī, the Pūrṇa-dārvī.
2.5.5	The Kṛṣṇa-niyāna of the Maruts who play.
2.5.6	In the Māhendrī, the six ending with the Indragnā.
2.5.7	Those who consume the Māhendra and the Vaiśvakarmaṇa.
2.5.8	The offerings to the Pitrs are concluded with the offering of clarified butter. The Soma-offering to the Pitrs is concluded with the offering to the Pitrs. The Soma-offerings to the Pitrs who are in heaven are concluded with the offerings to the Pitris who are in heaven. The offerings to the Barhisad Pitrs are concluded. The offerings to Agni are concluded. The Pitrs who are Agni-swittas are invoked. The offerings to Kavya-vahana Agni are concluded.
2.5.9	The offerings before the Agnihotra are offered in the southern fire which has been carried forward.
2.5.10-11	Having gone round the fire on the right, he sits down facing the west; the sacrificer and the Agnidhra sit down on the north.
2.5.12	The two verses say this: At the Pitryajna, Brahma, facing east, having offered the oblations, goes to the front, and then sits facing west in the ritual. The Agnidhra and the sacrificer, both of them, are to the north. "One should say, "May there be svadha!" This is the response here."
2.5.13	He smells the Ida.
2.5.14	The deities are sprinkled, the Sāmans end with the word "śam".
2.5.15	Those who are leaving after the measurement recite "O Agni, thou art the purifier."
2.5.16	Facing east, they step up and stand facing the sun, reciting "The rays of the sun."
2.5.17	Facing south, they recite "Heaven and earth."
2.5.18	Then facing north, at the crossroads, they recite "The Triyambaka hymn to Agni."
2.5.19	The sacrificer and the noble people, striking the right thigh with the Purorasa, circumambulate the fire three times from left to right, reciting: "We worship Tryambaka, the fragrant one, the enhancer of prosperity. Like the Urvara grass from its bondage, may I be released from death, from immortality."
2.5.20	Those with the Purorāsa in their right hands circumambulate clockwise.
2.5.21	He recites, "He is our own, the two released from the womb."
2.5.22	They go around to the right.
2.5.23	Now the Aditya sacrifice.
2.5.24	On the new moon day of Phalguna, the Sunasirya.
2.5.25	In the case of repetition, on the previous day.
2.5.26	Five ending with the Pusan.
2.5.27	The Vayu, Sunasirya, and Surya with the Sunasiryanta, "The Sun with the eye."
2.6.1	Then at the animal sacrifice, the full oblation to Vishnu is offered with the verse "O Vishnu, thou art great."
2.6.2	One recites the verse "O Araati and Ati-Araati" while the sacrificial post is being cut.
2.6.3	"What thou art, O Shikvi" while being washed.
2.6.4	"Thou art anointed, thou art anointed" while being anointed.
2.6.5	"Thou hast been anointed" while being smeared with fragrant substances.
2.6.6	"What is thy garment" while being clothed.
2.6.7	"O Vanaspati, the spread out (grass) is yours." When the grass is being spread out.
2.6.8	"O Vanaspati! With whom you are together." When the grass-cover is being raised up.
2.6.9	"O Holder, be firm." When the grass cover is being placed in the pit.
2.6.10	"O Vishnu, your deeds." When the grasscover is being raised with two verses.
2.6.11	"The fire is kindled today." At the Prayaja offerings.
2.6.12	"The god of the Narashansa is among the gods." The second verse.
2.6.13	"He is above him." So says the Brāhmaṇa.
2.6.14	"Bring him here." So says the Anjana.
2.6.15	"For Indra's share." So says the Yathadevata.
2.6.16	"He who is the lord." So says the one being released.
2.6.17	When being led away, one should offer the oblations of being released. May Agni, the protector of the world, be released and come to our share here. May the god Agni, knowing, carry the oblation to the gods, the sacrifice with three parts and seven threads. The two tusks that support you, they are bent, looking towards the south. May the fathers make it safe for us. When bound to the sacrificial post, may you be released. You are the most beloved one, go to Indra's abode. Run, knowing, the wise ones rub you with ghee. Having given food and strength to the sacrificer.
2.6.18	When being instructed, they turn to the right.
2.6.19	At the Catvāla, they sprinkle with the verses, "O Jātavedas, at the offering, may we be prosperous and may we be prosperous."
2.6.20	The Indra-Agni cake and the offering of the ladle.
2.6.21	When sent, the Agnidhra places the Upayajana embers in front of the Hotṛ from the Shamitra.
2.6.22	When the heart-stake is measured in the water, they recite, "O king, you are here."
2.6.23	Having performed the Iṣṭi with the Aindrāgna rite, one should offer a desirable animal.
3.1.1	One who is going to perform the Soma sacrifice should offer a bull to Indra and Agni if his father or grandfather did not drink Soma.
3.1.2	The priests are chosen: the Brahman who knows the Atharva Veda, the Udgātṛ who knows the Sāman Veda, the Hotṛ who knows the Ṛg Veda, and the Adhvaryu who knows the Yajur Veda.
3.1.3	The Brahmanas, the Ucchavasin, the Potas, the Agnidhra, the Sadasyas, the Prastotar, the Pratiharta, the Subrahmanyas are the followers of the Brahman. The Maitravaruna, the Acchavaka, the Gravastut are the followers of Udgatar. The Pratiprasthata, the Neta, the Unneta are the followers of Adhvaryu.
3.1.4	The Devas are worshipped in the spring and other seasons as per their respective castes.
3.1.5	If there is a pit, a stream, a tree, a mountain, a river, or a path in front of him, then he should not leave only the space for the divine worship in front.
3.1.6	One should meditate on the forms of Soma.
3.1.7	In the Dikshaniya (rite), one should offer to Agni-Vishnu.
3.1.8	It ends with the Patnisamyaja offerings.
3.1.9	While being anointed, the initiated one recites, "May they purify me."
3.1.10	While being purified,
3.1.11	The sacrificial thread is made of hemp.
3.1.12	Having been initiated, they wander at will.
3.1.13	When the sun has set, after the dismissal of speech, he stands facing the stars, saying, "May the stars be auspicious and shining."
3.1.14	Facing the fire to the south, he looks at the stars, saying "May the stars shine."
3.1.15	Again, he recites the mantra "Pranah" and recites the mantras.
3.1.16	He stands before the sun, reciting "May the radiance of the sun rise, salutations."
3.1.17	Vows:
3.1.18	One should not rise to greet others, nor should one greet others.
3.1.19	One does not accept one's name, but responds with "The wise one" to a Brahmin, and "The son of Prajapati" to a Brahmin.
3.1.20	One does neither giving, nor offering, nor cooking, nor studying, nor wealth.
3.1.21	One should wear a black antelope skin.
3.1.22	One should wear a kuśa grass.
3.1.23	One should make a fist.
3.1.24	One should raise three fingers, starting with the thumb.
3.1.25	One should take a deer horn and use it to scratch.
3.1.26	If one's speech is loose, one should release the fist and recite these mantras:
3.2.1	Agnihotra and the Full-moon sacrifice, the two, having become the bestower of desires, entered together with the earth, facing east. The Vasati and the New-moon sacrifice, facing west, the mind and the Pitryajna sacrifice, facing south, the speech and the Isti, facing south, semen and food, facing upwards, the eye and the Pasubandha sacrifice, facing from above.
3.2.2	At the end of the consecration, for the attainment of wealth.
3.2.3	He should not go beyond the Veda, nor should he go beyond the Veda. He should not be in the sun, nor in the shade.
3.2.4	He should speak the truth.
3.2.5	If one forgets the vow, one stands before the fire.
3.2.6	Having taken up a big lump of earth, saying, "The truth is great," he cleanses urine and excrement with the words, "The waters are pure." With the words, "With the pure earth," he sprinkles himself with the lump of earth.
3.2.7	Having sprinkled himself, he says, "He who is not present, may he be blessed." He recites the verse spoken in dreams, "May the heaven protect me."
3.2.8	Here also, if I have forgotten the poison of Madhu, may Agni and Savitar again place it in my belly. Thus one recites for oneself in the Jāmbīla Skandana.
3.2.9	If I have forgotten the falling of this juice, we invoke it here. May it again swell me. Thus for semen.
3.2.10	"Go away!" is said in praise of the good.
3.2.11	"The verse "O stone, cross the waters" is for crossing the waters.
3.2.12	"The waters from the ocean" is for sprinkling without covering.
3.2.13	"Like a bowstring" is for anger.
3.2.14	Having cooked the wife who is in season with the Sarūpavat-sāman, having poured over it, having taken it out, having taken it up, having made an offering, one should eat the remnants of the Garbhavēdan and Puṃsavana rites."
3.3.1	The three consecrations are unlimited or twelve less.
3.3.2	At the end of the consecration, in the Pravargya, the Pathya, the Svashti, the Agni, the Soma, the Savitar, the Aditi, the Pathya and the Revati, the Veda and the Svashti.
3.3.3	The Dhruva ends with "Shanti."
3.3.4	The full oblation of Dhruva is "In the Urus."
3.3.5	Having gone out, he recites the verse, "May the Soma-purchasing cow be led to heaven."
3.3.6	"The place of Ida is the place of the foot."
3.3.7	At the place of the upper part of the body, on the skin, he searches for Soma with the verse, "Soma is placed on the skin."
3.3.8	He recites the verse "This is a thousand."
3.3.9	Having bought it, he removes the chaff.
3.3.10	He rises with the verse, "For life, for long life."
3.3.11	When the chariot is being pushed, he murmurs, "O Aparatira (the one without an opponent)."
3.3.12	When the king is being taken to the seat from the royal carriage, he recites, "Dhruvam (the firm one) with the firm one."
3.3.13	Having approached the fire from the right, they touch the oblation for the Atithya (offering), reciting, "With sacrifice, the sacrifice."
3.3.14	"Vaisnavanam (pertaining to Vishnu), who is Vishnu?"
3.3.15	The Iḍāntas (verses) are recited.
3.3.16	They besprinkle the vessel of Tānūnapāt five times with ghee, saying, "I take thee for the descending, for the spreading, for Tānūnapā, for the Sakvaras, for the most powerful Sakman."
3.3.17	They touch it.
3.3.18	May the lord of consecration approve of my consecration, may the lord of austerity approve of my austerity. I have approached truth directly. May you be pleased with me. This is the sign of consecration. The consecrated one says this.
3.3.19	The Adhvaryu says to the Agnidhra, "The Apas are being drunk."
3.3.20	The Agnidhra and the Adhvaryu, the goddesses, the immortal ones, the increasers of truth, drink.
3.3.21	The Adhvaryu says, "Come forth with them."
3.3.22	The Agnidhra brings them forth with Kuśa grass.
3.3.23	Having touched them, they make the Soma grow: "O Soma, the god, may the rays grow for you. May Indra, the knower of one wealth, grow for you. Let Indra grow for you. Grow for Indra."
3.3.24	May there be welfare for you, O Soma, the god, as you go to the Soma-pressing.
3.3.25	Having touched water again, with hands stretched out, they sprinkle themselves on the Prastara. "Desiring wealth, desiring good things, I send (this offering) to Bhaga, to the truthful and truthful-speaking ones. Obeisance to heaven, obeisance to earth."
3.3.26	Having offered the oblations before the Pravargya, he sits down to the south of the Garhapatya.
3.3.27	At the first sacrifice, one should not perform the Pravargya rite. The learned one should do it according to his desire.
3.3.28	When the Adhvaryu has disappeared, he says, "O Brahman, we shall proceed with the Gharmā rite."
3.3.29	He permits by saying, "Proceed with the Gharmă rite."
3.3.30	Either loudly or in a low voice.
3.3.31	One should attend to the Gharmă when it is being heated.
3.4.1	I am burning with heat, with the stream of immortality, I give the oblation to the gods, to Savitr. The gods have eaten the pure oblation, the one who offers is in the womb of immortality. The lord of the gods goes, shining with truth, he discerns immortality. The golden-colored god Surya, shining, searches the ends of heaven with lightning. The pure oblation goes around the ocean, shining with splendor, shining with brilliance. He repels enemies, burns my foes. The wise Aditya has risen above the sky. He shines, shines, and shines again. The pure oblator rises from the waters, the slayer of Vritra's green army. The unobstructed forms of Surya, the oblation, is behind and in front. We have placed the two-toothed one against the enemies. Vaishvanara, wearing cold garments, may he slay all my enemies and foes. The oblation is cooked with the seasons by the one-hero Brahman. The pure oblators are kindled. The oblation, the thousandfold one, is kindled. May the directions be free from enemies for me. May Surya, Vaishvanara Hari, the heated oblation, burn my enemies. May the bull, the pure Aditya, the slayer of enemies, be slain by Surya. "Brahman, the unborn one, this is your father's." He says half of the verse like a weapon, avoiding the Avapratisara.
3.4.2	"You are shining," he recites while offering the oblation.
3.4.3	"Stand up, stand up for milking the heated (cow). Let us see," he says.
3.4.4	"Call out," he says to the milker of the heated (cow)
3.4.5	With the two verses "The heated is being offered with the Gharma-sutra, svāhā," and "At the Vaṣaṭ-utterance and Anuvṣaṭ-uttering of the heated," he offers the heated (cow)
3.4.6	The oblation of honey, the oblation of honey we have drunk, O Gharma, from the one who is full of honey, from the one belonging to the Fathers, from the one connected with the horse, from the one related to Brihaspati, from the one descended from the All-gods.
3.4.7	In the Sattra, the Hotṛ, the Adhvaryu, the Brahman, the Udgātṛ, the followers, and the householder.
3.4.8	They cleanse themselves with the Pavitras in the trough of the remnants.
3.4.9	When the Sūyavasad is recited three times, the Homa offerings are completed.
3.5.1	The Upasads are Agniya, Saumya and Vaishnavya.
3.5.2	The Vasatkaras are Apiayananihnvana.
3.5.3	Where the Adhvaryu says, "O Agnidh, proclaim the wives of the gods," then standing facing east, not eating, the Agnidhra proclaims the wives of the deities: "Pṛthivī is the wife of Agni, Vāc is the wife of Vāyu, Senā is the wife of Indra, Dhānenā is the wife the wife of Bṛhaspati, Gāyatrī is the wife of the Vasus, Tristubh is the wife of Rudras, Jagatī is the wife the of Ādityas, Anushtubh is the wife the the wife of Mitra, Virāj is the wife of Varuna, Paṅkti is the wife of Viṣṇu, Dīkṣā is the wife wife of King Soma."
3.5.4	In the Subrahmaṇyā-call, she recites three times in all places, "She is here."
3.5.5	Thus in the afternoon, in the Gharmopasad, and on the next day, in the morning and afternoon, in the Upavasatha.
3.5.6	Thus three for the Agniṣṭoma with twelve sacrifices.
3.5.7	He recites, "You are measuring," while measuring the altar.
3.5.8	In which the altar is surrounded.
3.5.9	Having recited "O Agni, go forth" when the fire is being taken out, he sits outside the altar.
3.5.10	For the southern Havirdhāna, one recites "This is Viṣṇu" and for the northern one, "Three steps".
3.5.11	When the Havirdhāna is being turned around, one recites with two verses, "From here to me"
3.5.12	"The two verses, "Who is the support of Vishnu?" are for the support of the support.
3.5.13	"We think of you, O heaven and earth," are for the offering of the Udumbara.
3.5.14	The priest who is invited for the offering to Agni and Soma goes to the Patni-sala through the sacred path between the Catvala and the mound, with the Agni-dheya mark on the north and the Sadasi. This is the sacred path.
3.5.15	Sipping water and other rites up to looking at the fire.
3.5.16	He follows the Agni-Soma being led out with the half-verse, "Soma, the king."
3.5.17	After the Agni-Soma offering, he goes around the Agni on the north and the Atithya on the south and sits down.
3.5.18	Now the rites for the Agni-Soma animal sacrifice have been explained. By this, the animals have been explained.
3.5.19	Up to the Patnīsaṃyājas.
3.6.1	When the Vasatīvarī waters are being taken around, he makes the Adhvaryu recite the verse, "O Adhvaryu, do thou fill the vessel completely."
3.6.2	When they are being placed in the Agnidhra chamber, he makes them recite the verse, “These are the waters of the Agnidhra.”
3.6.3	The initiated one stays there.
3.6.4	In the latter part of the night, the priests, having been awakened, sprinkle themselves at the door of the dining hall.
3.6.5	Having offered the oblations beginning with "Haviragupāvahrita" and ending with "Vaisvānara Agnistoma", he offers in the Agnidhra-chamber.
3.6.6	The Yajus-verses beginning with "Yajus-verses are the sacrifice" and ending with the four verses of the Visparda-hymn are recited before the morning recitation.
3.6.7	He sits down to the south of the Ahavaniya fire, beyond the Atigrahya-sada.
3.6.8	When the Hotṛ has sat down, having recited the Hotrī-sūkta, he offers the oblations in front.
3.6.9	He recites four Sūktas of the morning recitation, beginning with "Pātaṃ na Indrāpūṣaṇe".
3.6.10	Three Sūktas of Apomptriya, beginning with "Ambayo yanti".
3.6.11	When the king is being anointed, he offers oblations at the anointment. At sunrise, he offers the Upāṃśugraha oblation with the verse "The sun has risen above the sky." He also offers the Antaryāmiya oblation.
3.6.12	Having crossed the Havirdhāna cart from the east and sitting on the Khara cart, he consecrates the king with the Madhusūkta verse "From the sky, from the earth."
3.6.13	He recites the verse "Indra, the priests offer Soma" to the Soma placed in the Dronakalaśa.
3.6.14	"Drink, O Dhṛṣat!" at midday.
3.6.15	"Where he knows that the Soma has been spilled, he offers it to him with this (verse): "The god Savitr has become worthy of worship, now he is not to be praised by men at noon. He who bestows wealth on men, may he give us the best wealth here."
3.6.16	Those fires are within the waters. He offers with seven (verses).
3.6.17	The Adhvaryu, the Pratiprasthātṛ, the Prastôtṛ, the Udgâtri, the Pratihartṛ, the Brahman, the Sûna, and the Saman-chanter, having gone out, offer the oblations of the Vaisvadevas at the Bahispavamâna. "The drop has fallen, the drop which has fallen from thee, the drop which is fallen from thy hand, the drop which hath fallen from the strainer, that I offer to thee with mind and Vasat-call. The drop which hath fallen, the drop that is fallen beyond the cup, this god Brihaspati may he pour it for thee for prosperity. The drop which has fallen on the earth, the Soma which has fallen from the pressing stones, the Soma which is fallen from the strainer. This god Brihaspati, may he pour it down for thee for prosperity." "What has been spilled by me," (thus) they say.
3.7.1	They sit down to the south of the sacrificial ground.
3.7.2	The Udgātṛ gazes at the Udgātṛ, reciting the verse, "Doṣo gāyeti."
3.7.3	After the Stotra has been recited, the Prastôtṛ addresses the Brahman with the words, "O Brahman, we shall praise; do thou instruct."
3.7.4	There the ray is yours for destruction. You are to be praised by Savitar, the giver of wealth, for Bṛhaspati. O god Savitar, he has told you this. And may you bestow it. May you bestow it. Let the verses of long life not be lost. Let the truth of the hymn be true. Let the true intentions be true. Speak truth and reality. O Bṛhaspati, let us be agreeable. Let us be those who have Indra. Having said this, he praises with the first Svaramātrā, with the middle one at midday, and with the last one at the third pressing.
3.7.5	"Bhuva" at the midday pressing, "Svar" at the third pressing.
3.7.6	In the Ukthya and other (Stomas) and in the Ahina, "Om Bhuva Bhuva Svar Janad Vridat Karad Ruhant Mahat Tac Sham Om".
3.7.7	When the two Soma-offerings are being performed, the Stomabhagas are sung one above the other. The Stoma is sung for the praised, the praised for the praised. The Stoma of the praised is sung for the praiseworthy. The Stoma for the praiseworthy is sung for the praises. The Stoma that is sung for the praising is sung for the Stoma. The Stoma sung for the Stomabhaga is sung for the Soma. The Stoma-bhaga sung for the Soma is sung for the sacrifice. The sacrifice sung for the Stombhaga is sung for the Agni. The Stomabhaga sung for the Agni is sung for the Indra. The Stomabhaga sung for the Indra is sung for the Brhaspati. The Stomabhag sung for the Brbaspati is sung for the Prajapati. The Stomabhas sung for the Prajapatis is sung for the Vasus. The Stomabhasa sung for the Vasu is sung for the Rudras. The Stomabhega sung for the Rudra is sung for the Adityas. The Stomabhage sung for the Aditvas is sung for the Sadhyas. The Stombhaga sung for the Sadhya is sung for the Aptya. The Stomabhat sung for the Aptyas is sung for the Visve Devas. The Stomabhata sung for the Visvedevas is sung for all the Devas. We invoke from all sides the Devas, the Vasus, the Rudras, the Adityas, the Sadhyas, the Aptyas, the Visve Devatas, the All-Gods. May they be ours alone. May they make us powerful. While reciting this, one should look at the Brahmanas of others.
3.7.8	The praise of the praised is powerful, full of nourishment. May the praise of the praised come to me. We invoke those who are endowed with power. May we milk the offspring and nourishment. May my true blessing be among the gods. May it lead me to brahmic glory. He recites the praise in accordance with the praise.
3.7.9	"The belly of Indra" - when Soma is sprinkled, it is purified.
3.7.10	At the Bahispavamāna, he recites the formula, "Thou art the hawk", "Thou art the bull" at the Madhyamdina, and "Thou art the Rbhus" at the Arbhava.
3.7.11	The formulas are as prescribed in the Brāhmaṇa.
3.7.12	Then the Adhvaryu says, "O Agnidh, spread out the fires, spread the sacrificial grass, decorate the Paroda-cakes."
3.8.1	The Agnidhra moves about in the two Savanas with embers, in the third Savana with sticks. Facing the west, he cleans the Dhishnyas of the Hotri, Maitravaruna, Brahmanachas, Potri, Neshtri and the Upagantra.
3.8.2	He brings them back there itself.
3.8.3	Having spread the Prishti, he adorns the Puronuvakas.
3.8.4	Those fires, the kindlers, have been spread out over the earth. May they protect us, may they help us. To them be salutations. May they not injure us. He recites the formula for the kindlers at the two later pressings. "May the strength return to the Ahavaniya." This is said in regard to the Ahavaniyas.
3.8.5	They offer the oblations of the Pravargya rite. "May I be acceptable to speech, may I be acceptable to the lord of speech. O goddess, speech, in that which is the sweetest of speech, place me. Svāhā to speech, svāhā to the lord of Speech, svāhā." The fourth one is offered mentally.
3.8.6	Some say, "Seven oblations." To Sarasvati svāhā. To the great ones, to the united ones, svāhā. The Rk praises the Stoma.
3.8.7	Having risen after the sprinkling of the Vapa, they stand facing the sun, reciting, "On the back of the sky..."
3.8.8	"Do not go away!" Having approached the Havaniya fire, having churned out the sacrificial post, the fires with the name of Sagara, the fires with Sagara, with the army of Rudra, protect us, O fires, nourish us, O fires. May you protect us. May there be salutations to you. Do not injure us."
3.8.9	They approach the hall from the north of the Agnidhra fire.
3.8.10	The sacrificer and the Adhvaryu enter by the eastern door, the others by the western door.
3.8.11	Entering the Sadas, they bow to the Adhvaryus, saying, "Salutations to the Adhvarus, salutations."
3.8.12	Entering the Adhvaryas, they say, "Salutations, O seer," and "Salutations, o hearer," to the seer and the hearer.
3.8.13-14	The Adhvaryu, the Upagâtri, the Pratiprasthâtri, the Agnîdh, the Sâman-chanters, the Marjâlîya, the Khara-dhishnîya, and others approach the fires, saying, "Ye fires, ye are the sons of the sky." They touch the hall, saying, "Thou art the heaven; thou art the earth; thou art the air; thou art the sky; thou art the firmament; thou art the heaven; sprinkle the heaven; sprinkle heaven; sprinkle the sky; sprinkle the sky." "Thou art the door; thou art the door; sprinkle the door; sprinkle heaven; thou art heaven; thou art earth; thou art heaven."
3.8.15	Having gone forward, he says, "Salutations to the Anukhyataras." Having circumambulated the Dhishnyas on the right side, he goes to his own Dhishnya and says, "Salutlations to the Upadrashta."
3.8.16	Having sat down, the sacrificer recites the Stotra, "I praise you, O Indra."
3.8.17	The Sadasyas recite the Stotranama, "May the one who generates" with the Brahmaṇa on the right side.
3.9.4-7	The Adhvaryu, about to start, gives the following instructions to the Hotṛ, the Praśāstṛ, the Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin, the Potr, the Neṣṭṛ and the Agnīdhra. The Brāhmaṇacchaṃsin offers with the verse, "O Indra, we worship thee as the bull." The Potr and the Agnīdhrā offer with the two verses. The Yajus is repeated in between the two verses.
3.9.8	Those who offer, O Vashat! and so on, have the beginning and end of the chant.
3.9.9	At the morning pressing, after the Vashat-offering, one recites, "May speech be strength, strength be in me, inhalation and exhalation."
3.9.10	At the end, they perform the Anuvashat-offering with the chant ending in "O Agni, do you take Soma."
3.9.11	The offerings of the Soma-cup, the Indra-cup, and the Indra-cup are offered with the chant, "Indra is in heaven."
3.9.12	The Maitrāvaruṇa, the Indra-Marut, the Tvaṣṭra, and the Agniya are the offerings in the order of the Anuvṣaṭkāras.
3.9.13	The Adhvaryu says to the Agnidh, "Do thou, O Agnidh, come." He says, "I have come."
3.9.14	The eating of the Idā is as before.
3.9.15	At the Sadas, the Soma is eaten by those who have been invited.
3.9.16	"As in the case of the Prāśitra, having waited and received (the Soma), he says, "I partake of the portion of Indra, offered to Agni, drunk by Indra, possessing Indra's power, which is the portion of cows, horses, wealth, offspring, and worlds. I partake of that portion which has been invoked, with the Gayatri metre, with brilliance, with the lustre of Brahmanas."
3.9.17	The Trishtup metre is the Madhyandina Sāman, the Jagatī metre is the third pressing, the Anushtup metre is in the Paryāyas, the Pankti metre is in the Sandhi cups, the Atichandas metre is in the Aptobyāmaṇi.
3.9.18	Having eaten, they touch themselves. May it be well with us. O Soma, thou hast drunk, like a father to his son, like a friend to his friend, like a wise one to his wise friend, like a hero to his hero. Thou hast poured down the life-giving Soma for him who lives. Thou hast filled my limbs. Do not let me be separated from the hosts of the Maruts. May the seven sages be auspicious to me. May they stand by me. May the Maruts come to me with their songs.
3.9.19	The cups are filled with the formula, "Do thou swell; do thou swell."
3.9.20	Here is a verse: The wise one should fill the cups five times at the sacrifice, in the Ajya, Marutvatiya and in the Prathitaka.
3.9.21	The offering to Indra-Agni is made in the cup of the Acchavaka.
3.9.22	If they eat, it is in the Agnidhra's fire.
3.9.23	The members sit down and offer the Ritus according to their respective directions.
3.10.1	The Maruts are offered from the Potra. The first and the last verses are offered by the Potra, the second by the Agnidhra, and the third by the Brahmanasci.
3.10.2	The sacrificer instructs the Hotri to offer this.
3.10.3	They do not say "Vasat" in response.
3.10.4	There is a verse: The two-deity offerings, the seasonal offerings, and the Patnīvata cup, the Aditya cup, and the Savitr cup, we offer these with the Manuvatsa formula.
3.10.5	The seasonal offerings, the Indra-Marut offering, the Tvashtri offering, the Agni offering, the Indra-Mitra-Varuna offering, the four Dravinodasana offerings, the Asvin offering, and the Garhapatya offering.
3.10.6	They eat from the vessel of the seasons, anoint, or smell, saying, "Who are you? You are fame. You are Fame-giver. You are fame. Bestow fame on me."
3.10.7	Having received the Naraśaṃsa cup silently, they consume it, saying, "O Soma, Naraśaṃsapīta, praised by men, known by the mind, consumed by the fathers, invoked, I consume you, invoked."
3.10.8	"With the Urvas," at the midday pressing; "with the Kavyas," at the third pressing.
3.10.9	"We invoke the mind," they invoke the mind.
3.10.10	They consume the Nārāśaṃsa oblations five times.
3.10.11	Here is a verse: One should consume the Nārāsamsa oblations five times, before the Hotr's oblations, before the Agni-Maruts.
3.10.12	From the Ajya-Sastra, the Indra-Agni.
3.10.13	For the Hotṛ, the Prauga; for the Prastôtṛ, the Prasauti; thou art the Praiti for Dharma; I invoke thee, O Dharma. For the Maitrāvaruṇa, the Anviti; thou art the Anviti for Heaven; I invoke thee Heaven. For the Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin, the Sandhi; thou art the Sandhi for the atmosphere; I invoke thee atmosphere. For the Acchavaka, the Pratiti; thou art the Pratiti for Earth; I invoke thee Earth.
3.10.14-17	From the Prauga-sastra, the Vaishvadevam; from the Maitravaruna, the Maitravarunam; from the Brahmanaschamsin, the Indra; from the Acchivaka, the Indra-Agni. The Brahmanaschamsas calls the Adhvaryu three times with the words "Let us chant" from the last Pratishthara. The Anirukta, the Anurupas, the Ukthamukha, the Paridhanin, the Pragatha, and the Madhyandina are called the Yonas.
3.10.18	"O Adhvaryu, let us chant the Stotriya." "O Adhvaryu, let us chant at the third pressing."
3.10.19	The Adhvaryu responds, "Let us chant in the divine."
3.10.20	At the end, "Let us be in the divine." At the end of the chant, "Let us say Om." At the end, "Om."
3.11.2-4	This is your praise, O most powerful one. The last verse of the Uddhat should be recited as "The famous one who has attained fame." The first verse should be recited three times and the last verse three times. The verse ending with the word "artha" should be connected with the Pranava, removing the Svaras and the beginning, and then the verse ending with the words "pashasya" and "shasya" should be connected. The last verse should end with the word "m" and the Pranava.
3.11.5	The Udgātṛ recites the Śastroktha at the morning pressing, the Ukthamārcī at the midday pressing, and the Ukthamārci at the third pressing.
3.11.6	The Prātaḥsavan is the first pressing, the Madhyāndinasavan is the second pressing, and the Tṛtīyasavan is the third pressing. The Uktthyasampad is the final offering.
3.11.7	The Agni is the first pressing. The Agni is the first offering. The Agni is offered at the morning pressing. The Agni has the form of a hawk. The Agni is like Soma at the morning pressing."
3.11.8	The offerings are completed.
3.11.9	At each Savana, he recites: "May there be splendour in me, may there be greatness in me, may fame be in me, may everything be in me."
3.11.10	Having been sent out by the Madhyandina (officiant), they move out through the eastern gate, towards the Agnidhra chamber, the sacrificer going first.
3.11.11	The offerings before (the Agnihotra) are offered.
3.11.12	The sprinkling etc. has been mentioned.
3.11.13	They move towards the Pavamana hall.
3.11.14	When invited, he says, "You are the one who causes rain. I invoke you for rain."
3.11.15	If the fire is outside the altar, he recites, "O Agni, I approach you," while approaching the altar.
3.11.16	Brahma and
3.11.17	The initiated one, when the sun sets or rises, recites, "You are invited, O Agni."
3.11.18	The offering of curds and ghee is heard.
3.11.19	The eating of the hot-like food is the eating of the juice.
3.11.20	Of the animal cake.
3.11.21	"O Agni, protect me!" are the offerings at the beginning of the journey.
3.11.22	The offerings at the beginning are the Indra offerings.
3.11.23	At the Garhapatya, the offerings of the Dakshina are "O Agni, the bright one of the gods..."
3.11.24	The sacrificer with golden hands, standing outside the altar, says, "The cows coming from the south have come." He stands up.
3.11.25	He gives gold to the Ātreya priest and a golden plate to the Agnidhra priest.
3.11.26	The two ends of the sacrificial grass are let loose between the Garhapatya and the Sadas, towards the north, towards the Agnidhra-chamber and the Sadas and the Cātvāla. He makes them let loose with two formulas, "May the wind let you loose together."
3.12.1	"In which the former ones have done their duty," says Bhagalī. "Here you have come together," says Kausika.
3.12.2	The last portion is to be given to the Pratihartṛ.
3.12.3	The Marutvatīya Homa is performed with the verse, "Indra, the Maruts, and I are united."
3.12.4	The Hotr and others recite the verses, "May the day be praised, may the night be praised. You are the Usha, may you praise the Vasus. You are the Praketa, may you praise Rudras."
3.12.5	The Niskevalya is performed with the Mahendra verse.
3.12.6	The Iṣṭi of Indra is the first.
3.12.7	The Stotriya and Anurūpa are "We invoke thee, O Indra, the strong, the slayer of Vrtra, the wielder of the thunderbolt, the slayer of enemies, the subduer of foes, the giver of wealth, the giver of food, the giver of cattle, the giver of heroes, the giver of strength, the giver of good heroes, the giver, the giver of all good things."
3.12.8	One should recite the first verse again after reciting it twice or thrice. Having recited the first verse, one should recite the last half of the second verse. Having recited the second verse, one should then recite the last half. One should then recite the third verse.
3.12.9	Thus is the arrangement of the Stotriya-Anurupas of the Bṛhat.
3.12.10	The two verses should be chanted in the middle and high pitch.
3.12.11	"O ye who are most sweet, ye have risen up" is a Sāman-Prastāra with Svaravati.
3.12.12	"Indra, the breaker of forts, has surpassed" is a Ukthamukha with Pañcamas and Prativitatama.
3.12.13	"O Brahman, ye have sung, ye have been heard" is a Parāsa.
3.12.14	He places it with the verse, "Indra indeed" and offers with the verse, "Paraya".
3.12.15	From the consumption of the Acchavaka, one should offer the oblation to Aditya with the two verses, "If the gods" and "Devahendanam".
3.12.16	One should consecrate the sprinkling of the Ashera with the verse, "You are the purifier, the servant of the Ashera. May there be blessings and nourishment."
3.12.17	The Pavamāna Sūkta is recited for the Pavamāna Stoma. The Suditti Sūkta is for the Ādityas. The Udgātṛs recite the Āditya Sūkta. The Avadāna Homa is offered to Agni.
3.12.18	The Indra-Agni Sūkta is offered in the Ukthya sacrifice, the Indra Sūkta in the Sodashin sacrifice, and the Sarasvati Sūkta in Atiratra sacrifice.
3.12.19	On the eleventh day of the dark fortnight, the Agni, Soma, Vishnu, Sarasvati, Pusan, Brihaspati, Visvedeva, Indra, Indra-Agni, Savitar, Varuna.
3.12.20	The Savanīya offerings etc. are made with the formulas, "Indra and Soma drink together" etc. The offerings are made with the Prāṣṭhyāyājya formulas. The offerings are to Indra, Mitra-Varuna, Indra-Brhaspati, Maruts, Tvashtri, Indra-Vishnu, Agni.
3.12.21	At the Havirdhāna-shed, they take up three Purorāśa-cakes from their respective places, towards the south, with the formula, "We offer this to you."
3.12.22	Having recited the formula, "Here are the Pitrs," he recites the formula, "This is your share; those who are seated here, the hawk with human eyes."
3.13.1	At the Agnidhra-shed, they consume the remnants of the oblation.
3.13.2	The Savitrī-graha-homa.
3.13.3	The Adhvaryu offers at the Dhiṣṇya-homa of the Vaiśvadevya-yājyā, with the formula, "To thee, O Agni, with the Pautnivat."
3.13.4	His Homa.
3.13.5	The Nestr sits down at the end of the Dhiṣṭhya or at the side of the Nestr and consumes.
3.13.6	He addresses the Agnistoma-sāman-chanter with the formula, “Thou art Ojas; I invoke thee for the Pitrs."
3.13.7	"He recites the verse, "Dhruva, Dhruva," while the Dhruva is being lowered down."
3.13.8	It has been stated that the Agnidhra is sent forth with the verse, "May the Agni-Maruts offer the oblation, the charming sacrifice."
3.13.9	The Homa of Hariyajana is offered with the verses beginning with "Mandra."
3.13.10	They go out with the same.
3.13.11	He offers all the expiatory oblations in the Agnidhra fire.
3.13.12	"All the Shakalas in the fire, you are the atonement for the sin committed by the gods. Svāhā! For the sin committed by fathers, by men, by oneself, by the unknown and the known, whatever we have done, O gods, with the tongue, or with the mind, or with the intention to deceive the gods, the sin of those who harm us, may that sin be placed on him. The two verses of the Devhaedana (hymn) are recited."
3.13.13	Having taken the cooked rice from the Drona-vessel, they throw it into the ashes.
3.13.14	The Soma-cups brought by the Adhvaryu from the Cātvāla are taken to water with the Vaisnavī verse.
3.13.15	They release the friendship with the verse, "Both the youthful sages have come from the truth, from the law, from the truth and law. We release the friendships."
3.13.16	They are connected with the friendship of the gods. They are connected with each other in the group of days, starting from the last.
3.13.17	At the Agnidhra-fire, they consume curd, reciting the verse, "O you who are fond of curd."
3.13.18	At the Patni-Samājas, he sits at the door of the house.
3.13.19	Going around the Dakṣiṇā-fire, passing beyond it on the right side, he offers the Samīṣṭayajus oblations at the conclusion of the rites.
3.13.20-22	In the Apasvapatha sacrifice, the offerings before the Apasvapt-sacrifice are offered with the formula, "Thou art in the waters." The offerings at the conclusion are offered with the formulas, "Thou art Varuna." "Thou art Agni." "Thou art Indra." "Thou art Soma." "Thou art Sarasvati." "Thou art Pusan." "Thou art Yama." "Thou art Varupa." "Thou art Vayu." "Thou art Rudra." "Thou art Bhaga." "Thou art Dhruva." "Thou art Mitra." "Thou art Aryaman." "Thou art Savitr." "Thou art Saranyu." "Thou art the sun." "Thou art Vishnu." "Thou art Vasava." "Thou art Prajapati." "Thou art Brahman." "Thou art Brahma." "Thou art Viras." "Thou art Virana." "Thou art Viraj." "Thou art Virocana." "Thou art Visvakarman." "Thou art Vishvakarman." Some perform the offerings at the conclusion of the Iḍā-offerings. He offers the curds smeared with Soma with the formulas, “The god has become the drops. The drops are in thy ladle.”
3.14.1	Whatever has been spilled from the stone, from thy arm, whatever has been spilled by men, whatever has been poured from thy hands, may that be augmented, may that be united. O Soma, king, whatever has been cut off by the stone, O Soma, king. Whatever dear limbs, well-done, many, have been cut off, may they be united by thee. May they be augmented by ghee. As long as thou art not injured, may we always be united. Whatever skin they have pierced, whatever womb, or if thou hast fallen from thy place, or if thou art of noble origin, O Soma, whatever has been spoiled by thee, O Soma, may we be united with that. O king, do thou call us to thy good deeds. Be united with the out-breath and in-breath, be united with the eye, be united with hearing, O Soma, O king. Whatever has been spoiled by thy, may that be reunited. Do thou know this. At the meeting of the paths of men, the body is united with the juice. One becomes of another colour. To him, O Indra, do we offer this oblation. May we be lords of wealth. The oblations flow with ghee. The limbs are augmented by thee. To thee, O Soma. This is the Vasat. O king, call us to thy goodness.
3.14.2	Having placed the black antelope skin, he sprinkles it.
3.14.3	With the verses beginning with "The waters" and ending with the sprinkling.
3.14.4	They exit with the verse "We rise up."
3.14.5	They return with the verse "From the waters we have obtained Soma, from heaven."
3.14.6	They stand near the Āhavanīya fire with the verse "The divine waters."
3.14.7	With the verses starting with "I release" and ending with wiping.
3.14.8	The Udayanīya and Prāyaniya are the fourth of the Pathyā.
3.14.9	The Antasthā (rites) are concluded.
3.14.10	One who is standing in the Aparajitā (rite) recites the mantra "Obeisance to the slayer of enemies" as desired.
3.14.11	If the Yūpa is eleven-fold, the Vapamajrna is Tvaṣṭra's animal.
3.14.12	The release of the animal that has been sprinkled with fire.
3.14.13	The Ajyāvadānahoma, the Vasa animal, and the Purorāśa are offered to the Devikā goddesses.
3.14.14	Having placed the fire on the kindling woods, he recites, "This is your birthplace." "By that form of yours, O Agni, which is fit for sacrifice, may I ascend. By that may I enter. This is your birthplace." on himself.
3.14.15	"The unmeasured, the unknown." while placing the altar.
3.14.16	"May the sacrifice of the one who has everything, the one who has all, be offered."
3.14.17	Having saluted with "You are Agni", they go out with the same (mantra).
3.14.18	He recites the verse "Upavaroh" while churning.
3.14.19	Thus is the Agniṣṭoma.
3.14.20	One should perform the sacrifice with one-fold (mantra) even if one has little wealth.
4.1.1	"He offers to the Hotr reciting the Agniṣṭoma-sāman, to the Udgātṛ reciting the Ṣoḍaśī-sāman at the Atiagniṣṭoma, to the Maitrāvaruṇa and others reciting the Uktha. "
4.1.2	These are the offerings to be made to Indra-Varuna, the two well-disciplined ones. Brihaspati has conquered both of you.
4.1.3	We have praised you, O most excellent one, who are here and there. The Stotriya and Anurupya verses.
4.1.4	Having chanted the first pada of the Stotriya, he chants the second pada of the second Stotriya by joining it with the last pada of the first Stotriya, and then chants the third pada by joining it with its own last pada.
4.1.5	Thus is the arrangement of the Kakubha Stotriyas and Anurupas.
4.1.6	He chants from here onwards.
4.1.7	For the most powerful, for the great, for the great one, is the Utkha-mukha.
4.1.8	The Udghatas, protecting the young, is the Barhaspatya Samanshika.
4.1.9	The thoughts of me, O Indra, knowing the heaven, is the Parayas.
4.1.10	Thus he concludes with the Ekahasika.
4.1.11	He offers with the Paraya.
4.1.12	They attend on the Graha in the Sodashin (cup) who has become all the worlds, from whom there is nothing greater or higher, Prajapati, in agreement with the creatures, he places the three luminaries. He says to the Hotri, "You are the Abhijit, you are yoked to the Indra-grava, you are for Indra."
4.1.13	"O Indra, accept the sixteen-graha offering." "O Indra, the sixteen-grahas are powerful. You are powerful among the gods. Make me powerful and long-lived among humans." "Having been invoked, I partake of the invoked one." They partake in pairs, three Chāndogas.
4.1.14	The Sattr is like the heat.
4.2.1	At the Atiratra, after the Hotr and others, he says, "You are the lord, for the Prāṇa, I invoke the Prāṇa. You are the supporter, for the Apāna, I invoke the Apāna. You are the creeper, for the eye, I invoke the eye. You are the protector, for the ear, I invoke the ear."
4.2.2	The offerings to Indra are from the Aśvin to the Aśvin.
4.2.3	The first verses of the Stotriya and Anurūpa are taken up again and sung in the middle section, the middle verses in the middle section and the last verses in the last section.
4.2.4	The Ahavaukthasampada is sung like the Pratsavana.
4.2.5	"O Indra, we are your friends, we are your supporters." Thus the Stotriya-Anurūpa.
4.2.6	Three verses are sung in the middle of all sections, the last verse is sung in the last section.
4.2.7	The Udūchi is the Paridhāniya. The Yañjya is the one that is recited when the water is sprinkled.
4.2.8	"The Madhyama is the Trivrit. For the Trivrit, I invoke the Trivrit for you. The Pravrit is the Pravrit. For Pravrit, I evoke the Pravrit for you." The Savrit is the Savrit. For Savrit, I evoke Savrit for you. "The Anuvrit is the Anuvrit. For Anuvrit, I evoke Anuvrit for you."
4.2.9	O Agni, the bulls have praised thee with the Soma juice, the lord of cows, the mountain. The Stotriya and Anurūpa verses.
4.2.10	O Agni, when thou art the lord of the house, the Paridhanīya and Prāgāraṃ pītiṃ the Yājyā verses.
4.2.11	The best is for mounting, I mount thee, I win the mounting. Thou art the spreading, I spread thee, I win spreading. Thou art the gathering, I gather thee, I win gathering. Thou art the following, I follow thee, I win following.
4.2.12	At every yoke they yoke thee, the red-coloured, the broad. These are the Anurupas of the Stotras.
4.2.13	The Prāṣaṇṇī verses are "The waters of the former ones." The Yājyā verses are "O Śaci, the bountiful one."
4.2.14	The Hotr priest recites the verses for the Asvin deities. "You are Vasu, you are Vasyaṣṭi, you are Vesaśrī. For Vasu, for Vasyaṣṭhi, for Vesaśrī, I invoke Vasu, I invoke Vasyaṣṭī, I invoke Vesaśrī."
4.2.15	Thus the Jyotiṣṭoma sacrifice is performed in four ways, except the Ati-Agniṣṭoma.
4.2.16	This is the natural form of Soma sacrifices.
4.3.1	The Vājapeya sacrifice is performed in autumn.
4.3.2	All of them have seventeen Stomas.
4.3.3	The priests wear golden garlands.
4.3.4	The Brhaspati-Iști is performed after the Marutvatīya and before the Iḍānta, from the Ajyabhāga.
4.3.5	When the sacrificer is ascending the sacrificial post, he says, "May I ascend the most excellent heaven of Savitr, the god, from the back of the earth."
4.3.6	Having ascended, he looks as far as he can see.
4.3.7	Having descended, he gives the sacrificial post garments to the Brahman, saying, "O Earth, my mother."
4.3.8	Having ascended the chariot-wheel in the holy place, facing Aparajita, seated looking at the horses and chariots, he sings the Vājasāma three times, saying, "The boundary has appeared, the strong ones have reached the strength, the swift ones have won heaven in the Savana of the god Savitar."
4.3.9	That is what you sing," says the Stotriya.
4.3.10	He pours down the Stotriyas of the Abhiplva stotra.
4.3.11	At the midday pressing, the Stotriya verse is: "O Indra, I have come to your sacrifice." The Anurūpa verse is: "Indra, the most excellent one, the most sweet one."
4.3.12	The Sāman-pratha is: "The new one among the flax."
4.3.13	The Ahīna-sūkta is to be recited.
4.3.14	At the third pressing, the Stotrīya and Anurūpa verses are: "He who knows this alone, he who drinks Soma, O Indra."
4.3.15	Above the sixteen-fold Hotr, one does not become. You are Prajapati. I invoke you, Prajapati, the conqueror."
4.3.16	Some recite the Brihaspati-sava as the Pariyajna.
4.3.17	In the Apto-ryama, one recites the Garbhakara.
4.3.18	The Stotriya is "They yoke the tawny-colored one, the spreading one." The Anuvaka is "Come!"
4.3.19	"Break thou all foes asunder." The Anurupas are on both sides. "Come to us."
4.3.20	The Avapti is like the Vajapeya.
4.3.21	In the Madhyandina (Satra) the Anustubh verses "O Indra, thy hundred," and "O Indra, as far as thou art," are on both sides of the Stotriyas.
4.3.22	The Samas are "O Indra, be a shelter in three ways."
4.3.23	The Sukiirti-Vrshakapisam, the Sama-hymn, the Aahina-hymn, and the Aavapata-hymn.
4.3.24	At the third pressing, the hymn to the well-formed creator, the most powerful, the hymn to be recited before and after, the hymn to Suraptakritnu.
4.3.25	The remaining is as in the sixth day of the Paushtika Sadaha, with the Atiratra.
4.3.26	In the additional verses, the Hotr and others are invoked. The verse is for the purpose of invocation. For invocation thee, invoke the invocation. The verse is of crossing. For crossing thee, invoke the crossing. The verse is the crossing. For crossing thou, invoke the crossing, the verse is the crossing out. For crossing out thee, invoke the cross out. The verse is crossing out. For the crossing out thee, invokes the crossing out.
5.1.2	At the great vow, always.
5.1.3	In Phālguni, at the Sattra, in Pauṣya, in accordance with the qualities of that (month).
5.1.4	At the Prajāpati animal sacrifice, he recites "You are the fire that is being kindled" after the Samidhāmanī (verse).
5.1.5	"He who gives the self" is recited for the cutting (of the animal).
5.1.6	On the eighth day, the cauldron should be filled.
5.1.7	The Stoma is recited with eight grasped (verses).
5.1.8	"You are Agni," as the lump of clay is being drawn around.
5.1.9	"You are the one who is to be purified," as it is being touched.
5.1.10	"You, O Agni," as it is placed on a lotus leaf.
5.1.11	"The waters are your seat," as it is sprinkled with a Palasha twig.
5.1.12	"You the earth, in the earth," as the pot is being made. The part about making it again is from Bhagalī.
5.1.13	The third (verse) is recited when the oblation is being cooked.
5.1.14	At the moonless fortnight, at the consecration, at the worship of Vaisvānara and Aditya, when the oblations are being placed on the fire, the verses beginning with "O Agni, whatever" are recited.
5.1.15	The verse "May it be firm for me" is recited when the fire is being raised.
5.1.16	The verse beginning with "I have brought it to you" is recited when it is raised.
5.1.17	The verses beginning with "The highest" are recited when the nooses are being released.
5.1.18	He carries the fire-pan for a year. It is immediately (used).
5.1.19	He recites the verse, "Do thou bring us" at the time of carrying the grass.
5.1.20	"The embryo of plants" at the time when the fire-pan is being filled with ashes.
5.1.21	"With wealth do thou return" with two verses at the time when it is being filled and taken up.
5.1.22	"To thee again" at the time the fire-pan with fuel is being placed.
5.1.23	At the end of the consecration, he should offer the Veda-fire.
5.1.24	Having offered the Garhapatya fire, he should say, "Go away, go away."
5.1.25	"This is your place," while the bricks are being placed in the Garhapatyaga.
5.1.26	"Salutations to you, O Nirriti," while wearing the garment for the Pitrs, he should offer to Nirriti.
5.1.27	"What is yours, O Goddess," while offering the golden noose to Nirriti, which has come from the east.
5.1.28	Having approached without looking back, they stand by the Gārhapatya with the verse addressed to Indra, "We approach the place of meeting."
5.1.29	The Pravargya and other rites.
5.1.30	"The ploughs are being yoked" - while the plough is being yoked.
5.1.31	"The Plough is being driven by the Paviras" - while it is being driven.
5.1.32	"In the prepared womb" - while the seeds are being sown.
5.1.33	"Brahma, the born" - while the gold is being deposited.
5.1.34	"Hiranyagarbha" means the golden man.
5.2.1	"Madhuvata" means the tortoise being anointed.
5.2.2	"Vishnoh karmaani" means the mortar and pestle being placed.
5.2.3	"Ajah hi" means the head of a goat.
5.2.4	The morning Upasads are performed after the piling up of the bricks.
5.2.5	To Indra, the slayer of Vritra, to the strong, the swift, the terrible, the universal, the protector, the giver of wealth, the giver of food, the giver of strength, the giver of light, the giver of life, the giver of happiness, the giver of joy, the giver of bliss, the giver of peace, the giver of prosperity, the giver of good fortune, the giver of fame, the giver of glory, the giver of power, the giver of lordship, the giver of sovereignty, the giver of heaven, the giver of the world of heaven, the one who gives the world of heaven.
5.2.6	With two verses beginning with "Agni, born..." the bricks are placed in the fifth layer, the layer of the enemy-less.
5.2.7	With thirty-one Stomabhāga verses, the Stomabhāgikī verses.
5.2.8	"You, O Agni, from the lotus, they have awakened the Gāyatrī verses; Agni, they have awakened, the Tristubh verses; Agni, the Anushtubh verses; Agni the Hotar, they have awakened. The Atichandas verses; the Garhapatya praise.
5.2.9	This Agni is the lord of truth, by whom the thousand, they have awakened again."
5.2.10	O ye gods Bhava and Sarva, be gracious to us. The serpents are yours.
5.2.11	The stone is my armour.
5.2.12	From the sprinkling of the fire-place, the Adhvaryu sprinkles the altar with the verse, "The divine waters."
5.2.13	This is the water of the snow, this is the water of Vetasa. The water is here. The frogs are being pulled away from the Vetasa in the southern and other directions.
5.2.14	"He who is the lord of all," at the Upavasatha (rite), of the sixteen-fold half (of the Soma). "He is our father, the generator," of the other half."
5.2.15	"He should lead it upwards," when the kindling woods are being placed."
5.2.16-20	He sends forth the Apatiratha (oblation) reciting the Apatirathas. They ascend the altar with four verses beginning with "Follow ye Agni." Those being placed on the fire are recited with the verse, "That Savitr." He recites the verse, "The four-horned one is worshipped." He recitess three verses beginning with "O Agni, do thou." "The offspring of Vaja" are the oblations at the Vaja-prasava.
5.2.21	He recites the verse, "May they sprinkle me" while being sprinkled.
5.2.22	"Those who enjoy this place together" and "With whom is a thousand" are the offerings to Visvakarman.
5.3.1	One who has kindled the fire, one who has purified Soma, one who has drunk Soma, and one who is consecrated for the Sautrāmaṇī sacrifice are consecrated.
5.3.2	One who desires to attain the best of the best is consecrated.
5.3.3	One whose Soma has not been offered is not consecrated.
5.3.4	The Āditya sacrifice.
5.3.5	Indra's animal.
5.3.6	"The brown ones, the ones who drink the juice, are the plants, the Soma being mixed with them."
5.3.7	"The Soma is purified by Vayu," the Soma being purified by Soma.
5.3.8	"The Soma-drinkers, the Soma before," with a changed form.
5.3.9	"O Adhvaryu, the Soma pressed by the stones, pour it into the strainer, purify it for Indra to drink." The Adhvaryu is purifying the Soma.
5.3.10	When the clarified butter is taken up, he takes up the Pāyusuragrahas with the verse, "O ye two, O ye two, O Angiras, when the barley is taken up."
5.3.11	The four verses beginning with "Vapāmarjanād yuvaṃ suram" are for taking up the Pāyu-suragrahas. The Suragrahas are not to be consumed.
5.3.12	"The Asvins, at the request of Sarasvati, have brought down from the sky the bright, sweet, and shining Soma, the king, for Indra. I now drink it here."
5.3.13	"May they purify me in the words of the Argarata mountains, where the hundred-streamed river is flowing."
5.3.14	"Let it be uttered." He recites twice, "The Fathers seated on the sacrificial grass have been invoked. The Fathers, the Agni-swittas." He recites five times.
5.3.15	"Let it be uttered. Let it be uttered." While being consecrated for the sacrifice to Vanaspati, he makes him recite, "Om, Bhurbhuvah, Svarjanad, Om."
5.3.16	The Maruts, the singers of Indra, the great, the slayer of Vrtra, by whom they have generated light, the increaser of truth, the god for the god, the waking one, sings the Samanas in the Brihatī Indra-stotra.
5.3.17	They bind thee together with the binders, they join thee together, they fashion thee together, they have fashioned thee together. These are the Pratipads.
5.3.18	The names of the sacrificial posts are: Saṃśravas, Viśravas, Satyaśravas, Śravas.
5.3.19	The names of the sacrificial stakes are: Saṃjitya, Vijitya, Satyajitya, Jitya. For the Kshatriya, the names of the sacrificial poles are: Saṃpuṣṭi, Vipuṣṭi Satya-puṣṭi and Puṣṭi. For the Vaishya, the names of sacrificial poles are:
5.3.20	All the sacrificial posts are used.
5.3.21	From the Barhi Homa comes Avabhrtha.
5.3.22	When the pot is being filled with water, the verse is recited: "What the gods..."
5.3.23-27	The garment is like that of Drupada. The Maitrāvaruṇa priest offers the Āmīkṣā-oblation. The animal is for Indra, the sustainer of life. The Āditya-oblation. The verse beginning with "He who is far away" is recited with the Pranava at the end. They stand up with the mantra as prescribed.
6.1.1	Those who are going to perform the Sattra should be initiated by the Brahmanas on the eleventh day before the Magha month, with the exception of seventeen.
6.1.2	The householder should be the first to be initiated.
6.1.3	They offer oblations to the fires in the fire of the householder.
6.1.4	On the Ekastaka day of the bright fortnight, having cooked a cake on four potsherds, one should observe the Kshama rite in the morning, contemplating the deities mentioned in the mantra "This is our lord of heaven".
6.1.5	If it burns, it becomes equal to merit. If it does not burn, it becomes equal in sin.
6.1.6	Now the Gavayana rite.
6.1.7	The Prāyaniya (Sāman) is the twenty-fourth, the four Abhiplīvana (Sāmans), the Prsthyas (Sāmans) are the first month.
6.1.8	Thus four (Sāmans are) except the Prāyaniya and the twenty-fourth.
6.1.9	Three Abhiplīvana, the Prsthyā, the Abhijit, the Svarasāman (Sāmans)-this is the sixth month.
6.1.10	The Atirikta (Sāman), the Ātman, the Visuva (Sāman).
6.1.11	The northern half of the year is repeated.
6.1.12	The seven are the Svarasāma, Viśvajit, Pṛṣṭhya, and the four Abhipavas.
6.1.13	Thus there are four, excluding Svarasāma and Viśvajit.
6.1.14	The two Abhipavas, Gavāmayana, Dasātra, Urdhvastomas, Mahāvrata, and Udayaniya - these are the twelve.
6.1.15	This verse describes it. There are two Atiratras, six hundred Agniṣṭomas, two hundred and twenty Ukthyas, twelve Ṣoḍaśins, sixty Ṣaḍhas, and the Vaisuvata. In the twenty-fourth (day), the Ajyastotriya is "Indra, indeed, the poets praise you greatly" or "O Indra, come, O you of variegated radiance".
6.1.16	The third and the subsequent Stotriya verses are to be recited in the Abhiplava manner.
6.1.17	"The two Barhaspatya verses, "We invoke you, O Suradhasa, the well-known Suradhasa," and "Do not praise anything else, whatever the people here may say," are the Anurupas of the Stotriyas."
6.1.18	"The verse, "To him who is ready for the Turāyās, to him who is ready to give," is to be recited in accordance with the Ahīna Sūkta.
6.1.19	The Upavasatha-hymn is: "He who knows the one, who knows Indra, the drinker of Soma, he alone is the lord of all." The Upavasathayajus is: "Come to the Abhijit, to the Visuva, to the Vishvajit, to the Mahavrata." The Upavsathayajus has the Upavasathamantra as its anuvakya.
6.1.20	The six Ajyastotras are: "Come to Abhijit, for your good wishes are good." They are to be recited except for the Armbhaniya and Parivatsa.
6.1.21	To Indra, the slayer of Vrtra, the most vigorous, the most bountiful, come, O Indra, to our draught, as thou didst to Madhucchanda's. As I, O Indra, may be like thee, like the wave of the sea, like the juice, so pour out the verses.
6.1.22	"To him, the strong, the slayer of the foe," are the two verses of the Stotra and Anuvāka.
6.1.23	"To the impeller, the strong," are the two Yugma verses.
6.1.24	Indra, the breaker of forts, has surpassed the Dāsa with his rays. He who is to be worshipped by the hosts, who is the fierce-horned bull, the terrible one, among the Sampātas, each day, he pours down on the Prsthya Chandomas.
6.1.25	And in the middle ones, for you are indeed the protector of heroes. The Ukthas and Anurupas say this.
6.1.26	The Paruṣīpīrs are placed in front of the two Savanas, of the Prāstḥit Yajyas, with the verse, "The one who pours (Soma) attains the sixth of the Pṛṣṭhas. Thou art praised in all the Savanas." The Rtuyaajyas are placed above with the verse, “The Yajyas are mixed with the sacrifices, with the sharp-pointed arrows.
6.2.1	In the sixth day, the Ajyastotriya hymns are like the Abhipava. The first two days have the Prathma and the Anurupa hymns.
6.2.2	In the third day, there is the Sasahi hymn in the Vajapeya. It has five verses.
6.2.3	In the fourth day, there are nine verses beginning with "Purustuta's abode."
6.2.4	In the fifth day, there are fifteen verses beginning with "If I am like you, O Indra."
6.2.5	In the sixth day, there are twenty-one verses beginning with "To the lord of cattle, to the mountain."
6.2.6	The third and other stotras have the same anurūpa as the Prsthastotra, viz.
6.2.7	In the fourth stotra, there are six verses before the Sampata, beginning with "For thee these three pressing-times, O hero, all" and three verses in half-verses.
6.2.8	In the fifth stotra, there is a Paṅkta stotra of seven verses, two verses each, and the fifth is completed by three verses and two verses.
6.2.9	In the sixth (verse) he says, "You are the sixth, the united, the united ones," and having taken each of the seven verses, he connects two (verses) together. Having taken two (verses), he connects two (more).
6.2.10	"He who has placed in the forest, he who desires," is the eight-versed (verse).
6.2.11	The Anurupas of the Upavasatha are in the middle.
6.2.12	In the sixth (verse) are the two feet, 'Which worlds did they support? The gods went to slay the Asuras.'
6.2.13	'O Indra, O Maghavan, go against the enemies.' The fourth (verse) is in half-verses.
6.2.14	The Vrsakapi metre is so called because it flows like a bull. It consists of two feet, and the second foot has an extra syllable. The first and third feet have the first and last syllables respectively, and the second and fourth syllables are lengthened. The first, fourth, eighth and twelfth syllables are lengthened, and the second, third, fifth and sixth syllables are lengthened.
6.2.15	The first and third syllables are lengthened in the Ninnarda metre.
6.2.16-18	Example. For Indra, the god, did not see the stream of his own blood, where the bull, the lord, was intoxicated among the fat ones. "He is the best among all, Indra, he is above all." "In the house, he roared in his intoxication. "The god is intoxicated." "The god is strong."
6.2.19	This is the Kuntipa, consisting of fourteen half-verses, to be recited in order.
6.2.20	These horses are swimming, this is the Aitash-prajapam, to be recited by order, and with the last foot of it he recites.
6.2.21	The two rays are spread out, these are the Pravalhakas.
6.2.22	Here is east, here is west, here is north, here is south, thus he does not extend the Pratiraddhanas.
6.2.23	"Bhug" means "approached". There are three words ending with "i" and "a" in the nominative case.
6.2.24	There are fifteen oaths, such as "Pravalhika" and others.
6.2.25	The Dundubhi, the Ahanana, the Jaritara, the Uthama, the Daivakosha, the Rajani, the Granthi, the Daman, the Padam, the Uttamam, the Janim, the Janyam, the Uttanam, the Janim Varmanyan, the Alabu, the Prishatakam, the Ashvattha, the Palasha, the Pipilika, the Vatam, the Shvasah, the Vidyut, the Shva, the Parna, the Shasah, the Go, the Shapha, the Jarit, and the Purvasu, the Purvasu.
6.2.26	The gods have been praised too much.
6.2.27	O Jātavedas, when the wife is seen, we are praised by the divine Hotṛ with the Vīṣṭīmantra. O Jātavedasa, we are praised in the divine. This is the Pratigraha.
6.2.28	O Jātāvedas, the Ādityas. This is the Devānītha. It is like the Aitashpralāpa.
6.2.29	O Jätāvedas, thus, O Jätāvedasa. This is the Vyatyāsa Pratigraha
6.2.30	You, O Indra, are the protector. This is the Bhūtecchada.
6.2.31	"What is her most excellent form?" he says. "Like Vrishakapi."
6.2.32	"The response is 'Eka'. What is this? Is it 'O' or 'O'? Or is it 'O'? Or 'O'? Or, 'O'? Or a divine (sound)?"
6.2.33	"I have performed the Dhadhikravan (rite). The Soma-pressers are the most intoxicated with honey." The Pavamanis (verses) are recited. "The drop has stood on the shining (Soma)." The last verse.
6.2.34	He places it with the best (verse), or with the constant (verse).
6.2.35	Some let loose the Aindra-Jagat (verses) at the end, others after reciting the Aindra-Barhaspatya and the last Jagat (verses).
6.3.1	On the ninth day, the Abhijit, the Visuva, the Vishvajiti, the twenty-four verses, except the Uktha, and all the Abhiplvikas.
6.3.2	The bulls have raised thee with the Soma juice, the heard, the praised, the praised, they yoke the ruddy steed, the moving, the moving, thus the Stotriyas.
6.3.3	Come to the Svara and the Sama, for thy praise is great. The singers praise Indra, thou art with Indra, thou art united with Indra.
6.3.4	The rest of the Abhijit is like the second and third days of the Tri-day sacrifice. The Avapti consists of five verses.
6.3.5	At the Visuvat (equinox) on the solar back, "He has risen, the knower of beings," are the six Stotriya verses.
6.3.6	"The variegated army of the gods has risen, that is the divine nature of the sun, that is its greatness," are the Anurupya verses of the back. "You are great, O Sun, they are approaching like the sun," or "O Indra, I bring the will, I bring the best will."
6.3.7	The two verses, "You are eternal in the northern half, suitable, you are the one who overcomes, the one who is praised, the one who delights in Soma" and "The one who is suitable for the Naudhasa sacrifice, the one who desires" are the two verses from the same source.
6.3.8	The two verses, "The sky is the measure of Vaishvanara, the one who heals, the bull, the bird" are the remaining verses from the same hymn.
6.3.9	The Visvajit is the Vairāja-Prstha. The verses beginning with "O Indra, thy hundred powers" and "O Indra, as far as thou art" are the Anurūpa stotras of the Prstha. They are in the Bāṛhaspatya scale.
6.3.10	The third verse is "O Indra, I bring thee the sacrifice as thou hast spoken."
6.3.11	The Sāman-Prathā is "O Indra who art three-fold, be our refuge."
6.3.12	The hymn of the Samaveda, "He who was born as the first intelligent one, Sukirti and Vrishakapin," is the Aahina hymn.
6.3.13	The Dasha-ratra is mentioned as the Prsthya.
6.3.14	The hymns of the Chandomas are "O Indra, come with your variegated rays," "We invoke that Indra who is great and powerful," and "Indra, the mighty one."
6.3.15	The twelve-versed hymn, "Thou art the creator of beauty, the bestower of wealth," the thirty-two-versed hymn, "May thy union with us be auspicious," the sixty-versed hymn, "He who is to be worshipped by those who are to be worshipped,"
6.3.16	"We are the drinkers of thy Soma," etc., and ending with "Thou art the great one in the sun," are the Anurupas of the Prstha Stotra.
6.3.17	The two verses in the Uttara-saman are "May the truthful Maghavan come" and "The one who pours down".
6.3.18	In the other great Stotras, the two verses are "He alone knows" and the Uktha-stotra and Anurudra.
6.3.19	In the second (day), the Adhvaryus (recite), "The Adhvaryus have milked the reddish-coloured milk, the ray, which has suddenly supported the ends, like a cloud, spreading out widely." These are the daily (verses).
6.3.20	In the third (day), the verses are, "The Adhvarus (recite) the reddish-coloured one, the destroyer of mountains, the first-born, truthful, Indra, the lord, for drinking."
6.3.21	The one who broke the mountains, the seven-headed, the father, is the same for both, either in the middle, or at the beginning or end.
6.3.22	The tenth stoma is like the fourth of the Prsthya stoma, excluding the Utkha.
6.3.23	"O Indra, may they praise thee" is the Ajyastotriya.
6.3.24	"Thou art praised, O Indra, the most sweet, thy praise is praised" are the Anurupya stotras of the Prstha stoma.
6.3.25	The priests, having made the mental Stotra, proceed to the Sadas.
6.3.26	All the rites are performed mentally.
6.3.27	The Hotr says, "Thou art the ascent of the Hotr, I invoke thee with the mind, O Mind." He releases it.
6.3.28	He recites, "This is the cow."
6.3.29	He recites the Udumbara verse, "Thou art Dhriti, thou art Svadhriti," and places it in the middle.
6.4.1	When the stars have appeared, they go out and recite this verse: "You two, Indra and Parvata, are the vanguard warriors. He who would harm us, that one you should strike with the thunderbolt. He who would strike us, that one should be struck with the thunderbolt. The one who is far away, the one who is hidden, the one who has struck us, may the hero destroy our enemies from all sides. May the destroyer destroy them from all sides."
6.4.2	Having gone by the path of the Adhvaryu, having sat down to the south-west of the fire, having desired the desires, having gone to the father Prajapati, that which he did not do here, that which he transgressed, he says, "May it be here."
6.4.3	Standing, they invite speech: "May speech come, may speech approach, may speech approach me."
6.4.4	In the Subrahmanya.
6.4.5	One who does not study should recite "Om, the good Brahman" three times.
6.4.6	The Ajyastotriya (hymn) is "In the great vow, the creator of beauty, the one who protects."
6.4.7	The Avapata and Abhiplava hymns are "Seeing the shining ones, the ones who are like clouds."
6.4.8	At midday, the Hotrakas sit down after making their seats.
6.4.9	He recites the formula for the cows going away to graze, "The cows are fragrant, the cows are fragrant with the smell of frankincense, the cows are the mothers of ghee, may they be abundant here. This is honey. The cows did not drink the water of the river Gangā, they drank the water of the Sarasvatī river. They went to the east. This is honey." "We cross this river, like crossing a ford. We have scattered for you. The song of the one who has a horse and a chariot, when the song is sung. This is honey, when the gift-giver Raghatī gave the tiger to Mangīra, the people prosper in the kingdom of King Parikshit."
6.4.10	This is honey, this is honey.
6.4.11	In the wife's house, they strike a drum made of earth, covered with camel skin, at the tail, with the sound "High sound, breathe up."
6.4.12	In the sacred place, they strike the king or another with the words "These are the vital points."
6.4.13	Having armed himself, he recites the mantra "Indra conquers, he conquers."
6.4.14	He makes the Madhuparka offering to the one who is armed. The Brahman makes him accept it.
6.4.15	He makes the chariot ascend, reciting, "O Vanaspat, O Vīḍvaṅga."
6.4.16	He recites, "May they be uplifted," to the one who has ascended.
6.4.17	He releases the fourth arrow, reciting, "Released, may it fall away."
6.4.18	When he takes the Brahman's wealth, the sacrificer buys it.
6.4.19	The Stotriya and Anurūpa are "In the three-peaked mountains, the buffalo is in front of him."
6.4.20	"Protect him from the fierce and strong one," one should sow twenty-four seeds.
6.4.21	Then, if one is in a hurry, one should perform the Jyotiṣṭoma, Agniṣṭoma, Atmanishtrayana, Sahasradakṣiṇa, Pṛṣṭhaśamanīya.
6.5.1	One praises the Stoma as it is.
6.5.2	One praises Stoma with one or two (verses). One should not go beyond twelve.
6.5.3	In the case of the six-day Stotriya-Avāpā.
6.5.4	With unlimited (verses) in the two later Savanas.
6.5.5	Anurūpa is the one that corresponds to the Chanda and Devatas.
6.5.6	In ignorance, the Stotriya is recited twice.
6.5.7	In the single-day (Satra), the Anurupas are added after the Pratiras.
6.5.8	The Prathas are recited at midday.
6.5.9	The Anurupas of the next day are added to the beginning of the year.
6.5.10	"O Indra, having gone around from all sides, the beginning of the Anurup."
6.5.11	"Having crossed the atmosphere, the Parayas."
6.5.12	The Madhyandinaka Kanva is the new one of the Atasi. This is the Kanda-Vant-Sāma-Pragaṭha.
6.5.13	"Brahmanā te brahmayujā yunajmi" is the Ārambhaṇīya.
6.5.14	We shall explain the Stotras for the Atiśaṃsana.
6.5.15	The Trivṛt, Pañcadaśa and Saptadaśa Stotras are the stotras of the Go, Ajya and Ayus respectively. The two Prsthas are Saptadaśa.
6.5.16	The Uktha is of twenty-one verses. In the Prsthya Stomas, the Trivrt, Pañcadaśa, Saptadaśa, Ekavimśa, Trinava, Trayastrimsa.
6.5.17	In the Ajyastomas of Abhijit and Visvajit, the Pañcadaśaka and Ekavimśaka are in the Prstha, the Trinava and Trayastrimsa are in the Udgītha.
6.5.18	In the Svarasāma, the Saptadaśaka.
6.5.19	In the Visuva, the Ekavimśika.
6.5.20	The number of verses in the Chandomeshu is twenty-four, forty-four, and sixty-four.
6.5.21	The tenth is twenty-one in the Ajyapashtyas.
6.5.22	The twenty-fifth is in the Mahavrata.
6.5.23	In all places, the Sthastomasthaniya is based on the Samaveda and based on the Samavedas.
7.1.1	Now comes the Rajasuya.
7.1.2	The Pavitra is before the Taisya.
7.1.3	The Dasamsaṃsṛpa is in the intervening months.
7.1.4-8	The consecration is done on the full moon day of Māgha. The Iṣṭi to Brhaspati is performed after the Marutvatīya. He makes the person ascend on the seat of skin of tiger placed in front of the Havirdhāna and the Sadas, and consecrates him with the formula, "You are the spirit among the spirits." The Dasapāyina is performed on the full moon of Phālguna. The Cāturmāsya rites are performed for a year.
7.1.9	And when the Caitra month is over, the Prativarohani ceremony is performed.
7.1.10	The Vyushti ceremony is performed on the second day of the Vaishākha month.
7.1.11	The Kshatradhriti ceremony is performed on Jyeshtha day.
7.1.12	The Pavitra ceremony is performed on Ashadha day for the purpose of settling down.
7.1.13	Now, the Asvamedha ceremony.
7.1.14	On Phalguna day, he gives Brahmau-dana to the four Udgātṛs.
7.1.15	When the morning oblation has been offered, he gives a boon to Brahma.
7.1.16	The Agniṣṭoma and Pauṣṭika sacrifices.
7.1.17	When a horse is being yoked, one should recite this mantra: "May it be a destroyer of wind."
7.1.18	When it is being released, one should recite: "May it approach you, O old one."
7.1.19	When it has been released by the owner of the horse.
7.1.20	The Savitrī sacrifices are performed for three years.
7.1.21	For the narration of the Pariplāva, they sit on golden seats to the south of the altar.
7.1.22	The Kasi-pupa-barhana is the Brahmana's seat, the Yajamana's seat.
7.1.23	In the narratives, he recites the Vyahrtis according to the Vedas.
7.1.24	The initiation at the end of the year, the twenty-one initiations.
7.1.25	The first day is like the Abhiplava, the second like the Prathya-catutrtha.
7.1.26	When the horse is being yoked for the Bahispavamāna, he addresses it with the verse, "May the Gandharvas unite with you, may the waters, the rivers, the Samvaidyas, the Parivatsaras unite with you. Those who protect you always, may Savitar, the knower, protect them and the life of the cow."
7.1.27	"The divine Gandharva" - this is said by Kausika.
7.1.28	Having placed the wife in the sacrificial enclosure, they cover her with the garment.
7.1.29	The sacrificer strikes them with the verse, "May you be covered with the heavenly world. Place the anus on the thighs. Bring the lower garment. What is the food of living women?"
7.1.30	The Brahman, by the Hotr and the Maitra-varuna, raises her upwards, like a man carrying a load on a mountain, and then she is heated in the middle, like a cloth in the cold wind.
7.1.31	"He raises her upwards." This is the instruction for the Brahman.
7.1.32	In the assembly, the Hotr and Maitra-varuni ask the Brahman-reciter.
7.2.1	I ask you, O friend of the gods, if you know, if you have thought about it, in which of the three steps of Vishnu, the conqueror, the world entered.
7.2.2	He replied to the question, "It entered the five inner ones." Those five inner ones are entrusted to me. I am thinking about this for you. Do not be a worshipper of sacrifice. Be better than me.
7.2.3	You speak these words to me, the teacher, saying, "You are not my equal."
7.2.4	Having gone out, I ask the sacrificer, "What is the farthest end of the earth?" The sacrificer says, "This is the altar."
7.2.5	The third day has two Savanas like the twenty-fourth.
7.2.6	The Ajyastoma and Anurupas are as usual.
7.2.7	The third Savana is like the Atiratra.
7.2.8	The Visakha-post is set up with five animals.
7.2.9	Six animals are offered in each season, to Agni, Indra, Maruts, Mitra-Varuna, Indra-Varuna, and Agni-Visnu.
7.2.10	The animals offered in the Visakha-post are doubled in the Purushamedha and quadrupled in the Sarvamedha.
7.2.11	The Purushamedha is like the Asvamedha.
7.2.12	Before the Caitra month, till the end of the bestowal of boons, the Iṣṭis are offered to Agni, Kāma, Dātr, and Pathīkṛt.
7.2.13	He proclaims loudly to the people, "May everything conquered by the sacrificer be united."
7.2.14	The sacrificer says, "To whom should I give my thousand horses and my own kinsmen? With whom should I attain it?"
7.2.15	If a brahmin or a kshatriya should succeed, they say that the rite is accomplished.
7.2.16	If he does not succeed, he should sacrifice after defeating his enemy.
7.2.17	He should give that to his relatives.
7.2.18	He should proclaim loudly, "I will take all the wealth of the one with whom his wife speaks and kill her, the non-brahmin."
7.2.19	When he is bathed and adorned, a thousand-armed man, standing by, asks, "By whom is the heel (of the sacrificer) touched?"
7.2.20	The Iṣṭis are performed for a year for the sake of the path and welfare, for Aditi and Anumati.
7.2.21	At the end of the year, the animal sacrifice to Indra-Pūṣan.
7.2.22	The third month is Mahāvrata.
7.2.23	When the sacrificial post is being bound, he recites three times, "May it rise up." And when it is being released, he recites the Udasanī verses.
7.2.24	With the Hariṇī verses, the fire-wood is being carried.
7.2.25	When it is being placed, with two verses, "May it be firm for him."
7.2.26	With the verses of Yamasa and Sarasvata, the sacrificial post is consecrated.
7.3.1	Then for the sacrificer of medicines, he releases the eyes with the verse, "I release thee from thy eyes, O god, may thy sight go away. May the wind go away. May it go away." The Brahman recites the verse, "The well-flowing ones are dwelling together."
7.3.2	One should follow the eastern direction.
7.3.3	It is said, "Rise up, O woman."
7.3.4	"What the fathers did not do," all recite.
7.3.5	The cows, from the Brahma-world, have gone to the barley-field. The Aryas have seen them grazing together with their herdsmen. The Aryas are coming together from all sides. How much does the husband of the cows love them? (Thus) the Udgātṛ (praises).
7.3.6	In the question, whose daughter is not blind, who knows her, and who thinks of her? Who is the one who is released from her? Who carries her, or who would choose her?
7.3.7	The fourth and fifth are the Pratiprasthātr and the Agnīdhra. The fourth and fifth are Pratiprasthātṛ and Agnīdhra, the fifth is the Atiratra.
7.3.8	If the Upavasatha is in the middle, then the Agnīṣṭoma is in the end.
7.3.9	The wives of the priests of the horse sacrifice are the ones who give instructions. There are two kinds.
7.3.10	The Aśvamedha has two days, the Puruṣamedha three days, the Sarvamedha is like the Puruṣa-medha.
7.3.11	The Agniṣṭoma, the Indraṣṭoma, Sūryaṣṭoma, Vaisvadevṣṭoma, and the Pauruṣameḍhika are the fifth. The Vājapeya and the Aptoryāma are the sixth.
7.3.12	In this (sacrifice) they offer all the Medhas.
7.3.13	The Viśvajit is the last of the Prāṣṭhras, the Atiratra is the tenth.
7.3.14	At the end of the year, having struck the lower kindling wood on the Garhapatya fire, and the upper kindling wood on Āhavanīya, having touched the fire on oneself with the formula, "This is your womb," one should go forth to the forest.
7.3.15	Thus says Medhātithi for the Kṣatriya.
8.1.1	Now the variations of the Stotriya.
8.1.2	In the single-day rites, one recites, "We praise that your intoxication."
8.1.3	O ye who are born of Brihaspati, may we sing to you, O ye who are united with Sacha. This is the hymn of the two Savanas, beginning with the Ukthamukha and ending with the Parayasa. The Madhyandina Parayasa begins with the third verse and excludes the first two verses.
8.1.4	"In the Go Sava and the Abhishecana Savanas, they recite, "They yoke the red-coloured Brhaspati."
8.1.5	The thunderbolt, the hawk's beak, the rock, the arrow, the spear, the sword, the axe, the dart, the mace, the club, the staff, the stone, the pestle, the sling, the bow, the arrow, and the spear, may they be thy protection.
8.1.6	The former ones have not been drunk before, but the later ones have been drunk before.
8.1.7	In the Vratya Stotras, they say, "Come, sit here. O Indra, the singer,
8.1.8	In the Agniṣṭoma, the verses are: "We choose Agni as our messenger, we choose Agni as our guest, we choose Agni for our abode. O Agni, come with the fires."
8.1.9	In the Tīvrāsudupaśada and Upahvya, the verses are "This is your (Agni's) limit, O Agni, you who have many riches." The verses are for the Vyūṣti and Dvyahe.
8.1.10	At the Gosava, Vivadha, and Vaishvadev Stotras, they praise Indra thus: "O Indra, come to us from all sides, as the one who is worthy of offerings in all directions."
8.1.11	At the Pratichina Stotra, they praise him thus: "O Indu, you are the protector in battles."
8.1.12	At the Raji Stotra, they say: "You are the king of the people."
8.1.13	At the Udhib and Balhibhi Stotras, they say: Indra was praised by the Yajna.
8.1.14	Indra, bring forth the praise of Indra, thy great power, thy might.
8.1.15	In the gathering of his wrath, in the midst of his fury, that was his highest place among the worlds.
8.1.16	The Sun-hymn: The bright one, the all-knowing, the banner of the gods, the army,
8.1.17	In the Vajra-hymn: Thou, O Indra, art the bearer.
8.1.18	O Marut, the leader of all, in the Sahasra-Antya Stoma, you are the best. We praise you, O Marut, with the Sahasra Stoma.
8.1.19	In the Sahasra and Sahasra-adyas, the Sahasra is the best.
8.2.1	The Stoma of Indra-Agni is in the Viraj, the Stoma of Indra and Agni is in the Kulaya, Indra, in the Soma pressed for thee, Indra, in thy Madavana, the Soma pressed for Indra-Vishnu.
8.2.2	The Stoma of Agni is in the Viraja, the Stoma is in the Kulaja, we choose Agni as our messenger, O Agni, do thou be gracious to us.
8.2.3	The two kinds of wealth, the two kinds of wealth-obtaining, the two kinds, the two kinds-obtaining, and the two kinds of kingship, may the slayer of Vritra hear today, and may he hear both.
8.2.4	In the Rajasuya sacrifices, the Soma is offered to Indra-Vishnu. O Indra, the lord of the world, thou art without a rival. Thou art the bearer of the four-day, five-day, ten-day, and Chandomas-ten-day sacrifices.
8.2.5	In the Tivra-suci and Catuh-paraya sacrifices, which end with the Sahasra, and in the Vibhranshayajna, the Soma is drunk ten times, as if they were drawing near the sun.
8.2.6	The first is the one with the word "kresa" and the exclusion of "shyenavarm".
8.2.7	For the Atiratra sacrifices with all Stotras, the verse is: "May I not fall like a bird chasing a shadow, on the surface of water."
8.2.8	"Listen to us, O Indra, in the three, the fifteen, the seventeen, the twenty-one, the twenty-nine, the thirty-three, the twenty-seven, and the seventeen. Drink the Soma, O Indra, may it delight thee."
8.2.9	"The Abhijit (hymn) and 'O lord of cattle, O mountain' (are recited).
8.2.10	In the Anatiraatra (hymn) 'O bull, the Soma has been pressed for thee.'
8.2.11	Come, O Indra, to the twenty-four (verses). Let not another praise thee.
8.2.12	He who knows the one who conquers all.
8.2.13	O Indra, I bring thee the sacrifice which is equal.
8.2.14	In the Svarasama, Abhipava, Gavayus, and the remaining Prsthas, the twenty-first (verse) says: "Indra, with the bones of Dadhi, thou hast conquered all the enemies. Thou art indeed the hero, the protector of the brave."
8.3.1-2	"The second verse is: "We praise your power, O Angiras, O Kapivana, O Vatsa, O Maitra, O Asva, O Naras." The third verse is: "O Indra, the lord of all armies, the conqueror of foes." The fourth verse is: "The Catu-r-ma-sya, the Vaishva-deva, the Garg, the Vaid-ch, the Chanda-ma, the Para-ka-nta, the Vatsa, the Asva-medha, the Tri-rha, the Shag-dhy, the Shachi-pata."
8.3.3	The Sākamedha hymn says, "Indra is the deity of the gods."
8.3.4	The Vaidāsvarya and Sāman hymns say, "You are Indra, the bearer."
8.3.5	In the second verse, it says, "We invoke that Indra, the one who is to be invoked, the one who has the ancient inspiration. We praise that your inspiration."
8.3.6	The Aśvamedha hymn says "I am the eight-footed speech of the one who is sweet, the one who extends."
8.3.7	For the Udgâtriya-trisu, for the Udgâtris, for the Uddhatriyas, for the Udbhatriyas, and for the Udbhaṭṭariyas.
8.3.8	For the third (day) the great Indra, who with his strength, is the best of Sura drinkers, for the Ugghatriyas, the Udbhattriyas, and the Udbhaḍḍariyas.
8.3.9	"For the Sâkamedha (rite) we invoke that Indra, as the sun is rising."
8.3.10	"For the four-day (rite) we have invoked that Indra, as you, O Indra, are rising."
8.3.11	In the fourth (day) Indra is great, who by his strength, who alone, knows.
8.3.12	In all (days) may I be like the Niṣṭyas, like the moon, moving on the surface of the water.
8.3.13	In the moving and the four-heroic (days) this is thy (verse). The Puru-possessing one has come to thee.
8.3.14	In the five-day (rite) the Trivṛt and others are as before.
8.3.15	In the second of the two autumnal (sāmans) beginning with Abhyāsanga, it is said, "You are not Indra, O bearer."
8.3.16	For the Pañcaha of the Prstha, it is said "You are the protector of heroes."
8.3.17	In the fifth (sāman), it is said, "Rising with strength, Indra has grown for the sake of joy. The Saman is sung for Indra."
8.3.18	In the Pañcahas of the Abhipavamāna, it is said "He alone knows."
8.3.19	In the two autumnal (Satra) of five days, the verse is "They approach the sun as if it were sinking."
8.3.20	In the six-day (Satra), the verse is "O Indra, you are my kinsman, you are my brother, you are my friend."
8.3.21	In the fifth (Satra), it is "O Indra! Come to us, O beloved one."
8.3.22	If the sixth (Satra) is Utkhya, the verse is, "He alone knows, O Indra, when you drink Soma with Vishnu."
8.4.1	The second verse of the back is indeed, "O hero, you are the one who bestows life."
8.4.2	The third verse is, "You are united with Indra, we are the ones who have offered libations to you, you are the Indra who bestows."
8.4.3	On the eighth day of the Dasaha, it is said, "O Indra, east, west, north."
8.4.4	The ninth verse is, "Let us praise Indra here."
8.4.5	In the nine regions of the sky, O Indra, the lord of the Maruts, the lord of cattle, the lord of wealth, the lord of light, the lord of strength, the lord of heaven, the lord of earth, the lord of men, the lord of beasts, the lord of all, the lord of everything, the lord of every form, the lord of sacrifice, the lord of oblations, the lord of gifts, the lord of food, the lord of drink, the lord of songs, the lord of praise, the lord of hymns, the lord of prayers, the lord of truth, the lord of falsehood, the lord of good, the lord of evil, the lord of beauty, the lord of ugliness, the lord of joy, the lord of sorrow, the lord of happiness, the lord of unhappiness, the lord of life, the lord of death, the lord of birth, the lord of destruction, the lord of creation, the lord of non-creation, the lord of existence, the lord of inexistence, the lord of being, the lord of nothingness, the lord of time, the lord of eternity, the lord of past, the lord of future, the lord of present, the lord of yesterday, the lord of tomorrow, the lord of today, the lord of this world, the lord of other worlds, the lord of worlds, the lord beyond worlds, the lord who is the world, the lord who transcends the world, the supreme lord, the lord of lords, the lord of gods, the lord of demons, the lord of humans, the lord of animals, the lord of beings, the lord of plants, the lord of trees, the lord of herbs, the lord
8.4.6	In the eighth (day) the great Indra, who is strong, is praised.
8.4.7	In the twelve-day (rite), in the first and last (days), one praises: "You, O Indra, give (gifts), he who knows (the truth) alone."
8.4.8	In the Svarasāma (sāmans), one praises in succession: "Induce the variegated one, the leader, to come forward, to the good."
8.4.9	On your back, O hero, we praise you. We invoke you, O Indra, for your help. If a hundred times the heaven is yours, O Indra, may Soma delight you. What bright thing of yours will be for us? May the auspicious ones be for us at the same feast.
8.4.10	The Anurūpa Sāman is the next to these. The Stotra and Nidhana are regulated by the Chanda.
8.4.11	The Gavam Ayana has been explained in the Sanvatsara.
8.4.12	From this very (Soma-sacrifice) the Ahinâs are performed, even the one-day ones.
8.4.13	In all (these sacrifices) the Kâmakupti is taken from the Sâmaveda.
8.4.14	The Ahinâs beginning with the two-day (sacrifice) and ending with the twelve-day (sacrifice), are performed either before or after the Atiratra.
8.4.15	The Ratrisattras beginning with the twelve-days and ending with the year.
8.4.16	The Dasara-tra is the Ubhayatotîtra.
8.4.17	The Agniṣṭoma sacrifice is performed for twelve days before the Ahirbudhnya sacrifice.
8.4.18	One should perform the Viśvajit sacrifice for a thousand years, or for a period equal to a thousand years.
8.5.1	The Agnihotra sacrifice should be performed in spring by a brahmin who desires brahminical splendour, in summer by a kṣatriya who desires brilliance, in the rainy season by a vaiśya who desires prosperity, and in autumn by all for the removal of diseases.
8.5.2	Some say that it is to be done up to the full oblation.
8.5.3	Yuvā Kausīka says that it is to the Agnihotra-yājñas.
8.5.4	Of them, the Navasya is at the Āgrayaṇa.
8.5.5	The Agnihotra is performed with a Sthālīpāka or with barley-gruel.
8.5.6	If that is not available, then having placed a cow in a pen and having fed her with fresh grass, one should perform with her milk.
8.5.7	One who desires prosperity should always keep awake near the fires.
8.5.8	The Agnihotram is for one who desires heaven.
8.5.9	With milk, for one who desires all (kinds of) desires.
8.5.10	With curds, for one who wishes for the senses.
8.5.11	With ghee, for one who longs for brilliance.
8.5.12	With oil, for one who seeks prosperity.
8.5.13	With rice, for one who wants offspring.
8.5.14	With barley gruel, for one who craves a village.
8.5.15	With rice grains, for one who aspires for strength.
8.5.16	With Soma, for one who yearns for brahminical glory.
8.5.17	With meat, for one who is desirous of nourishment.
8.5.18	With water, for one who long for longevity.
8.5.19	The New and Full Moon sacrifices, for one who has all desires.
8.5.20	The Dakshayana sacrifice is for one who desires offspring.
8.5.21	The Sakamprasthayiya sacrifice is for one desiring cattle.
8.5.22	The Samkrama sacrifice is for one desirous of all (kinds of) desires.
8.5.23	The Ida-adha sacrifice is for one seeking cattle.
8.5.24	The Sarvaseya sacrifice is for the one desiring offspring.
8.5.25	The Shaunaka sacrifice is for one wishing to perform sorcery.
8.5.26	The Vasishtha sacrifice is for one wanting offspring.
8.5.27	The path of heaven and earth is for one desiring stability.
8.5.28	These are the sacrifices of the new and full moon.
8.5.29	The Agrayana is for one who desires food.
8.5.30	The Catu-rmasyas are for one who desires everything.
8.5.31	The Indra-Agni animal sacrifice is for one who wishes for life, offspring, and cattle.
8.5.32	The Yama, the hawk-yellow or the tawny-colored, is for one who seeks freedom from disease and the world of the ancestors.
8.5.33	The Tvashtr, the mule, is for one seeking offspring.
8.5.34	These two are for one who seeks.
8.5.35	The Sutyas are for one seeking everything.
8.5.36	The Ukthyas are for one desiring cattle.
8.5.37	The Vājapeya sacrifice is for one who desires sovereignty.
8.5.38	The Atiratra sacrifice is for one seeking prosperity.
8.5.39	The Gavāmayana sacrifice and the twelve-day sacrifice are also for this purpose.
8.5.40	The Rājasūya sacrifice is for those who desire sovereignty.
8.5.41	The Aśvamedha and Puruṣamedha sacrifices are for those who desire all kinds of prosperity.
8.5.42	The Sarvamedha sacrifice is for those seeking supremacy.
8.5.43	Due to the infinity of desires, sacrifices are limitless.
8.5.44	They have been explained in the original texts.
8.5.45	The sequence of sacrifices is known from the Brāhmaṇa texts, and the connection with the Virañca Sāman is also known.
8.5.46	He who recites these two Kalpas and knows them thus, he has performed all the sacrifices and obtains all his desires.
8.5.47	And they also say, "As is the case with the sacrificer, so is the case with one who recites. This is the Vedic tradition, this is the Vedic tradition."
