1.1.1.1	In the performance, the benefit of the man and the knowledge of the sacrifice.
1.1.1.2	We shall explain that.
1.1.1.3	First, one should recite the censure of all Dharma.
1.1.1.4	The sacrifices of Brahmins, Kshatriyas, Vaishyas, and Rathkaras.
1.1.1.5	The Iṣṭi and Agni-installation of the Niṣāda and Sthapati.
1.1.1.6	The Adhvaryu performs with the Yajur Veda, the Hotṛ with the Ṛg Veda, the Udgātṛ with the Sāma Veda, and the Brahman with all.
1.1.1.7	The Rgveda and the Samaveda are recited loudly, the Yajurveda is recited softly, and the instructions are given loudly.
1.1.1.8	The rule of sound is that the sound of the Rgveda and Samaveda is loud, the sound of the Yajurveda soft, and the instructions loud.
1.1.1.9	One should perform the rites facing east, looking towards the fourth rite.
1.1.1.10	The rites are performed facing north.
1.1.1.11	One should not perform the rites with one's own body.
1.1.1.12	One should turn away from the rites.
1.1.1.13	The internal ones are the parts of the sacrifice, the external ones are the performers.
1.1.1.14	And the performers, the principal performers are internal, the others are external.
1.1.1.15	One should perform rites with the sacrificial thread, rites for the ancestors with the thread hanging down, and rites for the gods after bathing.
1.1.1.16	One should combine the rites with the mantra at the end.
1.1.1.17	One should know the beginning of the previous one with the beginning of the subsequent mantra.
1.1.1.18	Because of the mention of the limbs in the order of their performance, the order of the limbs is determined by the order of their mention. The order of the sacrifices is determined by the sequence of their injunctions.
1.1.1.19	Ghee is denoted by the word "ajya". The wife is denoted by the words "patni" and "juhu". The Ahavaniya fire is denoted by the term "homa".
1.1.1.20	Gold is denoted by the terms "hiranya" and "jatarupa".
1.1.1.21	The offering of oblations and the pouring of libations are done in the Garhapatya fire.
1.1.1.22	The carrying of the embers from the Dakshina fire is done.
1.1.1.23	Brahmanas, priests, and young men of the Brahmana caste, who are great and have many children.
1.1.1.24	The injunction to offer oblations with a ladle indicates that one should offer oblations.
1.1.1.25	Placing clarified butter on the Garhapatya fire.
1.1.1.26	Encircling with fire, sweeping, rubbing the ladle and spoon, spreading, and sprinkling the Ahavaniya fire.
1.1.1.27	The offering with a ladle is done silently.
1.1.1.28	It is not dependent on the sky.
1.1.1.29	One should offer while seated, with the knees bent, and ending with the utterance of "svāhā".
1.1.1.30	The five-versed hymn of the Jamadagnis and the four-versed hymn of others, having addressed the Jamadagni, the non-Jamadagni should be five-versed.
1.1.1.31	With the two fingers of the flesh-joint and the thumb, he should offer the Puròdasha; with the ladle, the ghee and milk; with the spoon, the meat; with the Svàdhiti, the animal; with the Darbha, the Soma.
1.1.1.32	He offers to the deities as prescribed with the oblations, and the others with ghee.
1.1.1.33	One should perform the rites for the Dhruva with ghee.
1.1.1.34	Having placed the clarified butter, one should take portions of the oblation and pour clarified butter over it.
1.1.1.35	Having taken portions and poured clarified butter over it, one should pour clarified butter over the Dhruva ladle until the Svishtakrit ladle.
1.1.1.36	From the ladle for clarified butter, the Dhruva.
1.1.1.37	The portions should be the size of the knuckle of the thumb.
1.1.1.38	More for the Svishtakrt, more for the Ida.
1.1.1.39	Having taken out the middle portion of the oblation, he should offer the second portion from the first half of the oblation. From the last half of the fourth portion, he should offer a third portion. From the last portion of the fifth portion, he should make an offering.
1.1.1.40	From the first half, he should offer first portion to the eldest son, or to the son of the eldest son, who has lost his wealth.
1.1.1.41	The second portion to the youngest son, or to a son of the youngest son, who is desirous of prosperity.
1.1.1.42	At the Svishtakrit offering, he should offer all the oblations in the northern half, once for each of the four oblations and twice for each of the five oblations.
1.1.1.43	He should pour twice.
1.1.1.44	Where there are invocations, there are unheard and heard, four oblations and five oblations. Here, the oblations are offered once for each of them.
1.1.1.45	One should cross to the right by the right (foot) and to the left by the left (foot).
1.1.1.46	Having taken the Graha, or having taken it, he goes around on the right side, and instructs (the Hotr) to recite the Anuvāka, according to the deity, for the two Ajyās.
1.1.1.47	Having recited the Anuvākas, he becomes silent, from the time of the invocatory call, and when the Agnidhra has been heard, and when the Adhvaryu has been heard, he should say, "Recite, recite."
1.1.1.48	At the end of the Anuvākyā, the Hotṛ places the Praṇava. The Adhvaryu places it with the Praṇava in the Anuvāka.
1.1.1.49	"The Adhvaryu says, "O, listen!" The Agnidhra says, "Let it be heard!" Standing to the north, having taken up the wooden sword and the bundles of grass, he says,"
1.1.1.50-51	"He sends him forth with the words, 'Send him forth.' At the places of the principal offerings beginning with the Ajyabhāga and ending with the Svishtakrit, at the Patnīsaṁyājas and at the Vājina, there are the Yajya and Anuvākyā mantras.
1.1.1.52	Having stood facing the southern end of the altar, he offers the oblation without spilling it, as if covering it with his side, at the end of the Vasat-utterance.
1.1.1.53	He should mentally contemplate the person whom he dislikes while the oblations are being offered, spilling the oblation with his mouth.
1.1.1.54	The right-hand side is to be transgressed in the case of the Yajya-utterance, the Svāhā-utterance, and the Oṃkāra, which are predominant.
1.1.1.55	Having placed the Upabṛt under (the fire), he proceeds with the Upāṁśu-recitation. The Upāṁśus are known elsewhere.
1.1.1.56	The procedure of the Darsha-Pūrṇamāsa is common, except for the directions.
1.1.1.57	At both, the Agniya cake is offered. The second is Agnisomiya. At the full moon, the cake is offered to Indra-Agni. At the new moon, the cake to Agni. They are not mixed.
1.1.1.58	The Sāmnāyya is offered to the same deity.
1.1.1.59	The Saṁnāyya of Indra, or of Maheśvara, is to be offered.
1.1.1.60	The Upāṁśuyāja of Agni-Soma is to be offered at the full moon, and the Vaiṣṇava at the new moon.
1.1.1.61	This is the principal sacrifice.
1.1.1.62	The others are its subsidiaries.
1.1.1.63	One should perform rites for a specific purpose, or on the basis of a statement.
1.1.1.64	In the Soma-sacrifice, the Agniṣṭoma is the principal.
1.1.1.65	The injunctions of the Darsa-Pūrṇamāsa sacrifices, the principal ones, are found in the Iṣṭi and Pāśu-bandha.
1.1.1.66	In the Soma sacrifices, the Ekāha, Ahahīna, and Sattrimsa, the connection of the limbs is excluded from the Piṇḍapitryajña.
1.1.1.67	The cessation of the limbs is due to the purpose of the prohibition of the Pratiāmnāya, the omission, and the general meaning, and the non-hearing.
1.1.1.68	In the case of a rite where the injunctions are not explicit, one should recite the mantras as they are.
1.1.1.69	In the case of the non-availability of a substance, one should substitute a similar substance with the same meaning, and in the case of dissimilar substances, one should substitute with the same meaning.
1.1.1.70	In the event of a conflict between the injunctions of the primary rites, if there is a preponderance of one, one should not modify the injunctions, but follow the earlier injunction.
1.1.1.71	At the end of each verse, he recites the verses of the group of rites in the proper order.
1.1.1.72	When told, "Recite for the Soma being offered," he recites three times.
1.1.1.73	When the Soma is bought and the Havirdhana is being set up,
1.1.1.74	Darbha grass is spread.
1.1.1.75	The kindling woods end with the word "svāhā."
1.1.1.76	When about to place the fire, having raised the sign and sprinkled it with water, he places it.
1.1.1.77	In the rites of the dead, one begins from the front, clockwise, and ends towards the west or north.
1.1.1.78	In the rites for the ancestors, one begins from behind, counterclockwise, and ends towards east.
1.1.1.79	In auspicious rites, one follows the worldly practice.
1.1.1.80	If the rite is repeated, one should repeat the mantras in the order in which they were recited.
1.1.1.81	In the instructions and responses, if they are not heard or heard incorrectly, one should speak softly.
1.1.1.82	The middle ones are to be offered after the Samidheni and before the Ajyabhāga, and after the Ajyabhūga and before the Anuyājas.
1.1.1.83	The Anuyājas are to be offered loudly, and the Shamyus are to be offered silently.
1.1.1.84	One should offer the Darsha-Pūrnamāsa sacrifices for thirty years or as long as one lives.
1.1.1.85	The Pañchadasha Dākshayana sacrifice is to be offered in place of the Darsha-Purnamāsa sacrifices.
1.1.1.86	One should perform the Agnihotra as long as one is alive.
1.1.1.87	There is no restriction in other cases.
1.1.2.1	One should observe the new moon fast with the moon not visible, and the full moon fast with the full moon visible, or on the previous day.
1.1.2.2	Having shaved the hair and beard, the sacrificer and his wife should eat food without meat, beans, and salt.
1.1.2.3	I take Agni, the swift, who is the light of the sun, who rises up to the heaven-knowing one. The sun is the supreme light of lights. For the tomorrow's sacrifice, for the deities, I take this fifteenfold energy. The deities who have entered it, I take all of them. May they enjoy this full-moon oblation. May they enjoy the new-moon oblation." Having taken the glowing Āhavanīya from the Garhapatya, he adds, "O Agni, may my brilliance shine in contests."
1.1.2.4	With the two verses from the Uttara-Samhita, he approaches the two fires, having placed them in front.
1.1.2.5	"Having washed his hands, he says, "O Agni, the lord of vows!" The sacrificer approaches the Ahavaniya fire."
1.1.2.6	"You are the emperor, you are the guardian of vows, you are the lord of vows. I shall observe the vow. I tell you that. You protect that. I am able to do that. By that I am able to succeed. By that may I be successful." If the sun has set, he should say this to the Ahavanīya fire.
1.1.2.7	One should undertake the vow before the carrying of the sacrificial grass at the full moon and before the removal of the calf at the new moon.
1.1.2.8	The two should be consecrated on the previous day.
1.1.2.9	One should not speak untruth, eat meat, approach a woman, or eat forest-food in the evening except for peas.
1.1.2.10	If the forest-food is water, then water.
1.1.2.11	The sacrificer dwells in the Āhavanīya house, the wife in the Garhapatya house. The Dakṣiṇā is between them.
1.1.2.12	The mantras, not connected with action, are for the recipient of the sacrifice.
1.1.2.13	The offering to the right is for the sacrificer, the offering to the left is for the sacrificers wife.
1.1.2.14	Having invited, having uttered the Praṇava, permission is given according to the meaning.
1.1.2.15	He offers oblations according to the deity and according to the connection with the rite, from a distance.
1.1.2.16-17	Who is leading you? The earth, the speech, the cow, the Vat, the sky, the water, the fire, the one-syllabled, the ten-syllabled Viraj, those who pervade this entire universe, may those goddesses, knowing well, lead us to the sacrifice with prosperity. You are purified by Brahman. In the seating.
1.1.2.18	When the oblation is being poured out, he should recite the verse, "Agni, the Hotar, etc."
1.1.2.19	Sitting within the altar in front of the Stambayajus, he recites, "This Veda found the earth hidden in the depths, hidden in the depths. May it find me the world for the sacrificer, may it make the sacrifice abundant and flawless." He takes up the Veda.
1.1.2.20	The Veda, having known the altar, spread out on the earth. The earth carries the embryo of the lords of the earth within the worlds. Then the sacrifice spreads out, having all the worlds. Three times he anoints the altar with the Veda.
1.1.2.21	The pouring of clarified butter is done at both places.
1.1.2.22	The taking of clarified butter is from the end of the Anuvaka beginning with "For you, the five winds."
1.1.2.23	"I yoke thee" when the enclosing sticks are being placed.
1.1.2.24	The consecration of the brows is done on both sides.
1.1.2.25	"O Agni, my lustre" with eight Vaikhavya verses one should touch the oblations which are near.
1.1.2.26	One desiring offspring should offer four oblations at the full moon and five oblations at the new moon, desiring heaven.
1.1.2.27	The ladle is the mind. Thus (he recites) the ten-hotr in front of the Samidheni verses.
1.1.2.28	The Angirasas, with the morning prayers of this sacrifice, may they protect us. The Agni who is kindled, offered, and worshipped, may he protect us. Thus (he says) to the kindled one.
1.1.2.29	You are the mind, belonging to Prajapati. Enter with the mind as the element. Thus (he offers) the ladleful.
1.1.2.30	His speech is Indra's, the destroyer of enemies. With speech and with Indra's power he enters. This is the Srouca (verse).
1.1.2.31	The gods are the fathers. This is said when the Pravaras are being chosen.
1.1.2.32	The earth is the Hotri. This is said to the Catuhotar in front of the Prayajas.
1.1.3.1	I gratify the spring among the seasons. May he, being gratified, gratify me. By the worship of the gods in the spring, may I be brilliant and rich in milk. I gratify the summer among the seasons. May he, being gratified gratify me. By worshipping the gods in the summer, may I be endowed with power and strength. I gratify the rainy season among the seasons. Let them, being gratified, satisfy me. By worshipping the gods in the rainy season, may I be prosperous and rich in cattle. I gratify the autumn among the seasons. She, being gratified, may satisfy me. By the worshipping of the gods in autumn, may I be new-grain and brilliant. I gratify the winter and the cold among the seasons. They, being gratified, may satisfy me. By worshiping the gods in winter and the cold, may I be enduring and ascetic. Thus the Prayājas.
1.1.3.2-3	Agni is the Hotri. I am the Hotri. By the sacrifice of Agni, may I be the Hotri. Agni is the Hotr. I am the Hotr. By the sacrifice to Agni, may I become the Hotr. These are the two Ajyabhaga offerings. Agni, the Hotr, is the five Hotr priests in front of the oblations.
1.1.3.4	Agni is the giver of food. By offering to Agni, may I become the giver of food." "Dabdhi is his name. May I be undaunted and conquer my enemies." This is said at the Upamshu Yajus.
1.1.3.5	May I be the slayer of Vritra by the worship of Agni and Soma. May I be the eater of food by the worship of Indra and Agni. May I be endowed with power by the worship of the god Indra. May I attain the greatness of the god Maheendra. Thus one should recite the subsequent mantras also.
1.1.3.6	May I be the enemy of Indra Vāimātri's sacrifice to the gods. May I be the one protected by Indra Trātā's sacrifice to gods. May I have prosperity and cattle by Pūṣan's sacrifice to god. May I obtain speech and food by Sarasvatī's sacrifice to goddess. May I be born with offspring and cattle by Aditi's sacrifice to goddesses. May I attain union with life by the sacrifice to all the gods. May offspring and cattle be born by the sacrifice to heaven and earth. By whose sacrifice to the gods, may I be born. One should recite this for the unnamed.
1.1.3.7	Agni is the bestower of prosperity, the foundation of the sacrifice. By offering to the gods, may I attain prosperity through the sacrifice. Thus one offers to Agni, the bestower of good fortune.
1.1.3.8	Agni shall protect me from evil deeds, Savitar from evil intentions. He who curses us from afar, may I conquer him with this. Thus one offers the Prasitra when it is being offered.
1.1.3.9	Silently to Ida.
1.1.3.10	"O Indra, may we be the most prosperous in the assembly." "May we be the most powerful." "May we not be scorched by the ghee." "May Indra be at the end of us."
1.1.3.11	"May we be the best." This is the name-grasping.
1.1.3.12	"Ida, the cow with her calf, has come with her strength, flowing with milk, swollen. May she, with her food and oblation, with cows, with Ida, with the swelling milk, with her own, flow for us." This is the Ida-grasping.
1.1.3.13	He should touch the oblations placed on the sacrificial grass, saying, "Protect the heaven."
1.1.3.14	He should distribute the Agniyeṇa offering into four parts, saying, "This is for the Agnīdh, this is for the Brahman, this is for Hotr, this is for Adhvaryu," and "This is for Yajamana" for the Yajamana's share.
1.1.3.15	"Thou art the arrangement of the directions; I delight the directions; may the delighted directions favour me." When the directions have been indicated, he gives the Dakṣiṇā.
1.1.3.16	Having cooked the rice for the Dakṣiṇāgni, the sacrificer should place it in the southern line of the altar and touch it with the following mantra: "This pot is filled with nectar, with a thousand streams, inexhaustible, with this rice I cross over death. This is the share of Prajapati, nourishing, full of milk, inexhaustible, for the inexhaustible, you are named the inexhaustible, do not let me be deprived of you, protect my inhalation and exhalation, protect my inhalation, exhalation, and upward movement, protect my sight and hearing, this is nourishment, bestow nourishment on me, may I prosper through you directly."
1.1.3.17	Having turned towards the north, having placed the fire in front, having gone around towards the south, he should place (the fire) near the officiating priests.
1.1.3.18	"The fire-sticks are offered with the verse, "May my prayers be bent down, may the fire-sticks be bent down."
1.1.3.19	"The Hotṛ priest of the great oblation is the Saptāhotṛ (seven Hotṛs). The Saptāhotar is placed in front of the Anuyājas.
1.1.4.1	By the offering to Barhiṣ, may I be endowed with offspring. By the offering to Narāśaṃsa, may I be strong. Agni Sviṣṭakṛt is the foundation of the sacrifice. By the offering, may I attain the foundation through the sacrifice. Thus one offers the Anuyājas.
1.1.4.2	The Vājavatī is offered on both sides.
1.1.4.3	"When the Prastara is being thrown, (the Adhvaryu) says, "May this be true for me."
1.1.4.4	"May Vasu come here." He chooses the boon.
1.1.4.5	"May I release you." When the paridhi-sticks are being thrown, he says this to the Ahavaniya fire.
1.1.4.6	"The sacrifice is blessed by the Bhrigus." To the portions of the oblations that are poured down.
1.1.4.7	"May he come from there." He chooses the second boon. "May he come from here." He chooses a third boon.
1.1.4.8	The releasing of the ladles is done in both cases.
1.1.4.9	The wife recites the Patnîsamyâgas. "By the sacrifice to Soma, may I be the receptacle of all seed. By the sacrifice to Tvashtri, may I be able to enjoy all the forms of cattle. By the sacrifice of the wives of the gods, may I be a wife of the sacrifice, the mate of the sacrifice. By the sacrifice, may I be endowed with the mate. By the sacrifice (to the goddess) Râka, may I know the heroes. By the sacrifice(to the goddess) Sinîvâlî, may I know cattle. By the sacrifiice (to the goddess ) Kuhû, may I attain the firm foundation. Agni, the lord of the house, is the firm foundation of the sacrifice. May I attain the firm ground by the sacrifice, by the houses. Thus Agni, the lord (of the house)."
1.1.4.10	The Iḍā is the one who follows, with ghee, in whose place the divine-wishers purify. The Vaiśvānara is the Śakvarī, the one who has grown, who has come to the sacrifice. The Vaiśvadevī is the Iḍā.
1.1.4.11	The offerings to the Dakṣiṇāgni are made in both places.
1.1.4.12	"The one who is Sarasvatī, the one with the beautiful form," is said when the mouth is cleansed.
1.1.4.13	The oblations for atonement, the Samitsya-yajus, the releasing of the skulls, and the releasing of the offerings are common to both.
1.1.4.14	The sacrificer eats the share of the sacrificer with the formula, "May the lord of sacrifice bestow blessings."
1.1.4.15	If he is going away, he should offer with the Samitsya yajus, "I place you in the world named Vibhan of Prajapati, together with the sacrificer."
1.1.4.16	A non-Brahmin should not eat the Saṁnāyya.
1.1.4.17	"This is the oblation," for the cooked rice.
1.1.4.18	"I have done the churning of curd," for curd.
1.1.4.19	Having eaten the food offered on the grass spread within the altar, the priests and the sacrificer cleanse themselves.
1.1.4.20	Having sprinkled water on the head, and having recited the verse "May the water be uninterrupted in the seat", and having sprinkled in each direction with the verses for the directions, he wipes the faces with the verse "O Sarasvati, whatever wealth is in the water, cows, and horses, by that, O Sarasvati, may my face be anointed with strength and radiance."
1.1.4.21	I send you to the ocean; go to your own place. May our heroes be unharmed. Do not spill my milk. Do not harm me. This is your wealth. Having offered the remaining oblations, one should pay homage to the performed and unperformed rites. Homage to the performed and the unperformed rites. O Agni, the knower of beings, you have come to the sacrifice. Sit down here before me. Release the one who is bound. Grant us wealth, O Agni, the all-knowing. Thus it is said.
1.1.4.22	The sacrificer, having approached the Ahavaniya fire from the south, and having recited the verses, "Viṣṇu has spread himself on the earth", and "Viṣṇus has spread himself in the directions", and "With the Anushtubh metre", he enters the fourth one.
1.1.4.23	Having approached the sun, he returns, saying, "You are self-existent." "I banish from these directions the enemy of this food. I banish him whom I hate." "I banish the enemy of this aerial food. I banish the one whom I hate." "I banish the enemy from this earth, the enemy of this nourishment. I banish the enemy whom I hate."
1.1.4.24	"He goes to heaven with light." He should approach the Ahavaniya fire and say, "I am offering the life of so-and-so." He should offer it with his heel, turning to the right.
1.1.4.25	"He who hates us and whom we hate." One who is practicing black magic.
1.1.4.26	"You are brilliance." He says this to the Ahavaniya.
1.1.4.27	"O Agni, do thou purify the life-forces" (with these three verses) he offers to the Garhapatya fire. "O Agni, the lord of the house" (with this verse).
1.1.4.28	"Do thou protect me with thy body" (with this) he invokes his sons by name.
1.1.4.29	"For the purpose of light, for the purpose of the thread" (with these verses) he sits down inside the altar. The sacrificer recites the three Ati-moksa verses, "Those gods who are the killers of sacrifice".
1.1.4.30	"Thou art the Veda" (with this he takes up the Veda).
1.1.4.31-33	He strews the grass with the formula, "Thou art the one having ghee, the one having family." He strews continuously from the Garhapatya to the Ahavaniya. Having gone forward, he murmurs, "O Agni, the lord of vows, I have observed the vow. I have told you that. I was not able to do it. I was not capable of it. I was unable to do it." He says this to the Ahavaniyi.
1.1.4.34	You are the emperor, you are the guardian of vows, you are the lord of vows. I have observed the vow. I have told you that. I have been able to do it. By that I have been able. By that I am protected. Thus the Sun.
1.1.4.35	May he be our lord, may he be our lord. He became the sacrifice, he became the sacrifice. He became the lord of creatures, he became the lord of crea- tures. He became the protector of creatures, he be- came the protector of creatures. He became the guardian of creatures, he became the guardian of creatures. He was the sacrifice, he was the sacrifice. He was the lord of creatures. He grew again. He became the ruler of creatures. May he bestow wealth on us. May we be the lords of wealth. Having recited this, having placed all the kindling woods, he sprinkles with that rite.
1.1.5.1	In the Tantras and other texts, the king chooses Brahma as the supreme deity, saying, "O Lord of the world, O Lord of the great being, I choose you as Brahma."
1.1.5.2	The God Savitr is surrounded by the Vedas. They choose thee, O Brihaspati, as the Brahman. I tell this to the mind. Mind to speech. Speech to the Gayatri. Gayatri to the Tristubh. Tristubh to the Jagati. Jagati to the Anushtubh. Anushtubh to the Pankti. Pankti to Prajapati. Prajapati to the All-gods. Brihaspati is the Brahman of the gods. I am the Brahman of men. O Brihaspati! I am the protector of the sacrifice. I am the lord of the earth. I am the ruler of the world. I am the Lord of the great being. You have told me the greatness. You have told my fame. You have told the splendour. You have told praise. You have told food. You have told progeny. You have told stability.
1.1.5.3	He should perform the rites to the right.
1.1.5.4	One who is about to eat Brahmoḍana, taking a portion of rice, offers it with the formula, "I offer the rice to the rice, svāhā."
1.1.5.5	He eats with the formula, “O Agni, Angiras, do thou protect me from the unoffered. May the good protector place thee."
1.1.5.6	At the Darśa-Pūrṇamāsa sacrifices, having approached the sacrificial place spread out, from the right side of the Āhavanīya fire, he recites over the spread out grass, "O He Dadhiṣavy, standing here, may you sit in your own abode, the one who is more worthy of our offerings."
1.1.5.7	Having cut the grass with the left hand, he throws it towards the south, reciting, "The evil one has been thrown away."
1.1.5.8	Here do I sit in the house of Arvāgvāsa, impelled by the divine Savitr. Having touched water, he sits down.
1.1.5.9	I am the lord of the earth, I am the lord over the world, I am the master of the great being. I tell this to Agni, I tell this to Vayu, I tell this Surya. May Surya protect the sacrifice from heaven, Vayu from the atmosphere, may the lord of sacrifice protect, may Agni protect me, the human.
1.1.5.10	When the water is being offered, he says, "Do you offer the water." "Do you offer water." "Do this." "Do this" "Do this." He says, "Do this." The water is offered. "Do this." Translation: When the water is about to be offered, he says: "Do you offer." "Do you" "Do this" (to the water). "Do this" to the water. "Do this" is said. The water is offered.
1.1.5.11	The un-invited one permits the one who is about to sprinkle the oblation. The invited one permits the subsequent ones, the kindling wood and the sacrificial grass. The un-invited ones permit the Sāmidhenī verses and the Pravara verses. The invited one calls out for the sprinkling of the fire. "O Brihaspati, protect the sacrifice. Sprinkle the altar. O Prajapati, recite the sacrifice. Choose the sacrifice. O Vacaspati, call out the speech. Call out these (verses). Call out the sacrifice to the gods. O Prajapāti, establish the sacrifice." In accordance with the form.
1.1.5.12	The deity should be invoked with the verse, "May the deity bless you."
1.1.5.13	The Vyahrtis should be recited before and the Praṇava after.
1.1.5.14	When the Sāmidhenī verses are being recited, one should restrain speech, when the Prayāja and Anuyāja offerings are being made, and when the principal offerings have been made and the Prasitra has been removed, until the departure.
1.1.5.15	If he were to release speech, he would say, "This is Vishnu." "Agni-Vishnu, the purifying one, Sarasvati, the goddess of speech, we invoke Brihaspati." Having said this, he restrains speech.
1.1.5.16	While the sacrificial food is being brought forward from the front of the sacrificial fire, he waits for it, saying, "I wait for you with the eye of Mitra."
1.1.5.17	Having waited for Savitr, having received (the food), having placed it on the ground with the formula, "I place thee on the back of the Adityas", having looked at it with the formula, “I look at thee with the eye of Suparna Garutmā”, having eaten it with the thumb and the middle finger, without touching it, with the formula, "I eat with the mouth of Agni", with the belly of the Brahman, with the formula "For the Brahman of Brhaspati".
1.1.5.18	Having drawn the Prachîna lines, he touches the heart with the formula, "I touch thee with truth." He touches the region of the navel with the formula, “I place thee in the belly of Indra.”
1.1.5.19	Speech is in the nose, breath in the mouth, sight in the eyes, hearing in the ears, strength in the arms, vigour in the thighs, all the limbs are faultless. May my body be united with the body. All the limbs.
1.1.5.20	He instructs the Āhitāgni to recite the Anuyāja-Samit-mantra: "This is your Samit, O Agni. By it may you grow and flourish, and may we grow and flourish. Svāhā!"
1.1.6.1	Vasishtha was the Brahman at a Soma sacrifice.
1.1.6.2	When the Agniṣṭoma oblations are near, at the time of the morning recitation, one should sit down near the Āhavanīya fire within the altar, reciting mantras.
1.1.6.3	One should not go beyond the Dhishnyas.
1.1.6.4	One should proceed to the Tīrtha, offer the Prāyaschitta oblations, recite the Pavamāna hymns, and perform the Vārambhaṇa and Dhishnyopa sthāna.
1.1.6.5	When invited, one should recite the Stotrānujñāna: "Bhūr Bhuvah Svar, in the impulse of the divine Savitar, O Brihaspati, may the praise be sung by the rays for the sake of prosperity. May the praise be sung for prosperity." The subsequent Stomabhāga is also sung.
1.1.6.6	Having performed the Stuti and the placing of the Grahopastanakalaśa, he enters the assembly hall through the other door, with the rear half of the assembly hall. Having touched the door, as before, he says, "O wise one, you have led us to the vast world, knowing the heaven, the light, the fearlessness, the well-being. O Indra, your arms are strong, the refuge, the great ones." Having approached, he sits down to the right of the Maitrāvaruṇa and Adhvaryu.
1.1.6.7	The exit is through the eastern gate, as it was for the entrance.
1.1.6.8	After the Savana is over, one should exit through the western gate.
1.1.6.9	During the Savana rites, one should proceed as per the prescribed sequence.
1.1.6.10	One should restrain speech from the Vashatkara at the Stuti and Sastra, or from the Homa of the Prata-Anuvaka, or from the Upa-Antarya-Ama Homa.
1.2.1.1	The Darsha-Paurnamasa sacrifices are for all desires.
1.2.1.2	When the sacrificer is endowed with vows, the knowing gods find the path to the sacrifice with the lord of mind. The sacrifice of Vata should be performed. Having recited this, he brings a branch, either a Shami branch or a Palasha branch, with many Palasha leaves, with fresh tips, facing east or north.
1.2.1.3	Cutting it with "For Ishani," he bends it with "For good growth."
1.2.1.4	I bring this grass, the eastern and the western, the grass and the energy, the many-leaved, the fresh-tipped, the grass for the cattle.
1.2.1.5	With that grass, having darbha and pinjula, he drives away the calves six times, saying, "The winds are standing."
1.2.1.6	"The god is standing," he says, touching each cow, and drives them away.
1.2.1.7-8	"You are the goddesses of the waters, you are the goddesses of heaven, you are the deities of the waters, O ye goddesses of heaven." "Drinking the pure water from the good vessel, giving a hundred autumns to Indra, may the curse of Rudra protect you." He recites this verse to those who are going.
1.2.1.9	May Pūṣan, the protector, Aditi, the leader, Indra, your overlord, protect you. You are not lost. Come back again.
1.2.1.10	He looks at the sacrificer, saying, "You are firm in this." Or he turns around towards his house.
1.2.1.11	"Protect the sacrificer's cattle," he says, and places a branch facing west in front of the fire or in the fire-chamber.
1.2.1.12	He gives the ladle to the east of the Garhapatya with the Savitrī verse beginning with "O Vadeva" and ending with "I give."
1.2.1.13	He looks at the Garhapaty with the verse, "Thou art the seat of cows."
1.2.1.14	"The Rakshas are repelled" (he says) on the Ahavaniya. "May the sun dry you up" (he says on the Anvähäniya). "May you go to the desirable world" (he says). Having gone in the direction of the east or north, he brings Darbha grass from anywhere for the sacrificial grass.
1.2.1.15	"Thou art the portion of the gods." Having taken the stalk, he releases it with the verse, "The portion of the cows has been released." He releases one or two Śnuṣṭi-stalks.
1.2.1.16-17	"For the gods, for the gods of the upper grass," having wiped upwards, he says, "May I not be below or above the grass." Having brought the sacrificial grass, he cuts it with the verse, "With the Savitrī verse, I cut the sacrificial grass." Having made the first-cut grass with nails, he says, “Protect the union with the earth,” and places the grass after covering it.
1.2.1.18	"May he who cuts you not be harmed." Having cut a lot, he recites.
1.2.1.19	"You are the sacrificial grass." He touches the blades of grass.
1.2.1.20	"Having a thousand shoots." He touches himself.
1.2.1.21	Having touched water, he recites, "The womb is protected." Having covered the wood, he recites "You are the sun's rays." He wraps it with three, five, or seven layers.
1.2.1.22	Thus in the case of the collection and spreading of the sacrificial grass.
1.2.1.23	"He collects the sacrificial grass with the verse, "May I collect thee well-collected."
1.2.1.24	Having placed the Prāstara grass, he binds the ends together with the verse, "May thy womb be uninjured."
1.2.1.25	He makes a knot with the verse, "May Pūṣan make a knot for thee."
1.2.1.26	"He pulls it back towards himself with the verse, “May it stand for thee.
1.2.1.27	The waters have anointed thee, the Asvins have anointed thee, seven sages have anointed thee. I take up the banner of the dawn, the grass of Surya's rays. Thus taking up, he says, "I take thee with Indra's arms." Thus he takes up.
1.2.1.28	Placing it on his head, he says, "I take it with Brihaspati's head." Going, he says, "Go to the sky."
1.2.1.29	Having placed it below the place of the Paridhi, he places it above with the formula, "For the gods."
1.2.1.30	He arranges the sacrificial grass and the enclosing sticks. The sacrificial grass is of Palāsa, Khadira or of eighteen kinds of wood. The enclosing sticks are of Kārṣmarya wood along with their bark. They are of Bilva, Palāsa, Khādira, Rohiṇī, and Udumbara.
1.2.1.31	The longest, the middle, the oldest, the youngest, the one deserving of the southern offering, the shortest, the youngest, and the one deserving of northern offering.
1.2.1.32	"Having assumed the form of Krishna, you entered the trees. Now I collect you in twenty-one ways, collected well. Having collected, one binds with darbha grass along with roots, saying, "For the life of the sacrifice, following the directions."
1.2.1.33	Krishna is the best of all. May we prosper in the divine city. He places it above.
1.2.2.1	He makes a bundle of darbha grass. For one desiring cattle, he makes it with a calf. For one desiring brahmic lustre, he makes it three-layered. For one desiring food, he makes it for the sake of food.
1.2.2.2-4	Having made the sacrificial grass, having placed the calf-pen, having placed the sacrificial grass at the beginning of the Veda, having tied the head of the Veda three times, having tied the northern part, having tied the southern part, having tied it in the northern direction, having tied it from the northern direction, Having tied it from the southern direction, having tied the eastern direction, having tied from the eastern direction, Having tied the western direction, having tied in the western direction, Having tied from the western direction, he ties the southern direction, Having tied in the southern direction, he ties from the southern direction. Having tied the northern direction, he ties in the northern direction. Having tied from the northern direction. Having made the sacrificial grass the size of a span, he places the roots on the mound. Here itself, on the new moon day, he makes the altar. Everything is done on the full moon day.
1.2.2.5	He should cut the Palāśa twigs from the root and place them within the altar. He should also arrange the seats.
1.2.2.6	He makes a Pavitra of Darbha grass from the branch, without knots, three-leaved, and unbroken.
1.2.2.7	Having offered the Agnihotra, having collected and spread (the grass), having spread the vessels to the north of the Garhapatya, he arranges the pairs of vessels for the Snannayya in the ladle, the milking pot, the pot for the Kumbhi, and the twig for purification.
1.2.2.8	He makes the two blades of grass, which are the purifiers of the sacrificial grass, cut at the end, and of the size of a span.
1.2.2.9	"Having cut (the grass) with the formula, "You are pure, you are in the Vishnu-grass,", and having wiped it three times with water with the formula, "You are pure in the mind of Vishnu," he prepares the sprinkling water.
1.2.2.10	"May the god Savitr purify you." Having recited the Gayatri verse three times, having purified the water from the back, having recited the verse "The divine waters are the foremost," he sprinkles the vessels three times with the verse "Purify yourselves for the divine rite."
1.2.2.11	He instructs, "Tell me about the grazing ground and the village that has been attacked, and do not let them pass between us."
1.2.2.12	Having heated the pot, he says, "The Rakshas are heated, the enemies are heated." Having heated the pot and having placed the strainer with its mouth towards the east, he says, “You are the strainer of the Vasus.”
1.2.2.13	Having recited, "You are the sky," he places it, reciting, "You are Matarisvan's pot."
1.2.2.14	He begins the recitation and restrains speech.
1.2.2.15	He does not release it empty.
1.2.2.16-19	When the calf is being let loose, he recites, "For nourishment to you." "May I unite you with prosperity and abundance." "May you be united with the prosperity of cattle." "May they be united with the nourishment of cattle." When being led away, he recites "You are the cord of Aditi." "May the living ones come to you, swelling with nourishment and ghee, the living ones."
1.2.2.20	They milk the cow, the pot with four holes, the cow Idā, rich in honey, for welfare. May Indra and Agni stimulate it, for truth, and may it place the sacrificer also in the heavenly world. Thus is the sound of the stream.
1.2.2.21	The milker asks, "Who is being milked?" She tells him her name.
1.2.2.22	He recites the formula, "May she be the bestower of all life." He recites the second formula, "May be the bestower on all." He recites third formula, "May he be the bestower for all."
1.2.2.23	He pours out the milk.
1.2.2.24	He milks three times with the formulas and three times silently.
1.2.2.25	When the milk is collected three times, he thrice releases his speech loudly.
1.2.2.26	"Many are the lords of cows who offer oblations to the gods." Thus he instructs. "To Mahendra" - those who sacrifice to Mahendra.
1.2.2.27	Having released his speech, without being interrupted, he milks the northern (cow).
1.2.2.28	"Do ye unite yourselves with the truthful ones, the most sweet with the waves, drinking with milk, the slow one with milk, for the sake of wealth." Thus he brings the rinsing of the pot.
1.2.2.29	He recites the expiation for the spilled oblation, "Huta stoka."
1.2.2.30	While making the path, he sprinkles water towards the north, reciting, "Firm the cows, firm the cow-owner. May not the lord of sacrifice be injured."
1.2.2.31	He anoints the cold ground with curd or with milk kept the previous day.
1.2.2.32	He anoints, saying, "For Indra, I anoint your share with Soma." For those who sacrifice to Mahendra, he says, "For Mahendra."
1.2.2.33	He offers the gruel of barley, and puts back the ball of it, saying, "To Tamas, to Vishnu thee!"
1.2.2.34	Having deposited it, he says, "Protect the offering, O Vishnu!" and then, "Let him who is awake guard the water," with a vessel full of water, made of clay.
1.2.2.35	If it is made of clay, he should put in grass or wood.
1.2.2.36	With that rite, in the morning, he releases the calves for milking.
1.2.2.37	The Soma-sacrificers who perform the Soma-sacrifice at the new moon, they are always performing the Soma-sacrifice according to their desire.
1.2.2.38	The one who has heard (the Vedas) is the leader, the one who is a king is the one who has lost his glory.
1.2.2.39	The one named Aurva, Gautama, and Bharadvaja, they perform the sacrifice to the great Indra, and they are the ones who have lost their glory.
1.2.2.40	Those who have not performed the Iṣṭi to Indra for a year, should offer to Agni Vratapati an oblation of eight potfuls of cooked rice and then perform the Mahendra sacrifice.
1.2.3.1	At the time of the evening meal on the new moon day, one should offer a single oblation to the Pitrs in the east-south direction. "May the Asuras who have taken the form of the Pitrs and are moving around after abandoning their own forms, and who are supporting the cities of others and their own cities, be driven away from this world by Agni."
1.2.3.2	Having taken up the Veda from the north, he removes it with the wooden sword, once, towards the east, with the formula, "May the Asuras who are seated among the Fathers be removed."
1.2.3.3	Having spread the fire-places towards the east and south with their tips towards the south, he places each of the vessels to the south of the fire, namely, the pot for cooked rice, the ladle, the vessel for keeping the balls, the mortar and pestle, the black antelope skin, and the winnowing basket.
1.2.3.4	Having cut the grass once, having made it into one strainer, having sprinkled it silently, having purified it, he sprinkles the vessels once.
1.2.3.5	Having put the grass into one strainer, he pours the rice into the fire, having filled it, having wiped it, he puts it on the black antelope skin, facing east, with his face towards the south, having gone away.
1.2.3.6	He cooks the oblations, which have been made once, in the southern fire, in the order of their being eaten, the rice for the living.
1.2.3.7	He takes it back when cooked.
1.2.3.8	Having poured clarified butter, either unchurned or churned, over the cooked oblation, having taken it down towards the south, having sprinkled it in a single ladle, he sprinkles it once, having cut it.
1.2.3.9	Having spread the single-layered (grass), he places the rice-pap, the ladle, and the vessel for the cakes, one by one, on the sacrificial grass.
1.2.3.10	He spreads the grass from the side of the sun.
1.2.3.11	Having spread the grass with the seat and the cover behind the fire, he invokes the Pitrs with the verse, "Come, O Pitrs."
1.2.3.12	The sacrificer, wearing the sacrificial thread, offers three oblations with the ladle to Soma, the father, to Yama, the son of Angiras, to Agni, the carrier of oblations.
1.2.3.13	He strikes the ladle smeared with water into the fire.
1.2.3.14	The sacrificer sprinkles water three times, saying, "The departed fathers have gone beyond this." He takes the vessel back three times.
1.2.3.15	He offers three water libations, saying, "May the fathers drink."
1.2.3.16	He places three balls on the sacrificial grass, saying, "This is for you, O father, this is for you, my grandfather, this is for your great-grandfather." Having taken the name of the father, he says, "This is yours, my grandfather, and this is for your father." Having taken the names of the grandfather and great-grandfather, he says, “This is for your greatgrandfather.”
1.2.3.17	He should say, "And for those who follow you, may there be well-being."
1.2.3.18	When the sacrificer is going away, the Adhvaryu says, "This is for your father so and so, this is for your grandfather so and so, and this is for your great-grandfather so and so."
1.2.3.19	If he does not know the names, he should say, "Svāhā to the fathers seated on earth, svāhā to the Fathers seated in the sky, svāhā, to the Fathers seated on heaven."
1.2.3.20	The offering of the ball of rice to the living father should be omitted.
1.2.3.21	One should not give to the living.
1.2.3.22	If the grandfather is alive, then the ball of rice should be offered to the father alone.
1.2.3.23	The father should be smeared with paste.
1.2.3.24	Similarly, water, eye ointment, and unguent should be offered.
1.2.3.25	He smears the paste on the sacrificial grass, saying, "O fathers, may you enjoy this oblation according to your share."
1.2.3.26	Here the Pitrs are pleased. Having turned towards the north and sat facing the east, they say, "We who are alive, may we be the most prosperous of those Pitrs who are here." The Pitrs are pleased." Having placed the pieces of wood in the fire, he places the sticks smeared with oil, one by one, saying, "May this one be anointed." "May this one also be anointed."
1.2.3.27	"This is your father," he places the tuft of grass or the handful of grass. "These are ours," he looks at the remaining (grass).
1.2.3.28	One should place it on the head when the hair is growing. "May our fathers not abandon us."
1.2.3.29	"Then, with that formula, he sprinkles and cleanses the Barhis, saying, "May the Fathers be cleansed, may the Grandfathers be cleansed, may those who are beyond the Grandfathers be cleanse." Having offered three libations of water on the Barhis, he makes obeisance, saying, "Obeisance to you, O Fathers, to your mind; obeisance to you, Fathers, to your food; obeisance to your energy; obeisance to the nourishment; obeisance to strength; obeisance to what is living among you; obeisance to that which is terrible among you; obeisances to you, O fathers, to your nourishment; obeisances, obeisances to those Fathers who are dead here, to those who are living here; may we be the most venerable among those who are dead here; may I be the most venerable of those who are living."
1.2.3.30	He should smell the remaining (food). One who desires food should eat it.
1.2.3.31	"He rises with the words, "O Prajapati, not thee."
1.2.3.32	The sacrificer recites the Pravahaṇī verse, "O departed one."
1.2.3.33	"O both of you, O you who are endowed with mind, we invoke the mind." These are three verses.
1.2.3.34	We, O Soma, bearing your mind in our bodies, have become procreators. Thus they thought and rejoiced.
1.2.3.35	Having reached the Agni, he stands near the Garhapatya, saying, "O Agni, you are the giver of wealth."
1.2.3.36	The wife should eat the middle portion. The fathers placed the embryo, the young man with the lotus garland, saying, "May he be a man." The other two should be offered to the fires or a brahmin should eat them or be thrown into water.
1.2.3.37	Having sprinkled the two vessels twice, one takes them back.
1.2.3.38	One who has not kindled the sacred fires should perform the offering to the departed ancestors, having set up a fire for that purpose in the place of the Garhapatya and Dakṣiṇāgni fires.
1.2.4.1	Having offered the Agnihotra in the morning, having washed the hands with the formula, "For you two, O Agni and Soma," having spread the fires, having spread the fires for the Brahman-sacrificer and the sacrificer on the right side, he spreads the continuous Prṣṭhyas with the formula, "Thou art the continuity of the sacrifice from the Garhapatya to the Āhavanīya. I spread thee for the continuity of the sacrificer."
1.2.4.2	Having placed the utensils on the northern side of the sacrificial grass, he yokes the utensils in pairs: the wooden sword, the potsherds, the Agnihotra ladle, the winnowing basket, the black antelope skin, the pestle, the mortar, the stone for grinding, the Khadira ladle, the Palāśa Juhu, the Upabhṛt of the Aśvattha tree, the Dhruva of the Vaikankata tree, the Vārātrī of the Śamī tree.
1.2.4.3	The other vessels are made of wood.
1.2.4.4	The vessels are the pot, the ladle, the Veda, the Veda-like sound, the wooden ladle, the vessel for keeping clarified butter, the cooked rice, the vessel for taking the oblation, the vessel for the Prāśitra, the vessel for offering to the wife, the vessel for morning offerings, and the vessel for evening offerings.
1.2.4.5	One offers water with a vessel made of copper for one desiring Brahmic lustre, with a vessel made from a cow's horn for one desiring cattle, with a vessel of clay for one desiring stability, and with an iron vessel for one desiring to conquer.
1.2.4.6	Taking up the cup with the formula, "Thou art of the wood," he cleanses the cup with the verse, "Do thou cleanse for the gods."
1.2.4.7	"Thou art of the earth," he cleanses other cups with the verse, "
1.2.4.8	Then he takes up the water from the Garhapatya fire, with the strainer in between, meditating on the earth in his mind, saying, "Whatever is yours, O Revanta, is Revanta, whatever is yours, O Havisya, is Havisya, whatever is your strength and valour, I take that wave, sweet for the sake of offering to the gods."
1.2.4.9	Having consecrated the sprinkling water with the formulas, he says, "O Brahman, I shall sprinkle the water." Having thus addressed, he sprinkles the water with the darbha-grass along with the wooden sword. He sprinkles it with the formula, "He who sustains you all equally with his breath, he sprinkles you. He for whom you are sprinkled, for him you are sprinkled. Brihaspati sprinkles you for nourishment."
1.2.4.10	Having taken up the wooden sword from the north of the Ahavaniya fire, he places it (in the fire). "He says, "Who yokes you? May he yoke you. For whom do you get yoked? For him may you get yoked. May Brhaspati yoke you for all desires for the sake of offering to gods."
1.2.4.11	The Adhvaryu and the sacrificer should restrain speech. The one who has prepared the oblations should not speak.
1.2.4.12	With the sprinkling of water, with his hands purified, he touches the vessels, saying, "May the divine powers be appeased."
1.2.4.13	He takes the Agnihotra ladle, saying, "You are of the forest."
1.2.4.14	He takes up the winnowing basket, saying, "Thou art grown in the rain."
1.2.4.15	He goes to the village, saying, "Do thou win the earth."
1.2.4.16	"Having placed the oblations in the Āhavanīya fire, he says, 'The protection is repelled.' He addresses the sacrificer, saying, 'I shall offer the oblation.'
1.2.4.17	If he has to go away, he should say, 'O Agni, I shall offer.'
1.2.4.18	Having performed the Vṛṣṭi sacrifice with barley, one should offer with barley or with wheat."
1.2.4.19	Then the cart at the Agni-sthala, made of wood, covered, with a load, is yoked.
1.2.4.20	From that he pours out.
1.2.4.21	Having placed the wooden ladle on the ground, he murmurs the mantras.
1.2.4.22	"Thou art the yoke," he touches the yoke.
1.2.4.23	Having touched the northern yoke, he murmurs, "Thou art the most brilliant of the gods."
1.2.4.24	"Thou art the step of Vishnu," he places the foot.
1.2.4.25	"Thou art not to be shaken," he ascends.
1.2.4.26	"For the wide wind," he pushes.
1.2.4.27	"With the eye of Mitra, I look," he looks at the sacrificial food.
1.2.4.28	Having placed the Agnihotra ladle on the fire, he pours out with a handful of grains, saying, "For Agni Devaputra, for Agni Devaputra." Three times with the formula, once silently. "For Agni Devapatra, for Agni Devapatra."
1.2.4.29	"This is for the gods," he touches the ones that have been arranged. "This is for us to bear," he touches the remaining ones.
1.2.4.30	"For protection, for the cow-pen," he touches the arranged ones. "For the cow-pen, for protection," he touches the others.
1.2.4.31	"May the roads be firm," he descends.
1.2.4.32	"Svāhā to heaven and earth," he mutters the expiation for spilling.
1.2.4.33	"For release from Varuna," he makes the cart come out.
1.2.4.34	He looks at the sky, saying, "The heaven is manifest."
1.2.4.35	He says, "The light is Vaisvânara," to the Âhavanîya.
1.2.4.36	He places it behind the Garhapatya, saying, "Thou art the earth, the atmosphere; I place thee on Aditi's lap."
1.2.4.37	He places it in front, saying, "O Agni, protect the offering."
1.2.4.38	Having sprinkled the Prokṣaṇī water over the uncleaned Agnihotra ladle, he sprinkles the oblation without touching it, saying, "I sprinkle for Agni for your own sake, I sprinkle for Agni for his own sake." Three times with the Yajus, and once silently.
1.2.4.39	Having turned the vessels upside down three times, saying, "If you have been defiled by me,"
1.2.4.40	"Thou art the skin of Aditi." Having taken up the black antelope skin, he shakes it three times on the heap, saying, "Protect from the falling down." The neck is turned upwards.
1.2.4.41	"Thou art the skin, thou art the skin of the Aditi."
1.2.4.42	He spreads it behind the heap, with the neck towards the west, with the hair upwards, with the head towards the west, and with the mouth towards the east.
1.2.4.43	Not discarding the Kṛṣṇājin, he places the mortar, saying, "May it be large."
1.2.4.44	He does not discard it empty.
1.2.4.45	He sows the seeds of Havis, saying, "Agni's tongue," three times with the Yajus, and the fourth time silently.
1.2.4.46	Taking the pestle, saying, "Large pestle," or "May it be upright, belonging to the tree."
1.2.4.47	"He drives away the Rakshas, the destroyer of oblations, come hither." He drives away the second one, saying, "The destroyer of oblations has been driven away, come hither." The third one, saying, "The destroyer of obrations has been driven away; the Yatudhanas have been driven away; come hither."
1.2.4.48	"The destroyer of oblation has come hither." The king says this. "The destroyer of offerings has come hither." This is said by the Vaishya.
1.2.4.49	The wife drives away.
1.2.4.50	The Adhvaryu, having taken the Kuṭaru, says (to the sacrificer), "Do thou strike the stone." They strike the stone. He says, "Do thou strike (the stone) for strength." He says, "For the second time do thou strike for prosperity." He strikes the stone.
1.2.4.51	Three times with this rite.
1.2.4.52	"Thou art grown with the rain," he says, taking up the winnowing basket.
1.2.4.53	"You are grown with the rain." He looks at the sacrificial food.
1.2.4.54	"We know thee, O thou who art grown with the rain," he says while pouring out.
1.2.4.55	"Thou art purified, guard (us)," he says while pouring down the water from the northern side.
1.2.4.56	He places the pot of the Puronuvākyā cake on the black antelope skin, and says, "The share of the Rakshas is removed.
1.2.4.57	"This I strike down, O Rakshas, this I lead to the lowest darkness." With his heel he strikes down the chaff.
1.2.4.58	Having touched water, he separates (the grains) with the formula, "May god Savitr separate you. Be separated, be separated."
1.2.4.59	He sows the separated grains.
1.2.4.60	He separates the grains three times with the formula, “Purify for the gods.”
1.2.4.61-64	With that verse he spreads the Kṛṣṇājina (black antelope skin) and places the Dhṛṣṇā stone, saying, "You are Dhṛṣṇāsī Parvatī." He places the Dhṛti stone, saying, "Parvatī knows you." He draws the Dhṛti stones, saying, "You are the pillar of Aditi." He draws the Śamya stone, saying, "You are the Śamya." He draws the Upaśamya stone, saying, "You are Upaśamye." He draws the Upala stone, saying, "You are Upale." He draws the Pratiṣṭhā stone, saying, “You are Pratiṣṭhe.” He draws the Prāṇī stone, saying, Translation: With that verse he lays down the Dhṛṣṭṇā stone, reciting, "You are the Dhṛṣṇa stone, Parvati." He places the Prati-Dhṛti stone, reciting, "Parvati knows you." He pulls the Śamya stones, saying, "Thou art the pillar of Adithi." He pulls the Upaśambha stones, saying, "Thou art the Upaśamba." He pulls the Upala stones, saying, "Thou art the Upala." He pulls the Pratiṣthā stones, saying, “Thou art the Pratiṣtha.” He pulls the Prāṇi stones, saying,
1.2.4.65	"For Prāṇa thee" (he says) while drawing the eastern brick; "For Apāna thee" (he draws) the western brick; "For Vyāna thee" (the draws) the middle brick.
1.2.4.66	"For the long course" (he says), while placing it.
1.2.4.67	"For Mitra's sight I look" (he says while looking at the pounded bricks).
1.2.4.68	The god Savitr, with golden hands, may he receive (the oblations). He receives the oblations as they are being scattered.
1.2.4.69	A slave or wife scatters (the oblations)
1.2.4.70	He instructs (the sacrificer), saying, "Make them small."
1.3.1.1	Taking up the Upavesa (grass), he says, "Thou art Dhriti, thou protectest Brahman," and puts the embers from the Garhapatya, saying, "O Agni, do thou remove the Agni that is cooked.
1.3.1.2	"Remove the evil spirits!" thus he removes one of them.
1.3.1.3	Having placed the second one in its place, he places the skull on it, with the verse, "Thou art firm, thou expandest the earth."
1.3.1.4	Without letting go of the skull, he turns the charcoal over it, with the words, "Burned the Rakshas!"
1.3.1.5	"He places the Dhāruṇa (stone) first, the Dhātrā (stone) in the eastern half, the Dharmā (stone) in its middle, the Cid (stone) in (its) northern half, the Paricid (stone) in eastern half, the Visvasu (stone) in all directions, the Apam (stone) in western half. " "He places the stones in the eastern half of the altar, saying, "May the kinsmen of this sacrificer surround him. May the kinsmen surround this sacrificer."
1.3.1.6	The Aṣṭākapāla is for Agni, the Ekādaśakapāla is for Indra-Agni, and the Indra.
1.3.1.7	Having placed eight in the northern direction according to this rule, he places the remaining ones with the formula, "You are the Cit, you are the Paricit."
1.3.1.8	Having placed the embers of Vasus and Rudras, and having placed the cooked rice on the heated embers, he milks the cow in the morning as he did in the evening.
1.3.1.9	He places the strainer above.
1.3.1.10	He cooks it, not boiling it.
1.3.1.11	Having taken out the morning milk, he pours the flour into the strainer, having placed it in a vessel that has been heated and cooled down, with the formula, "For the god Agni." He pours thrice with the formula, "For the god so and so."
1.3.1.12	The heated waters are being drunk, having purified the oblation, he purifies it again with the Gāyatrī verse.
1.3.1.13	He brings them with the ladle, having made the Veda the Upāṃśu,
1.3.1.14	He mixes them with the verse, "May the plants be mixed with water."
1.3.1.15	"May you be surrounded by water, may you be united with water," with the waters being drunk.
1.3.1.16	"May they be seated in peace," he places them.
1.3.1.17	Having recited the formula, "Thou art the head of the sacrifice," he places the lump. "May Pūṣan, the knower of all, divide you according to your share. May you turn away equally." He makes them equal.
1.3.1.18	"This is for Agni" - for Agni. "This is for Agni-Soma" - having recited this formula, at the Full Moon.
1.3.1.19	According to the deity at the New Moon.
1.3.1.20	"Thou art heat" - he places it.
1.3.1.21	"May it spread widely," he says, spreading it as much as the tortoise-shell is suitable, the size of a horse's hoof.
1.3.1.22	"May your body and mine be united," he says, rubbing it with paste without breaking it.
1.3.1.23	He pours clarified butter on the right side.
1.3.1.24	Taking up the ladle of ghee with the formula, "Thou art Aditi, not cut off from the leaves," and having melted it in the southern fire, and having placed it between the Pavitras, he offers the milk of the cow with the formula, "The milk of the cow is at the head, the milk of the goat is at the head. This is thy milk, O Agni, which is being diminished, being increased, being nourished. I pour out the ghee for thee, for thy enjoyment, for thy worship, for thy sacrifice."
1.3.1.25	He thrice encircles the ghee and the oblation with the formula, "Parivājaspati," along with the paste.
1.3.1.26	"May the god Savitr cook thee." Having heated it with the fire-brand, he says, "O Agni, take the Brahman." Having let go the fire-brand and having taken the skin with darbha-blades, he says, "May Agni not injure thy skin." Without removing the flames,
1.3.1.27	"Mayst thou be united with Brahman." Having mixed the embers with the Veda, he says,
1.3.1.28	Having thrown the embers, he releases speech, saying, "Do not burn."
1.3.1.29	Having drawn three lines towards the east inside the altar with the wooden sword, he makes a good smear, saying, "To the one, svāhā! To the two, svāhā!" and "To the three, svāhā" in turn, heating it with the fire-wood from the Āhavaniya fire.
1.3.1.30	He makes the altar.
1.3.1.31	He takes up the Khadira-wood, the Sphyi and the Bhrishti with the Vitra.
1.3.1.32	Having rubbed with the Darbha grass, "Thou art the arm of Indra", he places the Darbha grass on the eastern third part of the altar and cuts it across with the Sphyi, "Thou art a protector of the earth, O Devayajani, the third and fourth parts of the earth".
1.3.1.33	"Go to the cattle-pen", taking the tip of the grass and digging out the dust.
1.3.1.34-36	May Parjanya rain for you. He looks at the altar with the verse, "O god Savitr, bind." He removes the grass and dust with the wooden sword. The Agnidhra takes the chaff and the roots of the altar and encloses it.
1.3.1.37	This is the house for him who among you, O gods, practices the holy life. The wise one, meditating in the directions, the ascetic, the secret messenger, moves among men. Thus he puts it into his hand and mouth.
1.3.1.38	"He who hates us and whom we hate," says the attacker.
1.3.1.39	"May the auspicious plants be for you," says the second.
1.3.1.40	The third (verse) is 'Drapsaḥ sa iti'.
1.3.1.41	With this rite, he carries (the earth) three times with the Yajus, and the fourth time silently.
1.3.1.42	He places the heap of earth with the spade, saying, "Exhausted is the Rakshas, exhausted is the evil-doer, exhausted are the Yatudhanas."
1.3.1.43	With the wooden sword he encloses the altar in front of the Garhapatya and behind the Ahavaniya, making it as wide as the sacrificer and as long as the oblations can be placed close together.
1.3.1.44	He draws a line towards the east from the western half, saying, "Thou art true existence." From the southern half towards the east, saying, "thou art truth." From the northern half towards the east,
1.3.1.45	For one who desires a firm foundation, one should do it in the sky.
1.3.1.46	Having dug two inches deep with a spade, one should remove the roots and throw them on a heap.
1.3.1.47	For one who desires cattle, one should do the removal of excrement.
1.3.2.1	Having come to this altar, men make it agreeable to the gods, near Aditi. May all the gods enjoy it, may they enter the patron with prosperity. Having smoothed it, he raises the shoulders towards the east, the hips towards the west, the back sloping towards the east, with the middle bent down, the buttocks close by.
1.3.2.2	This much is done on the previous day.
1.3.2.3	Having washed his hands, he washes the wooden sword without looking at its tip.
1.3.2.4	Having sprinkled the altar, he takes it up from the north, saying, "O Brahman, I am taking up the altar." Having said this, he takes it, saying, "The Vasus are yours" from the west, "The Rudras are yours" from south, "The Adityas are yours" from north.
1.3.2.5	"Thou art the giver, thou art the giver of life, thou art the broad, thou art the bountiful, thou art the loving, thou art before the cruel one." Having rubbed the altar with the wooden sword, having placed the wooden sword transversely on the third layer of the altar, having placed the sprinkling water, having placed the kindling wood and the sacrificial grass, having besmeared the spoon and the ladles, having bound the wife, having caused to be brought clarified butter, he instructs (the sacrificer), saying, "Do thou come."
1.3.2.6	The Agnidhra performs as he is directed.
1.3.2.7	Having filled the Prokṣaṇī vessel, having drawn water near the tip of the wooden sword, having drawn the wooden sword towards himself, he places it on the path of the wooden sword.
1.3.2.8	One should take up the wooden sword before the Sadana rite.
1.3.2.9	One strikes the mound with the wooden sword, saying, "Thou art the slayer of the hater," towards the east, towards oneself.
1.3.2.10	Having sprinkled, one places it back.
1.3.2.11	The kindling wood of the Ahavaniya is on the right, the sacrificial grass on the left.
1.3.2.12	He cleanses the ladles with the sound of the Veda, dividing them into four parts or not dividing them.
1.3.2.13	He burns the Rakshas away from the Ahavaniya or the Garhapatya, with the words "The Rakshas are burnt away." The ends of the bundles are at the front, the sides at the back, the faces at the front, and the roots at the back.
1.3.2.14	"He burns the Sammārga with the verse, 'Life, breath' (he burns) from all sides. With the verse, 'I burn thee with the most brilliant heat of Agni' (he burns).
1.3.2.15	'Eye, ear' (he burns), the Juhu, inside, towards the east, towards the west, outside.
1.3.2.16	'Speech, cattle' (he burns the Upabṛt), inside, towards the west; towards the east, outside.
1.3.2.17	‘Sacrifice, progeny' (he burns all around) the Dhruva.
1.3.2.18	Having sprinkled the broom, he strikes it into the fire with the verse, "The art of heaven has come down, resting on the corner of the earth. With that thousand-rayed one, you torment the hater. May the hater be tormented much. May it not come to us. The tormenting herbs, svāhā!"
1.3.2.19	O Agni, the Householder, do thou invite me. Do ye, the wives of the gods, invite me. The wife approaches the Garhapatya fire with this verse. This is thy world, O wife. Let there be salutations to thee. Do thou not injure me.
1.3.2.20	We have approached you, O Agni, the well-born, the well-wife, the destroyer of enemies, the invincible, the very heroic, sitting to the right, behind the Garhapatya, bending the knees.
1.3.2.21	The wife, with the yoke, binds the inner garment, desiring good fortune, offspring, good fortune, and the body of Agni. Having become obedient to Agni, she binds it for good deeds.
1.3.2.22	"He makes a knot, saying, "Pūṣan may your knot be firm."
1.3.2.23	"He imagines a knot on the right side, saying, "May it be yours."
1.3.2.24	Having touched water, he offers clarified butter with the Veda.
1.3.2.25	Looking at it, he says, "I look at you with an undaunted eye for prosperity, for good offspring, like Aditi, like Indra's wife, without a husband, may I be prosperous with offspring."
1.3.2.26	"This is Vishnu" he places on the Gārhapatya and Dakṣiṇāgni.
1.3.2.27	"Thou art splendour." This is the second (verse) to be recited after the Garhapatya.
1.3.2.28	"Thou art splendour, do thou descend," he says while carrying (the oblations).
1.3.2.29	"Do not let Agni take thee away," he says while placing it on the Ahavaniya, and then settles the path of the wooden sword towards the north of the sprinkling water.
1.3.2.30	"Thou are splendour." Having melted the clarified butter three times with the verses in order, he pours it back, and then with the Gāyatrī verse.
1.3.2.31	"He looks at the clarified butter with the formula, "Thou art nectar."
1.3.2.32	He takes the clarified butter in the ladle within the altar, covering the Veda, having placed the strainer. Taking it with the formula, "Thou art the abode," he takes four spoonfuls in the Juhu, eight in the Upabhṛt and the least in the Dhruva.
1.3.2.33	The fifth is the largest; for one desiring cattle.
1.3.3.1	"O waters, do ye flow together, do ye be united with honey. Do ye be placed in the place of the sacrificial grass. Do ye be brought in the manner of the Prokṣaṇī water." Thus he recites over the Prokṣani water. "O goddesses, ye are pure waters." Thus he recitates.
1.3.3.2	"O Brahman, I shall sprinkle the kindling wood, the altar, and the sacrificial grass." Having thus addressed, he sprinkles the kindling wood and the enclosing sticks, except the Paridhi.
1.3.3.3	"Krishna is the best of the Khara (i.e. the Khara class of deities). The Veda is the sacrificial grass. The Veda is the altar. The sacrificial grass is the altar. He sprinkles thrice.
1.3.3.4	Having reached the altar, he sprinkles the sacrificial grass thrice, saying, "You are the way to the gods." The tip is for heaven, the middle for the atmosphere, and the root for the earth.
1.3.3.5	Having sprinkled the knot of the foremost, sprinkle the roots.
1.3.3.6	"O Agni, be the strength of those who have the sacrificial grass. Be the life of the Fathers who are heated by the sun." Having poured the remaining water for sprinkling towards the south of the altar, and having loosened the knot with the formula, "Pūṣan may loosen thy knot," he says, "I place the Prāṇa and Apāna in the sacrificer" after releasing the strainer. Taking up the wooden sword along with the strainer with the formula, "Thou art the wooden sword of Visnu," he takes it from the Āhavanīya without shaking and without rubbing.
1.3.3.7	Having gone around in front of the Ahavaniya fire, he gives it to the Brahman or the sacrificer on the right side, saying, "I make you with Prāṇa and Apāna."
1.3.3.8	He receives it, saying, "Prāṇa and Apānas are in me."
1.3.3.9	Having covered the Darbha grass, he spreads the Soma-pressing stone on the right side with the verse, "May the stone be spread on the north, may the grass be spread on the south."
1.3.3.10	He should place the grass with its tip towards the west and its root towards the east, for one who is without a wife.
1.3.3.11	"He spreads the covering grass with the formula, "Do thou spread widely."
1.3.3.12	He spreads the grass with the eastern part towards the east or the western part towards the west.
1.3.3.13	He covers the roots with the eastern part and the altar with the western part.
1.3.3.14	With a bundle of grass in his hand, he lays down the Āhavaniya with the Paridhi-stones, with the formula, "Thou art Gandharva." The last one towards the west, the next one towards the north, with the formula "Thou art Indra's arm." The next one towards the east, with the formula "Thou art Mitra-Varuna."
1.3.3.15	Having removed the topmost portion of the kindling wood, he places the two kindling woods above it, with the formula,"Thou art the constant Hotar." The northern one silently.
1.3.3.16	Having approached the Āhavaniya fire, he spreads two darbha-blades with their tips uncut and without any inner-growth, with their tips towards the north, on the sacrificial grass, with the formula, "You are the supports of the world of Viśvajan."
1.3.3.17	He places the Prastara on the southern half of the sacrificial grass with the formula, “You are the supports for Vasus and Rudras."
1.3.3.18	"You are the heaven," on the Prastara, the Juhu ladle.
1.3.3.19	He places the sacrificial grass and the sacrificial grass-roots evenly with the sacrificial grass.
1.3.3.20	Having placed the northern spoon below, saying, "You are the sky," and having placed the northern Dhruva spoon above, saying, "you are the earth."
1.3.3.21	He places them without touching each other, with the tips pointing downwards.
1.3.3.22	Saying, "You are a bull," he places the full ladle to the right of the Juhu.
1.3.3.23	"He anoints the clarified butter with the verse, 'May the clarified butter be firm.'
1.3.3.24	Having placed the vessel on the fire and having poured clarified butter over it, he places the oblations in it with the verse, "The moist one, the protector of the world, the one who has been born, the one who is born, the one born from the womb, the one who generates the minds, the one who knows the minds, the knower of the minds, the protector of all beings, the one who protects all beings, the protector of beings, the one born in the womb, the protector of creatures, the one who causes the birth of creatures, the protector of cattle, the one who makes the cattle grow, the one who grows the cattle, the one born of the womb, the lord of cattle, the lord of the cattle, the lord, the one who rules the cattle, the protector of men, the one who gives protection to men, the one born, the one generated, the one who produces, the one who creates, the one who brings forth, the one who nourishes, the one who sustains, the one who supports, the one who upholds, the one who holds, the one who carries, the one who bears, the one who endures, the one who tolerates, the one who forgives, the one who pardons, the one who grants, the one who bestows, the one who confers, the one who imparts,
1.3.3.25	"O Agni, I pour thee with the lustre of the gods, with the lustre of Agni, with the lustre that is thine, with the lustre which is thine, with thy own lustre, with the lustre thou hast, with the lustre ye have, with the lustre we have, with the splendour of the gods, O Agni, I pour thy most agreeable (oblation)."
1.3.3.26	He pours it without striking or turning away, and wipes it with a Veda-text, and puts it in a vessel.
1.3.3.27	"May the earth's essence, Ira and Bhuti, not escape." Having poured over the potsherds, he adorns the cakes.
1.3.3.28	Thou art Tṛpti, the Gayatri metre. Satisfy me with brilliance and Brahmic lustre. Thou art Tṛptis, the Tristubh metre. Satisfy with me with strength and vigour. Thou art Truptis, the Jagat metre. Satisfy us with progeny and cattle. Thou art Tarptis, the Anushtubh metre. Satistify me with wealth and food. Thou art Tarti, the Paṅkti metre. Satisfy all of us with happiness and joy. Thou art Tarta, the Bṛhat metre. Satisfy the whole of us with happiness. Thou art Tārti, the Vairāja metre. Satisfy everything of us with happiness.
1.3.3.29	The one who adorns the two milking vessels below, he is the Self who has entered the animals, the one who seeks the enclosure of the gods. Come here, O Soma, with the Self and ghee, find the heaven for me, the sacrificer.
1.3.3.30	Then he places the ladle with its handle towards the west, having joined the two ends of the ladle and the pot, on the southern edge of the altar, having cooked rice, and curd on the northern edge, he places the Veda in front of the ladle.
1.3.3.31	Having spread the altar, having gone to the Hotr's seat, he instructs, "Recite the Anuvāka to Agni being kindled."
1.3.4.1	At each Praṇava he places the kindling wood, leaving aside the kindling wood for the Anuyāja.
1.3.4.2	He kindles the fire three times with the Veda, starting from the beginning of the altar.
1.3.4.3	Having placed the full ladle in Dhruva, having taken up the ladle from Dhruva, and having moved along the northern joint of the enclosing sticks, he offers the offering to Prajapati with the formula, "To Prajapati svāhā" mentally.
1.3.4.4	He instructs the Agnīdhra to touch the enclosing sticks and the fire three times each.
1.3.4.5	With the wooden sword he cleanses the fire-wood and the enclosing sticks, except the wooden sword. With the fire-wood he cleanses the enclosing sticks. "With the wooden sword he sprinkles the fire-wood. "O Agni, thou art going to the race, thou art going with the strength, thou art going for the strength, thou wilt win the strength, thou shalt carry the oblation to the gods, thou art the winner of the strength, I cleanse thee for winning the strength, O Agni, thou wilt win strength."
1.3.4.6-7	He offers the Anjali-offering with the formula, "To the Juhu and Upamant, salutations." He takes up the Juhu with the formula, “Agni is calling thee. We shall worship the gods with the divine worship." He takes up the Upamant with the formula, "The god Savitr is calling thee. We shall worship the gods through divine worship."
1.3.4.8-11	"May I be well today." Having recited this, he crosses (the fire) with the formula, "O Agni-Vishnu." He stands with the formula, "May I be firm in Vishnu's place." The right foot is within the altar, the left foot is like a sniff.
1.3.4.12	Then he offers the Aghāra-oblation with the verse, "The sacrifice is raised up." He offers it with the ladle turned upwards and facing east, continuously, for one who desires heaven. For one who is hated, he offers it with the tip of the ladle turned downwards.
1.3.4.13	Without touching the two ladles, he crosses over. "Protect me, O Agni, from evil conduct. May I be united with good conduct."
1.3.4.14	He anoints the Dhruva ladle three times with the Juhu ladle, saying, "The oblation is anointed with Agni, the oblation is anointed, the ghee is anointed with the oblation, the oblation with the ghee, the oblation of the Jikṣa with the oblation of Jikṣa, the oblation (of the Jikṣas) with the oblation (in the Jikṣā), the oblation of Agni with the oblation."
1.3.4.15	Having poured the Dhruva, he places the ladles in their places.
1.3.4.16	He pours the ghee on the Dhruva with the formula, "The oblations are brought forth for the prosperity," and pours the ghee on Juhu with the formula, “For the prosperity of the heroes, svāhā.”
1.3.4.17	The sacrifice is continued by sacrifice. He pours the Dhruva ladle over the Juhu.
1.3.4.18	The Adhvaryu, having taken the grass of the altar, stands towards the north, holding the wooden sword and the broom. The Agnidhra, having taken the wood of the altar, holds it towards the south. The Adhvaryus says, "Who will be the Adhvaryu? He will be the Advaryu." "I stand in the place of Vishnu, the sacrifice." "May speech perform the priestly function, may mind perform the priestly function." "I resort to speech." "Bhur Bhuvah Svah." "O Brahman, I shall announce the Pravara." Having announced after being requested, he says, "Agni is the divine Hotar, knowing and healing, according to Manu, according to Bharata, according to Amu, according to Amu."
1.3.4.19	The officiating priests, beginning with the highest, are chosen by the sacrificer.
1.3.4.20	The officiating priest is chosen by the non-Brahmana.
1.3.4.21	"Brahmanas are the officiating priests of this sacrifice, beginning with Brahma."
1.3.4.22	The Hotr is addressed in a low voice, and the name is given loudly.
1.3.4.23	"He is addressed as "having ghee."
1.3.4.24	Having taken up the kindling woods in the ladles, he makes the first one offer with the formula, "Do thou offer." He makes the others offer with the formula "Do thou offer, do thou offer."
1.3.4.25	Having offered three oblations, he takes up half of the Upabhṛt ladle and offers the two remaining oblations.
1.3.4.26	He offers five Prayāja oblations, all of them identical with the exception of the last one.
1.3.4.27	He pours clarified butter over the oblations beginning with the Dhruva ladle, ending with the Upabhrit ladle.
1.3.4.28	He offers the portions of clarified butter with the Jyotishmati verses, the Agniya portion in the northern half, the Soumya portion in the southern half, crossing the point of contact with the first offering.
1.3.4.29	The principal offerings are made in the order of the Samhita verses.
1.3.4.30	Having performed the Agniya rites, he performs the Upamshu rites.
1.3.4.31	He invokes the deity in a low voice, and the other in a loud voice.
1.3.4.32	The two offerings of milk, having the same deity, are offered together.
1.3.4.33	Before the Svishtakrit offering, he offers two oblations with the ladle, saying, "We invoke the bull, the horse, the full moon. May it bestow on us the most excellent wealth, the prosperity of a thousand. To the full moon, the bestower of good, svāhā!" at the full moon.
1.3.4.34	The New Moon is auspicious, well-favoured, like a cow, ever increasing in milk. May she yield us abundant wealth, a thousandfold, for the New Moon, for the Suradhas, svāhā. Thus at the New Moon.
1.3.4.35	In the eastern half of the northern half they place the Svishtakrit Agni.
1.3.4.36	He places the two ladles in their places.
1.3.5.1	With the thumb and the middle finger of the right hand, he offers a morsel of barley from the middle of the Agnihotra.
1.3.5.2	Placing the grass, pouring over it, and spreading the grass on the northern side of the altar, he arranges the herbs.
1.3.5.3	Having offered twice to each oblation, he arranges the Iḍā.
1.3.5.4	Having taken from the southern half of the Agniya portion, he offers the portion of the sacrificer, small and long, from the eastern half.
1.3.5.5	Having cut off the second ladleful from the middle,
1.3.5.6	Having turned the oblations towards the front and the ladles towards the rear, and sitting facing the east, the Hotṛ gives the ladleful to the Hotr.
1.3.5.7	Having gone around in front of the Hotr and behind the Idâ, having crossed or not having crossed the southern end, he anoints the joints of the Hotr's fingers, the right ones first, the left ones later.
1.3.5.8	The Hotr anoints the Idâ in his hand, the right ones before, the left ones after.
1.3.5.9	The Adhvaryu, the Agnîdh, the Brahman and the Yajamana begin.
1.3.5.10	When the Ida has been invoked, he directs (the Adhvaryu) to go around to the right, to the left, and to the left again.
1.3.5.11	The priests, with the sacrificer as the fifth, having gone around and eaten, sprinkle themselves on the Prastara grass, saying, "May the mind and light enjoy the clarified butter. May Brihaspati join the interrupted sacrifice. May the All-gods be pleased with this our sacrifice."
1.3.5.12	Having invoked the earth, the mother, he says, "May Agni from the Agnidhra-chamber invoke me." Having invoked the heaven, the father, he says, “May Agni from the Agni-chamber invoke me.” Having invoked, he says, “(I invoke) the earth, the giver, I eat (the oblation). I invoke the sky, the giver, the father, I eat. I invoke the heaven, the giver, (I eat). I invoke the directions, the giver, I eat.”
1.3.5.13	Having taken the portions of the Brahman and the sacrificer around the Ahavaniya fire from the Veda, he places the portion of the Brahman within the altar and the portion of the sacrificer outside the altar.
1.3.5.14	He places the Anvāhārya rice and the oblations.
1.3.5.15	Having taken the Anuyāja-kindling wood, he says, "O Brahman, we are about to depart." Having placed the kindling wood, the Agnīdhra should touch the enclosing sticks and the fire once each. Having instructed thus, he departs.
1.3.5.16	With the kindling-wood he cleanses the fire, saying, "Thou art the fire, the giver of wealth, the giver of good, the giver of strength, the giver of victory, the giver of oblations to the gods, the giver of gifts, the giver of the strong, I cleanse thee, the winner of the strong, the winner of wealth. Thou hast won the strong."
1.3.5.17	Having sprinkled the fire-places, he offers them into the fire with the verse, "May Rudra, the lord of beings, the bull, the mover of the string, the protector of cattle, not injure us. May this be offered to you. Svāhā."
1.3.5.18	Having brought the Upabṛt ladle to the Juhu ladle, he offers three Anuyāja offerings with the verses, "May I offer to the gods," "May I offer," and "May I offer" respectively.
1.3.5.19	Having kindled another fire, having offered another oblation, having placed the two ladles in the supreme place, having touched them together,
1.3.6.1	He takes up the Juhu with the Prāstara, saying, "May Indra be mine." He takes up the Upamant with, "May Indra and Agni be mine." He makes the Visuci, saying, "Indra and Agni are mine."
1.3.6.2	He carries the Juhu forward, saying, "I follow the impulse of Agni."
1.3.6.3	May the god Savitr ward off him who hates us and whom we hate. Having sprinkled (the oblations), he puts them back.
1.3.6.4	Having sprinkled, he puts them back (in the pot).
1.3.6.5	He anoints the enclosing sticks with the ladle, saying, "Thou art Vasu," (to the middle one); "Thou art Upavasu," (to) the southern one; "Thou art Visvavasu," (to ) the northern one.
1.3.6.6	"Having known the heaven and earth, having placed the sacrificial grass on the barhis, having released the Prastara, he anoints the root in the Dhruva with the formula, "In the earth, in the sky, in the heaven." Having placed the middle part in the Upabhuta, he anoints with the formula, "In the heaven, in the sky." Having placed the tip in the Juhu, he anoints it with the formula, "
1.3.6.7	Having again taken the grass from the Prāstara with the formula, "For the life of thee," having placed it with the roots, having seated himself on the Prāstāra, having caused to announce, having been announced in return, having caused to be recited, he directs the divine Hotr-priests to recite the Sūktavāka for the Bhadrā-vākya.
1.3.6.8	When it is said, "In this Rddhi Hotr," he strikes the kindling wood together with the Prāstara.
1.3.6.9	Having struck it forward, he releases them, saying, "Those who are released by the waters."
1.3.6.10	He instructs, saying, "Agni, lead."
1.3.6.11	The Agnidhra leads it three times with his hand.
1.3.6.12	The Agnidhr instructs, saying, “Strike and respond.”
1.3.6.13	"The life-force is not lost." He strikes the grass with the Upaṃśu (chant).
1.3.6.14	"This is it." He points with his finger three times.
1.3.6.15	"O Agni, you are the sustainer of life." He touches the limbs as per their shape.
1.3.6.16	Having touched the earth with the formula, "Thou art Dhruva," and having touched the eyes with the formula, Arci, he should touch the eyes with the formulas, "Yama gave me the eye again, Agni gave me the eye, Bhaga gave me the eye. The two Asvins gave me the eye for the eyes."
1.3.6.17-18	Having touched water, he goes around the middle enclosing stick, reciting, "Agni has gone." The Agnidhra replies, "He has gone." The Adhvaryu says, "Let him be heard." The Agnidhara replies, "Let it be heard." He instructs, "May there be welfare for the divine Hotr-s, and good fortune for the human ones. May there be peace for the Yajur."
1.3.6.19	The one whom you have protected, O Agni, the god, being pressed by the Pārvatikas, I follow him in this way, lest he should go away from you with a different mind. He strikes the Paridhīs.
1.3.6.20	He draws the northern half.
1.3.6.21	Having placed the ladle and the Upabhṛt, and having struck the Paridhīs, he releases the ladles.
1.3.6.22	He places the two ladles in the place of the posts of the Havirdhāna and the Kasta, saying, "I place you, the two ladles of Agni, the householder, in the assembly."
1.3.6.23	He draws the two yokes, saying, "May the two yokes of Ghritachi protect the sacrificer."
1.3.6.24	He does not place them back on the unremoved sacrificial grass.
1.3.7.1	The Adhvaryu, having taken the ladle, the Veda-cord, and the vessel of ghee, goes back. The Hotṛ takes the wooden sword. The Agnidhra takes the vessel of ghee.
1.3.7.2	The wives are consecrated at the Garhapatya fire. The Hotṛ is on the right, the Adhvaryu on the left, the Agnidhra behind, the wife of the Hotṛ in the rear half.
1.3.7.3	The sound of the Veda becomes audible.
1.3.7.4	In the northern half he offers to Soma, in the southern half to Tvashtra.
1.3.7.5	In the enclosed space he offers to the wives of the gods, Raka and Sinivali.
1.3.7.6	In front he offers to the wife of the gods, Sinivali, to one desiring cattle; above he offers to Raka, to one desiring heroes.
1.3.7.7	The wife, following the husband, offers with the ladle, saying, "May you be united, may you be united; may you follow the same path, may you follow the path of ghee. Whatever of yours has been poured into the fire, for that may you be united, husband and wife, svāhā."
1.3.7.8	In the northeast corner, Agni, the householder.
1.3.7.9	He offers four times, the Agnīdhra six times.
1.3.7.10	With the descending movement, he anoints the joints of the fingers. With the descending movement the Agnidhra invokes.
1.3.7.11	The eating has been explained.
1.3.7.12	Having placed the enclosing sticks around the fire, he offers the oblations of the four spoonfuls of clarified butter in the southern fire, saying, "O Agni, protect me from the unassailable, protect me from unassailable mind, protect me from heaven, protect me from prosperity, protect me from misfortune, protect me from ill-will, make our father free from poison, make the womb good, the good, the earth, svāhā."
1.3.7.13	"O Indra, make the minds of the people of this village agreeable to me. Svāhā." The second verse is for one who desires a village.
1.3.7.14	"On the pestle, mortar, potsherd, stone, and grinding stone, whatever is sprinkled, I offer it to the gods. May all the gods enjoy this oblation. Svāhā. " This is the offering of the ground flour.
1.3.7.15	Sarasvati who is the bestower of wealth, Sarasvati who is a bestower of wealth and beauty, these are the oblations of ghee.
1.3.7.16	The Hotṛ gives the Veda to the wife. "He says, "You are the Veda, you are the prosperity, you are the knowledge, you are the progeny, you are the action, you are the instrument, you are the activity, you are the good deed, you are the accomplishment, you are the accomplishing, you are the cattle." He sits down three times with each verse at the foot of the altar.
1.3.7.17	"This is the knot of Varuna, which Savitar, the upholder of truth, has untied in the womb of truth, in the world of the well-done. May I be without misfortune, together with my husband." Having untied the knot of the gold, he takes the yoke with the full vessel below.
1.3.7.18	He makes the wife recite the verse according to the sacrificer's wish in the full vessel.
1.3.7.19	At the end, he mutters "May we live together" over the full vessel.
1.3.7.20	He offers oblations for atonement to the desired ones, Svāhā! to the well-desired ones, Svāha! to the undesired ones, Svāhe! to the remedies for the ill-desired ones, svāhā! to Iṣṭi, svāhā to Svishṭi, svāhà to Niskṛti, svāhā, to Niskṛtyā, Darīṣṭyā, Durārddhyā, svāhā. To the divine bodies, svāhā; to the human ones, svāha. The excess I offer to the deficient, svāhā: the deficient I offer to the excess, svāhā The equal I offer to the equal, svāhā Earth, svāhā Heaven, svāhā Space, svāhā svāhā. You are our Agni, you are our Agni. The mind is light. The thirty-three threads. You are Agni and you are not Agni. The unheard, the over-heard, the Vasat-uttered, the non-Vasat-uttered, what is not recited, what is over-recited, the excess in the sacrifice, and what is deficient, Agni has joined them together, let him arrange them, svāhā Thus the unknown and the known are performed in the sacrifice. All that is done by Agni, for he knows it as it is. Svāhā! The Iṣṭi and the Svishṭi protect the sacrifice. May one protect our offspring, and may the other protect the sacrifice. Svāhā. Whatever fear has come to our house, whatever is unknown, whatever is caused by the gods, by the ancestors, or by humans, may Agni, the most powerful, remove that fear. May it be peaceful for our offspring, and peaceful for our cattle. Svāhā.
1.3.7.21	He fills the Dhruva vessel with ghee, reciting, "May the Dhruva be filled with ghee. May the divine ones, worthy of sacrifice, approach the sacrifice for Surya, the cow, the seat of Aditi, the great stream, the earth, at this sacrifice."
1.4.1.1	One should establish it in spring, in the full moon or new moon, a brahmin, in summer a kshatriya, in autumn a vaishya, and in the rainy season a chariot-maker.
1.4.1.2	It is for all castes and is cooling.
1.4.1.3	One should perform the rite of Rtu-Nakshatra-Parva-Sannipat.
1.4.1.4	Everywhere, one who is going to perform a Soma sacrifice.
1.4.1.5	Having shaved the hair and beard, wearing a linen garment, one should eat the Upvasa meal.
1.4.1.6	Having made three lines of the people of the gods, having placed the Upavasatha-offering on the western side of the middle line sloping towards the east, he offers with the verse, "To the wise, to the poet, to the knower, to the praiseworthy, to the bull, to the Vrishni, from where there is fear, may that be free from fear for us. May we worship the gods. Hail!" with the Kūṣmāṇḍa verses.
1.4.1.7	On that night he cooks Brahma-rice on the skin of a camel, having placed it in four vessels and in milk or boiled rice.
1.4.1.8	Having taken it out and made it oily, the four officiating priests, being initiated, eat it once.
1.4.1.9	He gives a boon to them.
1.4.1.10	Having taken three fire-sticks of the size of a span, he places them. The sticks of the Aśvattha tree of the month of Caitra, with leaves and flowers, are of the Stibigava variety. With the Gāyatrī verses, "May your impetuous horses come forth," he places the sticks of the Brāhmaṇa. "I am pressing you from all sides," he places the stick of the Rājanya. "Seven are your protectors of the people," he places the wood of the Vaiśya.
1.4.1.11	One should perform the Brāhmaudānika rite for a year, or for twelve nights, or for three nights, or for one night.
1.4.1.12	One should not speak untruth, should not eat meat, should not approach a woman, should not have his clothes washed, should not have the fire removed from his house, should not have it brought from elsewhere, should not go away, should not follow.
1.4.1.13	If he were to go away or follow, having cooked a pot of rice with four handles, he should again place the kindling woods.
1.4.1.14	He who is going to kindle the fire tomorrow, binds a black goat at night, saying, "O Agni, the offspring."
1.4.1.15	With the kindling wood in his hand, the sacrificer remains awake.
1.4.1.16	"He kindles the fire with chips, thinking, 'I am kindling the two worlds; I am prospering in both worlds; I am crossing over death.' One should kindle the fire with chips.
1.4.1.17	He kindles the chips on the fire-wood.
1.4.1.18	"This is your natural place of birth." He places the fire on the kindling sticks: "O Agni, the knower of beings, pour here the seed of the universe, from which the fire will be born through your heat." And also: "From the ashvattha tree, the carrier of oblations, born from the womb of the shami tree, the fire has been produced by Maya."
1.4.1.19	"You are the two who have the seasons, Agni and Retas, you have given the seed for growth and reproduction. That is true, that you are bearing a hero and will beget a hero. Tomorrow you will beget me. You who have been begotten, beget me with offspring, cattle, and brahmic lustre." Having recited this, he gives the kindling woods to the sacrificer.
1.4.1.20	The earth, the wife of the sky, the near one of truth, the one who is in the middle of the cattle, the one who has the Jātavedas as her son, the one who generates the sacrifices, the one who goes before, he accepts.
1.4.1.21	Having accepted, he restrains speech. "He approaches the truth from untruth. " "I approach the divine speech from the human." He restrains the divine speech."
1.4.1.22	They follow Agni and take out the ashes.
1.4.1.23-24	In the case of the Brāhmaṇa, he places the Garhapatya in front of the Āhavanīya, in eight steps; in eleven steps in the case of the Kṣatriya; in twelve steps in the case of the Vaiśya; or in an unlimited number of steps. The Dakṣiṇāgni is placed to the south of the Garhapaty, at a distance of three and a half steps.
1.4.1.25	In the order of the installation, he lays down the half of the materials for the Ahavaniya, and the other half for the other two fires.
1.4.2.1	"The wave of honey has come from the oceans, establishing the passage to sovereignty. We who are the generous ones and those who are the generous, may we gather the honey-sweet food." This is the Utsamudaka.
1.4.2.2	Whatever he saw in the middle of the water, the place of the earth, the support of the world, that leaf of the lotus, which was born from the abode of the lotus, I take the spreading of the earth. Having placed the lotus leaf, it was the highest, then the goddess, when she was spreading separately, that was struck by the boar.
1.4.2.3	Having placed the pot of earth on the mound, he meditates while sowing the seeds, "Whatever is dark in the moon, may that be here."
1.4.2.4	"Whatever is above the heaven and whatever is here on earth, you have come together to the same source. May the knower of beings sit on its back, may he be auspicious for the creatures, may he be here for prosperity." He sows.
1.4.2.5	The Moon, Agni, the Moon-chariot, Hari-vrat, the All-pervading, the Water-seated, the Knower of Heaven, the Plunger, the Swift, surrounded by powers, the Shining, the Gods have placed here the Shining One of good fame. Thus are the sands of the river.
1.4.2.6	One who is about to spread sand should mentally think of the hated one.
1.4.2.7	The three worlds are not firm, the three worlds are not strong, the three worlds have been conquered by the three worlds. He scatters (the grains) with the verse, "The three worlds are not steady, the three worlds do not conquer, the three worlds conquer the three worlds, the three worlds conquered the three worlds."
1.4.2.8	"Rise up, O Agni, from thy mother earth, and enter the great abode of the gods. The worshippers have placed thee on thy car, the bearer of oblations, the guardian of the world." Having placed the grass of the Aakhuka, the Pipilika, the cow-pen, the chaff, the iron-pieces, the Ashvattha, the Udumbara, the Vikankata, the Sami, the tree struck by lightning, and the Palasha, he mixes them together, saying, "I mix your hearts together. May your soul be agreeable. May your bodies be agreeable to me."
1.4.2.9	When the rays have appeared, he lays down the Garhapatya after churning it. When the sun has risen, or not risen, or set, he lays down (the other two fires) when the sun has risen.
1.4.2.10	Having placed the kindling woods in the form of the Garhapaty, he recites the formula on the kindling woods. With the sound of the Dashotr, he lays down both the kindling woods.
1.4.2.11	The Adhvaryu makes the sacrificer recite the Anuvāka beginning with "Cittī Sruks."
1.4.2.12	The one who is going to churn recites, "Agni who is ours, I am taking up."
1.4.2.13	He churns with the verse, "Be born with Agni, with wealth, with nourishment, with progeny, with Brahmic glory."
1.4.2.14	Born, he breathes forth. "With the breath of Prajapati, I breathe forth thee; with the nourishment of Pusan."
1.4.2.15	He gives a boon to the born one.
1.4.2.16	"The mortals have generated the immortal, the unaging, the unwearied, the unweariable. The ten sisters, the high-born, the uniform, have embraced the male, the born one." He takes it.
1.4.2.17	Brahma, seated to the right, worships the golden piece placed to the north.
1.4.2.18	The sacrificer gives silver to the one he hates.
1.4.2.19	If the one hated is not present, he throws it away.
1.4.2.20	Worship and giving are done everywhere.
1.4.2.21	Having recited the mantras for placing, he places it on the ground.
1.4.2.22	"This is the cow," says the serpent queen.
1.4.3.1	Whatever nectar there is in the earth, that Agni gave to Agni. In that (Agni) may this be deposited. With that beginning and ending with 'With light thou hast attained light', the Angirasas, the Brahmanas, should deposit thee in the vow of the gods. The Bharadvajas should deposit thee in Bharadvaja's vow. The Angirasas should deposit thee in Angiras' vow. The Bharadvajas should deposit thee in both Bharadvaja and Angiras' vow, the Angirasas should also deposit thee in both. The Angirasa-Bharadvajas should also deposit thee. The Angiras-Bharadvaja-Bharadvajas should also deposit thee.
1.4.3.2	The Adhvaryu says, "I am placing the two mantras of the kindling." The sacrificer says, "You are placing."
1.4.3.3	Having kindled the blazing (fire), he recites, "May you delight in wealth." Having recited the last verse, "May the two Sarasvatis protect you," he places three kindling sticks of ashvattha with the three verses, "O Agni, do thou purify the life-breaths."
1.4.3.4	He places the southern fire from the Garhapatya.
1.4.3.5-7	When the Āhavanīya fire has gone out, one should rekindle it from the Bhrāṣṭra fire. For one who desires food, from the Bhrāsṭra fire. The Sarpārajni verse, "The thirty worlds, the nectar of the sky, that Agni gave to Agni, may this be deposited in that." This is the Vyāhṛti verse, as the Adhvaryu deposits it.
1.4.3.8	Having placed the Agni-bringing rites on the Garhapatya fire, having placed the horse of the chariot in front facing towards him, he mutters at his right ear, "O Vājin, of Agni."
1.4.3.9	He lifts up the Agni with the words, "For strength and power to thee."
1.4.3.10	Having placed the chaff in a basket, he places the ladle below.
1.4.3.11	He moves it with the words, “In the eastern direction.”
1.4.3.12	The horse is led in front.
1.4.3.13	The horse is taken away from the ankle, the knee, the navel, the shoulder, the ear.
1.4.3.14	One does not lift the horse beyond the ear.
1.4.3.15	The horse, being taken away from the right, is held with the breath.
1.4.3.16	At the same time, he gives a boon.
1.4.3.17	When the horse is being led, the Brahman, holding the reins, turns the chariot.
1.4.3.18	One who has an enemy or a rival should thrice circumambulate the chariot wheel.
1.4.3.19	One should advance the horse towards the fire with the verse, "All have assembled."
1.4.3.20	One should not let it go forward.
1.4.3.21	The Brahmana explains that one should not leave it without placing it.
1.4.3.22	The Sarprajni (hymn) is recited within. Whatever nectar there is in heaven, that Agni gave to Agni. Let this be deposited in that. Bhuvah, Svar, the Vyahrti (hymn), as far as "O Agni, for the offering, for carrying."
1.4.3.23	Standing facing east, with his back to the fire, he should place the foot on the ground, reciting the verse, "May you delight in the rays of the sun." At the end, he should make the horse smell the two ends of the sacrificial grass, reciting the verse "May the two ends of Sarasvati's grass be purified."
1.4.3.24	He should say, "May the Jātavedas Agni placed on the kindling woods be sung in this Sāman," referring to the kindling woods placed on the ground.
1.4.3.25	One should say, "Sing this Sāman, 'Agni, the men with their rays,' at the time of joining together."
1.4.3.26	"Your earth is shining, O Agni," one should say, "sing this Sāman at the time of smoke."
1.4.3.27	"You are the best knower of the path," one should say "sing this Sāmā at the time of birth."
1.4.3.28	One sings the Rathantara when the Garhapatya is being set up.
1.4.3.29	When the big sacrificial fire is being taken up,
1.4.3.30	the Vamadevya and the Yagyayajniya are being laid down.
1.4.3.31	When the Varavantiya is laid down, the Varapani is laid down. When the Shyaita is laid down,
1.4.3.32	he lays down the Sabhya fire in front of the Sabhya hall and the sacrificial fire.
1.4.3.33	Behind it he lays down four hundred dice.
1.4.3.34	Before the Sabhya, the Avasathiya.
1.4.3.35	Having released the speech, he gives the Dakṣiṇā.
1.4.3.36	The horse is for the Brahman, the Adhvaryu.
1.4.3.37	The goat is for the Agnīdhra, the Upabarhaṇa, and the entire thread.
1.4.3.38	This silken garment is for the Adhvaryus.
1.4.3.39	Having gone around the horse and the cow in front of the resting place and behind, to the Hotṛ.
1.4.3.40	The two-year-old and the one-year-old are the two kinds of yokes. All these are not specified.
1.4.3.41	The number of cows is six, twelve, twenty-four, and unlimited.
1.4.3.42	One should avoid speaking untruth, fasting as a brahmin, staying in one's own created pit, bathing inside a boat, eating cooked food from a pot, and kindling a fire with wet wood.
1.4.3.43	The sacrificer worships the fires.
1.4.4.1	He says, "Protect my cattle" to the Ahavaniya fire, "Protect my progeny, my man" to the Garhapatya fire, "Understand my food, protect" to the Dakshina fire, "Protect the assembly, the foremost" to the Sabhya fire, "Protect me, the serpent, the Brahman" to the Avashthya fire.
1.4.4.2	He puts on the Āhavaniya fire-wood of various trees, saying, "To Savitr, the desirable, we offer." He puts on the Samidha fire-wood of the Shami tree, saying, "We offer to the desirable." He puts on a fire-wood of Vikaṅka tree, saying, "Agni is kindled." He puts on fire-wood of Udumbara tree,
1.4.4.3	The form of thine, O Agni, which is dear to thee in the cattle, which is in the earth, which is in Agni, which is in Rathantara, which is in Gayatri metre, that I have won for thee. To that be svāhā. The form of thine which is dear to thy, O Agni, in the waters, which is in heaven, which is in Vāyu, which is in Vaimātrya, which is in Trishtup metre, that I win for thee. To it be svāhā, The form of thine that is dear to thee, O Agni, that is pure in the sun, which is in Heaven, which is in Brihat, which is in thunder, which is in Jagatī metre, that I now win for thee. Be svāhā to it. Thus three oblations.
1.4.4.4	From the ocean, a wave. With three (verses) he places three Samī-wood kindling sticks smeared with ghee.
1.4.4.5	The fires that are of one mind. With an Udumbara wood kindling stick not cut.
1.4.4.6	"Hunger, thirst, oiliness, always, the unfathomable, the unoffered, and the unappeased, these are thy bodies, O Agni, that are ever active. May they go to him whom we hate." Thus does the sacrificer, meditating on the hated one in his mind, mutter.
1.4.4.7	Having taken four spoonfuls of clarified butter, he offers a full oblation, going forward towards the Ahavaniya, turning towards the north, and reciting, "Seven are thy fires, O Agni."
1.4.4.8	When the oblation has been offered, he gives a cow.
1.4.4.9	"Those who are the fires in heaven," with this (verse) the second (oblation).
1.4.4.10	Having turned back, the king and the lord of the subjects, having approached the Ahavaniya in turn, he offers an oblation to Agni on eight potsherds.
1.4.4.11	Having placed the dice in the middle of the sacrificial ground, having placed gold, having seated himself with the vow observed, having offered the oblation, having sprinkled the oblation, he should offer to the king at the Madhyādhidēvanē.
1.4.4.12	On that day, the cows should be gambled in the assembly.
1.4.4.13	There, he gives a hundred dice to the sacrificer.
1.4.4.14	That should be examined.
1.4.4.15	Without harming the dice, they should be gambled.
1.4.4.16	He should offer it to the assembly.
1.4.4.17	With that, whatever food he conquers, he should give it to the Brahmins.
1.4.4.18	"He offers with the verse, "O serpent, the lord of wealth," to the two who are truthful by nature."
1.4.4.19	Having placed gold in the middle of the assembly, he offers with the verse "Now indeed the lord of Brahman,"
1.4.4.20-22	"He stands by the Garhapatya with the verse, "Heat is the head." He stands by the Dakshina Agni with the verse, "Sun is the light." He stands at the Ahavaniya with the verse "Wind is the breath." He should recite the verse "May the father cook for us without poison." everywhere. " "May heaven and earth be auspicious to us." With the verses "May heaven and earth".
1.4.4.23	Having performed the Iṣṭi, one should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Pavamāna.
1.4.4.24	The Dakṣiṇā is gold weighing thirty mānas.
1.4.4.25	The second one is with two oblations, a cake on eight potsheds to Agni Pāvaka and another to Agni Śuci.
1.4.4.26	The Daksiṇā for the former is gold weighing thirty mānasa, and for the latter, gold weighing forty mānasa.
1.4.4.27	The last one is twenty-four.
1.4.4.28	One should offer a cake on eleven potsherds to Agni-Vishnu, a rice-pap in ghee to Vishnu-Shipi-vishta, a rice- pap in ghee to Aditi, a cake on eleven potsheds to Agni-Soma.
1.4.4.29	One should offer it immediately after the twelve-day or the year-long sacrifice.
1.4.4.30	For one who is going to perform a Soma sacrifice, there is an option of the three northern ones.
1.4.4.31	The cooked rice of the Charu-oblation is offered to Pūṣan.
1.4.4.32	With the first verse, he places the Charu-rice in the pot.
1.4.4.33	With the second verse, he offers the second Charu-rice of the Svishtakrit and the five-fold oblation.
1.4.4.34	At the end of the Samyu-rite, they should circumambulate the fire with the sun in front, for Brahma.
1.4.4.35	And the four priests, the Ārṣeyas, eat together, two by two.
1.4.4.36	He gives them a calf and a cow.
1.4.4.37	For twelve nights one should offer Agnihotra with ghee in the Angiras-scriptures.
1.4.4.38	The time for the Iṣṭi and animal sacrifice is in the first fortnight.
1.4.4.39	The New and Full Moon sacrifices begin with the New Moon.
1.4.4.40	One who is going to perform the Full-moon sacrifice should observe a fast on the day preceding the Full-moon day. One who is going ot perform the New-moon sacrifice should fast on the day following the New-moon day.
1.4.4.41	On the Upavasatha day, he offers seven oblations of clarified butter to the deities beginning with Agni. The oblations are: Nivesani, Sangamani, Vasuna, Vishvarupa, Vasuna, Avashayantini, Sahasraposha, Subhaga, Raranana, and Agada. The oblations to be offered are: Agni-Soma, the first, with energy, Vasus, Rudras, and Adityas, here to be invoked. The Madhyama (midday) offering is accepted by the Full Moon. May they be increased by Brahma and good deeds. Then may they bestow upon us all-heroic prosperity. The two oblations to be performed at the Parvan (Full Moon) are: "O Sarasvati, the one who bestows, O Sarasvati, the giver of wealth." The four oblations are offered with the mind.
1.4.4.42	One should offer a cake on eleven potsherds to Agni-Vishnu, and a cake on eight potsherds to the Agni-Bhagini, for one who desires, "May I be blessed and have food."
1.4.4.43	A cake to Sarasvati and a cake on twelve potsherds to Sarasvata - these are the offerings.
1.4.4.44	One offers to Jaya before the Svishtakrit.
1.4.4.45	Twelve times one offers with "To Aakuta svāhā, to Kūta svāhā."
1.4.4.46	Prajapati gave (this) to the thirteenth day.
1.4.4.47	"One who desires should offer on the fourteenth day, saying, "O Agni, O Balad!" He becomes the most distinguished among the people."
1.4.4.48	He becomes the most distinguished.
1.4.4.49	The Dakshina is a pair of cows.
1.5.1.1	If the Garhapatya and the Ahavaniya fires have gone out or have been extinguished, or if they have been carried away, one should perform a re-installation rite. If one's own house becomes desolate, or if the kindling woods are destroyed, or if the fires have been carried away while being loaded, one should perform the rite for the lost fire.
1.5.1.2	One should offer a sacrifice for the destruction of the fire, with a cake on twelve potsherds to Agni Vaiśvānara.
1.5.1.3	He offers the oblations to be offered in front of the Svishtakrit. "The body of thee, O Agni, which is dear to the Pavamana in the cattle, with that do thou ascend the earth with the Gayatri metre. The body of thee, Agni, which is beloved to the Pavaka in the waters, with that do ascend the sky with the Tristubh metre. The body which is dear to thee, Agni, in the sun, with that dothou ascend the heaven with the Jagati metre."
1.5.1.4	Having kindled the fire, one should establish it in the year.
1.5.1.5	One should establish it in one of Rohini, Anurādha, or Punarvasu, during the rainy season or autumn.
1.5.1.6	All the offerings are as in the Agni-establishment.
1.5.1.7	Having placed the materials, one should scatter Darbha grass.
1.5.1.8	One establishes the Garhapatya with the Sarpārajni mantras and the Nitya mantra.
1.5.1.9	The sacrificer kindles the fires placed in the Upabṛttha grass, saying, "What thou, angry, hast hurled away from thee," (he says) to the Garhapatya; "what thou, angry, didst hurl away from thee," to the Dakṣiṇāgni; "what thou didst do with thy anger," to the Āhavanīya.
1.5.1.10	Before the Full oblation, he offers the oblations of continuity with five oblations each, with the five verses, "The thirty-three threads..."
1.5.1.11	One should offer an oblation to Agni with eight potsherds or with five potsherds.
1.5.1.12	One should offer before the Prayāja oblations with the verse, "Return with energy..." and above the Anuyāja oblations with "Return with wealth..."
1.5.1.13	Agni, Agni, Agni, by Agni, Agni, to Agni, Agni, the god Agni, the gods Agni. These are the declensions.
1.5.1.14	The Hotṛ performs four declensions at the four Prayājas and two at the two Anuyājas.
1.5.1.15	They perform everything pertaining to Agni, from the last Anuyāja.
1.5.1.16	He offers the names of the Sun, beginning with "Purāstāt svistakṛt, salilaḥ salīgaḥ."
1.5.1.17	The garment that was worn again, the chariot that was renewed, the bull that was released again, and gold weighing a hundred māṇas are the gifts.
1.5.1.18	He gives gifts to both sides.
1.5.1.19	Having completed the Iṣṭi, one should offer an Ekādaśakapāla oblation to Agni-Varuṇa.
1.5.1.20	In the third kind of installation, having installed the fire, one offers oblations named after the Sun after the full oblation.
1.5.2.1	In the evening and morning, one should carry the burning fire from the Garhapatya to the Ahavaniya.
1.5.2.2	Or one should take it at night.
1.5.2.3	With speech, with the Hotr, with breath, with the Udgâtri, with sight, with the Adhvaryu, with mind, with the Brahman, with hearing, with the Agnidh, with these five divine priests I draw thee up. So he draws it up.
1.5.2.4	"O Uddhṛta, O Uddhara, remove the sin, whatever sin I have committed, whether knowingly or unknowingly, whatever sin I may have committed during the day, may I be freed from all that sin. May I be freed from that sin." In the evening, and "Whatever sin I may have done during the night" in the morning.
1.5.2.5	I offer the oblation of immortality to the immortal Agni in the earth for the conquest of immortality. With that Agni, O lord, we conquer this desire. Prajapati, who conquered Agni first, Agni in Agni, svāhā. In the evening, "Agni in the sun, svāhā." In the morning, "Agni, svāhā."
1.5.2.6	Those whose wealth has gone, always holding the Āhavanīya fire, whose wealth has gone as they wish.
1.5.2.7	He should offer the Agnihotra at dusk, having seen the constellation or when it has set.
1.5.2.8	When the sun is setting, or when it has risen, or when it is not yet risen.
1.5.2.9	The Agnihotra offering begins in the evening and ends before dawn.
1.5.2.10	The Agnihotram is a ladle of the size of an arm-span, with a single handle, made of wood, with a bowl shaped like a pot, with a handle above, and circular in shape.
1.5.2.11	He milks her towards the south, placing another person, a Śūdra, towards the north.
1.5.2.12	The two breasts are for the eldest son or the son of the eldest son, or for one who has lost his wealth. The other two are for the youngest son or the son born to the youngest son, or for the one who is desirous of prosperity. All the others are for the remaining sons.
1.5.2.13	He touches them in succession.
1.5.2.14	Having collected the Āhavaniya fire, he says, "O Agni, purify yourself." Having collected the Garhapatya fire, he (says), "O Agni, the householder, purify yourself." He collects the Dakṣiṇāgni fire, saying, "O Agni Vahni, purify yourself."
1.5.2.15	Having collected the fires, having placed the big sacrificial grass brought by the sacrificer, he should sprinkle it with the formulas, "I sprinkle you with truth and truth" in the evening, and "I sprinkle you in the morning with truth and truth."
1.5.2.16	He pours down a continuous stream of water from the Garhapatya to the Ahavaniya, saying, "Thou art the continuity of the sacrifice; I lead thee to the continuity of the sacrfice."
1.5.2.17	Having removed the embers from the Gārhapatya fire towards the north, he places them. "He says, "The abode of Ida, having ghee, having the earth, O Agni, do thou accept this oblation. May there be prosperity of all these domestic and wild animals here."
1.5.2.18	"May I be born with offspring and cattle." He looks at the light.
1.5.2.19	"May I not be separated from you." With the ladle he takes back a drop of curds and ghee.
1.5.2.20	Then he again sprinkles it with that same formula, "May the Rakshas be excluded, may the evil spirits be excluded." Having made a path with three layers of grass, he makes it face north and sprinkles it with the formula, "You are heat, the bestower of prosperity. Here may you find nourishment."
1.5.2.21	Having placed the fire-wood on the fire, having heated the iron-rod, having heated the ladle, having recited the Praṇava, he invites the sacrificer in the evening with the words, "I shall take up (the oblations)", and in the morning with the words, “I shall take up”.
1.5.2.22	I lead you to Agni and to Earth, I lead you to Vayu and to the atmosphere, I lead you Surya and to Heaven, I lead you water and to plants. He leads them four times.
1.5.2.23	All of them are full. According to the gain.
1.5.2.24	If one desires that he may prosper with progeny, he should be the eldest, as explained in the Brahmanas.
1.5.2.25	Having taken up the oblation, he should restrain speech.
1.5.2.26	Having taken up the animals, he should place them down, saying, "Protect my animals."
1.5.2.27	Having touched the oblation ten times, he touches the oblation taken up in the evening, saying, "Together with the gods, in the evening, with the rays," and in the morning, saying, "With the gods, in morning, with the rays."
1.5.2.28	This is for the gods', he says, while taking up the remaining portion.
1.5.2.29	He carries the Gārhapatya fire to the middle of the altar, saying, "Carry the earth to the sky."
1.5.2.30	He places the fire on the path, saying, "Svāhā to Agni Vaisvānara, svāhā."
1.5.2.31	He lifts it up, saying, "To Vāyu."
1.5.2.32	He places it on the Darbha grass behind the Āhavanīya fire, saying, "Grant me life."
1.5.2.33	"This is your Agnihotra-wood, O Agni," he says, and puts a Palasha-wood twig of the size of a span into the Ahavaniya fire.
1.5.2.34	He offers twice the size of a finger-joint, blazing, with the formulas, "Bhuvah, Bhuvah, Svarah, Agnihotra, Hotr, Agni, Light, Light, Agni, Svāhā," in the evening, and "Suryah, Light, Light Suryah, Svāhā" in the morning.
1.5.2.35	"He smears the paste downwards in the evening with the formula, "To Isha thee."
1.5.2.36	He settles it with the formula, "Do thou bestow brilliance on me."
1.5.2.37	He smears the paste on the Darbha grass with the formula, "To the plants thee."
1.5.2.38	He looks at the Garhapatya with the formula, “O Prajapati, do thou protect my cattle.
1.5.2.39	He offers the second oblation, which is not connected with the first, to Prajapati with the formula, "To Prajapati svāhā." mentally.
1.5.2.40	He takes up the ladle towards the north three times with the formula, “Anābha, Mṛḍ, Dhūrti.”
1.5.2.41	With that formula he cleans and cleans again, saying, "Grant me progeny."
1.5.2.42	He spreads the paste on the ground towards the south with the formula, "May the Pitrs be pleased."
1.5.2.43	Having touched water, he eats twice with the finger, saying "I am Pūṣan."
1.5.2.44	He should not let the teeth go.
1.5.2.45	He eats with the ladle pointing towards the north, within the altar, saying "Satisfy the embryos, svāhā to the embryos."
1.5.2.46	Having removed the smear with the sprinkling, having washed the ladle, having given the heap, having filled it, he sprinkles towards the east, saying, "I gratify the serpents and ants with the nectar of the earth, svāhā to the serpents and ants."
1.5.2.47	The second time, behind the Āhavanīya, saying, "Svāhā to the nectar of the Earth."
1.5.2.48	Having heated the ladle, having held the hand towards the north, he places it. He pleases the seven sages with the formula, "To the seven sages svāhā."
1.5.2.49	The offering is made according to one's desire. "O Agni, lord of the house, do thou accept the oblation. Svāhā." He takes up the ladle with one ladle. In the southern fire, "To Agni, the lord of nourishment, svāhā." In the northern fire, "To Prajāpati, svāhā".
1.5.2.50	He places the water for rinsing inside the altar, saying, "Satisfying the serpent-like gods, svāhā."
1.5.2.51	Having placed the kindling woods in the fire pit with the mantras "Dihi, Dihi, Dihi Dihi, svāhā," he sprinkles them with the water for sprinkling, following the same procedure.
1.5.3.1	One should offer with milk for one desiring cattle, with barley-gruel for one desiring a village, with ghee for one desiring brilliance, with curd for one desiring strength, with rice for one desiring power.
1.5.3.2	For twelve nights with ghee, for twelve nights with curd.
1.5.3.3	Milk and barley-gruel always.
1.5.3.4	If there is no milk, barley-gruel without drying.
1.5.3.5	Having milked two cows into a vessel, one should offer to one who desires cattle.
1.5.3.6	One should offer with the verse, "O Agni, the knower of beings, accepting the oblation, do thou accept this oblation. Svāhā." One should offer where Rudra is afflicting cattle.
1.5.3.7	Clarified butter is the Agnihotra.
1.5.3.8	If one is unable to offer, one should offer with the mantra, "O Agni! If I am unable to offer, do thou accept. Svāhā.
1.5.3.9	If he does not deserve, he should offer every evening for twelve nights.
1.5.3.10	One who does not deserve should offer Agnihotra on the Parva days, not in between.
1.5.3.11	In the evening and morning, one should take the first portion of food from a Brahmin family and recite the Agnihotra.
1.5.3.12	One who deserves should offer continuously.
1.5.3.13	In the morning, the wife should attend, not in the evening.
1.5.3.14	One should approach a woman with the sound "Hi!"
1.5.3.15	One should not obstruct a guest who arrives at sunrise.
1.5.3.16	One should not eat in the evening without having offered the Agnihotra, nor in the morning.
1.5.3.17	One should burn a pile of wood in spring and winter.
1.5.4.1	When the Agnihotra has been deposited, one should recite the four Vaikhavya verses beginning with "O Agni, may my lustre" and the four subsequent verses before the Agniṣomīya (Sāman).
1.5.4.2	One should stand reciting the verse "You are lightning, remove my sin" after touching water.
1.5.4.3	One restrains speech when the Soma is being taken up.
1.5.4.4	Having recited the Upāṃśu verses, having sat down, having touched the northern end of the fire, having offered the Upāṃshu oblation, having risen, having approached, having recited the Adhvara verses, one should worship the Āhavanīya fire facing east and north with four Anuvākas.
1.5.4.5	The Agniṣomīya sacrifice is performed in the bright fortnight, the Indra-Agni sacrifice in the dark fortnight.
1.5.4.6	"O Agni, do thou purify the life-breaths." With these six verses he offers to the Āhavanīya every year. To the Garhapatya every year.
1.5.4.7	"Thou art the kindling wood of Agni." With these verses he offers the kindling wood to the Āhavaniya.
1.5.4.8	"May the one who has the variegated garment be well for you. May the one who has a garment of variegated colour be well for you." He recites this three times at the morning rising. "May the one standing in the water be well for you" he recites while standing near the house.
1.5.4.9	"May the Revatī stars be well for you," he recites while remaining between the fires.
1.5.4.10	"You are the collection of all forms," he recites when offering the Vasha grass or a calf.
1.5.4.11	"O Agni, I have approached you from heaven to heaven." He says this while approaching the Garhapatya fire. "All (worlds) are yours." He says this to the Ahavaniya fire.
1.5.4.12	"I see you with energy. May you see me with energy." He looks at his house and cattle.
1.5.4.13	"You are the Ida." He says this when taking up the cow. "You are the universe." He says this about the calf.
1.5.4.14	"You have been lowered." This is explained in the Brahmana.
1.5.4.15	The directions are addressed by the names of the directions.
1.5.4.16	"O Agni, the householder!" - thus one should address the Gārhapatya fire as per the Yājamāna rite.
1.5.4.17	"O Jyotiṣe, O Tantu!" - having sat down within the altar, one should address the Avāhanīya fire and sprinkle water on oneself, saying, "You are the rain, sprinkle my sin."
1.5.4.18	One should rise in the morning with the Prātara-avanega mantra.
1.5.4.19	"O Lord of Waters, that share of yours which is in the waters, that is this. Having sprinkled the water-cup towards the east, he sprinkles it three times towards himself, saying, "The evil spirits are repelled."
1.5.4.20	Having washed his hands, saying, "For you, O Time," he spits, saying, "I am pouring this down on the one who is ill-disposed."
1.5.4.21	He washes his hands, saying "For my brothers and enemies."
1.5.4.22-24	"Today, O Indra, I touch my limbs in the form of..." "Do not harm me today..." "The wives of the sun..." "The bull is powerful..." Having recited the four Vahirs and having recited the Anuvaka, one should stand near the Ahavaniya with the verse, "The heat is in the belly..."
1.5.4.25	"May it be well with you, may it be well with thee." Thus he invokes his sons by name.
1.5.4.26	"Prepare the fires," he says when he is about to depart.
1.5.4.27	He stands up to the shining one, saying, "Protect my cattle." To the Ahavaniya he says, "Protect my progeny, O man." To the Garhapatya he says, "Protect my food." To the Dakshina Agni he says, "Understand my food and protect it." To the Sabhya he says, "Protector of the assembly, protect my assembly." To the Avashthya he says, "The serpent-born one, protect my mantra."
1.5.4.28	"May Mitra and Varuna protect these my houses." Standing between the two fires, he mutters this.
1.5.4.29	"My name first, O Jātavedas, my father and mother gave it to me. You have borne it again. Now I shall bear it for myself." He says this to the Āhavaniya fire.
1.5.4.30-33	Let us not go astray from the path, let us not go astray, O Indra, from the sacrifice of the Soma-presser. Let not the evil ones be within us. He who is the stretching of the sacrifice, the thread stretched among the gods, him we have offered. Thus he goes. He restrains his speech in a close place and releases it in an open place. He should recite at the time of attending the fire and offering oblations. Having risen, he brings the kindling woods.
