1.1.1	Now, we shall explain the Darsha-Pūrnamāsa sacrifices.
1.1.2	Having offered the Agnihotra in the morning, one should take out another fire for the Ahavanīya and then offer the Agnihotra in it.
1.1.3	One who has not received the Agnihotra offerings should not take out another fire.
1.1.4	The gods, knowing the path, have found the path with the lord of mind. The sacrifice has been joined with the wind. Having recited this, he says, "May my radiance be in disputes." He kindles the Ahavaniya with the Uttarā verse, the Garhapatya with the Uttarī verse, and the Anvāhāryapacana with the Uttarīya verse.
1.1.5	With three or three verses.
1.1.6	The best (kind of) oblation should be offered in the Ahavaniya fire.
1.1.7	Some people mention the Anvadhana (kindling) with the Vyahrtis.
1.1.8	He places a Palasha branch or a Sami branch, having many leaves and many branches, with its tip not dried up and not rotten.
1.1.9	If one desires of a person, "May he be without cattle," one should bring him a leafless one, with dry tips. He becomes without cattle. If one desires of him, "May he have cattle," one should fetch him a leaf with many branches. It is known that he makes him have cattle.
1.1.10	She who is east or north or northeast, one cuts her with the formula, "For the pressing, for the pressing."
1.1.11	Or, he cuts (the grass) with the formula, "To the form thee!" and bends it with the formula, “To the strength thee!” He then smoothens it.
1.2.1	He carries it with the formula: "I carry the grass, the eastern, the western, the grass and strength, well-prepared, having many leaves, not dry at the tip, for the protection of cattle."
1.2.2	With the formula, "O Vayu, be thou here! O Vayu, be here!" he removes the calves, six and a half in number.
1.2.3	With darbha grass or darbha-grass-broom.
1.2.4	"He sends the cows to graze, with the formula, "May Savitr, the divine, lead you."
1.2.5	He touches one of the cows going to graze with a branch, with darbha grass or with a darbha-grass broom.
1.2.6	Some recite the formula, "Grow, O harmless ones, for Indra, the divine share." Some recite, "For Mahendra."
1.2.7	One should identify Indra in the Vedas, those who sacrifice to Indra, and Mahendra in those who sacrifice to Mahendra.
1.2.8	"The pure waters are drinking from the good well, giving a hundred autumns to Indra, the curse of Rudra may protect you." One who is setting out recites this.
1.2.9	"May the cows be firm in this protector, may they be many." One who is going around the house of the sacrificer recites this.
1.2.10	"Protect the animals of the sacrificer!" He places a branch facing east in front of the fire or in the fire-chamber, or a branch facing west behind.
1.2.11	One who knows the house of the Adhvaryu becomes a householder. One should examine from the fourth rite onwards: "I shall do this, I shall do that." These are the houses of the Adhvaryu. One who knows this becomes a householder. This is known.
1.3.1	The axe and the wooden mallet are placed north of the Garhapatya.
1.3.2	"With the impulse of the divine Savitr" (he says) while giving the horse-scraper. Silently he gives the bull-scraper.
1.3.3	"You are the sound of the sacrifice" (he says), having recited the Garhapatya, he says, "The Rakshas is repelled, the evil spirits are repelled" while scraping the Garhapaty and the Ahavaniya.
1.3.4	He does not scrape the scraper.
1.3.5	Having said, "He has gone to the beloved," one should proceed towards the eastern or northern direction, and bring darbha grass from wherever it is available.
1.3.6	One should scatter darbha grass, saying, "You are the covering of the gods."
1.3.7	One should release a single stalk of darbha grass for those who are desired, saying, "This is the mound of Vishnu."
1.3.8	Having sprinkled one tree, he gives it all.
1.3.9	Having released the share of cows, he releases one, two or three channels.
1.3.10	Having sprinkled the released ones, he touches them, saying, "This is for the gods." Having released them, he touches them saying, "This for the cattle."
1.3.11	"With the impulse of the divine Savitr, with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of Pusan, I spread the sacrificial grass, the abode of the gods." Thus one spreads the sacrificial grass on the Visakha grass.
1.3.12	"May the gods protect thee from above, from below." Thus one binds it.
1.3.13	"May I be thy support." Thus one places the grass.
1.3.14	"Do not cut me." Thus one cuts it.
1.3.15	He releases the fist with the nails.
1.3.16	That is the Prastara.
1.3.17	The Kulmi, the Aratni, the Pradesa, the Urvasthi, the Janvasthi, the Srugdanda are the horizontal measures.
1.4.1	He places it below, saying, "Protect the earth from the contact."
1.4.2	He releases the fist with odd fingers.
1.4.3	So also the Nidhanas.
1.4.4	Some say that the Prastara is for the odd ones.
1.4.5	The Prāstara is as one wishes.
1.4.6	Whatever is left out after the Parivana and Utsarga, that is to be done everywhere.
1.4.7	The Prāstara alone is offered with a mantra, the rest silently, says the Vājasaneyaka.
1.4.8	Having sprinkled everything, he touches the Ālāvas, saying, "May the Devabarhi grow with a hundred shoots."
1.4.9	"May we grow with a thousand shoots," he says about himself.
1.4.10	"He makes the metal three-fold or five-fold, saying, 'To Aditi the cord.'
1.4.11	He puts it back, saying, 'The womb is the protector.'
1.4.12-13	"Having spread out the grass with its tip towards the north, he says, "I am collecting thee well-collected. Having collected the bundles in it, he says, "The womb is covered." Having placed the Prāstara on the last bundle, he says, "The armour of Indra." Having tied it, he says,
1.4.14	"May it be yours." He places the knot in front, facing east, or behind, facing west.
1.4.15	The waters have anointed thee, the Asvins have anointed thee, seven sages have anointed thee. Thou art the banner of the dawn, the banner of the sun, the banner of heaven. Thus he takes up the banner. He takes it up with the verse, "With Indra's arms I raise thee." He places it on the head with the verse, “I take thee with Brihaspati's head.”
1.5.1	The two going-away and coming-back are the two going-away.
1.5.2	"He places it on the lap of Aditi" in the place of the enclosing sticks within the altar, upside down.
1.5.3	"He recites, "You are the sacrificial grass leading to the gods."
1.5.4	"He places the grass upside down, reciting, "You are leading to the gods."
1.5.5	The plants that were born for the gods three ages ago, their season is now. I bring the covering of the grass. May the water be pure, fit for sacrifice, with the gods, and auspicious for me. May the cutter not injure you. May you live a hundred autumns. Of the unlimited, the limited are bound together for good deeds. May it not injure me. Whatever I have done, may I not rise again. May there be many. The covering of the grass, the binding, the cutting, and the binding - according to the appropriate signs.
1.5.6	He makes the sacrificial grass of Khadira, Palasha, and twenty-one kinds of wood.
1.5.7	There are three enclosing sticks.
1.5.8	Palasha, Karshmarya, Khadira, Udumbara, Bilva, Rohitika, Vikankata - these are the sacrificial trees.
1.5.9	They may be either moist or dry, with bark.
1.5.10	The longest, the middle one, the shortest, the longest, the one facing south, the shortest, and the one facing north.
1.5.11	Two Āghāra-sticks, two Anūyājā-sticks, and twenty-one Darbha-blades.
1.5.12	Having made the fire-wood as before, with the Darbha-blades either with or without roots, and having spread them with their tips towards the north.
1.6.1	When Krishna, assuming the form of a tree, entered the trees, then I collect you in twenty-one ways, well collected. The three enclosing sticks, the three kindling woods, the life of the sacrifice, the wandering ones, the garment, the ladle, and the strength, I collect, well collected. He collects the wood of the sacrificial post.
1.6.2-3	Krishna is the best of all, O God, he girds himself with the girdle. He puts on the knot facing east, or facing west, or below.
1.6.4	You have made the altar known. By you the sacrifice is born, all-giving, without a flaw. The knower of the sacrifice follows it. By you the Hotṛ extends the half-months. Thus he makes the altar of Darbha grass.
1.6.5	For one desiring cattle, the one with the calf; for one desiring food, the one with a calf; for one desirous of brahminical lustre, the one with three heads.
1.6.6	Having taken a portion of the wood from the wood-pile, he puts down the articles for the Veda-recitation.
1.6.7	Having cut off the Palasa-branches from the tree within the altar, having taken a portion of them, he makes the Upaveṣa-offering with the formula, "Thou art Upaveṣā; I have taken thee for the sacrifice. Making the oblation for Indra, thou art auspicious and auspicious."
1.6.8	The Soma is brought from the third heaven, from the Gayatri verse, for the Soma-drinking. He takes the Vaka-grass for the purpose of placing it in the Soma-drinking vessel. Taking the grass for the purpose of binding, he places it in the known place.
1.6.9	Having made a filter of three-leaved Darbha grass, he says, "You are the filter of the Vasus." He puts it loosely on the branch, the roots at the root, the tips at the tips, not making a knot.
1.6.10-11	The Trivṛt and Palāśa are the two kinds of Darbha grass, each measuring a span in length. May the purifying oblation, the most nourishing, be offered to me at the sacrifice. May these two, Prāṇa and Apāna, moving everywhere, nourish the limbs of the sacrifice, flowing through the purifying oblation that purifies the oblation. The sacrificer recites this while the oblation is being offered. They close the fire-chamber and smear the sacrificial grounds.
1.6.12	The sacrificer and his wife decorate themselves.
1.6.13	The two pots of cooked rice for the new-moon sacrifice are smeared with cow-dung up to the level of sugar.
1.7.1	On the day when the moon is not seen, one performs the Piṇḍapitṛyajña.
1.7.2	In the afternoon or when the sun is above the tree, they perform the Piṇḍapitṛyajña.
1.7.3	The grass is brought in with the root intact, with the formula, "The grass of waters, pure, fit for sacrifice."
1.7.4	The grass is cut once, and the days are also counted once.
1.7.5	Having spread the Darbha grass with their tips towards the south and east, having spread the Darbha grasses towards the south and west, he places the sacrificial vessels for the Pitṛyajña one by one, with their tips towards south, namely, the wooden sword, the ladle, the black antelope skin, the mortar, the pestle, the winnowing basket, the vessel for ghee, the vessel for cooked rice, and whatever else he may need.
1.7.6	To the right of the cart is placed a vessel filled with grains.
1.7.7	The Adhvaryu, wearing the sacred thread, covers the pot with a single strainer and pours it out either to the right or to the left of the cart.
1.7.8	Having filled it, he smears it.
1.7.9	He pours it into a clay pot, saying, "I pour out what is dear to the Fathers," or silently.
1.7.10	The wife, standing to the south-east of the Ulukhal, which is placed to the north-east of the Anvāhāryapacan, and facing the east, strikes the Parāpavam with the skin of a black antelope.
1.7.11	He makes it into a single ball.
1.7.12	He cooks the rice for the living on the southern fire.
1.7.13	The Asuras, the Rakshas, the Pisacas have been driven away. The Fathers are seated on the Veda. Having placed the Veda between the Garhapatya and the Anvähäryapacaniya fires, having taken up the Anvähärvapacaniya fire towards the south-east, having taken up towards the south-west the Veda, which is of one thickness, and which is turned towards the east, having sprinkled it with water with the formula, "May the Fathers be purified," having recited the formula, "Let the Fathers come with the speed of mind," having spread the Veda with the grass which is cut once, soft, and tender, with the formula, "For the Fathers I spread this; may my Fathers, the Soma-drinkers, the Grandfathers, the Great-Grandfathers, together with their followers, be seated on it." He spreads the Veda with the once-cut grass.
1.8.1	Having poured out the hot water, he pours the cooked rice into the pot with fresh butter or ghee. Having placed the ladle in the ladle-stand, he places the cooked rice in the ladle.
1.8.2	He places the broom, the brush, the ointment, the unguent, and the water-pot on the right side.
1.8.3-4	The Adhvaryu, having put on the Upavīta, having placed the ladle on the right knee, having taken it up and having poured clarified butter over it, offers to Soma, drunk by the Pitrs, with the formula, "To Svāhā, to Yama, to Angiras, to the father of the Pitrs, Svāhā, svadhā." The second with the formula, “To Yama, to Angira, to the father, to the Pitrs, svadhā, svadhā.” The third with the formula, “To Agni, the carrier of Kavya, svadhā svadhā.”
1.8.5	Having offered the rice-grains in the Meṣaṇā vessel, he silently places the Meṣaṇa vessel.
1.8.6	Some say, one should not offer to Yama.
1.8.7	May the Asuras, in the form of fathers, who, having abandoned their forms, behave thus, who support the cities of others and their own cities, may Agni drive them from this world. Those who are gods, fathers, and men, those who died in the womb or beyond, those who are raised up or buried, may they be pleased here together. Those who, abandoning their forms, behave with their own rites, though they are Asuras, who support the other cities and their own cities - may Agni drive them away from this world. Those who, in the form, of relatives, are Asuras who have entered the fathers through illusion, who support the others' cities and their own - may Agni drive those away from this world." He offers incense to the southern fire with a single torch.
1.8.8	Having once drawn a line towards the south-east with the wooden sword, he sprinkles water on the raised portion with the formula, "The lower one is raised." At the end of the line drawn, he places it.
1.8.9	From now onwards the sacrificer performs rites facing east.
1.8.10	May my fathers, may my grandfathers, may my great-grandfathers purify me. He offers three water-libations in a single vessel.
1.8.11	Or he sprinkles three times from the right.
1.8.12	The Vājasaneyins prescribe three water-bowls.
1.9.1	Having placed the left knee on the ground, with the right hand stretched out, he gives the balls of rice, reciting the verse, "This is thy share, and those who follow thee."
1.9.2	The fourth one silently.
1.9.3	He gives the balls of cooked and uncooked rice.
1.9.4	Or to the great-grandfather and others.
1.9.5	The balls of rice are taken away by those who have not been invited.
1.9.6	If one does not know the names of the relatives, he should offer the first ball with the words, "Svāhā to the Pitrs who are in the earth." The second with the words, “Svāhā to those who are in the sky." The third with the words, "Svāhā to them who are in heaven."
1.9.7	If there are two fathers, one should indicate two each in each ball.
1.9.8	If the father of the living does not give, one should stop after performing the Homa.
1.9.9	Whatever my mother did wrong, whatever she did not follow, may my father destroy that semen. May another be born. Having stood here, saying, "To the fathers, to the fathers who have Svāhā, Svāhā! To the grandfathers, to the grandfathers who have Svāha, Svāha! To the great-grandfathers, to the great-grandfath ers who have Svāhe, Svāhā!" and having said, "May the fathers distribute their share according to their portion," he turns away.
1.9.10	He offers the Hotṛ-oblation after the Hotṛ-offering has been excluded.
1.9.11	The Pitrs, the sons of Soma, have been pleased. The Hotṛ-oblations are excluded. They return to the excluded or to the unexcluded.
1.9.12	He smells the remnant in the vessel. Those who are equal, of equal mind, the Pitrs in the kingdom of Yama, their world, Svāhā, salutations. May the sacrifice be accomplished among the gods. May the father give a hero.
1.9.13	One who is sick may eat food that is not fit to be eaten, if he desires it. But one who is not sick should not eat food that is unfit to be eaten.
1.9.14	As before, having offered three water libations in the one-pot ritual, he anoints himself with unguents and gives his garment three times, in small pieces.
1.9.15	"O grandfather! O great-grandfather!" This is the anointing.
1.9.16	Thus, the anointing is done with the mantra "O grandfather!
1.9.17	If one does not know the names, one should recite the mantra "May my father be anointed, may my grandfather be anointed, may the great-grandfather be anointed." This is the anointing. The anointing is done with this mantra.
1.10.1	"These are your garments, O Fathers. Let no other Fathers than these deprive you of them." Having cut the garments into ten pieces, he puts them down. The garment with wool is for the former age, and the one without wool for the later age.
1.10.2	"In the hot-air-filled balls, salutations to you, O Fathers, for the life-giving." He recites salutations.
1.10.3	"Our fathers have given us a house; our fathers have given us the seat." Thus he worships the Pitrs.
1.10.4	"Carrying nourishment, nectar, ghee, milk, and flowing honey, you are Svāhā. Satisfy my Pitrs." Thus he pours water.
1.10.5	"We invoke the mind." Thus he worshops with the Manasa-s.
1.10.6	"Rise up, O Fathers, ye heroes, ye who have gone the way of Yama, ye who know the ancient path. Let him give us wealth and what is good. Do ye proclaim to us the share of the Fathers in the deities." Thus he makes the Fathers rise.
1.10.7	"O Fathers, ye who have passed away, ye who are friendly." Thus he makes them pass away with the Pravahaṇī.
1.10.8	"O Prajapati, none of these belongs to thee." Thus one wearing the sacrificial thread goes to the place of the Garhapatya.
1.10.9	With the verse, "Whatever is in the sky" he attends to the Garhapatya fire.
1.10.10	He gives the middle ball to his wife with the verse, "I consume the essence of water and plants, may you hold the embryo created by the beings."
1.10.11	The wife eats it with the verse, “The fathers placed the embryo, the young one with a lotus garland, so that he may be a man here.” It is understood that the woman becomes a man.
1.10.12-13	May the prosperity of those who are born together, of the same mind, of the same life, of the same breath, of the same self, of the same soul, of the same body, of the same lineage, of the same clan, of the same family, of the same name, of the same caste, of the same Veda, of the same learning, of the same knowledge, of the same conduct, of the same sacrifice, of the same offering, of the same ritual, of the same rite, of the same faith, of the same devotion, of the same worship, of the same deity, of the same heaven, of the same world, of the same destiny, of the same goal, of the same path, of the same destination, of the same abode, of the same place, of the same time, of the same age, of the same birth, of the same death, of the same good, of the same evil, of the same happiness, of the same sorrow, of the same joy, of the same grief, of the same hope, of the same fear, of the same desire, of the same hatred, of the same love, of the same anger, of the same affection, of the same enmity, of the same friendship, of the same enemy, of the same friend, of the same wealth, of the same poverty, of the
1.10.14	The one who was our messenger, the one who knows the oblation, having made the fragrant offerings, gave them to the fathers. They ate with their own share. O Agni, knowing, come back again. Having thrown the single-wick lamp and sprinkled the vessels, he recites the Dvanda verses.
1.10.15	The Piṇḍapitṛyajña comes to an end.
1.10.16	He should offer water or give it to a Brāhmaṇa.
1.10.17	This is the procedure for one who has not kindled the fire.
1.10.18	The offering of oblations is the duty of cooking in the Upavasana rite.
1.10.19	One should offer it in the Atipraṇīta rite.
1.10.20	One who offers it should stand near it.
1.10.21	In that case, the word "Gārhapatya" would be omitted due to the prohibition of consecration.
1.11.1	On the night of the new moon, the sacrificer himself offers the Agnihotra oblation of barley-gruel. He keeps aside the remnant of the Agnihotra for the purpose of sprinkling.
1.11.2	The young boys do not get milk on this night.
1.11.3	After offering the evening Agnihotra, he milks the evening milking.
1.11.4	Having spread the fires, having washed the vessels for the Saṁnāyya oblation, having spread darbha-grass to the north of the Garhapatya fire, he places the pair of fire-sticks.
1.11.5	A pot, a twig, a ladle, a vessel for keeping the milk, a wooden vessel, a milking pot, an iron vessel or a wooden vessel for keeping the fire-sticks, a fire-stick for the Agnihotra oblation, and a seat.
1.11.6	He makes two Darbha-blades, not cut at the tip, of the size of a span, as the purifying (blades).
1.11.7	"Standing as the purifying (Darbha-blades), the wind of Vishnu may purify you with the mind." Having covered the grass or wood, he cuts it.
1.11.8	Not with a nail.
1.11.9	Having wiped them with water, saying, "May you be purified by Vishnu's mind," he brings the sprinkling water from the Agnihotra ladle covered with the filter, and sprinkles with the filter held above the head, saying, "The god Savitar purifies you" for the first time, "With the flawless filter" for the second time, "With rays of the shining Vasu" for the third time.
1.11.10	Having recited the verse, "The divine waters are in front of us", he turns the vessels upside down and sprinkles them thrice with the verse, "Purify for the divine rite". He places them in a known purifying vessel with the verse, "The divine waters are pure. Purify the vessels for the rite of Upatankya. Purify the leaves and bark of the gods with the rays of the sun that are purified by Savitar. All the vessels are purified with the rope of the purifying cow." Having sprinkled them while reciting this verse, they move around. The cows are giving milk, full of honey, having offspring, of various forms, and many are being born. May Indra delight in the cows here." The sacrificer awaits the approaching cows.
1.12.1	Having heated the Rākṣasa and the evil-wisher, having heated the Saṁnāyya vessels on the Garhapatya, taking up the Upavesha with the formula, "Thou art Dhṛṣṭi, thou art the Brahman, thou art the protector," having placed the embers from the Garhapatyā towards the north, with the formula, "The army is firm, the fear is firm, the army is firm, thou art the destroyer of enemies," he places the pot on them with the formula, “Thou art the heat of Matarisvan.”
1.12.2	For the non-slipping of the sacrifice, I place the two supports. May they hold the cooked food offered to Indra, as it is brought by the animals.
1.12.3	"Heat yourself with the heat of the Bhrigus and Angiras. Having surrounded it with embers in a clockwise direction, he places the twig-filter on it, with the words, "You are the filter of the Vasus." The twig-filter is placed with the tip towards the east."
1.12.4	Towards the north, in the morning.
1.12.5	He restrains his speech from the time he begins to fill the pot.
1.12.6	He remains holding the purifying (grass).
1.12.7	He takes up the ladle, saying, "Thou art the ladle of Aditi."
1.12.8	The sacrificer recites over the ladle being taken up, "Thou art of thirty-three threads, thou art taken with the purifying (grass), this is the auspicious rope, may it be used by the non-slayer."
1.12.9	He puts the calf to the cow with the formula, "May Pūṣan put you together."
1.12.10	He instructs with the formula, “May you be instructed by me.”
1.12.11	He invites with the formula, "I am inviting. May I be united with you without consumption. May you be united with me without consumption. May I be joined with you without consumption." He puts the calf together with the cow with the verse, "May you be united with my progeny, with prosperity and abundance."
1.12.12	He instructs, "Do not move between the cow and the calf."
1.12.13	If he were to go away after having approached her, he should say, "May the Saṁnāyya not be lost."
1.12.14	He invites her, saying, "I am approaching." "May your progeny be free from consumption. May you be prosperous with plenty. May you be nourished with energy, milk, ghee, and life. May you live with life. May you be approached with the gift of life." The milker approaches.
1.12.15	A Śūdra should not milk.
1.12.16	One should milk in a wooden vessel.
1.12.17	The sacrificer recites the formula, "May you be free from consumption; I unite you with progeny." (He recites) while the cow is being milked. "May heaven and earth unite this sacrifice; may the creator with Soma, with wind, may Vayu bestow wealth on the sacrificer." (He recitess) while the cow being milked.
1.13.1	They milk the Utsa, the four-holed pot, the goddess Idā, the sweet one, the giver of wealth. May Indra and Agni stimulate it for truth, may they place the sacrificer in immortality. Thus is the sound of the stream.
1.13.2	Having milked, he carries it.
1.13.3	He asks, "Whom did you milk? Tell me. The oblation for Indra, the strength."
1.13.4	He points to her with the words, "This is she in whom the milk of gods and men is placed." She replies, "It is so."
1.13.5	He recites the verse, "She is the life of the universe."
1.13.6	He pours the water through the strainer into the pot with the verse, "May god Savitar purify you with the strainer of Vasu, with a hundred streams, with good purification."
1.13.7	He reciter the verses, "The oblation is the drop, the oblation is the particle," for the drops.
1.13.8	Thus he milks the second and the third time.
1.13.9	He recites the second verse as "She is the all-pervading" and the third verse as "She performs all tasks".
1.13.10	Having milked three times, may the milk for the gods, the lords of milk, increase again. May it be for the calves and men to be milked again. Having uttered the formula three times, he should not repeat it. Having milked the remaining cows silently, having brought the milk to the milking place, they should mix it together. Having brought the rinsing water from the pot, he causes it to flow down, making it well-mixed.
1.13.11	"Firm the cow, firm the cow-lord, may not the lord of sacrifice injure you." Having made the path, he sends forth towards the east. Towards the north or towards the east and north.
1.13.12	For one, two, or three days before the Upavasatha day, having milked for the purpose of churning, they continuously milk for the Upavastha day.
1.13.13	With that he churns the cold butter.
1.13.14	With Soma I anoint thee, for Indra. With curd.
1.13.15	Thou art the continuity of the sacrifice. I anoint thee according to the continuity of the sacrificial rite. Having placed the remnant of the Agnihotra offering in the ladle, he says, "May this milk, having become Soma, go to its own place." He places the leaf-stalk, the Soma strainer, which is for Soma, for Soma is made from Soma. He places the piece of the strainer.
1.14.1	The herbs, the pure grains, the husks, the rice grains, and the leaves are the options for the covering.
1.14.2	In the absence of leftovers, one should cover with rice grains. In the absence of rice grains, one should cover it with herbs.
1.14.3	"O waters, be awake in the oblations, as you are awake in the gods. Thus be awake in this sacrifice for the sacrificer who is awake." Having brought it in a vessel of iron or wood, he places it with the formula, "Thou art the setting sun. I place thee in Vishnu, in the sacrifice. With the waters that have been purified and are flowing around, he places it. The vessel of the gods is made of nectar. May it be employed in the life of the sacrifice. The waters have been brought beyond the strainer. May they be held by me." The sacrificer mutters.
1.14.4-6	If he were to put it in an earthen pot, he should pierce the grass or wood with a stick. "He puts it down with the verse, "O Vishnu, protect the oblation." " "He puts down the two leaves and darbha grass, which are the purifiers of the oblation of the gods, with the verse, "Protect the oblation of Vishnu, O protector, for the morning meal." " He puts down the known branch purifier.
1.14.7	With that same branch, he drives away the calves with darbha-grass, as in the evening milking, for the morning milking.
1.14.8	Having placed the potsherds, he milks the morning milking, as in the afternoon milking. The covering, the covering, and the storing are also stopped. One who is not a Soma-sacrificer should not join, or should join.
1.14.9	One whose prosperity has not come should not sacrifice to Mahendra. It has been said that there are three whose prosperity has not yet come.
1.14.10	Aurva, Gautama, Bharadvaja, and others, after Soma-sacrifice, worshipped the great Indra.
1.14.11	Or whoever.
1.14.12	Then he orders, "Spread, arrange the fire, the arranged fire may bless the sacrificer. The juice of water and plants, these golden coins may be the wish-yielding cows of the sacrificer, here and in the other world."
1.14.13	Some people recite this as the Paristaraṇī (mantra).
1.14.14	One strews the fires with Darbha grass with their tips towards the north and the east.
1.14.15	The tips of the Darbha grass should be towards the north and then towards the east.
1.14.16	Having done this, one observes fast.
1.14.17	The placing of fire, the taking away of the calf, the kindling wood, the sacrificial grass, the Veda, the altar, the enclosing sticks, having made the plastering of the ground on the next day, one should take up the northern enclosing sticks and the covering of the ground. On the previous day of the new moon or full moon, one should perform the placing of fire, covering of the ground, and fasting.
1.14.18	Or, everything is done on the same day if it is the time for the new moon.
1.15.1	When the sun has risen, he commences the rite of the full moon before sunrise.
1.15.2	There are four priests.
1.15.3	If the fires have not been strewn, he strews them as before.
1.15.4	"May I be able to perform the rite for you, O gods." Having rubbed his hands, he spreads the grass of the continuity of the sacrifice, saying, "You are the continuity of the continuity of sacrifice. I spread you for the continuity of the sacrificial continuity." Having moved away from the Garhapatya, he spreads the continuous grass of the Ulaparaji towards the Dakshina, silently, towards the north.
1.15.5	He places the seats of the Brahman and the sacrificer to the right of the Ahavaniya, first for the Brahman and then for the sacrificer.
1.15.6	Having spread Darbha grass to the north of the Garhapatya and the Ahavaniya fires, he places the utensils in pairs, ten in the front and ten in the back.
1.15.7	The ladle, the spoon, the Upabhṛt, the Dhruva, the Veda, the vessel, the vessel for keeping clarified butter, the vessel for taking the Prasitra, the vessel for the Idā, the vessel for carrying the Prāṇīta, and the vessel for carrying Prāṇītas are the eastern ones.
1.15.8	The remaining ones are the northern ones.
1.15.9	The Anvāhāryāśān, the stone, the Upaveṣa, and the vessels for milking in the morning.
1.15.10	The offering of the Prāṇīta-cup is performed before the offering of the cups. Some recite the following verse: The ladle is made of Khadira wood, the Juhu of leaves, the Upamudra of Ashvattha wood, the Dhruva of Vaikankata wood.
1.15.11	One should make the ladle of any one of these woods.
1.15.12	They are of the length of the arm or of the span, with their tips turned upwards, without holes, and resembling the chief of swans.
1.15.13	The wooden ladle, the wooden pestle, and the wooden spoon are made of Khadira wood.
1.15.14	The wooden implements for the Homa are made of Palasa wood.
1.16.1	Here, as before, one makes the filter. If one does not add it,
1.16.2	then one adds it according to one's ability.
1.16.3	"He washes the vessel with water, saying, "Thou art of the wood, be purified for the gods." "He places the vessel with the strainer on the other side of the Garhapatya, saying, ">Who among you will take? May he take for you. For whom among you shall I take? For him I shall take for you. To the nourishing one." "He brings it down with water.
1.16.4	While taking water, he mentally contemplates the earth.
1.16.5	Having filled the Upabilla vessel and having sprinkled it like the Prokṣaṇī vessel, he recites the mantra and says, "O Brahman, I am offering water. The sacrificer should restrain speech."
1.16.6	In all cases, the offering is mentioned.
1.16.7	While the water is being offered, the Adhvaryu and the sacrificer restrain their speech.
1.16.8-9	Who loves you, may he love you. The goddesses, the loving ones, may they unite us with the sacrifice. The ones who are drunk with joy, with backs anointed with ghee, the ones who are flowing down to the thousand-fold nourishment of the sacrificer, the ones who flow together with the breath, holding with the wooden sword, pouring without spilling, he carries. He meditates on the earth with his mind.
1.16.10	"Who yokes you? May he yoke you!" He places them on the darbha grass, not touching the northern side of the Ahavaniya fire.
1.16.11	They do not bend or sway, covered with darbha grass until they stand still.
1.16.12	"May the divine hosts be seated." Having touched the vessels with the purifying hand, he says,
1.17.1	"He takes up the Agnihotra ladle with the formula, "For the right (of the sacrificer) thee, O wood-born one." " He takes up the winnowing basket with the formula, "For the winnowing (of the grains) thee." "
1.17.2	He bakes the oblation on the Ahavaniya or Garhapatya fire with the formula, "The Rakshas is repelled, the evil spirits are repelled." " He announces, "I shall offer the oblation for the sacrificer." "
1.17.3	When he is about to depart, he says, "O Agni, I shall offer the oblations." "
1.17.4	"May the sky be above." He proceeds towards the cart.
1.17.5	To the south of the Garhapatya, the cart is placed with its yoke facing east or north, loaded with grains or barley.
1.17.6	"Thou art the axle." He touches the southern yoke or the northern one.
1.17.7	"Thou art the most brilliant of the gods." Having taken the northern end, he mutters.
1.17.8	"May Vishnu press thee." Having placed the left foot on the right, he ascends, saying, "Thou art the unerring Havirdhana."
1.17.9	"For the wide space." Having covered the end, he looks at the Puronuvakya-s, saying, "May I look at thee with the eye of Mitra.
1.17.10	The Rakshas is removed, the evil-doer is removed. Whatever is left over from the oblations, that is removed. Having recited the verse, "May the milk be in me for your nourishment," and having explained the Dashahotra, he places the oblations in the ladle after placing the Pavitra in the ladle, and offers the oblations with the Agnihotra ladle. With that Pavitra.
1.17.11	Rice or barley.
1.17.12	Taking up the five-fold handful, he pours the handful into the ladle, reciting "For the god thee" and then thrice with the Yajus, silently the fourth time.
1.18.1	Thus the subsequent offerings are made according to the deity. At the full moon, "to Agni and Soma" and at the new moon, "to Indra and Agni".
1.18.2	Having placed four handfuls, having placed them, he touches the placed ones with this (verse), "This is of the gods." He touches the remaining ones with this (mantra), "This is for us together."
1.18.3	Having touched the placed ones with "For thee, O Sphyati, for thee, O Narati," having gone out with "This I am released from Varuna's noose," he looks towards the east with "May I proclaim heaven."
1.18.4	"May it be well-known." He looks around the entire dwelling. "He says, 'The fire of all quarters.' He says, 'The light of all quarters.' 'The fire of the house.' 'The light of the house.' He says, "Svāhā to heaven and earth." Having recited the mantra over the scattered (fire), he says, "May the heaven and earth be firm." Having descended, he says, "Do you carry (the fire) along the sky."
1.18.5	"He places it on the seat of Aditi" (with the formula), "I place thee on the seat of aditi." He places it near the Garhapatya according to the deity.
1.18.6	If he cooks in the Ahavaniya, then he cooks in the Garhapaty.
1.18.7	If he were to pour out in a vessel, then having placed the wooden sword towards the south, he should recite all the formulas of the cart in that (vessel).
1.19.1	Having brought the Agnihotra-vessel with the fire, having heated it as before, having recited the mantra, having addressed the Brahman with the words "I shall sprinkle", having recited the Anudruta verse "For the god thee", having sprinkled the oblation three times according to the deity with the words "For Agni I sprinkle what is agreeable", one should not sprinkle the fire.
1.19.2	One should sprinkle on the one whom one hates.
1.19.3	Having turned the vessels upside down, cleanse them with the formula, "For the divine rite." Having sprinkled them thrice, having placed the remaining water in front of the Garhapatya, having taken up the black antelope skin with the formula, “Thou art taken up by the impulse of the divine Savitr,” he shakes it thrice on the heap of ashes with the formula, "The Rakshas is shaken off, the evil spirits are shaken off." The animal is turned upside down with its head towards the outside and is cut open.
1.19.4	"Thou art the skin of Aditi," he spreads the skin with the neck towards the north and the hairy side upwards, either on the heap of ashes or to the north of the Garhapatya.
1.19.5	He puts the ashes towards the east and the west.
1.19.6	"Thou art the black antelope skin," he puts the pestle on it.
1.19.7	Not letting go of the mortar, he says, "You are the body of Agni." He pours the oblation into it three times with the Yajus formula and once silently.
1.19.8	Taking up the pestle, he says, “You are the mountain, you are the wood.” He strikes the oblation three times, saying, “Come, O oblation-maker!” He does not strike the oblation-maker. He calls out to the oblation-making.
1.19.9	"O Havis-maker, come!" (thus) to a Brāhmaṇa; "O Havis maker, come!" ( thus) to a Rājanya; "O Haviṣ-maker, run!" ( thus) a Vaiśya; "O Hāviṣ-maker, rush!" ( thus) for a Śūdra.
1.19.10	The first of all.
1.19.11	"O Rākṣasa, I strike down the enemy of heaven." Thus he strikes.
1.20.1	"Strike high!" thus he orders.
1.20.2	"You are a good stone, you have a sweet tongue," taking up a stone, the Agnidhra strikes it on the pressing stone. They strike it on the pressing stones.
1.20.3	Twice on the pressing stones, once on the pressing stone, moving it three times, he makes it nine times.
1.20.4	Taking up a wooden mallet with the Savitrī verse, they strike it with it.
1.20.5	"You are a year-old," having thrown the chaff in front, or in the north.
1.20.6	"You have grown with the year", he says, while taking up the grains. "I know you who have grown with the years", he says, when pouring them down.
1.20.7	"The Rakshas is purified, the evil spirits are purified", he says, purifying them on the heap.
1.20.8	"The Raksas is driven away, the enemies are puffed up", he says, following the scattering of the chaff.
1.20.9	Having placed the husks in the middle pot of the oblation, he places them below the black antelope skin with the formula, "Thou art the share of Rakshas." The subsequent one is in the intermediate space.
1.20.10	One should place them with the hand. This is in the Brāhmaṇa of Bahvrīcas.
1.20.11	Having touched the skull with water, having placed it in a known place, having sprinkled himself, having separated (the skull) with the formula, "May the wind separate you", having separated (the bones) with the formula "May the shining god Savitr with golden hands receive you", having thrown the rice into the vessel, having looked at it with the formula, “I look at you with the uninjured eye for prosperity, for radiance, for good progeny, for the protection of the eye, for the blessing”, having looked at it, he instructs, “Make three balls”.
1.20.12	The wife of the sacrificer is struck with the Abhi-druta.
1.20.13	If there is no wife,
1.21.1	he makes them pure for the gods, saying, "Purify for the gods, purify for the gods, make pure for the gods." He makes them pure for himself, saying, "Make pure for me, make pure for me, purify for me."
1.21.2	Having washed the Trivrit, he carries it three times to the heap of bones, saying, "Let the share of the Rakshas go away from here."
1.21.3-4	Here, having taken up the Kṛṣṇājin, etc., before the turning around, having placed the Kṛṣṇa-skin with the northern pot and the wooden sword, having placed the stone on the wooden sword with "You are the stone, you are the mountain," having placed the stone-slab on the stone with "You are a stone, you are a mountain," having placed a stone on the stone-slab.
1.21.5	Having recited the formula, "O portions, be sweet", he recites the formula, "For the deity thee" and pours the rice grains on the heated pan according to the deity. He pours them three times reciting the formula and once silently.
1.21.6	Having placed the eastern stone with the formula, "For Prāṇa thee", having placed the western stone with the formula "For Apāna thee", having placed in the middle with the formula "for Vyāna thee", he binds them together with the formula, “For Prāṇa, for Apāna, for Vyāna thee.
1.21.7-8	"May the long-lasting life be yours." Having thrown the flour towards the east, he says, "May Savitar, the divine one, with golden hands, accept it." Having thrown the ground flour on a black antelope skin, and having looked at it with an unblinking eye, he says, “May the flour be ground.” The slave or the wife grinds it.
1.21.9	Or the wife of a Śūdra may destroy it.
1.22.1	One cooks the oblations in the Āhavanīya or Gārhapatya.
1.22.2	"Thou art Dhriti, thou art Brahman." Having taken up the Upavesha, he says, "Burn the hand of the Rakshas." Having recited the formula, "Thou art Budhniya," he says, "O Agni, burn the raw Agni." Having taken out two coals from the Garhapatya, he says, "Remove the carnivorous one." Having placed one of them in the intermediate space, he says, "Carry the divine oblation." Having placed the southern one, he says, “Thou art Dhruva.” He places the middle pot for the cake on it.
1.22.3-4	Having burnt the Rakshas, having burnt the evil spirits, having placed a piece of charcoal on the skull, having touched the first one with the formula, "Thou art the support," having touched the second one with the formula "Thou art the supporter," having touched the third one with the formula “Thou art the supporter,” having touched the one on the right side of the middle one with the formula,“Thou art the separator, thou art the separator in all directions," having touched the one to the left of the middle one, with the formula, “Thou art the separator in the directions.” The others are to be touched as per their suitability.
1.23.1	"Thou art the impulse of the Maruts," is the sixth; "Thou art Dharma," is the seventh; "Thou art Cit," is the eighth.
1.23.2	Thus he places the northern skull-cup.
1.23.3	Or, having placed the middle one, he should place the fingers of the left hand on it and say, "The Rakshas are burnt, the enemies are burnt." Having placed a burning ember in the skull, he should say, "You are the holder." Then, "You are beyond that." Then, "The other ones as appropriate."
1.23.4	The Vājasaneyins mention the placing of the respective fingers and the spreading of the embers.
1.23.5	He places the embers above the eight fingers, silently or with the verse, "Thou art the highest, thou art the highest."
1.23.6	Having spread the embers in the skull-cups with the verse, “Be ye heated by the penance of the Bhrigus and Angiras," he places the Madanti-cups.
1.24.1	Having washed the vessel, heated it, and sprinkled it with Pavitra-water, he pours the flour into it, reciting "For the deity thee" and then "I pour the offering for Agni." He does this three times for each deity, silently for the fourth time.
1.24.2	While pouring, he restrains speech, and releases it while sprinkling.
1.24.3	Having purified the flour as in the case of sprinkling, he mixes it with the Prāṇita-water.
1.24.4	If the Praṇītā is not obtained, then one should purify with another Yajus.
1.24.5	Having taken up (the flour) with the ladle, having mixed it with water, having brought it near the heated (water), having sprinkled it with heated water, having mixed it, saying, "I mix thee for generation", having made a ball, saying, "Thou art the head of the sacrifice", having divided it according to the share, having made two equal balls, having touched them according to the deity, saying, "This is of Agni", the one for Agni, "This is for Agni and Soma", the one for Agnisomiya.
1.24.6	"This is the face of the army, I remove it with the Veda." Having removed the coals from the potsherds, he places the Agniya Puronuvakya oblation on eight potsherds with the verse, "You are heat, having life for all."
1.24.7	In the same way, the subsequent ones on the subsequent ones.
1.24.8	Thus, the rites are performed in sequence from here onwards.
1.25.1	He excludes each one by a similar act.
1.25.2	Those which are capable of being done once are done once.
1.25.3	While spreading the sacrificial cake, he spreads all the potsherds, saying, "Be extensive, be extensive! May thy lord of sacrifice be extensive!"
1.25.4	He makes it of the shape of a tortoise, not too high, without a lump, the size of a horse's hoof.
1.25.5	Or as much as he thinks.
1.25.6	Some say, "He does not make it large by means of the Sastra."
1.25.7	"Take the skin," he says, making it smooth with water, not making it too sour.
1.25.8	Having heated all the oblations three times, he says, "May the god Savitar melt you," and heats it with torches.
1.25.9	Agni does not burn your body. With darbha grass he kindles the fire with flames.
1.25.10	He releases speech, saying, "Do not burn."
1.25.11	The Agnidhra prepares the oblations well.
1.25.12	"Be united with the Brahman," he says, and puts the embers and ashes on the cake with the Veda.
1.25.13	Here he releases speech.
1.25.14	After washing the fingers and rinsing the vessel, he cleanses the fire-pan with a wooden sword and draws three lines within the altar, either from east to west or from north to south.
1.25.15	He pours the water three times without spilling it, saying, "For the one who goes away, for the one who goes back, for the one."
1.25.16	Having poured, he should cleanse, he should cleanse.
2.1.1	Taking up the wooden sword with the formula, "By the impulse of the divine Savitr," and reciting the formula, "Thou art Indra's right arm," he cleanses it with a darbha-grass with the formula, “May thy lustre not go away from me." He makes the altar towards the west, of the size of the sacrificer or unlimited, towards the east.
2.1.2	The altar should be made sloping in such a way that the oblations may be placed on it.
2.1.3	The Veda, having known the altar, made the earth spread out. The earth carries the embryo of the kings within the worlds. From that the sacrifice is born, giving everything. Thus it is said before the Stambayajus. With the Veda, he smears the altar three times from above.
2.1.4	From the eastern half of the altar, from a third of the distance, one takes the Stambayajur.
2.1.5	Having placed a darbha-grass with its tip towards the north or east, he strikes it with the wooden sword with the formula, "O Earth, thou art the deity to be worshipped." Having removed the grass with the wooden sword, he takes it away with the formula, "The grass has been removed from the earth." He takes it away with "Go to the village, go to the cattle-pen." He looks at the Vedi with the formula, "May the heaven rain for thee."
2.1.6	"O god Savitar, bind (the oblation)!" Thus he pours out the Veda in the northern direction, in front, in the third part, towards the north, on the two-footed (animal), or in an unlimited quantity.
2.1.7	That is the heap.
2.1.8	The Agnidhra takes up the sprinkled (oblation) with a cup, saying, "May thy Araru not fall from heaven."
2.1.9	He carries the second and the third (oblations) in the same way.
2.1.10	Carrying the fourth one silently, he carries all the remaining darbha-grass.
2.2.1	The second verse says, "The unapproachable Araru is the place of worship of the gods on earth." The third verse says, "May the Araru not fall down from heaven." The second verse says again, "The Araru has been removed from the place of worship on earth." The last verse says, "Araru has been removed and is not the place of worship for the gods on earth."
2.2.2	The Āgnīdhra priest takes up the second ladle with the formula, "Thou art the repeller of evil." The third with the formula, “Thou art the repeler of evil-doers." The fourth with the formula, "Thou art the repellor of the demons."
2.2.3	"May Drapça protect thy heaven." Having looked at the Khâni, he encloses the Vedi with the Sphyi, saying, "May the Vasus enclose thee with the Gayatri metre." On the right side, "May the Rudras," on the left side, "May Aditya."
2.2.4	"May I remove the unapproachable, the non-divine sacrifice of the earth." With the Sphyi he removes the last skin.
2.2.5	The Agni-dhr is to throw the ashes three times on the heap of ashes.
2.2.6	"The men have made this altar for the gods, agreeable to Aditi, may the gods enjoy this, may the prosperity of the sacrifice enter the sacrificer."
2.2.7	He digs a hole of two fingers, three fingers, four fingers, as much as the heel is white, of the size of a palm, of the size equal to the circumference of a chariot wheel, of the size like a seat, of the size as much as the span of the hand, or of the size of the thumb, with soil.
2.2.8	He does not dig holes exceeding these sizes.
2.2.9	To the south, the hole should be smaller, sloping towards the east, or sloping towards the east and north.
2.3.1	The two ends of the altar are to be raised, the front one being lower and the rear one higher.
2.3.2	In the middle it is to be made more sloping.
2.3.3	If the root (of the altar) exceeds (the prescribed limit), he should cut it with a spade, not with a nail.
2.3.4	If the soil exceeds, he should throw it on a heap.
2.3.5	One desiring cattle should make the altar with soil brought from a place where cattle have grazed.
2.3.6	Having done that which was done before digging, he should dig with the mantra.
2.3.7	Having invited the Brahman with the words, "O Brahman, I shall take up the northern boundary," he takes up the altar with the wooden sword, saying, "You are truth," on the right side, "You are the abode of truth," on the west, "You are truthful glory," on the north.
2.3.8	Some people say that the two opposite enclosures are one.
2.3.9	"One says, "You are the earth, you are the earth," while the western altar is being levelled with the wooden sword."
2.3.10	"Having taken it, he looks at the altar, saying, "The earth has been taken away by the one who gives away."
2.3.11	Having placed the wooden sword horizontally in the southern half of the Veda, he instructs, "Bring the Prokṣaṇī water, arrange the sacrificial grass and wood, cleanse the spoon and ladles, bind the wife, and bring clarified butter."
2.3.12	Or one may not give the instruction.
2.3.13	Having filled the Prokṣaṇī vessel, having removed the wooden sword, having placed the wooden sword on the right side without touching it, having placed the path of the wooden sword, he says, "You are the abode of truth." Thinking of the enemy in his mind.
2.3.14	"You are the hundred-arrowed one, you are the wooden one, you are for the killing of enemies." Having placed the wooden sword towards the east on the heap, thinking of the enemy in the mind.
2.3.15	The hands should not be wiped on the vessels.
2.3.16	Having wiped the hands, he cleans the wooden sword, not touching the tip.
2.3.17	He places the kindling wood and the sacrificial grass to the north of the Ahavaniya fire, with the tips towards the east, the kindling wood on the right and the sacrificial grass on the left.
2.4.1	Some prescribe the binding of the wife first, others the cleaning of the ladle.
2.4.2	"O Agni, you call the Ghrtachi-s for the sacrifice to the gods." Having taken up the ladles, he says, "The Rakshas are repelled, the evil ones are repelled." Having heated them on the Ahavaniya or Garhapatya, he recites, "They are sharp, they destroy enemies." Having divided the edges of the Vedas, or not having divided them, he cleans the ladles with them, holding them upright, facing east and north.
2.4.3	Some say that the Upabhṛt is indeed the one facing north.
2.4.4	"One should not destroy the cowpen," one should make the ladle with the tips facing inward, with all sides, with the roots, and with the handle.
2.4.5	"Speech, breath," one should make a ladle with the tips pointing inward, with the middle ones facing east, with the outer ones facing west, and with the roots, the handle.
2.4.6	The eye and the ear are the two upper ends, the nose and the mouth are the two lower ends, the head is the middle.
2.4.7	The offspring and the womb are like the ladle and the Dhruva vessel.
2.4.8	"The form and colour of the animals, do not destroy them. I rub you, O horse, for conquering enemies." The removal of the Prasitra is done silently.
2.4.9	He does not touch the cleansed ones with the un-cleansed ones.
2.4.10	Having again heated and sprinkled, he places the fire-wood on the Darbha-grass in front of the heap of wood, either with the front or the rear end.
2.4.11	Having touched the cleansing of the spoon with water,
2.5.1	The art of heaven is spread out, resting on the corners of the earth. With that which has a thousand shoots, we destroy the enemy. Svāhā! He strikes the fire on which the ashes are being spread out or on which they are being deposited.
2.5.2	While the wife is sitting with her knees raised towards the Garhapatya or standing, the others tie her up, saying, "Seeking happiness."
2.5.3	Some say, he should recite.
2.5.4	With a woolen rope or with a rope made of any other material, or with a yoke, he should tie the inside of the garment.
2.5.5	Some say, the garment should not be tied.
2.5.6	Having made a knot to the north of the navel, having gone round clockwise, having placed it to the south of the navel, he rises and stands by the Garhapatya, saying, "O Agni, lord of the house, do thou invite me."
2.5.7	"The wives of the gods call to me, O wife! This is your world. May there be reverence to you. Do not injure me." He stands before the wives of the gods.
2.5.8	Having moved away from that place, he sits facing south, saying, "We, O Suapti, for you."
2.5.9-11	May I be like Indrani, the widow, and like Aditi, the mother of good sons. May the Garhapatya fire be near you for the sake of good progeny." The sacrificer instructs, "May those who are yoked follow my sacrifice." It is known that one should offer the Darsha-Paurnamasa sacrifices with plenty of ghee.
2.6.1	"May Pūṣan open your nest." Having turned around the nest of the clarified butter, having poured clarified butter into the southern fire, having taken up the vessel of clarified butter with the verse, "Aditi is the one with an unbroken leaf," having deposited the clarified butter in the vessel with the verse, “The milk of the great ones, the juice of the plants, of him who is being consumed, I pour for the sake of offering to the gods," having taken up the clarified butter in that vessel with the verse "This is Vishnu who has wandered," having deposited it in the southern fire with the verse "For you," having deposited it on the southern half of the Garhapatya with the verse "To you," having taken it up with the verse "In you," having tied it with a thread, the wife offers it.
2.6.2	She looks at it with closed eyes, and then looks at it with open eyes, saying, "Thou art the water of the earth."
2.6.3	"Thou art the lustre," she places on the northern half of the Garhapatya.
2.6.4	If the wife is absent, the lustre is omitted. The placing on the Garhapaty
2.6.5	Having taken up the spoon with the formula, "For brilliance thee," he takes up the clarified butter with the formula, "Thou art brilliance; do thou go along brilliance." Having placed it on the Ahavaniya with the formula, “May Agni not deprive thee of brilliance," he places the handle of the spoon with the verse, "Thou art the tongue of Agni."
2.6.6	The Adhvaryu and the sacrificer, having closed their eyes and looked at each other, look at the clarified butter without sucking it.
2.7.3	Holding the ladle with the ladle, the middle part of the ladle, the ladle on the ground, and the Dhruva in the proper place.
2.7.4	Four in the ladle, eight in the ladle, four in the Dhruva.
2.7.5	For one desiring cattle, fivefold in the Dhruvas, as in the natural state, in the other two.
2.7.6	Some say: Tenfold in the ladle, fivefold in other two.
2.7.7	More in the Juhu, less in the Upamant, most in the Dhruva.
2.7.8	"O Shukra, thee in the Shukra (vessel), with three (verses). Thee among the five Vayu (winds), with two (verses). In the Juhu four or five times, according to the number of verses."
2.7.9	I take thee for the five directions, for the five peoples, for the five waters, for the five backs. Thou art the abode, the dear abode of the gods, the unassailable divine worship. I take thee for divine enjoyment. Thee of the five-holed ladle. With five ladlefuls, eight or ten times, for each verse.
2.7.10-12	With Śeṣa, on Dhruvā, four or five times for each mantra. One does not place the sacrificial grass and clarified butter. One does not take away what has been taken inside the altar.
2.8.1	Having sprinkled the Prokṣaṇī water as before, having invited the Brahman, having scattered the kindling wood, he sprinkles three times with "Kṛṣṇa is the best of the black ones." "You are the altar" three times to the altar, "You are the sacrificial grass" three times to sacrificial grass. Having placed the sacrificial grass within the altar with the knot at the front, he sprinkles the tip with "For you, O Heaven," the middle with "For you O Atmosphere," and the root with "For you Earth."
2.8.2-3	He offers the roots of the sacrificial grass, saying, "For nourishment to thee." Having loosened the knot towards the east, he pours the remaining Prokṣaṇī water, saying, "Svāhā to the Fathers." Having poured it continuously on the right buttock of the southern cow, he loosens the knot, saying, "Pūṣan has loosened thy knot."
2.8.4	He places the Pancham (brick) with its mouth upwards and the Pratyansh with its mouth downwards.
2.8.5	"He places the Prastara on the Ahavaniya fire, saying, "Thou art the mound of Visnu." He does not throw it up, does not throw it down, does not throw across, does not scatter, does not wipe, does not wipe back, does not wipe along.
2.8.6	This is the Prāṇa and Apāna, which have gone to the sacrificer. At the sacrifice they were the two Potāras, the purifiers of the oblation. I place the Prāṇa-Apāna in the sacrificer. Having sprinkled him in the purifier, he says, "I make you of the same nature as Prāṇa- Apāna." He gives him to the sacrificer, the sacrificer to the Brahman.
2.8.7	The Brahman holds the Prāstara, the sacrificer.
2.9.1	Having covered the altar with darbha-grass, he spreads the armour on the right side with the verse, "May the eye protect thee."
2.9.2	He spreads the altar with the darbha-grass with the verse, “I spread thee with wool and gold.” It should be spread abundantly, not visible, with the tip towards the east or the tip towards the west. It may be of three or five layers.
2.9.3	He covers the roots with the tips.
2.9.4	He recites the mantra at each layer.
2.9.5	Holding the Prastara in his hand, he places the Paridhıs touching each other, reciting the respective mantras, the middle one with its tip towards the north, the other two with their tips towards the east.
2.9.6	The Ahavaniya is placed with its tip towards him, the Dakṣiṇāgni towards the south, and the Uttarāgni towards the north.
2.9.7	"May Surya protect thee from the east." Having recited this, he places the sacrificial grass on the Ahavaniya fire and performs the Agni-worship.
2.9.8	"One should place the Uddalaka (kindling wood) towards the east for the Anuyaja offerings." This is according to the Vasistha school.
2.9.9	Having touched the middle enclosing stick, he places the two kindling sticks above.
2.9.10	"O Vītihotra, the sages have placed thee on the right side of the fire; for life they have placed thee on thy left side."
2.9.11	Or silently.
2.9.12	He makes two darbha-blades with their tips pointing towards him and their bases towards the fire.
2.9.13	Having placed them in the middle of the altar with their tips towards the north, he says, "The classes are in the instrument." Having placed the Prastara over them, he says, “May the Vasus, Rudras and Adityas sit in the assembly."
2.9.14	The Prāstara-roots are more prominent than the Barhi-roots.
2.9.15	With the mantras, "You are the Juhu, the Ghata-chi," he places the spoons, not touching each other, on the Prāstara.
2.10.1	Or he places the Juhu alone on the Prāstra.
2.10.2	He makes the ladle equal to the roots. He holds the ladle above the Upabhṛt, as if it were a little lower below. He holds the Dhruva above the Upabṛt, as it were a little higher above.
2.10.3	"Thou art the bull, the son of Sakvari and Ghritachi, thou sittest in the dear place with thy dear name. He places the ladle on the right side, the spoon on the left side, or the Dhruva on the left side.
2.10.4	Having recited the formula, "These have been placed," he recites the formula, "You are the Viṣṇu-places, you are the Prajāpati-places." Having removed the embers from the cake in the form of a skull, he recites the verse, "O Agni, shine forth with the light of the sun, for the sake of the great power." Having recited the formula "May the Agni, the source of ghee, be nourished," he pours the Agniya cake silently.
2.10.5	The Self which has entered into the animals, which has taken its place among the gods, having become Soma, having ghee, may it go to the gods and obtain the good. For the sacrificer, for me. This is the morning milking.
2.10.6	I make thy dwelling place pleasant with the stream of ghee. I make it well-adorned. Having placed the cake on the vessel, he turns around the cake, saying, "The moist one, the first to be born, the protector of the world, the cooked one, the generator of thoughts, has risen." Having turned around the cake, he places it.
2.11.1	Having wiped the ashes with the Veda, he establishes himself in the nectar of the Veda. He establishes the rice in the vessel, thinking with a good mind.
2.11.2	Silently, the barley-made one.
2.11.3	"May the juice of the earth not escape," having sprinkled the skull-cups with the ladle, he anoints the cake with the ladle, saying, "May the god Savitr anoint thee with honey." He anoints the cake, saying, "Well-anointed, without a turtle, without a lump, without a border."
2.11.4	Having anointed from above, he anoints from below.
2.11.5	One should offer the oblations at the Full-moon sacrifice with four Hotr priests and at the New-moon sacrifice with five Hotr priests.
2.11.6	It is known that one should offer the oblation with the name of one's beloved and the statement "May I be with my beloved" at the Full- and New-moon sacrifices.
2.11.7	One should offer the two Puronuvakya verses to the east of the ladle.
2.11.8	The two milking verses are recited in the reverse order.
2.11.9	Or else he places the two pots of curds and milk in the middle of the altar, the one that has been boiled first and the other that has been churned. Then he takes them out and places the one that has boiled on the southern part of the altar and the one that has churned on the northern part.
2.11.10	This Veda found the earth in its hidden state in the dense and intricate (places). May it find the world for the sacrificer. May it perform the sacrifice without a flaw. May it do many deeds. Having placed the Veda in front of the northern Dhruva, having spread the Veda-ending (bricks), having arranged the Hotr's seat, he proceeds to the Samidheni bricks.
2.12.1	He instructs him to recite the verse "To Agni who is being kindled" or "To Agni who has been kindled".
2.12.2	He recites fifteen verses of Agni.
2.12.3	It has been said that there are three verses.
2.12.4	He adds fuel at each verse.
2.12.5	When the verses of Agni are increased, the fuel also increases. When they are decreased, it is as per the original.
2.12.6	Having recognized the fire as being well-kindled, he places all the remaining wood on the fire, except for one kindling-stick for the Anuyaja-offering, or on the Paridhananiya-kindling-stick.
2.12.7	Having thrice sprinkled the fire with the Veda, having taken up clarified butter from the Dhruva vessel with the Veda, and having moved along the junction of the southern and northern boundaries while seated, meditating on Prajapati mentally, he offers the offering of clarified butter facing south, straight, continuous, and luminous, touching all the pieces of wood.
2.12.8	The two Āghāra-offerings are to be made by the Hotṛ, either facing east or sideways, either in succession or not in succession.
2.12.9	Having taken clarified butter from the vessel of clarified butter with the ladle, he should make the Dhruvā ladle full of clarified butter, saying, "May the Dhruvā be full of clarified butter." This is applicable everywhere.
2.12.10	The Adhvaryu instructs the Agnidh to touch the enclosing sticks and the fire three times each.
2.13.1	With the kindling woods, with the wooden sword, without the wooden sword, the Agnidh follows the enclosing sticks, rubbing them three times each, in the proper order. "He rubs the Agni, the winner of the prize, the one who is going to win the prize, the winner of prizes, the winner of contests, for the sake of winning contests, saying, "I rub Agni, the eater of food, for the sake food." Three times he rubs Agni facing east.
2.13.2	"Thou art the world," (with these words) he takes up the Juhu ladle, having made a handful of the Dhruva ladle. Having said, "Take the Juhu," he takes the Juhu ladle. Having said "Come, O Upamant," he takes the Upamant ladle.
2.13.3	"May the ghee-eater be well-covered for me today. May it be well-covered in the well-covered." He places the Juhu ladle on the Upamant.
2.13.4	Having taken it from the mouth, he puts it back into the mouth.
2.13.5	In all cases, the pouring of the oblation and the carrying of the oblation are done in this way.
2.13.6	And he does not sprinkle (the oblation) and holds the ladle at the navel.
2.13.7	"He steps forward with the words, "May I not transgress Agni-Vishnu." He steps forward to the right of the southern enclosing stick, to the left of the northern enclosing stick, with the right foot first, then with the left foot."
2.13.8	This is the opposite.
2.13.9	"You are the place of Vishnu." He stands.
2.13.10	The right foot is within the altar, the left foot is outside.
2.13.11	Then standing upright, having turned the right joint of the girdle,
2.14.1	He offers the Jyotishmati-libation, touching all the pieces of wood of the fire-wood, beginning from the top and going upwards, straight, continuous and shining.
2.14.2	It is said that one should offer the libation obliquely for one whom one desires to be a deceiver.
2.14.3	One should offer the libations in the reverse order for one whom one hates.
2.14.4	One should make it oblique for one who is impotent.
2.14.5	One should do it obliquely for one who desires rain.
2.14.6	Some say: of one who is hated.
2.14.7	One desiring heaven should offer the most abundant oblations after the pouring of the oblation.
2.14.8	Or else, one should not pour the oblation, but offer it in the eastern, middle or western part.
2.14.9	Having offered, one breathes out.
2.14.10	Taking up the ladle with the formula, "Thou art the great light," he moves back with the ladle not touching the other one, with the formula, “O Agni, protect me from evil conduct; may I be devoted to good conduct."
2.14.11	These two formulas are used in stepping forward and stepping back.
2.14.12	With the formula, "You are the head of the sacrifice," he anoints the Dhruva ladle twice or thrice with the Juhu ladle.
2.14.13	Having taken up clarified butter in the spoon from the Dhruva vessel with the formula, "Thou art taken up for the sake of wealth," having poured over the Juhu with the formula, “Svāhā to Suvira,” having taken up the Juhu, having poured over the Dhruva with the formula, "Sacrifice is connected with sacrifice," having placed the spoons in their places,
2.15.1	Who will be the Adhvaryu? He will be the Advaryu. May the sacrifice perform the priestly duties of the sacrifice. May the mind perform the priestly duties. I resort to speech. Earth, atmosphere, heaven. I stand in Vishnu's place. Having taken up the kindling woods and the sacrificial grass, they stand facing north, the Adhvaryus to the east and the Agnidhra to the west.
2.15.2	The Agnidhra (priest) having taken up the bundles of grass, recites the formula, "Who will be the Agnidhra? He will be the Agnidhra."
2.15.3	Having addressed the Brahman with the words, "I shall announce to the Pravara," he announces, "Announce, announce to me."
2.15.4	The Agnidhra, standing to the right of the mound, facing south, holding the wooden sword and the broom, replies, "Let it be so."
2.15.5	In the Agnidhra-shed at the Soma-sacrifice.
2.15.6	In all cases, the reply is given in the same way as the question.
2.16.1	They proceed without uttering anything.
2.16.2	When the Adhvaryu is about to call out, he should not say anything other than the calling out. When the Agnidh calls out, he should say nothing other than the response. When the Pratiprasthātṛ responds, the Adhvaryū should say nothing other then "Let us offer." When "Let us offer" is said, the Hotṛ should say nothing other except "Vasat."
2.16.3	If he says anything else, he should call out again.
2.16.4	Or he may recite the Vyāhṛtis.
2.16.5	The Hotr priest, seated with knees raised, is chosen by the sacrificer. Agni is the divine Hotr, he knows the gods, he is wise, he is skilled, he is like Manu, like Bharata, like Amu, like Amu. Thus the sacrificer chooses according to his own sage.
2.16.6	He chooses three sages who have composed mantras.
2.16.7	One, two, three, five.
2.16.8	He does not choose four, he does not choose more than five.
2.16.9	From here onwards the Adhvaryu chooses (the priests) from above, the Hotṛ from below.
2.16.10	The king chooses with the best of the Purohita.
2.16.11	"He says, "May the Brahmanas be the invokers of this sacrifice." He says this to the remaining of the best."
2.16.12	Or he may not choose the Rṣeya, he should say only, "Like Manu."
2.16.13	The Hotṛ sits down.
2.16.14	The Hotr takes up the Upamsu cup silently, and the Mantr invokes it aloud.
2.16.15	He strews grass on the Vedi.
2.17.1	Having taken up the Juhu and the Upabhṛt in the Ghrtavatī vessel, he offers five Prajās to the east, crossing once towards the south, and offering the oblations together.
2.17.2	In each direction, the kindling woods are in front, the Tanūnapāt in the south, the Idā in the west, the sacrificial grass in the north, and the Svāhā-call in the middle.
2.17.3	All together in one place.
2.17.4	He first instructs, "Recite the invocation and respond to the invocation, and offer the kindling woods," and then instructs the others, "Offer, offer."
2.17.5	If one wishes that he may be more powerful, one should offer to him while advancing; if one wishes that he be less powerful, one should make the offering while retreating; if one wishes neither that he be more powerful nor that he be less, one should make it while standing in the same place.
2.17.6	Having offered three portions, having brought half of the Upabhṛt ladle, having offered two portions, having returned, having poured over the Dhruva ladle with the remaining portion, he pours over the oblations in succession, the Upabhara ladle at the end.
2.17.7	One should not pour over the oblations. One places the two ladles in the place of the hated one.
2.18.1	The Agniya and Saumya are the two oblations of clarified butter. The two portions of clarified butter are taken in four spoonfuls.
2.18.2	But in the case of the Jamadagnis, the five-fold oblation is also prescribed. The Jamadagni should address the Jamadagni and perform the five-fold offering everywhere.
2.18.3	Having instructed the Puronuvākyā, "Do you recite the Anuvākyā for Agni," having taken up the Prāstara and Barhi with the ladle, having taken up the Juhū and Upabhṛt ladles, having gone around along the right side, having called out, and having been called out in response, he recites the Yājyā, "Do thou offer to him." This is common to all.
2.18.4	He offers to Agni in the eastern half of the northern half.
2.18.5	In the eastern half of the southern half, Soma is equal to the eastern (half).
2.18.6	Both are in the Jyotishmati.
2.18.7	He does not put down the two ladles until the offering of the clarified butter is offered.
2.18.8	He offers the other oblations between the two offerings of clarified butter.
2.18.9	Having returned, having placed the Juhu, he offers the oblation with the formula, "Do not be afraid, do not be frightened, do not injure me, do not let your brilliance diminish. I shall lift up Bharata, I shall sprinkle the offerings. I shall offer back to you. Obeisance to you. Do not injure me." From the middle of the Agniya cake, he offers an oblation the size of the joint of the thumb, turned towards the east. From the eastern half, the second oblation is offered turned towards the north, having four corners. From the western half, the third oblation is offered having five corners.
2.18.10	Without touching the flesh, he offers the cake with the two fingers and the thumb.
2.19.1	With the ladle, he offers the clarified butter and the cooked rice.
2.19.2	Having offered the first portion from the eastern half of the cake of the younger brother, he should place it in the eastern half of his ladle. Having offered the second portion from the middle of the cake, he should place that in the western half of his ladle.
2.19.3	The first portion of the first half should be given to the eldest son, or to one who has lost his wealth.
2.19.4	The first portion of the second half should be given for the youngest son, or to the one who is the youngest, or to one desiring to be so.
2.19.5	If a priest or one desiring to be a priest were to offer, he should take the first portion from the first half and place the ladle in the first half of the fire and offer.
2.19.6	Having poured the ladles, he pours them back, saying, "What ladles you have poured, I have poured in the reverse order for myself. I have anointed it with clarified butter. May that be replenished again." Having poured the oblation back, he says, "To Agni, announce!" and "Sacrifice to Agni!" are the two instructions.
2.19.7	Having poured the clarified butter, he pours it back, as if not to spill it. Having offered, he anoints with clarified butter.
2.19.8	He offers oblations with the distinction of pouring libations.
2.19.9	He offers the oblations with the ladle, each time offering a different portion of the oblation.
2.19.10	He should offer oblations with the mind to the one whom he hates.
2.19.11	When the fire is without flames and seems to be flickering, then he offers oblations.
2.19.12	The Upāṁśuyāja with ghee as the oblation is performed at the full-moon sacrifice, either dedicated to Viṣṇu or to Agni-Soma or to Prajāpati.
2.19.13	The Upāṁśuya is indeed the principal (sacrifice).
2.19.14	One who desires to prosper should offer to Viṣṇus.
2.20.1	One who has an enemy should offer to Agni-Soma.
2.20.2	One should proceed with the subsequent oblations as prescribed for the respective deities, beginning with the Āgneya.
2.20.3	Having united the two milk-offerings.
2.20.4	Having cooked the curd, he offers it with the ladle. This is the opposite of the above. All the liquid offerings are made with the ladle.
2.20.5	At the full moon and new moon sacrifices, we offer to the bull, the horse, the full moon. May it bestow on us abundant prosperity, a thousandfold, for the breath, for the Suradhas, for the full moon. Svāhā! At the new moon: May it bestow on the breath, for Suradhas, the new moon, for the new moon. Svāha! At the new-moon sacrifice: The new moon is auspicious, well-favored, like a cow, ever increasing. May it bestow abundant prosperity, a thousands-fold, for the out-breath, for Suradhis, for the new-moon, for the newmoon. Svāhā!
2.20.6	He offers the most excellent oblations. The ten forms of the sacrifice are the divine ones. May the sacrificer gratify them with ghee. The one who is praised in the most excellent oblation, the divine one of the gods, became immortal. The gods appointed you as your share of strength, O Indra, the hundred-powered one. This is what he gratifies you with, may you be satisfied with it. O Indra and Agni, I am the one who performs the good deeds of the gods in this world. May this be pleasing to me, and may there be no enmity. I offer to you, O Indra and Agni. The wise one knows that Indra has assigned a share to you both. O Soma, be a giver of wealth in this sacrifice. O Maruts, be kind to us. May we not be known for our evil deeds. May we not know the enmity of those who hate us.
2.21.1	The Brahman is the foundation of the mind, the Brahman is the speech, the Brahman is of the sacrifices, the oblation, the ghee, the excess of the rite, and what is deficient. The sacrifice is the joints, the one who is arranging, the Svāhā-offered oblation goes to the gods. I place your mind in your mind, your breath in your breath. I place your Vyāna and Apāna in you. The sacrificer, having grasped, becomes immortal. May you be well to the two-footed and the four-footed. Svāhā. With these mantras, one by one.
2.21.2	This is the time for the Upāṃśus, either immediately after the principal offering or before the Samitsya-yajus.
2.21.3	Having spread the Juhu, he offers the Sviṣṭakṛt oblation once from the northern half of all the oblations. The oblations are offered five times.
2.21.4	The deities, Sauviṣṭakrt, Eḍa and Cāturdhārika, the latter is superior to the former.
2.21.5	He pours twice, and does not pour back the oblation.
2.21.6	"Having recited the Anubrūha formula, "To Agni Svishtakrit," and "I offer to Agni Svishtakrt," he offers in the northern half of the eastern half, without mixing with the other oblations.
2.21.7	Having returned, having brought the ladle, he offers this oblation to Vaisvānara Agni, the thousand-fold, hundred-streamed, the father, grandfather, great-grandfather, nourishing in the heavenly world, with Svāhā. He places it within the boundary. He places it.
3.1.1	Some recite the Ida first, some the Prasitra.
3.1.2-3	Having cut off the Agniya cake, either lengthwise or across, and having arranged it with the thumb and the middle finger, he offers the Prasitra from the middle, of the size of a barley-corn or a pepper-corn, for the sake of the ghee. From the size of a grain of barley, it should be done. This is for the sake of Ruru. The pure and well-offered oblation is for the sake of the sacrifice. In the same way, he offers the northern one.
3.1.4	Having spread (the grass) he pours over it. This is the contrary (to the proper way). Or he spreads and pours over it.
3.1.5	Here itself some prescribe the taking of the grass and eating.
3.1.6	Having spread the ladle for Idā, he divides the Idā from all the oblations, either in four or five portions.
3.1.7-9	The oblation of the Agniya cake is taken from the right half, beginning with the first portion, and then the second portion is taken from the junction. The oblation of the Yajamana is taken from the left half, being small and long.
3.1.10	Having offered it with ghee, he offers it to Dhruva.
3.1.11	Or, having taken the share of the sacrificer from the southern half, then from the junction.
3.1.12	In this way, he offers to the northern half.
3.2.1	Having poured ghee over it, having given it to the Hotṛ, he goes around the Hotṛ on the right, not letting go.
3.2.2	The Hotṛ takes the Adhvaryu by the ladle.
3.2.3	Or, having removed the Ida towards the east, he sits towards the south and anoints the joint of the Hotṛ's finger with the spoon.
3.2.4	Having anointed the other, he anoints this one first. This is the opposite.
3.2.5	Sitting towards the east, with water sprinkled, he offers the Ida in the Hotṛ' s hand, between the Ida and the Ida.
3.2.6	The Adhvaryu first offers the oblation, the Hotṛ himself the second. This is the reverse order.
3.2.7	The sprinkling, spreading and pouring of melted butter are done.
3.2.8	The Adhvaryu and the sacrificer, having known that the divine Adhvaryus have been invoked, recite the formula, "May I become one who possesses cattle." The sacrificer, having recognised that this sacrificer has been invoked, recites the same formula.
3.2.9	Having offered the oblation to Agni, he offers the oblation to Brahman.
3.2.10	Having offered the oblation, the Hotṛ eats the remnant in the Aṅgiras-vessel, saying, "I eat the oblation offered to Vācaspati, I eat the oblation to Sadaspati."
3.3.2	Having sprinkled himself with water on the Prāstara grass within the altar with the formula, "May the mind enjoy the light", he divides the cake for Agni into four parts. Having made it to be seated on the sacrificial grass, he divides it into four parts.
3.3.3	The sacrificer directs it thus: "This is for the Brahman, this is for the Hotṛ, this is for Adhvaryu, this is for Agnidh."
3.3.4-7	The Adhvaryu, having indicated the share of the sacrificer, prepares the largest portion for the Agnidhra, with six portions. Having spread once, he puts twice, having spread twice, he pours twice. Or he spreads twice, puts twice, and pours twice.
3.3.8	The Agnidhra takes the portion of Agni with the formula, "Thou art the Agnidhra of Agni, thou art the Shamitra of Agni. Obeisance to thee. Do not injure me."
3.3.9	He takes the portions of Veda and Brahma with the formula,
3.3.10	separately with two vessels.
3.3.11	The Hotṛ consumes it with the formula, "Thou art the share of Pṛthivī." The Adhvaryu with the formula, “Thou art the share for Antarikṣa." The Brahman with the formula, "Thou art the share in heaven."
3.3.12	He cooks the great and unlimited rice-pap in the southern fire.
3.3.13	Some say that it is cooked in milk.
3.3.14	Having poured it down, having or not having poured it down, he places it within the altar.
3.4.1	He instructs them to bring the oblations from the south.
3.4.2	The sacrificer tells the Brahmanas seated in the north, "They are in the south."
3.4.3	He gives them the Anvähärya rice, saying, "This is the rice for the Brahmanas."
3.4.4	He instructs them to take it from the north and place it in the south.
3.4.5	Having placed the remnants of the oblations in the ladle, having sprinkled water, having placed the kindling wood, having placed the sacrificial grass, having placed the firewood, having placed the fire-wood, having placed the Agnihotra-vessel, having placed the ladle, having placed the spoon, having placed the potsherd, having placed the strainer, having placed the wooden sword, having placed the two ladles, having placed the Darbha-grass, having placed the water-pot, having placed the vessel for the remnants of the Soma-juice, having placed the Soma-vessel, having sprinkled water on the Soma-vessel and the vessel for the Soma-juice and having placed them, having placed the vessels for the Soma-juices, having placed the cup for the Soma-pressers, having placed the cups for the Soma-drinkers, having placed two cups for the Soma, having placed the Sruk, having placed the Upabhṛt, having placed the Dhṛ
3.4.6	Agni-dhrā, having been permitted by Brahma, places the kindling-wood. This is your kindling-wood, O Agni. By it may you grow and increase. May your lord of sacrifice grow and increase. And may we grow and increase. Svāhā.
3.4.7	As before, he touches the enclosing sticks once each, saying, "O Agni, winner of prizes, I touch thee, the winner of prizes, the winner of the prize, the winner of horses, the winner of horse-prizes, for winning the prize. I touch Agni, the eater of food, for eating food." Once he touches Agni facing east.
3.4.8	Having touched the bundles of wood with water, he says, "May Rudra, the lord of beings, the bull, the wanderer of the strings, not harm our cattle. May this be offered to you. Svāhā!" He strikes the fire or places it in a heap, in a shed, in a cowpen, or in a cow-pen.
3.5.1	Having brought the Upabhṛt ladle to the Juhu, having taken it in the Juhu and Upabhṛti, having gone once beyond the Aghamarasa, he offers three Anuyājas towards the west, instructing at each invocation, "Do you offer to the gods." He instructs first, then the other two.
3.5.2	In the first half of the sacrifice, he offers the first oblation, in the middle the second oblation facing east, and in the end he establishes the third oblation, uniting the other two.
3.5.3	Having returned, he places the ladles in their places and arranges them with the Vājavatī verses.
3.5.4	With the force of the horse, he lifts up the Juhu with the right hand, stretched out, with the stones. Then with the left hand he holds the Upamant with the formula, "My enemies."
3.5.5	He lifts up the Juhū with the formula, “Udgṛbhaṃ ca” and holds the Upamantra with the formula, ”Nigrābhaṃ ca.”
3.5.6	The gods have increased through Brahman, he pushes the Juhū towards the east.
3.5.7	Then, having taken the Upabhṛt ladle in the left hand, having thrown it outside the altar towards the west, having sprinkled it, having taken it up, he anoints the enclosing sticks with the Juhu ladle, saying, "For the Vasus thee" (to the middle one), "For the Rudras thee" (to that on the right), "For the Adityas thee" (to one on the left).
3.5.8	He does not place the Juhu ladle on the Prastara.
3.5.9	May the heaven and earth, Mitra and Varuna, bless you with rain. Having taken up the sacrificial grass with the two Vadhriti ladles, having placed the sacrificial grass on the sacrificial grass, having besmeared the ladle with clarified butter, he anoints the sacrificial grass.
3.6.1	"The flowing waters" (he says) on the Juhu, "the womb of offspring" on the Upasthya, "the plants are swelling" on the Dhruva. Thus thrice.
3.6.2	"Or in the sky" (he says), "in the sky" on the Juhu; "in the atmosphere" on the Uprasthya; "on the earth" on the Dhuruva.
3.6.3	Thus again.
3.6.4	Then the other (verse), "To thee, O Earth!" in the Dhruva; "To thee, the Ether!" in the Upabṛt; "To thee the Heaven!" in the Juhu.
3.6.5	Having taken up the grass for the purpose of life, having placed it in a known place, having taken up the Prastara with the right and left hands, having placed it on the Juhu, having sat down after being summoned, having been summoned back, having been ordered, having been requested, the divine Hotr-s are requested to recite the auspicious verses, and the human one is requested to recite the Sukta.
3.6.6	When the Sūktavāka is being recited, he strikes the fire-altar with the Prāstara, along with the branch, saying, "O Maruts, ye are the spotted ones."
3.6.7	He does not offer with Svāhā.
3.6.8	He does not shake, does not shake down, does not scatter, does not wipe, does not wipe back, does not wipe along, does not strike with a raised hand.
3.6.9	Holding the hand horizontally, as if drawing, he strikes the Havaniya.
3.6.10	It is said that he does not accept it.
3.6.11	Having spread it, he should strike the one whom he desires to be his wife.
3.6.12	He releases the fire-wood towards the east.
3.7.1	Turning his left hand.
3.7.2	He instructs, "Agni, lead (us)."
3.7.3	Three times Agnidh holds the Prastara upright, without bending it, with the formula, "May Agni, the deity, go to the deity." With each formula.
3.7.4	Then Agnidh says to him, "Strike it."
3.7.5	He strikes the grass that has fallen from the Prastara with the formula, “Svāhā to the bodies."
3.7.6	Having pointed to the fire three times with the index finger, he recites, "O Agni, you are the protector of life. Protect my life."
3.7.7	"Be firm," he touches the earth within the altar.
3.7.8	Then the Agnidhra says, "Speak."
3.7.9	The Adhvaryu says, "The Agni has gone." The Agnidhra says, "It has gone." The Adhvaryyu says, "Let it be proclaimed." The Agnidhre says, "Let us hear."
3.7.10	Starting from the middle enclosing stick, he instructs, "Svaga to the divine Hotṛs, welfare to the human beings. Do you say 'Syama'?"
3.7.11	When the Syama-vaka is being recited, he throws the enclosing sticks into the Ahavaniya.
3.7.12	The middle one is the one which you have girt around. The other two are the paths of the sacrifice which have been traversed.
3.7.13	He places the tip of the northern half on the embers.
3.7.14	Having recited the formula, "The sacrificer shines forth," and having placed the tip of the ladle and the tip of the Upabhṛt on the ladle, he offers with the Saṃsrava-oblation with the formula, "For the share in the Saṃsravas."
3.7.15	Here only the priests consume the remnants of the oblations.
3.8.1	The Adhvaryu takes the Veda, the Hotṛ the wooden sword, the Ājyā-vessel and the water-pot. The Agnidhra takes the ladle.
3.8.2	Going towards the east, they proceed to offer the oblations to the wives.
3.8.3	The Adhvaryu stands to the south of the Garhapatya, the Hotṛ to the north of him.
3.8.4	Having placed the two ladles on the two supports, he says, "May the two be placed on the yoke and the yoke-end." He places them on the yoke and yoke-end.
3.8.5	If one were to offer in a vessel, one should place the two ladles in the two supports with these two formulas.
3.8.6	The wives are consecrated with the two ladles or with the two spoons.
3.8.7	Having taken up the Veda, some perform the offering with the Juhu and Sruva.
3.8.8	Sitting facing the Gārhapatya, they offer to the wives with a loud or low voice.
3.8.9	The Adhvaryu is on the right, the Agnidhra on the left, and the Hotṛ in the middle.
3.8.10	Having offered to Soma and Tvashtra with ghee, they offer to their wives with the thigh bone or with ghee as taken up.
3.8.11	"He offers the Soma in the northern half, with the two injunctions, 'Recite to Soma, offer to Soma.'
3.8.12	In the same way, Tvashtar.
3.9.1	'The wives of the gods, Agni, the householder.'
3.9.2	Tvashtar to the south or north, Agni, the Householder, in the middle.
3.9.3	The wives of the Gods on the periphery of the Ahavaniya or on the periphery of Agni."
3.9.4	One desiring a son should sacrifice to Raka, one desiring cattle to Sinivali, and one desiring prosperity to Kuhū.
3.9.5	Some recite them as always.
3.9.6	Some recite these goddesses of the gods in front or above.
3.9.7	The Hotṛ, as before, touches the joints of his fingers, and then, having touched water, he offers four drops of clarified butter on the Hotṛ's hand. The Agnīdhra offers six.
3.9.8	The Adhvaryu, the Agnīdhra, and the wife join in the invocation.
3.9.9	The Hotṛ and the Agnīdhara eat the invoked oblation.
3.9.10	Here he offers with the ladle, when the wife has begun to follow, saying, "May the wife and husband go together in good deeds, may they be united in the yoke of sacrifice, may they know each other, may they cast off evil, may they attain the eternal light in heaven, svāhā."
3.9.11-12	Some people offer this oblation in front of the goddesses. One should offer the oblations of flour and fruit on the upper or lower part of the fire. Having placed the fire-wood and ashes on the southern fire, one offers the oblations of dough and fruit.
3.10.1	The Homa of the Phalikarana is done first, or this (Homa) may be done in the reverse order. Having taken four spoonfuls of clarified butter, he offers with the formula, "To Agni, the unvanquished, the uninjured, the unhurt." In this way he offers the paste of flour, the pestle, the mortar, the chaff, the winnowing basket, the stone, the potsherd, the drops of water, the drops of oil. "I offer the drops of water and the drops of oil together. May all the Viśve Devas accept this oblation. Whatever drops there are in the sacrifice, all those drops, offered in Agni, I offer them all, well-offered, svāhā."
3.10.2	To Sarasvati who is the bestower of beauty, svāhā. To Sarasvati who bestows beauty, svāha. At the Indra-Upānas, make the minds of the people beautiful and good, svāha." He offers separately with each mantra in the southern fire.
3.10.3	"He says, "You are the Veda." The Hotṛ priest places the Veda on the wife's lap and recites it three times.
3.10.4	He drives away the one who hates and causes harm, and the one who is going away, and the one going away, he drives back.
3.10.5	The Hotṛ, while spreading the thread, says "spreading the thread" after having moved from the Garhapatya and spreading continuously from the Āhavanīya.
3.10.6	The wife releases the yoke-rope, saying "I am spreading this."
3.10.7	For her, he brings a full vessel in the palm of the hand that is yoked.
3.10.8	"May I be united with life, may I be united with offspring." He recites this while bringing (the fire).
3.10.9	Having taken the fire, he stands up, saying, "May I be prosperous, having cattle, having offspring, a householder."
3.11.1	Having gone back to the Āhavanīya fire, he offers all the expiations with the Juhu ladle or the Sruva ladle.
3.11.2	"Brahma is the support of the mind." This is the invocation. The invocation is excessive, the Vasat-utterance is excessive, the Anusavana is excessive. Whatever rite is excessive or deficient in the sacrifice, the sacrifice is the boundary. The one who makes it up, the oblation offered with Svāhā, may go to the gods. Whatever you, O gods, have transgressed, the striving of the gods, the enemies have attacked us with excessive anger. O Maruts, throw him away from us. The waters are spread out there. That is spread out again. The most delightful thought is praised for prosperity. This ocean is indeed the remedy for all. May they be satisfied with the Svāhā-offered. We have risen above darkness. O Varuna, this bright one. I seek you. You are Agni. You are Agni, the one who has not gone, the one who is not going, the one who was brought by the mind. The one who is not gone, the carrier of the offering, the one who does not go, bestow healing on us. Whatever has gone wrong in this sacrifice, whether through mantras or rites, by this unoffered oblation, I appease it all. May all the gods be satisfied and be sprinkled with ghee.
3.12.1	What is known and what is unknown, what is approved and what is not approved, Agni, you know the truth. You know how it is. What he did not do, what he did not do not, what he did too much, what he did less than, Agni, the well-knower, may he make all that which is well-offered and well-sacrificed. What he did too much or too little in this rite, Agni, the knower, may he do all that which is welloffered and well-sacrifices. From that we are afraid of you, O Indra, make us free from fear. O Maghavan, be gracious to us for that. Destroy the enemies and foes. The lord of the house, the slayer of Vrtra, the subduer, the powerful, the bull, Indra, may he come to us, the giver of welfare, the bestower of freedom from fear. By these hymns, whatever is deficient, may it be increased, O giver of wealth, growing. When you are the most generous among the singers, may we be the most generous among those who receive. What is unknown and what is known, what is done in the sacrifice, Agni, you arrange it. You know how things are. The sacrifice is the size of a man, the man is the size of the sacrifice. Agni, you arrange his size. You know how he is. Those mortals who, with their minds bent down, do not understand the sacrifice, Agni knows that, the Hotṛ, the knower of rites, the most sacrificable one, sacrifices to the gods in due order. Whatever the wise and the unwise priests do, Agni, may the goddess of faith and the goddess of truth release me from that.
3.13.1	O Agni, the knower of all, the inner one, the first, sitting before us, may he release the released, may he release us. O Agni, the giver of wealth, may we obtain the good. O Varuna, if there are a hundred of yours, if there are thousands of yours, the yokeable nooses spread out in many ways, may Indra, Savitar, and Vishnu, all the gods, the Maruts, release us. O you who are awake among beings, Agni, be awake and rise up. Having offered with the Vyahrtis, which are the statements, and with all the Samstas.
3.13.2	Having filled the Dhruva vessel as before, the priests who know the path of the gods, standing above the altar, offer the Samishtayajus along with the Dhruva.
3.13.3	At the middle "svāhā" sound, he strikes the sacrificial grass.
3.13.4	If the sacrificer has to go away, he should offer the sacrificer's share in the Dhruva, having placed it aside, along with the Samishtayajas, saying, "This is the world named Vibhan of Prajapati."
3.13.5	Spread the altar, encircle it, do not injure the sacrificial grass, lying down in the proper place. The golden, green sacrificial grass-blades are the seats of the Hotṛ. These are the seats of sacrifice. Having spread the altar with the seats of the Hotr, he releases them, saying, "Who will bind you? May he release you." Having placed the sacrificial grass within the altar, he releases it.
3.13.6	The gods placed the garment of the dead on the dead. Those who are not of our mind, may they be here for us. May the garment of the deceased be for us, may it be for our offspring, for our prosperity, and for our wealth. May the two-footed and the four-footed be for us, firm and not departing. He places the garment of the departed in front, on the mound, on the elder one.
3.14.1	If he should perform the rite of the black garment, let him reach the one whom we hate." Then he strikes him with the name.
3.14.2	"Drive him away from the house, the enemy who attacks, with the oblation of the one to be driven away, may Indra drive him away. Go to the three beyond, go to the five beyond the people, go to the three beyond the bright ones, as far as the sun is in heaven. May Indra, the slayer of Vrtra, lead you to the highest beyond, from which you will not return, to the eternal seasons. He is slain, he is driven away, he is bound." With these five (verses) one should drive him away, or bury him.
3.14.3	"Let the arrow, released, fall on the enemy, sharpened by Brahman. Go to the enemies, enter them, let none of them be left."
3.14.4	With the four-footed verse "The skulls in the summer," he releases the skulls and scatters them.
3.14.5	The Darsha-Pūrnamāsa sacrifices are concluded.
3.14.6	He should place the Samyu-mantra at the Garhapatya, the Iḍa-mantra at Vāhavānīya, the Iḷa-mantra again at the Garhaptya, and the Samyu-mantra at the Vāhavān̄īya.
3.14.7	If the Śamyuvaka is at the end, then taking grass from the Veda, one should anoint the tip of the ladle, the middle of the spoon, the root in the vessel of clarified butter. Its arrangement is like the Prastara. From the Śamyuvāka.
3.14.8	One desiring heaven should perform the Darsha-Pūrnamāsa.
3.14.9	One desiring one thing or all things.
3.14.10	One should desire simultaneously or separately.
3.14.11	One should offer to them for as long as one lives.
3.14.12	Or for thirty years.
3.14.13	Or one should desist when old.
3.14.14	One should offer two full-moon sacrifices and two new-moon sacrifices if one desires to prosper. Having said this, one should offer only one.
3.15.1	Having established the full-moon sacrifice, one offers a cake on eleven potshards to Indra-Vauma-Ridiha.
3.15.2	Some people recite the Sama Veda in the same way.
3.15.3	It is regulated by the order of the procedure, as one wishes.
3.15.4	The sacrifice with seventeen oblations, with Dakṣiṇā according to one's faith.
3.15.5	"O Agni, be thou eager for great prosperity. Let thy most brilliant rays be foremost. Make the lordship of the sacrifice thine own. Stand forth against the enemies. Thou art the great one. Thou art the one who is to be worshipped. Thou art the lord of the sacrifice. Thou art the king. Thou art the supreme lord. Thou art the highest lord. Thou art Agni. Thou art the fire. Thou art the Agni. Thou art Agni."
3.15.6	He offers the Ekadashakapa Agni-Soma oblation on the full moon day, the oblation of ghee to Aditya, the oblation to Sarasvati, the oblation for Pusha and the Ekadashaka pa oblation to Indra on the new moon day. On the new moon day and the full moon day he offers to the one who has an enemy or to the one who is practising sorcery.
3.15.7	He should offer a cake to Indra, the protector, as the second oblation, if he fears death or if he is afraid of death. The fee is a goat.
3.15.8	One desiring offspring, cattle, or progeny should offer an oblation of Indra, the lord of strength, on eleven potsherds.
3.15.9	One should perform this oblation.
3.15.10	Or the other two.
3.15.11	One should offer this oblation if one is in doubt.
3.16.1	He should offer to Indra Vāimṛdha.
3.16.2	He should not hear or speak. He should offer to Indrā-Aho-Muci.
3.16.3	He who has an enemy should offer to Indra-Vṛtratura.
3.16.4	He who is not troubled by anyone should offer to Indra alone.
3.16.5	One who has an enemy should perform this Iṣṭi after having established the Full-moon sacrifice. He should offer a cake on eleven potsherds to Agni-Viṣṇu, a cooked rice-ball to Sarasvatī and a cooked rice-bal to Sarasvata.
3.16.6	One who has an enemy, should offer the Full-moon (sacrifice).
3.16.7	One performs the Pitryajña at the New-moon.
3.16.8	The Vajra is transferred to the brother's enemy, so it is known.
3.16.9	The Trivarga is transferred to the new moon.
3.16.10	The Agniṣomīya sacrifices should be the principal ones at the new moon and full moon for one who has a brother's enemy or for one who is practising sorcery.
3.16.11	One should perform the Sākamprathasthīya sacrifice for one desiring cattle, so it is said at the new moon.
3.16.12-16	Two milking sessions are in the evening, and two in the morning. They proceed with the evening milking sessions in the evening, with the morning milking sessions in the morning. Or all in the morning. At the time of preparing the vessels, he prepares four vessels of Udumbara wood. Their shape is like that of the Juhu vessel.
3.16.17	Having offered the two Ajya-portions and the cake to Agni, having given the two ladles to the Agnidhra, and having advanced with the pots, he says, "O Indra, do thou proclaim; let the Indra be invoked." These are the two announcements.
3.17.1	As many pitchers as there are, so many Brahmins, wearing the sacred thread on the right shoulder, having risen, fill the vessels from the pitchers and offer oblations to the Adhvaryu who is offering.
3.17.2	There is no Svishtakrit offering and no Bhaksas.
3.17.3	From here onwards the performance is common. The Sākamprathasthāyin is concluded.
3.17.4	One desiring heaven performs the Dākṣāyaṇi sacrifice.
3.17.5	One should perform two Full-Moon sacrifices and two New-Moon sacrifices.
3.17.6-7	The Agniya offering of cooked rice on eight potsherds, the Agnisomiya offering of cooked rice of barley on eleven potsherds, and the offering of cooked rice to Agni and Soma on eleven potsher ds are offered at the first full moon. The Agniya offering on eight potsher ds, the offering of curds to Indra, and the offering to Agni and Indra on eleven potsherbs are offered at the second full moon. The offering of cooked rice for Agni on eight potsherbs, the offering of cooked barley to Mitra and Varuna, and the offering for Agni and Indra on eight potsher bs are offered at the third full moon. The Agn iya offering on eight potshe rds, the offering of milk to Mitra and Varupa, and the offering on eight potshers are offered at the fourth full moon. The offerings of cooked rice to Indra on eight potsherd s, the offering of curd to Indra, and that to Indra on eleven potshers are made at the first new moon. The offering to Agni on eight potshards, the offering of barley to Indra, and to Agni and Indra are made at the second new moon. The offerings to Agni on eight potshe rb s, the offering to Mitra and Varua, and to Agni on eight po tshers are made on the third new moon.
3.17.8	One should approach one's wife during the seasons.
3.17.9	This is the option in the sequence of the Darśa-Pūrṇamāsa sacrifices. One should offer the Darśa and Pūrṇamāasa sacrifices.
3.17.10	Having performed them for fifteen years, one should stop or offer them.
3.17.11	The Dakṣāyaṇa sacrifice is concluded.
3.17.12	The sacrifices of Nīda, Sārvasenī, Vasiṣṭha, and Śaunaka are explained by this.
3.18.1	The Brahman is the best among Brahmans.
3.18.2	He chooses him, saying, "O Lord of the Earth, O Lord of the World, O Lord of Great Beings, I choose you as Brahman."
3.18.3	Having been chosen, he mutters:
3.18.4	I am the lord of the earth, I am the lord over the world, I am the ruler of the great being. I shall perform the priestly duties with the blessing of Savitr, the divine Savitr. I choose you, O Brihaspati, the divine Brahman. That I tell to the mind. The mind to the Gayatri. The Gayatri to the Tristubh. The Tristubh to the Jagati. The Jagati to the Anushtubh. The Anushtubh to the Pankti. The Pankti to Prajapati. Prajapati to the All-gods. The All-gods to Brihaspati. Brihaspati to Brahman. Brahman to the earth, the heaven, and the sky. Brihaspati is the Brahman of the gods. I am the Brahman of men. Having said, "O Brihaspati, protect the sacrifice," he goes around the Ahavaniya from the right side and stands facing the east. Having removed the grass from the Brahman seat, he says, "This I sow in the lower seat. May we sit in the seat of the one who is sown. Blessed by Savitr, the god, I sit in the seat belonging to Brihaspati." That he tells to Agni, that to Vayu, that to Surya, that to the earth. He sits down.
3.18.5	He stands facing the Ahavaniya fire.
3.18.6	He restrains his speech at a rite or in a rite.
3.18.7	In rites where mantras are used, he may speak as he pleases. In rites where there is silence, he should be silent.
3.18.8	If he speaks out of carelessness, he should restrain his speech after reciting the Vaisnawi verse and the Vyahrtis.
3.18.9	When asked, "Brahman, I am going to offer water,"
3.19.1	O God, you increase the sacrifice. May the sacrificer be on the back of heaven. Where is the world of the seven sages and good deeds, there place this sacrifice and the sacrificer. Oṃ, Prāṇaya, you are praised.
3.19.2	In all invitations, this is the praise. By that rite, in which one invites.
3.19.3	"Sprinkle the sacrifice." (The Adhvaryu) sprinkles the sacrificial grass and the sacrificial grass-blades. "O Brihaspati, do thou enclose the Vedi." "May the seats of the gods be auspicious." "May the sacrificial grass spread on it." "May the earth, the divine one, be harmless to us." (Thus) at the second enclosing. "O Prajapati, do thou proclaim the sacrifice." (Thus) when the Samidhenis are about to be recited. "O Vacaspati, do thou announce the speech. Do thou announce this." "Do thou announce the sacrifice among the gods, not among men." (Thus) in the Pravara.
3.19.4	"May the deity increase you." He follows this everywhere.
3.19.5	"He looks at the meat being cut with, 'I look at you with the eye of Mitra.'
3.19.6	"He looks around with, 'Go along the path of truth.' He says, 'I see you with the eye (of Mitra) of Surya,' when it is being brought.
3.19.7	Having taken it with the Savitrī verse, he places it on the navel of the earth, on the place of Ida. Having arranged the grass within the altar with the handle towards the east, having looked at it with the verse beginning with "With the uninjured eye" and with the Savitrî verse, having taken it with the thumb and the middle finger, he eats it with the verse, "I eat thee with the mouth of Agni, with the belly of the Brahman, with the belly, O Indra, I place thee with the belly of Brhaspati." He eats it without vomiting.
3.20.1	The deities in the waters, may they pacify this oblation offered with "Svāhā". Go to Indra's belly, offered with "Svāhâ". Having sipped water and rinsed, he touches the navel region, saying, "May you not touch my belly. Let it be below my navel. I place you in Indra's belly."
3.20.2	"May my speech be near me" - he touches the limbs according to their sequence.
3.20.3	The remaining ones are called "Arista" and "Vishvani".
3.20.4	Having washed the vessel and filled it, he offers it to the directions, saying "May the directions be pleased." He then offers it to the supreme deity.
3.20.5	He then offers it to himself, saying "May I be pleased."
3.20.6	When the Brahmana portion is brought to him, he receives it and eats it before it becomes stale.
3.20.7	"O Brahman, you are Brahman. You are called Brahman. Do not injure me. May I be auspicious to you. The one who is near the Anvāhārya rice within the altar, touches it."
3.20.8	When it is said, "O Brahman, we are about to depart," the god Savitar says this to you. May you prosper and may you sacrifice. Brihaspati is the Brahman. Protect the sacrifice, protect the lord of sacrifice, protect me. Om, to the established one, he sends forth.
3.20.9	Earth has gone to earth, the mother has gone to the mother. May we be with sons and cattle. He who hates us, let him be split. Whatever made of clay is broken at the sacrifice, one should recite this mantra over it.
3.20.10	Having eaten the portion of Brahman, Agni, the knower of beings, may he lead us. May he be gracious to us. May he unite us with good intentions and with strength. Having approached the Ahavaniya fire, he goes back as he came.
3.20.11	Thus is the Brahmanhood of the animal sacrifice prescribed.
4.1.1	We shall explain the Yajamana.
4.1.2	The vow of celibacy of the sacrificer, the giving of Dakṣiṇā, the allocation of wealth, and the desire for desires.
4.1.3	He recites mantras with the wish for oneself, attends to the performance of rites, and pronounces the benediction.
4.1.4	On a festival day, he shaves his head and beard.
4.1.5	Some shave even a few hairs. This is according to the Vājasaneya school.
4.1.6	"Thou art lightning; thou hast driven away the evil. I approach the truth from the truth." Thus one who is about to perform a sacrifice touches water.
4.1.7	This touching of water is common to all sacrifices.
4.1.8	I take Agni, the swift, who is the same as Maya, who mounts the rising sun, the Aditya, the supreme light of lights, for the delight of the sacrifice and the deities. The Vasus, Rudras, Adityas, together with Indra, the deities, I take them first in their own abode with my mind. These deities, the fifteen deities of energy, who have entered here, I take them all first. May Agni, the bearer of oblations, bring them here. This full-moon offering of theirs is in me. This new-moon offering of them is in me. He recites as per the prescribed order when the Ahavaniya is being placed on the Garhapatya.
4.1.9	The animals, the intermediate fires, have come to the assembly of the gods. I take them in my own abode, according to my will. Standing between the intermediate fires, he recites this.
4.1.10	Here may the creatures of all forms delight, dwelling together with Agni, the Householder. I take them in first, in my own place, with my mind. Here may the animals of all forms delight... I take them in... with my mind. This is the Garhapatya.
4.2.1	This is the fire of the Pitrs. The Pitrs have placed it in the Dhva. I take it first, may it make us free from disease. The fire of the Dakshina, the constant one, the guardian of the assembly, the one who shares in victory, may he kindle you for shining, O Agni, for victory in the assembly, for a hundred autumns. The fire of assembly, the one in the house, may it bring you food for a hundred autums. May the serpent, the one in water, restrain the speech. The fire of house.
4.2.2	This I proclaim as the sacrifice to the Vasus, the eldest of whom is Agni. This I proclaim as sacrifice to the Rudras, the eldest of which is Indra. This I proclaim to the Adityas, the eldest of them being Varuna. He recites this while the Anvita-s are reciting.
4.2.3	The plants are rich in milk. This is what the husband and wife who have brought the grass before the sacrifice eat before the calves. They eat on the new-moon day.
4.2.4	Those who are going to fast for the full-moon day should not be too hungry.
4.2.5	They should eat a meal of beans and milk, or if that is not available, with curd and milk.
4.2.6	He undertakes the vow of the full-moon sacrifice when the calves are driven away and the new-moon sacrifice when they are brought back.
4.2.7	When the oblations are being brought in or are about to be brought in, he undertakes the vow. This is common to both.
4.2.8	Some say that the meal, the kindling of the fire, and the offering of the vow are the three. Some say that the offering of the meal, the vow, and the kindling of fire are the three. Others say that the kindling of fires, the offering of the vows, and the meal are the three.
4.2.9	He sips water with the verse, "May the plants be rich in milk." He touches water.
4.2.10	He goes around the Ahavaniya fire from the right side.
4.2.11	This is the way of the sacrificer from now onwards.
4.3.1	Standing to the right of the sacrificial fire, about to undertake the vow, he meditates on the ocean mentally.
4.3.2	Then he recites: "O Agni, lord of vows, I shall undertake the vow." A brahmin says this. "O Vayu, lord of vows; O Aditya, lord of vows. I shall undertake the vows of the vow-holders." A kshatriya or vaishya says this.
4.3.3	Or all to a Brāhmaṇa.
4.3.4	Then he worships the sun, saying, "Thou art the overlord, thou art the guardian of vows, thou art the lord of vows. I tell thee this, I am able to do this, by that may I succeed."
4.3.5	If one were to undertake the vow after sunset, he should recite this formula while standing near the Āhavanīya fire.
4.3.6	Both the fires are spread out. The deities may be present. I am observing fast for the village. The cattle are for me, the cattle-keeper. Having spread out in the evening, he mutters:
4.3.7	One eats the forest-food in the evening, without pulses and meat.
4.3.8	Or one may eat as much as one likes, from the path, from honey, from the Prashatika.
4.3.9	Or one drinks water or nothing at all.
4.3.10	He should not eat in the evening what he is going to eat in the morning.
4.3.11	One who is going to spend the night in the forest eats water or not.
4.3.12	One who has been bitten by a snake should say, "May Daksha be in me."
4.3.13	One should keep awake during the night of the new moon.
4.3.14	Or one may sleep, but not on the upper part.
4.3.15	Or one should sleep on the upper part, but one should be a celibate.
4.3.16	Some people prescribe keeping awake at both places.
4.3.17	One should sleep in the Āhavanīya or Gārhapatya house.
4.4.1	O gods, may you be the foremost among the gods, the second among the second, the third among the third. May the eleven come here. May I be able to do this. May the self do this for the self. I shall do this remedy. This is my remedy. The two Asvins have brought this. Having recited this, on the next day he chooses the Brahman.
4.4.2	O Lord of the Earth, O Lord of the World, O Lord of Great Beings, I choose you as Brahma. Having said this, he goes around the Ahavaniya fire from the right side and sits down.
4.4.3	The sacrificer goes around first and then the others.
4.4.4	Earth, Water, Speech, Wheel, Cow, Banyan, Space, Smoke, Wind, Fire, and the Goddesses of the Ten Directions, who have pervaded this entire universe, may they lead us to prosperity, knowing the sacrifice. May the goddesses who are purified by Brahma, who are connected with all desires, who flow forth in front, above, and from all sides, may they lead me to prosperity with their rays and purifying (waters). When the offerings are being taken forward, he recites: "I am taking forward the offerings." When he is told, "I am offering the oblations," he permits it loudly.
4.4.5	When the oblation is being offered, he recites, "We invoke Agni, the Hotar, here."
4.4.6	He either touches the vessel in which the oblation is poured or recites over it.
4.4.7	Then, having recited, he restrains speech.
4.4.8	Then he yokes the sacrifice.
4.4.9	He examines the entire sacrificial ground, reciting, "Who yokes you? May he yoke you."
4.5.1	The young woman with four locks of hair, well-formed, resembling ghee, in the middle of the world, being rubbed for great good fortune, you should milk for me, the sacrificer, the desires. Thus, the altar being rubbed.
4.5.2	He who hates us with his heart, mind, speech, and with the Veda, with his deeds, with his hearing, and with his heart, O Indra, I cut off his head with the thunderbolt. The Stambayajus is being taken away.
4.5.3-4	This is the house for him who among you, O gods, practices the holy life. The wise one, meditating in the directions, the ascetic, the messenger, moves among men. Thus, taking up the altar. I take up the altar, taking up the sacrificial post, taking up the fire, taking up the Veda, taking up the ladle, taking up the spoon, taking up the cup, taking up the pot, taking up the vessel, taking up the water, taking up the earth, taking up the wood, taking up the grass, taking up the stone, taking up the bricks, taking up the mortar, taking up the pestle, taking up the cloth, taking up the garment, taking up the thread, taking up the cord, taking up the rope, taking up the wooden sword, taking up the broom, taking up the door, taking up the threshold, taking up the house, taking up the roof, taking up the stairs, taking up the ladder, taking up the window, taking up the skylight, taking up the smoke hole, taking up the chimney, taking up the hearth, taking up the oven, taking up the cooking pot, taking up this house, taking up this altar. I hold you, O altar, with the measuring, the pressing, the pressing again, the pressing again and again, the pressing repeatedly. Thus, taking the altar. "I hold you, the altar, with the pressing, the repeated pressing, the repeated repeated pressing, the pressing repeatedly." Thus, taking the Veda. "I take you, the altar." Thus, taking up
4.5.5	When, striking, we injured the earth, plants and water, the Adhvaryus, makers of the Sphyas, with the Sphyas struck the sky, the Moru, and the earth. From that we injured the cruel one. We made the altar with the mind, desiring the gods. May we not go to that injury. May the earth be auspicious to us with all the worlds. When the earth was being raised up, it became the earth and nourished the greatness. Then the goddess nourishes the waters, the waters which are to be offered at the sacrifice. The plants and the waters here are the Sakvaris. When the earth is being prepared, I approach the waters, the goddesses, by means of the Ida. By day and night, the flowing ones, the flowing ones. Having approached the sprinkling water, the soft wool, the first, the auspicious, the seat for the gods, the sacrificial grass, place the sacrificer in the heavenly world. Place me on the back of the sky, in the highest heaven. When the sacrificial grass is being spread.
4.5.6	With water and ghee, the water and ghee are purified well with the purifying formulas of Savitar. Those goddesses, the Sakvaris, with the Sakvari formula, have come to this sacrifice, in agreement. The ghee and the sprinkling water are being purified.
4.5.7	Both the ghee-graspers recite.
4.6.1	The plants which you have cut with the spade, the roots of which you have destroyed, may they be auspicious, may they be well-disposed to us, may the plants be well-disposed for the sacrificer. May the waters, the Shakas, the Varis, the rain, the heaven, Parjanya make them grow. The golden-coloured plants, a hundred-fold, uninjured, are placed within the altar.
4.6.2	The young woman with four locks of hair, well-formed, resembling ghee, wearing the garments of the wind, she is being spread out for great good fortune. May she grant me the desires of the sacrificer. May she be auspicious, strong, and kind to me. May she be nourishing and bountiful to me. May I have strength and milk. May you fill me with food and strength. May you fill my Brahmanic splendor. May you fill the strength of my nobility. May you fill up my clan and prosperity. May you fill life and food for me. May you fill offspring and cattle for me. She is being spread out.
4.6.3	"Thou art firm." With these (verses) he places the enclosing sticks, which are being placed, in this sacrifice. "May I be honoured. I place the enclosing sticks for non-disturbance. The supporter, the supporter of the supporter, Agni, the remover of enemies, from here."
4.6.4	"I unite thee with divine Brahman," he says, addressing the Ahavaniya. "The most brilliant of thy heat, the shining ones, the rising ones, the forms that are thine, O Agni, with them do thou enwrap thyself on all sides. May the demons who destroy the sacrifice not injure thee."
4.6.5	I cut off my enemies, born and unborn, with my two arms. I drive them away with my two hands. May I be the best of my own people. The gods have said: "The one who drives away his enemies with his hands, all evil, all sin, all death, all bad luck, may he sink down in the world of the righteous." The two goddesses, Dhriti and Vidhriti, have said: "May you hold your breath in me, may you hold your offspring in me, may your cattle hold in me." The two goddesses Dhriti and Vidhriti have said this.
4.7.1	This is the support of both, of the Prayājas and Anuyājas. It supports the variously-shaped kindling-sticks. I place the ladles on it.
4.7.2	O Juhu, mount the path of the gods, where the ancient sages, the firstborn, are, whose golden wings are gathered, and who carry me to the worlds of the good. O Juhu, O Ghata, O Gati, O Gatiri, O Gatira, O Gatiras, O Gatirasi, O Gatirasa, O Gatiriti, O Gatiritis, O Gatiritasi, O Gatirita, O Gatirite, O Gatitiri, O Gatitiras, O Gititiriti, O Gititiriti, O Gitiritiriti, O Giritiritiriti, O Giritiritiriti, O Giritiriritiriti, O Juhu, O Juhuriti, O Juhus, O Juhuritis, O Juhusiti, O Juhusiriti, O Juhutiriti, O Juhutritiriti, O Jutiritiriti, O Jutritiriti, O Jyutiritiriti, O Juhuritiriti, O Jatritiriti, O Jitritiriti, O Jiritiriti, O Jirritiriti, O Jarritiriti, O Jurritiriti, O Juriritiriti, O Jusritiriti, O Junritiriti, O Jugritiriti, O Jujuritiriti, O Judiritiriti, O Judritiriti, O Juzritiriti, O Jubritiriti, O Jibritiriti, O Jobritiriti, O Joburitiriti, O Jomritiriti, O Jorritiriti, O Josritiriti, O Jotritiriti, O Jouritiriti, O Jowritiriti, O Joyritiriti, O Jueritiriti, O Jufritiriti, O Julritiriti, O Jumritiriti, O Juniritiriti, O Jungritiriti, O Juniperitiriti, O Juritiritiriti, O Jerritiritiriti,  Translation: Mount the path of the Gods, where the ancient Rishis, the firstborn ones, are, whose wings are golden, whose limbs are gathered, and carry me to the world of the good. You are Juhu, Ghata, Gati, Gatiri, Gatiras, Gatirasi, Gatirasa, Gatiriti, Gatiritis, Gatiritasi. You are Gatiriti, the one who carries the sacrifice without fail, with the Triṣṭubh metre, with all the knowledge of the universe. You are Gitiriti, the one carrying the sacrifice with good conduct, with the divine protection of Indra. You are the ladle, the one who offers the hundred-syllabled hymns, with the Anushtubh metre, the one who anoints all the sacrifice. You are the one who pours out the oblations, with the divine blessing of Brhaspati. You are the vessel, filled with ghee, with a hundred streams, with the divine grace of the Maruts. You are the ghee vessel. This ladle is eager to offer oblations, with a hundred syllables, with the Anustubh metre, anointing all the sacrifice. With the divine blessing of Indra, you are the one carrying the oblation with good conduct. With the divine grace of Brhaspati, you are the ladle. This vessel is filled with ghee, having a hundred streams, having the divine grace of Maruts. This is the ghee vessel.
4.8.1	Thou art Tṛpti, the Gayatri metre. Satisfy me with brilliance and spiritual lustre. Thou art Tṛptis, the Tristubh metre. Satisfy with me with strength and vigour. Thou art Trupti, the Jagat metre. Satisfy us with progeny and cattle. The cakes are being offered without ghee.
4.8.2	You are the sacrifice, present everywhere. May I be present in the past and future. May there be a hundred blessings for me, may there be a thousand blessings for me, the blessings of Iravatī, the blessings of Pāśumati. You are Prajāpati, present everywhere. May I be present in past and future. May there be a hundred of my blessings, may there be thousands of my blessings, the blessings of Irāvatī, the blessed of Pāśumatī. He touches the Agniya Purorasa that is near, all the offerings.
4.8.3	This is the immortal organ of Indra, the strength. With it the cattle are healed for Indra. With it the gods have attained. May I attain here. May I attain the strength, the fame, the power. May it be cooked for me. May it be deposited in me. The morning milking which the earth performed, that entered (the cow) by which Indra, Prajapati, poured out strength. That is the bright honey, the strength-giving, by which he placed above the great Indra. May the curd be deposited in me.
4.8.4	This sacrifice has come together with oblations, with the Rk, Saman, Yajus, and the deities. By that we conquer the worlds with the sun. May we attain Indra's friendship and immortality. All the oblations.
4.8.5	"He who is our younger brother, who desires (to be so), at this sacrifice, to the sacrificer, to me, may Indra and Agni drive him away from the worlds. May I know the progeny with heroes." This is the Indra-Agni (hymn).
4.8.6	"May my lustre be in contests," one should touch all the oblations with this Anuvaka, or with eight.
4.8.7	One desiring offspring should touch the oblations at the full-moon sacrifice with four Hotr priests. One desiring heaven should touch the oblatioins at the new-moon sacrifice with five Hotr priests. Some recite it as eternal.
4.9.1	One should recite the Dashotr before the Sāmidhenī verses.
4.9.2	One recites the Prātaranuvāka verses of the Angirasas at the beginning of the month, saying, "May they be accomplished."
4.9.3	When the Dashotr is being recited, he explains the Agni who is being kindled as "Agni is kindled, Agni is offered, Agni is worshipped, Agni is praised, Agni is worshipped by us, Agni is worshipped with oblations, Agni is worshipped in the fire, Agni is worshipped through the fire, Agni has been worshipped, Agni is worshipped." When the Samidha is being kindled, he says, "Agni is being kindled, Agni is being offered, Agni is being worshipped, Agni is being praised, Agni is being honoured by us, Agni has been honoured with oblations, the Agni has been honoured in the fire, the Agni has honoured through the fire, the Agne has been honoured, the Agni is being honoured." When the Samit is being kindled, "Agni has been honoured, Agni is being honored."
4.9.4	When the Sruva is being poured, he says, “You are the mind, you are Prajapati.”
4.9.5	When the Sruka is being filled, he says, "You are the speech, you are the Indra."
4.9.6	The gods are the fathers, the fathers are the gods. I am he who am, and I offer. I do not transgress him whose I am. My own is the sacrifice, my own is the gift, my own is what is fulfilled, my own is that which is exhausted, my own is my offering. Agni is my overseer, Vayu is my hearer, Aditya is my announcer, Heaven is my father, Earth is my mother, Prajapati is my kinsman. He who am, I am he who offers. This is said when the Hotri and Adhvaryu are being selected.
4.9.7	Having explained the four Hotr priests, I gratify the spring season among the seasons with these verses, each time offering the Prayājas as prescribed.
4.9.8	One is mine, one is his. He whom we hate and whom we hate, two are mine, two are his. Three are mine, three are his. Four are mine, four are his. Five are mine, none are his. He whom he hates and whom he hates, and with these verses.
4.9.9	"By the offering to Agni and Soma, may I become one with sight." Thus are the two portions of clarified butter offered.
4.9.10	The two portions of clarified butters are offered with the mantras "Vihrata" and "Anumantrata".
4.9.11	May I be the one with sight through Agni's sacrifice. May I be the seer through Soma's sacrifice.
4.9.12	One should recite the five Hotr priests before the offering of oblations.
4.9.13	"He recites the formula, "By the sacrifice to Agni, may I be a nourisher of food." He recites the formula for the Agni-offering. "Thou art the ladle." "He recites the formulas for the Upāṁśuyāja-offerings. "To Agni and Soma." "He recits the formula for the Agnisomiya-offering. " "To Indra and Agni." "He recitess the formula for the Indragnomiya-offering. " "To Indra." "He recitates the formula for the Indriya-offering. " "To the great Indra." "He recitees the formula for the Maindriya-offering. " "To Agni Sviṣṭakṛt." "He recitatess the formula for Sauviṣṭakrt-offering.
4.9.14	Some people mention another deity in front of the Svishtakrit.
4.10.1	May I be the conqueror of Indra's enemies, the conqueror of Indra, the conqueror of the gods. May I be the protector of Indra, the protector of the gods. Through the worship of the gods, may I be the protector. May I be prosperous in both worlds of heaven and earth. May I attain the firm foundation. So say some. Through the worship to Pusan, may I beget offspring, cattle, through the worship of Sarasvati, may I obtain speech, food, through the worship to all the gods, may be attain union with life. Through the worship for Aryaman, may I attain heaven. Through the worship dedicated to Aditi, may I be born with offspring and cattle. Through the worship offered to Indra, the lord of strength, may I be a lord of food, a possessor of strength. Thus are the optional verses.
4.10.2	Agni protect me from evil. Thus one should say when the food is being served.
4.10.3	Come, O you of beautiful form and complexion, to the Iḍā.
4.10.4	"More and more, better and better, more and more, O mind, come, come, O curd, come, O honey, come, O truth, come, O Ida, come, O Upamsu, come, O Hotr, she recites the seven divine cows at the high offering: "Thou art the mind, thou art the intellect, thou art the delight, thou art the beloved, thou art the son, thou art the daughter." At the high offering she recites the high seven human cows: "O goddesses, may you turn to me with the gods. May you be kind, may you be united with kind ghee. This is the name of the sage who gave (the cows). He brought them out of the ocean, as if with ladles. Speech stands before the sage, with ten horns, giving in the directions."
4.10.5	When the wind is invoked, looking at the Hotar, one should meditate on Vayu mentally, saying, "My mother is Ida."
4.10.6	"May my blessings be true," and "May my blessings be nourishment."
4.10.7	"May I be possessed of cattle by the sacrifice to Ida." Thus invoked, Ida, the cow, with her calf, came with her milk flowing, full of strength. She came to us with food and oblation, with cows, with Ida. Thus she is brought for eating.
4.10.8	The eating of Ida and the broom have been mentioned.
4.10.9	May the directions be arranged for me, may the divine and human directions be arranged for me. May the day and night be arranged for me. May the half-months be arranged for me; may the months be arranged for me: may the seasons be arranged for me.
4.11.1	Then, having arranged him in the four directions, we offer this oblation to the guardians of the directions, the four immortals, and to the overseers of the world. For the Brahmins are the sharers of the shares of those who offer. May the sharer of the share not be the one who does not share. May we share the one who does share, the one who is not a sharer. May the waters swell, may the plants grow. Protect the bipeds, protect the quadrupeds. Send down rain from heaven. This oblation is for the Brahmins, for the Soma-drinkers, for the Soma drinkers. The non-Brahmin is excluded. There is no place here for the non-Brahmin.
4.11.2	The heaven, invoked, is my father. May the heaven, my father, invoke me. Agni from the Agnidhra for life, for radiance, for living, for the auspicious. The earth, invoked, is our mother. May the earth, our mother, invoke us. Agni from the Agni-dhra for life, radiance, for living and for the auspicious. This is the special portion of the Agnidhra.
4.11.3	"He touches the Anvāhārya rice kept near the altar with the verse, "O Brāhma, swell thyself." This pot is filled with nectar, having a thousand streams, inexhaustible, it supports the earth, the sky and heaven. With this rice-pudding one crosses death." He gives the Anvāhāryya rice to the sacrificer with the verse,
4.11.4	The injunction and the giving of the Anvāhāriya rice have been explained.
4.11.5	This is your kindling wood, O Agni. (The Adhvaryu) places the kindling wood of the Anuyāja offerings. "O Agni, I am burning him whom I am burning, who is moving away from me, and his progeny and root, the gods have burnt him down. O Agni, he who attacks us, whether he is equal or inferior, like the burning of a faggot, may there be no remnant of him." "O Jātavedas, he who hates me, and whom I hate, and he who hates me and whom I hate - may Agni burn them all." When the fire has been placed.
4.11.6	The altar, the sacrificial grass, the cooked oblation, the sacrificial wood, the enclosing sticks, the ladles, the clarified butter, the sacrifice, the verses, the mantras, the offerings, and the Vasat-utterance, these are the Sammārgās (the right paths).
4.11.7	One should recite the Saptahotṛ (mantra) before the Anuyājas or above them.
4.12.1	"May I be endowed with offspring by means of the sacrifice to the gods on the sacrificial grass." Thus, with each verse, he offers the Anuyājas.
4.12.2	Both recite the Vājavatī verses.
4.12.3	"He offers the Paridhi-sticks, one by one, with the formulas, "May I be united with the Vasus, the Rudras, the Adityas, the gods, through the sacrifice." He offers the sacrificial grass, mixed with clarified butter, with the verse, "May the sacrificial grass be united with the Adityas and Vasus, with the Maruts, with Indra, with all the gods. May it go to the divine sky. Svāhā." He offers a piece of wood, mixed with clarified
4.12.4	"I follow the prosperity of Agni." Thus one should recite the verses according to the sequence of the deities.
4.12.5	When the Hotṛ priest recites his name, then one should say, "We have come to the blessings, desiring to milk."
4.12.6	May the truth of my vow lead me to the gods, to the most agreeable, to the most desirable, to the most pleasing. May my mind lead me to the Gods. May the sacrifice lead the Gods. May it come to me today." Thus does the reciter of the Sūkta take the name of whatever he desires.
4.12.7	"The Agni-bearer, with the words, "May Agni go to the deity," should throw the Prastara grass as each verse is recited.
4.12.8	"The peg of heaven has come down, it has risen up from the earth; with that thousand-branched one we torment the hater; may the hater be tormented by me, O herb; may I not be tormented." Thus should the Agni-bearer throw the Prastāra grass.
4.12.9	I release you. When the boundaries are being released.
4.12.10	"O Vishnu, O Shambu! O Shambu! To the sacrifice, salutations to you, O sacrifice, salutations and salutations to you. O sacrifice, may you be accomplished with auspiciousness, with prosperity, with good fortune, with brahminical splendour. May you be accomplished with the prosperity of the sacrifice. O sacrifice, salutings to you, salutings to your salutings, salutings to salutings to you. The sacrifice is desired by the Bhrigus, bestows wealth by the ascetics, bestows blessings by the Vasus, bestows blessings with the Atharvas. Of that desired and accomplished one, may there be the coming of wealth." The libation is poured out.
4.13.1	"By the Soma-sacrifice I shall beget the seed of the gods." Thus he offers the offerings to the wives in accordance with the signs.
4.13.2	"By the sacrifice to Raka, may I beget offspring; by the sacrifice to Sinivali, may I be rich in cattle; by the sacrifice of Kuhu, may I be prosperous and rich in cattle." These are the optional offerings.
4.13.3	By the sacrifice to Rāka may I be blessed with offspring; by the sacrifice to Sinīvālī may I be blessed by cattle; by the sacrifice of Kuhu may I be blessed, prosperous and cattle-rich. The wife recites this.
4.13.4	May Ida protect us with ghee, in whose abode the divine-desirers are purified. The goddess of the world, the Sakvari, the nourisher, has come to the sacrifice. The goddess of all, the Ida of ghee.
4.13.5	Placing the Veda within the altar, he touches it, saying, "You are the Veda."
4.13.6-7	If one were to think of the name of one's enemy in the past, one would take that name and know that one would take away everything of his. Having offered the oblation at the end of the Homa, the mouth is examined. "O Sarasvati, the one who bestows wealth, may I be blessed with your grace. May I be devoted to you."
4.13.8	Vasu is the sacrifice, the sacrifice is Vasu. May I come to the sacrifice, to the Vasu, to the Vasumant. May it come to me. He recites the Samisht-yajus and offers the oblation. He takes the name of the deity he desires.
4.13.9	"The sacrificer is the lord of blessings." He eats the portion of the sacrificer.
4.14.1-3	One should not eat the Saṁnāyya without a Brāhmaṇa. The Adhvaryu pours a continuous stream of water on the offerings placed within the altar, reciting, "May I be present in the assembly." He recites this while the offerings are being brought.
4.14.4	"May the gods, the priests, sprinkle in the eastern direction." Having sprinkled with these (formulas) according to the indications, he says, "I send you to the ocean. Go to your own place. May I be without a break in progeny. May my milk not be spilled." Having taken the remaining water inside the altar, he says, "Whatever honey is in the water, O Sarasvati, in the cows, in the horses, with that, O Sarasvati who bestows strength, anoint my mouth. O Sarasvati who is in Vaishmbalya, bestow it on me. May I be the most partaker of it." Having cleansed the mouth,
4.14.5	Both of them recite the Kṛṣṇāyāmṛta.
4.14.6	"He says, "Thou art the step of Viṣṇu," and steps four steps of Viṣṇus, going eastwards with his right foot, each step being longer than the preceding one, and not exceeding the left one."
4.14.7	He does not cross the Ahavanīya.
4.14.8	Standing up, he recites the fourth verse.
4.14.9	Some recite the verses in the order of Vishnu, Vishnu-transcending, and transcending-transcending. Some recite them in the order of transcending-transcendings, transcending-transcedings, and Vishnu-transcendings.
4.14.10	"The verses beginning with "I conquer the battle with the god Agni" are Vishnu-transcendents, and those beginning with "Those who are the gods, the destroyers of sacrifice" are transcending-transcendeṇts."
4.14.11	"He recites the verses beginning with ".
4.15.1	May the rising sun today, the friend, destroy my enemies. Destroy them with lightning from the sky, and make them fall below. Rising today, may it divide us like a father among his sons. May it grant us long life. O Sun, rising today, the friend. Rising to the highest heaven, O Sun, remove my heart disease and also my jaundice. I place my jaundice in the parrots and in the plants. And I place my jaundice also in the yellow garments. The sun has risen, together with all the world. May it destroy my enemies. May I destroy my enemies. He who curses us, and he who curses those who curse us, may both of them be destroyed. May both Dawn and Night destroy all evil for him.
4.15.2	He turns around, reciting, "I have turned around the enclosure of Indra."
4.15.3	If he is practising sorcery, he should recite, "I am withdrawing the life of so-and-so, son of so-andso," and crush the right foot with his heel.
4.15.4	Having said, "May the auspicious ones prosper, may the sinful ones be defeated," he turns back, reciting, "May I be united with offspring, may my offspring be united with me."
4.15.5	"May the kindled Agni shine for me. May I shine for thee, O Agni, when kindled." Thus he kindles the Ahavaniya. "May the sacrifice be prosperous, may I be more prosperous." Thus he stands up.
4.16.1	"May the gods destroy our enemy, the man who hates us, as one destroys a firebrand. May there be no remnant of him."
4.16.2	"O Agni, do thou purify the life-forces", with these two verses addressed to Agni, he attends upon the Garhapatya fire. "O Agni, the lord of the house", with this verse.
4.16.3	He takes the name of the son, hoping for that blessing. "The threads" if the son is not born; "The one who is born" if the son has been born.
4.16.4	In the science of astrology, he says, "May the divine thread not be cut, may the human thread not be cut. May you not cut from the divine abode, may you not cut from human." He takes the name of the beloved son.
4.16.5	"O Agni, O Vahni, may it be pleasing to our son, may it cook for the father, may it be auspicious for the offspring and body." He says this to the southern fire.
4.16.6	"He sits down within the altar with the formula, "Thou art the light, thou art the thread." The name is taken as before.
4.16.7	Having sat down with the formula, "Thou art the light; thou art the thread," he recites.
4.16.8	Having placed the Veda on the altar, he sits down within the Veda and recites the Atimochaka formulas.
4.16.9	Here some prescribe the spreading of the Veda and the eating of the portion of the sacrificer.
4.16.10	"Who binds thee, may he release thee." He releases the sacrifice.
4.16.11	"O Agni, lord of vows, I have observed the vow." He releases the vow.
4.16.12	"The sacrifice has been performed." He recites this for the renewal of the sacrifice.
4.16.13	He recites "O Agni, lord over cattle" facing east. He recites "O cattle, lord over cattle."
4.16.14	Here one should eat the share of the sacrificer.
4.16.15	May the sacrifice be auspicious to me, may the sacrifice be for me, may the life be mine, may the strength be mine, may my sacrifice be auspicious, may my sacrifice prosper, may my sacrifice not be defective. Having performed the Darsa-Pūrṇamāsa sacrifices, Soma sacrifice and animal sacrifice, he mutters.
4.16.16	You are the rain. Bestow on me (the rain). I have approached the truth from the untruth. Having recited this, he touches water. This touching of water is done in all sacrifices.
4.16.17	Having offered oblations to the Brahmanas, he instructs them.
4.16.18	When going out, facing the direction of his residence, he mutters the Yajamana-mantra.
4.16.19	He steps forward with the steps of Vishnu.
4.16.20	He recites the formula while going towards the east, reciting the formula while going to the Gomati river.
5.1.1	We shall explain the Agnihotra.
5.1.2	He brings the kindling wood of the ashvattha tree which has the embryo of the shami tree, saying, "I bring you with the Brahman and the sacrificial banners." He brings the kindling woods of the ashvatthha tree which has the shami tree as its embryo.
5.1.3	The Vājasaneyins say that even if it does not have the shami tree embryo.
5.1.4	I collect the sacrificial body of Agni, born from the horse-sacrificial fire, from the womb of peace, the embryo of the Shami tree, for Agni, the begetter, for the life-giver. May you bestow life upon me, and may the sacrificer have life." Having thus invoked the kindling woods, he brings seven earthly materials.
5.1.5	Or more earthly materials.
5.1.6	The Vajasaneyaka says, "One should not accumulate the requisites."
5.1.7	May the sand enter the pleasant form of the all-pervading fire on the earth. The sand that is here, the sand that is there, the sand that exists between heaven and earth, may they be united. May the black sand protect the black (sand). May the black sand come to both the sacrifices. The one who makes the sand, when he moves over the earth, having perceived the form of the boar, which is hidden, they bring it here, saying, "May we live a hundred autumns, having many heroes." They bring the boar's dung, the energy, the juice of the earth, saying, "We may live a hundred autumnal years, having many (heroes)." The hearing that is hidden in the holes, which is blessed by the female boars, may we not be deaf. The Varāhaka-vihata (obstruction) is the one whose form, when he found this earth entered into the middle of the body, that is hidden here, and is removed. It is said, "They are spread out here."
5.2.1-2	Those by which the firm foundation of the world, this earth, the support of all men, was established, may all those auspicious sands be for us. Thus are the sands. O Agni, the seed, the moon, the gold, arisen from the waters, the immortal, in the creatures, gathering it, having placed it above, giving it away, he crosses the difficult path. Thus is the gold. Thus are the earthly ones.
5.2.3	If there are five pieces of iron, the fifth is the one that is not used.
5.2.4	The horse, having assumed the form of a horse, stood for a year at the Ashvattha tree, and the gods, gathering it here, said, "Let us live a hundred autumns, O heroes." The Udumbara tree has risen from the earth, O tree, with a hundred shoots, grow, with you we may enjoy food and strength, in the prosperity of wealth. The leaf of the Udumbara tree that fell when it was being carried away in the Gayatri metre, that is this leaf. For the leaf of the Udambara tree is born from the Soma-drinking tree, therefore I bring it for the sake of obtaining the drinking of Soma. The divine Brahma-talk that you heard when the gods were speaking, you are indeed known as Shruta. Let that Brahma-splendour enter me. Gathering it, I obtain it directly. With these two leaves. Prajapati pacified the arrow of the Agni that was created by you. I bring this Shami tree for peace, not for destruction. The light that reached you when the Agni that was born from you became crooked, with that light, may you illuminate our extensive world. The Vikankata tree. The Maruts, having cut out the heart of the Agni that had become crooked, and having darkened it with water, I bring this for you to eat. May Agni have a soul and a heart. The tree that was struck by lightning, in the middle of the body, he saw the earth, the support of the world. That leaf is born from the abode of the lotus, I bring the spreading of the earth. The leaf of a lotus.
5.3.1	"He places it with the formula, "O Jātavedas, I have collected thee as the body is placed in the elements. Thou art collected, be auspicious to the creatures. Thou knowest our extensive world, thou hast extended it."
5.3.2	Now the stars.
5.3.3	One should place the fire in the Kṛttikā constellation. He becomes the chief and most lustrous among Brahmanas.
5.3.4	His house becomes fire-scorched.
5.3.5	Having placed all the stars in Rohini, one prospers.
5.3.6	In Mrigashirsha, one who desires brahminical glory or desires sacrifice.
5.3.7	One who was formerly good but becomes worse again in Punarvasu.
5.3.8	One who desires in the two eastern Phalguni stars, "May my offspring be desirous of giving."
5.3.9	One who desires the two western Phalguni stars "May I be fortunate and have food."
5.3.10	This is the same, but in reverse.
5.3.11	If one places the former on the latter, one becomes worse, and if the latter on the former, one becomes better.
5.3.12	If one desires in the hand, "May it be given to me!"
5.3.13	If one has an enemy, one should do it in Citra.
5.3.14	If one wants offspring, one should do so in Anuradha. If one wants prosperity, one should do in Sravan. If one wants nourishment, one should do on the northern Pushya. If one wants establishment, one should do
5.3.15	All of them are eternal, according to some.
5.3.16	Having said that one should perform the Falgunipūrṇamāsa (new moon) rite, he says, "If one were to perform the Falgunīpūrṇamāśa rite, one would place it at the beginning of the year, two days before or on the same day."
5.3.17	It should be performed on the new moon or full moon day.
5.3.18	Spring is for the Brāhmaṇa, summer for the Kṣatriya, autumn or winter for the Vaiśya, and the rainy season for the artisan.
5.3.19	Those of the three castes who perform this rite, their time is this.
5.3.20	The winter season is for all castes.
5.3.21	One who is about to perform a Soma sacrifice should not choose a constellation for dancing.
5.3.22	One who has decided to go away should perform the rite of setting up the fire. One who has not decided should go on a pilgrimage.
5.3.23	Or one should go for one day.
5.4.1	The impure matter of this (victim) is being thrown away. May it remove the sin of the sacrificer. May the four directions be auspicious to us. May our mother, the earth, be auspicious to us, the offspring. Having thrown away the sacrificial place sloping towards the east, he says, "May the auspicious goddesses, the waters, be auspicious to drink for us. May they flow towards the auspicious." Having sprinkled it with water, he makes the pole sloping towards the north in it.
5.4.2	In front of it is the middle post, the place for the Garhapatya.
5.4.3	From this, the place for Ahavaniya is eight steps eastwards for a Brāhmaṇa, eleven for a Kṣatriya and twelve for a Vaiśya.
5.4.4	In the twenty-four steps or as far as the eye can see, the place for Āhavanīya is to be fixed. This is heard in general.
5.4.5	The place of the Dakṣiṇāgni is to the south of the Garhapatya, in the third space from it, towards the west.
5.4.6	The place of the Āhavanīya is different from that of the Garha-patya.
5.4.7	The Sāṃbhārya is in front of the Āhavaneya, in the Sāṃbhāra hall.
5.4.8	The Āvasathyā is in front of that, in the Āvasatha hall.
5.4.9	He shaves his hair and beard, cuts his nails, and bathes. The wife does the same, except the hair.
5.4.10	The husband and wife, wearing linen garments, should kindle the fire.
5.4.11	At the time of giving the Dakshina, they should give it to the Adhvaryu.
5.4.12	In the afternoon, when the sun is above the trees, having brought the fire from the Upavasana fire, he places the Brahmauvanika fire to the right of the Garhapatya fire.
5.4.13	The Upavasana is all.
5.4.14	Or the Nirmathya.
5.4.15	If one were to bring all the offerings for the Upavasatha rite, one should bring the Apūpa made of barley and rice, and place it between two leaves of the Udumbara tree. One should place the barley Apūpa at the back and the rice Apūpa at front.
5.4.16	If one were to bring everything for the Upavaṭha rite, one should offer the Apūpa and the Apūpa-like offerings.
5.5.1	On the eastern side of the fire, on a red skin, on a goat with its head towards the east, with its hair turned upwards, or on a mat, at night, he offers the Brahma-rice in four pots.
5.5.2	Having recited "For the god thee," he offers the first pot, saying, "I offer what is dear to Brahma, to the Prāṇa." The second, saying, "To Apāna." The third, saying, "For Vyāna." The fourth, saying, "What is dear to Brahma."
5.5.3	Or all of them may be silent.
5.5.4	He cooks in four kinds of vessels.
5.5.5	He does not wash or drain.
5.5.6	Some say that it becomes milk.
5.5.7	It is understood that it is cooked like live rice.
5.5.8	Having taken up the Brahmoḍana with the ladle, he recites the verse, "To the wise, to the poet, to the bull, to the lord of bulls, from whom comes fear, may that be our protection. Let us worship the gods who are to be worshipped." He offers or recites the mantra.
5.5.9	Having divided the Brahmasūtra into four parts, having sprinkled it with plenty of ghee, having pressed it and not having cut it, he offers it to the four Ārsheya priests.
5.5.10	The first balls are not touched, they are untouched. Then, having collected the remaining of the Brahma-rice, he brings the remaining ghee to it and offers three moist, unsplit, palm-sized twigs of the variegated ashvattha tree in it, which are not split by a stick.
5.6.1	The Brihatis, collected from Citriyas and Asvatthas, are arranged in the body, they are three, measured by the Yajnaमुख, the Prajapati, the three-fold, the pairs, for procreation.
5.6.2	Then he places them with ghee-bearing, Agni-related, Gāyatrī verses, the Tristubh verses for the Brāhmaṇa, the Jagatī verses for the Rājanya, and the Jagatī for the Vaiśya.
5.6.3	The Agni is worshipped with the kindling-sticks. This is the verse: "O Agni, may the bestower of gifts, the golden-coloured ones, come to thee. Accept the kindling-wood. I, with the kindling wood, O Angiras, increase thee with ghee. The most excellent, the most brilliant, the most powerful." This is the first duty of the Brahman when the fire is being kindled. "The all-embracing, the golden-haired, the ghee-flowing, the shining one, the well-sacrificing Agni, the giver of life, is being kindled with ghee. The Agni who is being kindled with the ghee, ghee is his food. The rivers carry thee, the ghee-dripper, with ghee. Drinking ghee, do thou worship the gods. O Agni, thou art the giver of life." This is the verse for the king. "O Agni, the most excellent, the messenger of the gods, the bearer of oblations, the long-living, the ghee-born, the offered, the shining one have made thee their eye. The Agni who shines in the sky, the most excellent one, the giver of light, the giver of food, the giver of wealth, the giver of happiness, the giver of strength, the giver of offspring, the giver of heaven, the giver of all good things, the giver of everything, the giver of the highest heaven, the giver, the giver of immortality, the giver of long life, the giver of prosperity, the giver of fame, the giver of glory, the giver of power, the giver of protection, the giver of safety, the giver of peace, the giver of tranquillity, the giver of bliss, the giver of joy, the giver of delight, the giver of pleasure, the giver of satisfaction, the giver of enjoyment, the giver of good fortune, the giver of success, the giver of victory, the giver of Agni, the giver, is being kindled by the Sūmans with ghee. He, having grown with the plants, stands in the long-lasting, the wide-spreading, the earth-covering, the ghee-receiving, the shining one. The Agni who has been kindled with the ghee is the friend of truth. The Agni who was kindled shines in the sacrificial places. The bright-coloured one raises our understanding." This is the Brahman's verse.
5.7.1	He gives three heifers to the three fires.
5.7.2	Brahmins eat rice.
5.7.3	To those who have eaten, he gives a common boon.
5.7.4	If one is going to kindle the fire in a particular constellation, one should place these kindling woods in that constellation, twelve days, two days, or three days before the year.
5.7.5	They should be placed by one who is kindling the fire.
5.7.6	Then he performs the vow, does not eat meat, does not approach a woman, his fire is not taken out of the house, and is not brought from elsewhere.
5.7.7	One should live for a year with the Brahmau-danika.
5.7.8	If one is a student, his fire rituals are performed in this (fire).
5.7.9	One should not go.
5.7.10	One should not follow.
5.7.11	If he were to go away or follow him, having cooked a Brahmoḍana, he should place the kindling woods with the same (mantra).
5.7.12	If in a year he does not approach him for the Agnihotra, having cooked a Brahmaṇḍana and placed the kindling woods, he should approach him and then place (the fire).
5.7.13	The maintenance of the fire is as one wishes.
5.7.14	One should perform the rite for twelve days or for one day.
5.7.15	He who is going to kindle the fire again, cooks the Brahmic rice.
5.7.16	He who is going to rekindle the fire, observes this vow on that night: he does not eat meat, does not approach a woman.
5.7.17	He binds a black goat to the north of the Garhapatya-fire with the verse, "O Agni, do thou unite the subjects and the quarters together with the cattle. Do thou place the countries which were of Savitr's Savana."
5.8.1	Then the sacrificer undertakes the vow and restrains speech. He says, "I undertake truth from untruth, I undertake divine from human, I restrain divine speech."
5.8.2	They keep him awake all night with the sound of the lute and the bow.
5.8.3	Or he does not keep awake or restrain his speech.
5.8.4	He sits and kindles the fire with shells all night, saying, "I kindle the fire with shells. I shall attain both worlds. I shall cross death by attaining both worlds."
5.8.5	In that (fire-pan) he kindles the fire-wood on the fire-pan. "The knower of beings, pour here the seed of the world, from which Agni will be born through Tapas. The Agni, the carrier of oblations, born from the ashvattha tree, from the embryo of the Shami tree, who is the source of light, is generated from this your natural seat." With these two verses.
5.8.6	The Agni, the immortal, the shining, the pure, the purifying, the worthy of praise, having recited this, the great one, the mistress of the house, the one who is on the side of truth, the one who has the womb, the one who knows the offspring, the one who generates the sacrifices, the leader, having recited this while the kindling woods are being brought, the sacrificer waits.
5.8.7	"You are the milker, you are the milked, you are the cow. I give you your share." He gives it to the sacrificer.
5.8.8	"Come up, O ten, O Śakvarīrs, with the immortal Agni, with life and lustre, may we live longer and longer. May I see the full moon and the new moon, and may I perform the sacrifice as it should be performed." Having accepted (the oblation), she stands with the Rtvīya-verse, "Agni is the seed, you two are the womb, you two will deposit the seed. I give you that truth, that you bear a hero, that you will generate a hero. You two will generate me in the morning, you two will generate me when generated, with offspring, cattle, and brahminical lustre, with the heavenly world." Having accepted (it), the sacrificer recites (the following):
5.9.1	"He takes up the fire from me first, saying, 'The Agni who is our father.' Both recite the formula. Having taken it out of the house, he says, 'Go away, go away.' Having taken it out, he sprinkles it with water, saying, 'May the goddesses protect us.'
5.9.2	In the same way for the Dakṣiṇāgni, Āhavanīya, Sabhya and Avāsathya fires.
5.9.3	Thus the rites are performed in due order.
5.9.4	Having divided half of the sand into two parts, he pours half into the Garhapatya fire-place and half into the Dakshina fire-place. Having divided half into three parts, he pours the first part into the eastern fire-place.
5.9.5	In this very manner, he pours all the earthen (bricks).
5.9.6	"The ashes of Agni" (he says) while strewing sand; "the sign" (he says), while strewing ashes.
5.9.7	While strewing them, he mentally thinks: "Whatever is black in the moon, may that be here."
5.9.8	"O Agni, rise up from the womb of the earth, enter the great abode. The gods who have brought thee, the bearer of oblations, the protector of the world, have placed thee in the anthill." He pours the anthill-earth in the place of the Garhapatya fire.
5.9.9	"What is in the sky" (is said) for the southern fire; "What is in heaven" (is said for) the eastern fires.
5.9.10	The wave of honey from the ocean has come, bearing the sovereignty, and those who are generous and we, may we collect the honey-sweet food. "You were the first to be in the kitchen" (is said). It is the boar-killed.
5.9.11	The Goddess, the first, who is separate from the gods, has spread out her greatness. You have established (her) with the sand. You have conquered the three worlds and the four directions. The sand is what is to be hated, and one meditates on it with the mind.
5.10.1	I spread the truth, the dung, on the earth. I place Agni in truth. I place Agni on truth. He arranges the materials in the places.
5.10.2	"May your bodies be united." With this (verse) he unites them. "May your hearts be united. May your mind be united. May the breath be united." Having united the Vānaspatya (plants), he scatters sand with this verse, "Agni was born first."
5.10.3	Those thy auspicious forms, O Jātavedas, which are in the sky, in heaven, on earth, having united with them, with thy retinue, with thy friends, O Agni, born of gold, do thou carry the oblation. In the place of the Garhapatya fire, he places a golden piece of gold to the north of the sacrificial materials.
5.10.4	The moon, Agni, the moon-chariot, the tawny-skinned, the all-consuming, the water-seated, the gold-knowing, the plunging, the swift, surrounded by powers, the tawny, the gods here have placed the very glorious. Thus he praises the Upasthya. He gives silver to the hated.
5.10.5	If he does not obtain the object of his hatred, he should drive it away in the direction where the object of his hate would be.
5.10.6	Thus he does it in all directions.
5.10.7	Having removed the ashes from the Brahmauḍanika, he kindles the fire from the embryo of the Sami tree.
5.10.8	When the rays are rising, he places the fire-stirring stone of Dashotr.
5.10.9	"He stands with the Agni-mantra, 'Be born with Agni, with wealth, with prosperity, with offspring, with cattle, with Brahmic lustre.' He makes the Agni-mantras while tending the horse.
5.10.10	The horse is white, with uninjured eyes, or red, with a black knee. Or any horse with a black spot.
5.10.11	When the fire is being churned, he recites the Sāman of Śakata in the Sāṅkṛti metre. When smoke arises, he recites Gaṭhin of Kausika. The fire is placed on the sacrificial wood.
5.10.12	When the fire is being brought down, he recites "O Jātavedas, come down."
5.11.1	Here he makes the sacrificer recite the four Hotr verses.
5.11.2-4	Agni, born before all, pure, purifying, worthy of praise, is born. The sacrificer gives a boon to the one who is born. A cow is a boon, another is a boon beyond that; a milch cow is a boon; another is a boon; a bull is a boon; another is a boon; an ewe is a boon;
5.11.5	The sacrificer breathes over it, saying, "I breathe thee with the breath of Prajapati, with the nourishment of Pusan, for long life, for a hundred autumns, for a hundred years, for life, for splendour, for the good, for the auspicious."
5.11.6	The mortals have generated the immortal, the flowing, the crushing, the strong. The ten sisters, the bright ones, have come together, they have embraced the man who has been born. Having taken the born one with joined palms, he says, "You are the emperor, you are the universal emperor. May the two fires of Sarasvati kindle you. May you be the eater of food, may you be the lord of food." Having performed the Upasampidhana, having lifted him up facing east, while seated, with the last of all the mantras, while the Rathantara is being sung, and the Yajnayajniya, with the first Yrshadhana, with the first two Vyahrtis, or with the first two serpents, and with the first Gharmashira.
5.11.7	"He should place (the pot) of the Bhrigus on the Brāhmaṇa, saying, "I place you in the vow of the Bhrigas, the gods, the lords of vows." He should place (the one) of the Angiras on the Brāhman who is an Angiras, saying, " "I place you in vow of the Angiras, the gods, lords of vows." "He should place (one) of the Adityas on the Brāhmāṇī of other castes, saying, " "I place (you) in the vow of Adityas, the gods." He should put (the pot) on the king, saying, " “I place you in Varuṇa's vow, the king, the lord of vows." On the Kṣatriya, he should place (the jar) saying, " " "I put you in the vow Indra, the lord of Indra, the lord." On the Vaiśya, he should put (the jar) of the Manos, saying, " "I place you in Manos, the lords of villages, the lords of the vow." On the Rāthakāra, he should place the jar of the Rbhus, saying, " 'I place you in Rbhus, the gods, in the vow, the lords of vow.' This is the placing of the jars.
5.12.1	Bhūr Bhuvah Suvar are the Vyahrtis. Bhumi is the name of the earth. The serpent king is the name of Agni. The head is the name of heat. This Agni is dear to cattle. He has become. The vomit is for the offspring and the son. The wind is the name of life. This Agni is the dear one to cattle. He is the one who has become. The offering is for the offspring, the son, and the father. The sun is the name of fire. This Agni is what is dear to cattle, he has become. The light is for the offspring. The father is the name of cooking. The eye is the name of Arka. This is the sun. This Agni is that which is dear to cattle.
5.12.2	The auspicious forms of yours, O Jātavedas, which are in the sky and on the earth, all those, having come together, with the host, with the same intention, O Agni, born of gold, do thou carry the oblation. I place thee, the vital breath, the immortal, the eater of food, for the eater of food; the protector for protection; with the strength of heaven, with the greatness of earth, with the nourishment of the atmosphere, with the brilliance of cattle, I have placed thee, the lord of all cattle. O Agni, lord of the house, I have placed you in the assembly, in the assembly of heaven, earth, and atmosphere. Find the world for the sacrificer. I place thee on the head of the earth, in the sacrificial world. The one who is near us, O Agni, and the one who is far away, this one I place upon thee.
5.12.3	"Agni, burning the evil ones, the evil ones, bestowing the best of the dawns, driving away the enemies, bestow on us prosperity, food, and strength." Thus one addresses the one being placed. The Adhvaryu makes him recite the verses beginning with "O Agni, the head of the sacrifice."
5.13.1	When the sun has risen half, one places the Ahavaniya fire.
5.13.2	When the sun has risen, for one who desires Brahmic glory.
5.13.3	He lights a fire of ashvattha wood on the Garhapatya fire and prepares sand and a ladle.
5.13.4	He is the one who strives for strength, for power, for virility, for life, for radiance, for the destruction of enemies, for the destruction (of the demon) Vritra. The glory that is yours among the gods, the heaven, the self that has entered into the cattle, the prosperity that is yours among men, with that, O Agni, come to us, consenting. From heaven, from earth, from the atmosphere, from the wind, from the cattle, from the plants, wherever, O all-knowing one, you have been born, from there, O Agni, do come to us, willing. "The All-gods have raised you up." With these four verses.
5.13.5	He lifts up the fire as if from above.
5.13.6	He holds the lifted up and the held up.
5.13.7	Then at the right ear of the horse, he makes the sacrificer recite (the formula), "O Agni, bring that dear form of yours which is in the animals, which is purifying, which is dear. O Agni, bring that form of yours which in the waters, which is purifying and dear. O Agni bring that form of thine which is in the sun, which is pure and dear." He thus makes Agni abide.
5.13.8	Then the Agnidhra, having brought the domestic fire, having churned it, and sitting with knees raised, he places the southern fire, while the Yajñāyajñīya is being chanted, with the second Vyāhṛti, with the three Sarprajñī verses, and with the second Gharmashira, "Whatever thy auspicious forms, O Jātavedas, are in the sky, on the earth, and in the atmosphere, all those, united, with thy retinue, with thy friends, O Agni, born of gold, do thou carry the oblation. I place thee, the vital breath, the eater of food, the eater of what is eaten, the protector, the protector, by the strength of heaven, by the greatness of earth, by the nourishment of the atmosphere, by the brilliance of cattle, I place thee, Agni, the eater of oblations, the giver of food, the giver of good food, the eater from heaven, from earth, from the atmosphere, I place thee in the world of sacrifice, the eater of the oblation, the giver of the oblation. The one who is near us, O Agni, and the one who is far away, this one I place upon thee." He places it in the sacrificial materials.
5.14.1	If a Brāhmaṇa, a Kṣatriya, a Vaiśya, or a Śūdra, like a demon, is very prosperous, then one should take from his house and offer it to one who desires prosperity.
5.14.2	One should not eat from his house.
5.14.3	If one desires food, from the top of a tree that is burning, like Ambarīṣa. If one desires brahmic glory, from the topmost branch of a tree that has been struck by lightning.
5.14.4	One should recite the Vāmadevya hymn when the Āhavanīya fire is being carried away.
5.14.5	"Go to the east, to the directions!" This is the (verse). Be victorious, O great one! I know you among men. Be awake in the three worlds. May I have offspring and wealth. May these goddesses stand near me for wealth. May I dwell here with these offspring. May Ida stand here, of universal form. In the middle of wealth, shine, O all-knowing one!" The horses go forward, facing the east.
5.14.6	To the right, Brahma makes the chariot or chariot wheel turn as many times as the wheel turns three times.
5.14.7	Six times for the hated one.
5.14.8	Holding it at the knee-height, he carries the third fire to the navel-height, the third to the mouth-height, and does not take it beyond the ear-height.
5.14.9	If he were to take it up and hold it, he would hold it with his mouth.
5.14.10	He should not pass between the fire and the sun.
5.14.11	Taking it from the right side, he carries it.
5.14.12	At half the distance, the sacrificer gives a gift.
5.14.13	At half distance, having placed gold, he crosses, saying, "You are the sky, the firm foundation, the passage."
5.14.14	He places the horse facing east, with the right foot towards the north, and steps over the fuel as it is placed, so that the embers of the fire as it was placed may come under the right foot.
5.14.15	Having turned to the right, he again steps over, with the verse, "What thou didst cry out."
5.14.16	He holds the horse facing west in front.
5.14.17	The horse is placed in the east.
5.14.18	In the absence of that, the cowherd of the village performs these rites. This is the Paiṅgīya Brāhmaṇa.
5.15.1	One should place the foot of the water pot. This is the Bahvṛca Brāhmaṇa; one should place the foot on the goat. This is the Vājasaneyaka.
5.15.2	Then the sacrificer mutters the auspicious verses: "Those two auspicious forms of yours, O Agni, are Viraj and Svaraj, may they enter me, may they enliven me. Those two auspicious forms of you, O Agni, Samraj and Abhibhu, may they enter, may they enliven. Those two auspicious forns of yours, O Agn, Vibhu and Paribhu, may they en ter, may they enliven." Those two auspicious forms, O Agni, Prabhvi and Prabhuti, may they enter you, may they enliven you. Those two auspicious form of yours, O Agne, may they enter and enliven you.
5.15.3	"O Agni, with those terrible forms of yours, go to him!" The sacrificer sends forth to the one he hates. With them he destroys him.
5.15.4	The Anuvākyās are in the forest.
5.15.5	Whatever is here in heaven and whatever is there on earth, the two have come together in agreement. May the all-knowing one sit on their back, for the welfare of creatures, for his own body. Having recited this, standing facing east, he places the Āhavanīya fire.
5.15.6	When the Brihatī and the Śyaita-varāvantī are being chanted, and the Yajñāyajñīya, and with the Rṣyādhāna, and with all the Vyāhṛtis, and with all (the verses) beginning with "O Serpent", and with the third Gharmashīrṣa, whatever thy auspicious forms, O Jātavedas, are in the sky, or on the earth, all those, united, of one mind, of one accord, born of gold, O Agni, do thou carry the oblation. I place thee, the life-giver, the eater of food, the protector, the protector, in the air, with the strength of heaven, with the greatness of earth, with the nourishment of the atmosphere, with the brilliance of cattle, I place thee, the eater of all cattle, Agni, the universal king, the one-footed, the one-born, the one-hoofed, the one-horned, the one-headed, the one-bodied, the one-natured, the one-shining, the one-blazing, the one-sacrificing, the one-offering, the one-knowing, the one-seeing, the one-going, the one-coming, the one-moving, the one-standing, the one-sitting, the one-lying, the one-sleeping, the one-waking, the one-breathing, the one-speaking, the one-hearing, the one-smelling, the one-tasting, the one-touching, the one, the one-eyed, the one-eared, the one-nosed, the one-mouthed, the one-armed, the one-handed, the one-legged, the one-hooved, the one-horny, the one-head, the one-body, the one-nature, the one-shine, the one-blaze, the one-sacrifice, the one-offerer, the one-knower, the one seer, the one-goer, the one comer, the one mover, the one stander, the one sitter, the one-sleeper, the one-wakener, the one breather, the one speaker, the one hearer, the one smeller, the one taster, the one toucher, the one, one-eyed, one-eared, one-nosed, one-mouthed, one-armed, one-handed, one-legged, one-hooved one-horned one-head, one-body, one-nature, one-shine, one-blaze, one-sacrifice, one-offerer one-knower one-seer, one-goer one-comer, one-mover, one-stander, one-sitter, one-sleeper one-wakener one-breather, one-speaker, one-hearer, one-smeller, one-taster, one-toucher, one, one-eye, one-ear, one-nose, one-mouth, one-arm, one-hand, one-leg, one-hoof, one-horn, one-head, one-body, one nature, one shine, one blaze, one sacrifice, one offerer, one knower, one seer, one goer, one comer, one mover, one stander, one sitter, one sleeper, one wakener, one breather, one speaker, one hearer, one smeller, one taster, one toucher, one, one eye, one ear, one nose, one mouth, one arm, one hand, one leg, one hoof, one horn, one head, one body, one nature, one shine, one blaze one sacrifice, one offering, one knowing, one seeing, one going, one coming, one moving, one standing, one sitting, one sleeping, one waking, one breathing, one speaking, one hearing, one smelling, one tasting, one touching, one, one eyed, one eared, one nosed, one mouthed, one armed, one handed, one legged, one hoofed, one horned, one headed, one bodied, one natured, one shining, one blazing, one sacrificing, one offering, one knowing, one seeing one going, one comer, one moving, one standing one sitting, one sleeper, one wakener, one breathing, one speaking, one hearing one smelling, one t
5.16.1	"He eats, he eats all, he eats the whole life. I am yours, you are mine. This is yours, this is my womb. I am yours. Being mine, do carry the oblations. O Agni, the son, the creator of worlds, the one who knows all, the one who is being placed, the sacrificer recites this mantra."
5.16.2	The sacrificer recites the Vyāhṛtis, the Serpent-king, and the Gharma-head verses at all the offerings.
5.16.3	One should touch the fire that has not been placed and offered with ghee and herbs.
5.16.4	The form of thine, O Agni, which is dear in the cattle, which is in the earth, which is in Agni, which is in Rathantara, which is in Gayatri metre, that I offer with this (oblation). Svāhā. The form of thine which is dear in water, which is in air, which is in Vayu, which is in Vaimateya, which is in Trishtup metre, that Ioffer with this (oblution). Svāhā, The form of thine whic is dear in the sun, which is in heaven, which is in Aditya, which is in Brihat, which is in Jagat metre, that I otter with this (oblution). Svāhā." With these (verses) he offers oblations of clarified butter and herbs, each time repeating the verse.
5.16.5	Some say that he should offer the kindling wood.
5.16.6	Brahma recites the Sama hymns at the Agni-installation.
5.16.7	Some prohibit this.
5.16.8	The Vājasaneyins say that the Udgītha is done with the Vyāhṛtis.
5.17.1	Then he installs the Sabhya and Avāsathya fires, having brought in the worldly fire, churned it, and installed it from the Āhavanīya as per the Rṣya-installation.
5.17.2	Agni, do thou purify the life-breaths. O Agni, do thou cleanse thyself. Agni, the sage, the purifier, the five-born, the priest, him, the great giver, we seek. He places three kindling-sticks of the ashvattha tree on each one.
5.17.3	Or three on the Ahavaniya.
5.17.4	The wave of the ocean rose up, the sweet one, and with the Upamsu (verse) he attained immortality. The secret name of ghee is the tongue of the gods, the navel of immortality. We shall proclaim the name in this sacrifice, holding it with ghee and salutations. May Brahma listen to the praise being sung. The four-horned bull was born, the white one. It has four horns, three feet, two heads, and seven hands. The bull is bound in three ways and roars. The great god has entered among mortals. The three Shami-wood sticks are anointed with ghee. He places three in each, three in each. Or three in the Ahavaniya.
5.17.5	Thus, having placed the kindling woods, he offers the Agnihotra silently.
5.17.6	Then he offers the Agnihotras silently.
5.17.7	Or else, having filled the ladle with twelve spoonfuls, he offers, meditating on Prajapati in his mind. This is the place of Agnihotra.
5.17.8	The sacrificer sends him to the one he hates, saying, "O Agni, with those terrible forms of yours, go to him." With them he afflicts him. The Anuvākyā (verses) are recited in the forest.
5.18.1	Having filled the ladle with twelve spoonfuls, he offers a full oblation with the sevenfold verse, "O Agni, thy seven kindling-sticks, thy seven tongues." When the oblation has been offered, the sacrificer, having given a boon, recites the auspicious verse, "Those fires which are in heaven, which are on earth, coming together, yielding food and nourishment, may those fires, having given wealth, being pleased, having become sharers of oblations, may they go to their respective places and set again, svāhā." He offers thus.
5.18.2	Then the sacrificer stands up with the Viraj verses. Then (he says) "O Anvähäryapacana, protect my food, which is equal to my breath, with the Pitrs. May we be united with the food and nourishment, with the prosperity of wealth." He says this to the Anvähärya-pacana. "O Garhapati, protect my cattle, which is the root of the world, the progeny, the continuation of the self, created from the heart. I give it to you." He says this about the Garhapati. "O Ahävaniya, protect my cattle which is of various forms, wealth, and prosperity. I give you the prosperity of the houses and the joy." He says this regarding the Ahävaniya. "O Sabhya, protect my assembly, which is the means, the enhancer of prosperity. I give the shadow of the assembly to you." He gives this to the Sabhya. "O Budhniya, protect my mantra, and the prosperity along with fame. I give the mantra to the Budhniya and the prosperity and fame." He says this concerning the Budhniyan. The Viraj Agni spread out in five ways, created by Prajapati. The Rohini Agni ascended upwards, the source of Agni, the foundation. All of them.
5.19.1	He begins the procedure of the Agniya eight-vessel oblation.
5.19.2	The oblation is placed, the oblation is placed near, the oblation has not been sprinkled. Then having taken up the oblation from the middle of the assembly, having sprinkled it, having placed the dice, having placed gold in the dice, having mixed, having arranged, having spread, having sat down, having taken up the vow, he offers to the king in the middle of the oblation.
5.19.3	In the middle of the assembly, having placed gold in the house, he offers gold with mantras. "Pra Nuna Brahmaṇaspati speaks the praiseworthy mantra, in which Indra, Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman, the gods have made their intentions."
5.19.4	May the serpent, the one with the single foot, the one with a single foot, the earth, the ocean, the All-gods, the increasers of truth, the invoked, the praised mantras, the wise ones, may they protect us. Having said this, while giving the hundred dice to the sacrificer, he says, "Let us play for a cow from the barley grains, without harming the pieces."
5.19.5	They act as if they are giving instructions.
5.20.1	The sacrificer conquers by means of it.
5.20.2	They offer the food prepared by means of it to those who are seated in the assembly.
5.20.3	They eat in the house.
5.20.4	The sacrificer stands by the fires with the formulas "May the heaven and earth be united, may the fires be united."
5.20.5	He undertakes the rites beginning with sprinkling.
5.20.6	At the time of giving the Dakshina to the Agni-priest, he gives the Dakshina.
5.20.7	A goat, a full vessel, and a garment are given to the Agnidhra.
5.20.8	A horse fit for riding is given to the Brahman or the Adhvaryu.
5.20.9	A bull is given to the Adhvaryus in the place of the Ahavaniya.
5.20.10	A cow is given to the Hotri on the other side of the Garhapatya.
5.20.11	The clothes, the pair of animals, the new chariot are given to all.
5.20.12	Having said that it is given up to twelve, it is understood that it is given beyond that, because of the restriction of the unlimited.
5.20.13	He says beyond the prescribed gifts, "Six should be given, twelve should be given, twenty-four should be given."
5.20.14	They choose among them.
5.20.15	For those animals whose prosperity one desires, one should offer the Vayasam.
5.20.16	One should offer a Ditya cow and a Ditya-drawn cart, and a Muṣkara.
5.20.17	One gives the Varadamanā as Dakṣiṇā.
5.20.18	If one were to establish the fires without being wealthy, one should offer a cow as Dakṣiṇa. It is known that this is the prescribed offering for cows.
5.20.19	The Iṣṭi is concluded successfully.
5.21.1	One should immediately offer the oblations to Pavamāna.
5.21.2	In the twelve-day, two-day, three-day, four-day, half-month, month, season, or year.
5.21.3	One who is not going to perform a Soma sacrifice should not offer before a year.
5.21.4	Some say one should offer.
5.21.5	If one were to offer three oblations of ghee to Agni Pavamāna, Agni Pāvaka, and Agni Śuci, then one should offer to the deities of Soma.
5.21.6	The rites are uniform or diverse. The rites are uniform with Agniye.
5.21.7	If one desires of him, 'May he be worse', one should offer these oblations separately. If one desires of one, 'May he not be better or worse', one should make all of them together. If one desires, 'May he become better and superior', one should offer after having offered to Agni Pavamāna, the oblations of Pāvaka and Śuci with the same sacrificial grass.
5.21.8	The Dakṣiṇā is a hundred-man gold.
5.21.9	The two earlier oblations are of thirty measures each, and the last one is of forty measures.
5.21.10	One gives it after having measured the gold with the same measure.
5.21.11	The Iṣṭi comes to an end with success.
5.22.1	One offers the cake on eleven potsherds to Indra-Agni and the rice cooked in ghee to Aditya.
5.22.2	There are seventeen kindling verses.
5.22.3	At the time of the division into four parts, he offers the sun to Brahma.
5.22.4	The four disciples eat it.
5.22.5	To those who have eaten, he gives a common boon. Some prescribe the gift of a cow and a bull. The Isti is concluded.
5.22.6	He offers the cake on eleven potsherds to Agni-Vishnu, the cake on eleven potsherds to Agni-Soma, and the rice cooked in ghee to Vishnu-Shipi-vishta in three potsherds.
5.22.7	The Iṣṭi comes to an end with the accomplishment of the offerings.
5.22.8	In place of all the offerings made in succession, they offer the cake on seventeen potsherds to Aditya cooked in ghee, with the Dhenu as the sacrificial fee.
5.22.9	The Iṣṭi comes to an end with the Siddha.
5.22.10	One who is about to perform the Agnihotra, having mentally followed the Dashotr, offers the Graha in the Āhavanīya, then offers the evening Agnihotra.
5.22.11	One should offer with the Vyāhṛtis.
5.22.12	When a year has passed, one should offer with the same Vyāhṛtis.
5.22.13	The sacrificer himself should offer Agnihotra for twelve days in the fires of the twelve months, without going away, wearing fresh clothes.
5.23.1	He gives the cow which is milked first for Agnihotra as Dakṣiṇā.
5.23.2	Having performed the Agnihotra for a year after having laid the fires in one place, he performs the Darśa-Pūrṇamāsa sacrifices. Having performed the Darśa and Pūrṇamāasa sacrifices for a year, he performs the Soma sacrifice or the animal sacrifice. Thereafter he performs other rites.
5.23.3	The sacrificer, wearing fresh clothes, should offer Agnihotra himself for thirteen nights without going away. Here itself, having surrounded the fires with Soma-animal, one should abandon them. Just as one would release cattle after giving them good fodder, so should it be done. This is said in the Satyayani Brahmana.
5.23.4	Then he offers the two Homa-offerings to Sarasvati and Sarasvata, and performs the Anvarambhaniya Iṣṭi.
5.23.5	The offerings are: to Agni-Visnu on eleven potsherds, to Sarasvati on one potsherd, to Sarasvata on twelve potsherds, and to Agni-Bhagini on eight potsherds.
5.23.6	If one desires to be blessed with food, one should offer to Agni-Bhaginī on eight potsherads.
5.23.7	Some recite it as a regular rite.
5.23.8	Some say that it is of many kinds.
5.23.9	O Agni, all the blessings of the world, O fortunate one, proceed from you. The forests are like the old ones. The heard-of wealth, the strength, the destroyer of Vritra, the rain of heaven, the path of the waters, the praiseworthy, the giver of wealth, the giver of food, the giver of light, the giver of strength, the giver of cattle, the giver of offspring, the giver of happiness, the giver of prosperity, the giver of good fortune, the giver of the good, the giver of all good things, the giver of everything good, the giver, the giver of gifts, the giver of Agni, the giver of Mitra, the giver of Varuna, the giver of Aryaman, the giver of Indra, the giver of Vishnu, the giver of Sarasvati, the giver of Yama, the giver of Nirriti, the giver of Soma, the giver of Savitar, the giver of Pusan, the giver of Rudra, the giver of Bhaga, the giver of Dhruva, the giver of Vasus, the giver of Sadhyas, the giver of Maruts, the giver of Angiras, the giver of Ancestors, the giver of All Gods, the giver of Heaven, the giver of Earth, the giver of Sky, the giver of Space, the giver of Water, the giver of Plants, the giver of Fire, the giver of Wind, the giver of Sun, the giver of Moon, the giver of Stars, the giver of Time, the giver of Seasons, the giver of Years, the giver of Days, the giver of Nights, the giver of Half-months, the giver of Months, the giver of Fortnights, the giver of Twilights, the giver of Rivers, the giver of Oceans, the giver of Mountains, the giver of Trees, the giver of Herbs, the giver
5.24.1	The mind and the mind-power are mentioned before. One offers the oblation to Jaya at the end of the Svishtakrit offering.
5.24.2	Some recite the mantra as "To the mind, svāhā; to the mind-power, svāhā."
5.24.3	Prajapati is the thirteenth.
5.24.4	O Agni, give me strength and power to tread on those who curse me. For the sake of the people who are not cursed, for the sake of the best, thus (is recited). If one desires, "May I be variegated among the people", he becomes variegated. But his face becomes mottled.
5.24.5	The sacrificial fee is a pair of cows.
5.24.6	The Isti comes to an end with success.
5.24.7	One who is about to perform the Darśa-Pūrṇamāsa sacrifices, having offered the Homa with the Graha in the Havaniya fire, having followed the four Hotṛ priests mentally, then performs the Darśa and Pūrṇamāsas.
5.24.8	One should offer the oblations with the Vyāhṛtis. When a year has passed, one should offer them with the same Vyāhṛtis.
5.24.9	If one were to perform the rite of Ādhāna on the day of New Moon, then on the day of Full Moon, one should perform the rite of Pūrvapārvan, along with the Anvarambhaṇīya rite, after having excluded the rite of Ādhana.
5.25.1	On the next day, one performs the rite of Pūrṇamāsa.
5.25.2	Immediately after the rite of Ādhāna, one observes the vows of a person who has performed the rite of Āhāna.
5.25.3	One should not speak untruth.
5.25.4	A Brāhmaṇa who is not a guest should not stay in one's house.
5.25.5	He should not refuse to give shelter to a guest who arrives in the morning.
5.25.6	He should not eat food that is cooked by a non-Brāhmaṇa.
5.25.7	He should avoid using wet wood.
5.25.8	He should eat food only after washing it.
5.25.9	He should sit in a place where he has himself made a pit.
5.25.10	He should be meritorious.
5.25.11	He should approach his wife after making a sound and with restraint of speech.
5.25.12	He should speak.
5.25.13	One should not eat at night without having offered the evening oblation.
5.25.14	The same applies to the morning.
5.25.15	One should not eat at home without having offered the morning oblation. This is the vow for others.
5.25.16	One should give food to others at night.
5.25.17	Some say one should give.
5.25.18	When giving food, one should not give it away.
5.25.19	In this year, one should not eat meat without offering it to the fire.
5.25.20	"With my mind, I offer food to the fires. May they eat it with my speech. I am not negligent and am attentive. I am eating with a benevolent mind." If one is instructed to eat, one should eat after reciting this mantra.
5.26.1	We shall now explain the re-establishment.
5.26.2	The rite of Agni-installation is to be performed in this case.
5.26.3	One who, having installed the fires, should die within a year, should again install them, if he desires offspring, cattle, prosperity, or if his sons are dying, or if he is afflicted by misfortune.
5.26.4	One who is about to consign the fire to water should offer an oblation of eight potfuls to Agni, a cake on twelve potfuls to Vaiśvānara Agni, a cake to Varuna on ten potfuls, a cake to Agni in water on eight potfuls, and cooked rice to Mitra.
5.26.5	The body of thine, O Agni, which is dear, which is thine, which is thine to be sought, which is thine in the Pavamāna (hymn), with that enter thou the earth, with the Rathantara (hymn) and with the Gayatra (metre). The body of thine, which is dear to thee, O Agni, the most beloved, which is thine by the mind, with that enter thou mid-space, with the Vamadevya (hymn) with the Trishtup (metre). Thereby bestow on us food, and increase the householder's rites. The body of thee, O Agni which is bright, which is dear in the sun, which is bright, and is stored up above, with that enter ye heaven, with the Brihat (hymn) the Jagati (metre). Thence bestow on us rain. Those thy forms, O Agni, that are bestowers of desire, that are stored up according to the divisions, therewith do thou here milk for us our desires, offspring, prosperity, and wealth. Those thy stores, O Agni, Indra, the Boar, hath brought, in those thy lights be thou at ease, in the ashes of the All-god.
5.27.1	Those materials of yours, O Agni, which are in the woods, and which have been collected, go with them to the trees, to their own place, as each one goes. Agni has sat down in his own place, in the place of the non-killing of heroes, he has gone to the gods with the mind. He offers seven oblations before the Svishtakrit.
5.27.2	The Iști comes to an end with success.
5.27.3	Having performed the Full-moon sacrifice, one abandons the burning fires.
5.27.4	One becomes one who has abandoned the fire for a year at most.
5.27.5	The stars Rohini, Punarvasu and Anuradha.
5.27.6	One should perform in the rainy season and autumn.
5.27.7	The materials and the Yajus formulas are prepared or not prepared.
5.27.8	Or one brings five earthen materials, or five wooden materials.
5.27.9	Having spread the old darbha-grass in the sacrificial places, he places the Garhapatya fire with the serpent-queens' formula, "The earth is the lord of the earth."
5.27.10	At midday, the other fires.
5.27.11	With darbha-grass from the Upavela region, which have been blown by the wind for a year, he takes out the blazing Ahavaniya fire.
5.27.12	"When you, angry, poured it out," (he says) to the southern fire; "when your anger was poured out," (he adds) to the other fires.
5.27.13	"May the mind and light be accepted," (he says), standing up with the verse addressed to Brihaspati.
5.27.14	"Your seven fires, O Agni, are seven tongues," (he says,) offering the Agnihotra.
5.28.1	He offers an oblation to Agni on seven potsherds or eight potsherds.
5.28.2	If there are five potsherds, the Samyājyā are Gāyatrī verses; if there are eight potsherds, they are Paṅktyā verses.
5.28.3	All of it is Agni-related.
5.28.4	The Sāmidhenī verses are fifteen or seventeen in number.
5.28.5	From the Sāmidhenīs onwards, one offers silently, and from the last Anuyāja onwards, loudly. The Svishtakṛt offering is made loudly.
5.28.6	In the four Prayāja offerings, he places four cases.
5.28.7	Not in the last one.
5.28.8	Having uttered the case, he makes the Vasat-call with the Prayāja.
5.28.9	If one desires to injure someone, he should place the case after the Yajamāna's offering or before the Vasat-calling.
5.28.10	The verse "We invoke Agni with praise" is the Puronuvākyā for the Ajyabhāga offering to Agni. The verse "O Agni, you purify the life-forces" is for the Soma offering.
5.28.11	One may also use the verse "Agni is the head".
5.28.12	For one who desires offspring or cattle, or for one whose offspring or cattle are afflicted.
5.28.13	The verses for the Patnisamyāja offerings are those in which Agni is mentioned.
5.28.14	Or else, as before, the two portions of clarified butter, so also the offerings to the wife.
5.28.15	The verses of invocation and response are in the form of a row of syllables, "O Agni, today that horse..." Two for Agni and two for Svishtakrit.
5.28.16	He offers oblations around the cake with the verse, "Again with energy and wealth..."
5.28.17	Again, "with wealth" before the Prayājas, and "with wealth" after the Anuyājas.
5.28.18	This is the opposite.
5.28.19	He gives the Dakṣiṇās of both kinds.
5.29.1	The Agni-installation, the re-installation, and the chariot that has been repaired, and the hundred-man gold.
5.29.2	Therefore it is said that silver is gold.
5.29.3	Again, the chariot is mentioned, the root of the scattered (seeds) is mentioned again, and the attainment of desire is mentioned again, according to some.
5.29.4	If the other (sacrifices) were not to exist, one should give only the bull, for these desires are indeed in the bull, and from it there are more, says the Paiṅgalyan Brahmana.
5.29.5	In the two Anuyājas, he places the two Vibhaktis, "The god Agni in the god Agni."
5.29.6	Not in the last one.
5.29.7	One addresses the last one loudly.
5.29.8	The Iṣṭi is concluded successfully.
5.29.9	He offers a cake on eleven potsherds to Agni-Varuna in place of all the cakes offered in succession, or in place of the cakes to two deities.
5.29.10	The Iṣṭi comes to an end. The Punaḥādheya comes to an end again.
5.29.11	One who would perform the third (Punaḥādheyan) should offer these oblations: Laka, Salaka, Sulaka.
5.29.12	If one who has ascended the kindling woods perishes,
5.29.13	If the two fires have gone out or have been extinguished, or if they have risen up, the expiation for that is the Punaḥādheyana.
5.29.14	Again, Āśmarathya says that it is to be deposited again. Ālekhan says that it is the depositing of fire.
6.1.1	We shall explain the Agnihotra.
6.1.2	Taking up the Upavesha, he recites over the Garhapatya, "You are the Garhapaty, you are the Su-Garhapaty."
6.1.3	Then he awakens him, saying, "Wake up, O Agni, and be watchful. May you be united with the performed and the yet to be performed. May this (Agni) and the sacrificer be seated together in the upper and lower (worlds) with all the gods."
6.1.4	The sacrificer says in the evening, "May he be raised up." In the morning, "May he (be raised up)."
6.1.5	He obtains the wish-yielding cow with a thousand (cows).
6.1.6	"With speech I draw thee with the Hotr, with breath with the Udgâtri, with sight with the Adhvaryu, with mind with the Brahman, with hearing with the Agnidh, with these five divine priests I draw thee." Having taken up the burning fire from the Gârhapatya, he draws it towards the Âhavanîya.
6.1.7	"He recites the verse, "O Uddhariyaman, do thou release me from sin, whatever sin I have committed knowingly or unknowingly, whatever sin I may have committed during the day, release me from all that." The sacrificer recites this verse in the evening. "Whatever sin I may have done during the night, release me from that." He recites this verse at dawn.
6.1.8	To Agnipati, to Agni, do thou be gracious to me. To Agnipati, do thou be kind to me. I offer the immortal oblation in the immortal. I offer Agni on the earth for the conquest of immortality. By that I conquer the endless desire. Prajapati conquered him first. Agni in Agni, svāhā.
6.2.1	O Agni, the king, the one-footed, the one to be invoked, the one to whom oblations are offered, the one who has found the world of heaven, earth and the intermediate space, I place you on the head of the sacrificer in the sacrificial world. The one who is hostile to us, O Agni, and the one who is not hostile, I place him against you. Having circumambulated in front, facing north or west, he establishes the fire in the evening at the place of worship. Facing east in the morning.
6.2.2	The sacrificer himself brings the kindling woods, saying, "May we bring them with a mind not distressed, O Agni, may I not offend against thy dwelling-place." With this (verse).
6.2.3	"Whatever thou art, O Agni, and whatever thou art not," with these five verses he places the kindling woods in the fires, each time with a different verse.
6.2.4	In the Āhavaniya fire he places the largest.
6.2.5	As they are placed, so he should proceed in order from the Āhavanīya.
6.2.6	The fire should be placed so that the offering does not fall short.
6.2.7	One should not walk between the fires.
6.2.8	If one has gone before, one should walk back.
6.2.9	For then one has gone behind.
6.2.10	Some say that one should walk back if one has offered by mistake.
6.2.11	One should keep the Āhavanīyī fire at night.
6.2.12	The eternal one, the one who has gone to heaven, is borne.
6.2.13	The Garhapatya is always (used).
6.2.14	If the Anvāhāryapacana is obtained by churning,
6.2.15	If the Anvähäryapacana (is obtained) by churning, they bring it to him from the south every day.
6.2.16	They should bring it on the day of fasting, or on the ninth day, according to the Vâgasaneya.
6.3.1	They decorate the fires with a collection of things.
6.3.2	The decorations are in front in the evening, and above in the morning.
6.3.3	Some say that this is the opposite: the decorations are on both sides in the evening and in the morning.
6.3.4	"O Agni, lord of the house, purify yourself!" (he says) to the Garhapatya fire. "O Agni, the burning one, purify yourself!" to the Dakshina Agni. "O Agni the king, purify yourself!" he says to the Ahavaniya fire. "Agni, the social one, purify yourself!" to the Sabhya fire. "O Agn, the one who is in the assembly, purify yourself!"
6.3.5	He strews the fires with Darbha grass, with the tips pointing towards the north and the east.
6.3.6	The ladle is made of Khadira wood, with one edge, and is used for Agnihotra. It is of the size of the arm or of the span.
6.3.7	The Agnihotra vessel is made of noble metal, with a handle, and with a hole in the middle. It is made with a hole in it.
6.3.8	To the right of the dwelling place stands the Agnihotri. The sacrificer recites over her: "I am the Ida, the upholder of vows. I shall observe the vow of both. I am the Surashani, the upholder. I shall observe both vows. Come, O Ida, be established in me. Come, O Aditi, come, O Cow, come, O Faith, come. I invoke you with truth."
6.3.9	Then, touching the place of the altar, he says, "This is it. Your calf is Agni. May you milk for me heaven and immortality."
6.3.10	Having placed the calf to the south, and having turned towards the east, he milks the cow, either facing the east or the north.
6.3.11	A Śūdra should not milk.
6.3.12	For a Śūdra is born from non-existence.
6.3.13	Or he may milk.
6.3.14	Whatever he places on the Gārhapatya, he purifies it.
6.3.15	He milks with the milking pot of the Agnihotra and the milking pot.
6.4.1	He should milk the two first for the eldest son, the grandson of the eldest, or for one who has lost his prosperity. He should milk the two last for the youngest son, the grandson, of the youngest, or for one younger, or for one seeking to prosper.
6.4.2	He does not touch the breasts.
6.4.3	He milks according to the perception in the eternal Kalpa.
6.4.4	The sacrificer recites the following mantra while the cow is being milked by the attendant as before, and the sound of the stream of milk is heard:
6.4.5	He milks when the sun has set.
6.4.6	The Homa should be performed when the sun has not yet set.
6.4.7	The day and night are the ocean, and the meeting place is the ford in it. Therefore one should offer at the meeting place. This is the Śailāli Brāhmaṇa.
6.4.8	Having seen the constellation, in the evening or at night.
6.4.9	Having seen at dawn or sunrise, in the morning.
6.4.10	When he offers at sunrise, he thereby secures the Agniṣṭoma; when he offers at midday, he thereby secures (the rite called) Ukthya; when he offers in the afternoon, he thereby secures Sodasi; when he offers before nightfall, he thereby secures first the course of the night; when he offers during the middle of the night, he thereby secures second the course of the nignt; when he offers after nightfall, he thereby secuires third the course of the nighit.
6.4.11	It is understood that he should not think that oblations should be offered at all these times. He should think that oblations are offered in an emergency.
6.4.12	The time for offering oblations is the time for the performance of the rites.
6.5.1	His Agnihotra becomes like that of his wife.
6.5.2	His wife sits in her own place.
6.5.3	Having gone round the Ahavaniya fire along its right, and having sat down to the south of it, the sacrificer sips water with the verse, "Thou art lightning. Thou hast dispelled my sin. I have approached truth from untruth. May faith be in me."
6.5.4	In the evening he sprinkles with the formula, "I sprinkle thee with truth and with truth." In the morning he sprinkles with the verse, "I sprinkle with truth and with the truth." First the Āhavaniya, then the Garhapatya, then the Dakṣiṇāgni. Or the Garhapaty, the Āhavani ya and the Dakṣiṇa Agni as they are placed.
6.5.5	"You are the continuity of the sacrifice. I follow the continuity of the sacrificial fire." Having moved away from the Garhapatya, he causes a continuous stream of water to flow from the Ahavaniya.
6.5.6	"You are Dhṛṣṭi, you are Brahman. You are the protector of the world. You are the remover of fear. You are the one who removes the fear of the offspring. You are the army. You are the guardian." Having taken up the Upaveṣa, having placed the embers from the Garhapatya towards the north, having made them without ashes with the Garhapaty, having recited the mantra "You are the one who stands with the serpents," he recites, "I take Agni from the sun for the day and night" in the evening, and "I take Agni for the sun from the night and day" in the morning.
6.5.7	The place of Ida is full of ghee. O Jātavedas, accept this oblation. Those domestic animals of various forms and shapes, of those seven, may there be enjoyment here for the sake of prosperity, good offspring, and good strength. He places the Agnihotra among them.
6.6.1	One should not offer the Agnihotra when the semen is not well-dried. One should dry the semen, but not too much. It should be just right.
6.6.2	One should offer the Agnihotra at the end of the month.
6.6.3	Having made it end, one should offer it.
6.6.4	It would be unpreventable for one who desires brilliance, for one who desires brahmic glory, for one who wishes to destroy sin, and for all desires. And for one who wishes, 'May a hero be born to me.'
6.6.5	The fire is placed on the ground.
6.6.6	He looks at it with the eye of the untarnished one. He looks at it with a burning grass.
6.6.7	"Having brought the ladle for pouring, he pours with the verse, "May you not go away without me." He pours with a little water.
6.6.8	May I be born with offspring and cattle. May I not be deprived of thy wealth, O rising one. May the heavenly world shine in the three worlds. Looking back again, he says, "The Rakshas is covered, the evil ones are covered, the evil is covered, the sin is covered, the sinful deed is covered, the sinner's sinful deed is covered. He who intends to do evil to us, may it return to him." Having thrice turned around, he says, "Thou art the heat, the bestower of wealth and prosperity. Here let me accumulate food." Making the path, he sends forth towards the east or north-east.
6.6.9	Some say that it does not make a path.
6.6.10	Here, having placed the offspring and cattle three times on the ground, having placed the embers in the Garhapatya fire, having recited the verse "May the offspring be protected, may the army be protected, may those who are afraid be protected,"
6.7.1	Taking up the ladle and the spoon, saying, "By the impulse of the divine Savitr," he heats it on the Ahavaniya or Garhapatya fire, saying, "The Rakshas are repelled, the evil spirits are repelled." Having touched it, saying, "May the sacrificer and his wife be free from harm," and having recited over the Agnihotra ladle, saying, "This is the golden staff, the leaves of immortality, the stream of sacrifices," in the evening he says, "I shall offer the oblation to the gods, the sacrificer from sin." In the morning he says, " I am offering."
6.7.2	"You are the oblation of the gods, O Death! May I have safety from you. May there be safety for me." Having uttered this in a low voice, he makes it known loudly, saying, "May it be raised." If the sacrificer makes a mistake, he should himself make it known.
6.7.3	While being raised, both should restrain speech until the offering.
6.7.4	The sacrificer stands without closing his eyes.
6.7.5	When raised, he sits down.
6.7.6	He pours four times.
6.7.7	If one desires that he may prosper in sons, one should pour the full (portion) towards him.
6.7.8	If one wishes that his progeny may be superior to that of his elder brother, one should pour full (portion) first, then less and less, towards the younger. This is the opposite. If all are equal in strength, then equally.
6.7.9	As one perceives, the imagination advances.
6.8.1	"You are offered to Agni and to Earth," is the first. "You are offered to Vayu and to Space," is the second. "You are to Surya and to Heaven," is the third. "You are for the Moon and to the Stars," is the fourth.
6.8.2	"You to the Waters and to the Plants," is the fifth. To the Jamadagnis.
6.8.3	"Bhuḥ, Iḍā; Bhuvaḥ, Iḍa; Suvaḥ, Ida; Kāra, Iḍa, Pṛthak, Iḍa." Thus for each verse.
6.8.4	Having placed the animals in the direction of the Garhapatya, he places them around it, or in the direction of lowering. Having heated his hand in the Garhapaty, he touches it, saying, "May the gods who are present in the evening, those who are present in evening, may they lead us to welfare. May we be united with animals and may we be united with offspring." In the evening. "May the gods present in the morning, those who are presented in morning, may they lead to welfare. May be be united with animals, and may we be joined with offspring." In morning.
6.8.5	Having touched the Palāśa-wood measuring a span, he carries it above the Garhapatya fire, saying, "May I be able to carry the fire."
6.8.6	He runs, saying, "Carry the earth and the atmosphere."
6.8.7	While running, he recites the Dashotr hymn.
6.8.8	He carries it evenly with his breath.
6.8.9	He places it in the middle region, saying, "Svāhā to Agni Vaisvānara."
6.8.10	"He takes it up with the formula, "To the wind thee!"
6.8.11	" "He places it on the Darbha-blades to the rear of the Ahavaniya with the formula, "Obeisance to the departed, to the restrained, to the one who has gone within, to the one having a share in the share, to the world of the seven sages where is the well-done, there do thou place this sacrifice and the sacrificer. Do thou be near. Do thou be on the earth, in the midregion, in heaven. Do thou grant me life."
6.9.1	When the fire is being carried out, the offering is made in the Vasus. The fire lies down in the Dhūpāyas. The first kindling wood is offered to the Rudras. The flame is offered to the Ādityas. The kindling wood is completely offered to all the gods. The flame goes out completely. It becomes like a red-coloured fire. The offering is made to Indra. The embers become. From those embers, the flame rises. The kindling sticks are offered to Prajāpati. Then the flame rises, appearing like a blue-coloured fire. It is offered to Brahman.
6.9.2	Whatever shines when the embers have become quiet, that is the mouth of the gods. Therefore, one should offer in such a way that it is placed in the mouth. This is known.
6.9.3	One who is about to offer, having touched water, places a Palāśa twig as an oblation, either one, two, or three.
6.9.4	This is thy Agni-kindling. I place thee in the form of a golden post, the passage to the heavenly world. The second (brick) is of silver, with a yellow embryo, having the light of Agni, uninjured, yielding what is desired, leading to heaven, for the heavenly world. I place the evening brick, the deity, firm like Angiras. The third (brick) is yellow, with a silver embryo, having the lustre of the sun, uninjured, giving what is desired,leading to heaven, for heaven. I place the morning brick.
6.10.1	Having placed the sacrificial grass, having inhaled and exhaled, having closed the eyes, having looked, having offered oblations, one should meditate on whatever one desires.
6.10.2	Having offered oblations, he looks at the great fire.
6.10.3	When the fire is blazing, or when it is dark, or when the flames have passed and it seems to be flickering, or when it smokes, for one who desires a village, when it is burning, for one who wishes brahminical splendour, on the embers, for one who seeks brilliance.
6.10.4	He offers the sacrificial grass at a distance of two fingers from the root.
6.10.5	He offers in the evening after advancing and in the morning after retreating.
6.10.6	Or at both times after advancing.
6.10.7	He murmurs, "Bhūr bhuvah suvar."
6.10.8	He offers the Agnihotra in the evening with the formula, "Agni is light, light is Agni, svāhā," and in the morning with the formula, “Sūrya is light, light Sūrya, svāhā.”
6.10.9	The evening oblation is offered with the formula, "The fire is light, the sun is light, the light is Svāhā." The morning oblation is offered thus, "The sun is light, Agni is light, the lights are Svāhā."
6.10.10	With the formula, "For Iṣe thee" he smears the evening paste below the mouth of the ladle. With the formula, "for Urge thee" he smears above the mouth of the morning ladle.
6.10.11	"Oṣadhibhyaḥ tvauṣadhayaḥ jinve" (RV 10.9.1) - having rubbed the paste on the sacrificial grass, having placed the ladle, saying "Give me radiance", having waited for the Garhapatya fire, saying "O Agni, the householder, do not burn me; in the self, in the immortal, in the offspring, in the light, with the unerring eye, I wait for you", having waited for Garhapatya, saying "Bhūr bhuvaḥ suvaḥ" (RV 6.61.1), he offers the northern oblation in the eastern part of the sacrificial grass, either silently or with the above-mentioned formula.
6.10.12	Some say, "Do not offer with kindling wood."
6.11.1	Having offered the last oblation, he eats more food.
6.11.2	If one desires, "May he be worse," one should offer more of his earlier oblations and less of his later oblations.
6.11.3	Having offered, he takes up the ladle and recites, "O Rudra, be pleased, O Mṛḍānārbha, be pleased, be pleased, I pay homage to you, O Pāśupata, protect him." He thrice makes the fire in the ladle leap towards the east.
6.11.4	Having wiped off the paste as before, having put on the upper garment, having wiped off the paste on the ground to the south of the altar with the formula, "May it bestow progeny on me," having placed the spoon, having offered the oblation with the formula, “Thou art the rain. Thou hast sprinkled me. I have approached truth from untruth," having touched water, having placed the spoon within the altar, having taken it up with the finger, having eaten the paste with the formula, "Pūṣan is here," silently, without leaving any part of the mouth.
6.11.5	Having sipped water, he again sips and then sips water. Having turned towards the north, having gone out, he says, "I delight the embryos for the embryos. May the Agni-offering be for me, the one who knows, for the ten heroes, for all the groups, for welfare. For the self, for progeny, for cattle, for safety, for the world, for rain, Agni may make my progeny abundant. May he bestow on us food, milk, semen. May he bestow upon us prosperity, wealth, energy. Svāhā." He sips water with the ladle held towards the north or east.
6.12.1	The morning-hymn is concluded with the words, "The oblation to the sun."
6.12.2	Twice he should lick the ladle, filling it with water, and then taking it to the place of disposal, he should rinse his mouth and wash the Agnihotra-ladle with Darbha-grass in front of the sacrificial fire.
6.12.3	It is known that the gods do not eat the food of one who has not washed his hands.
6.12.4	Having filled the ladle with water, he sprinkles in the four directions, saying, "For the serpents, I sprinkle you, for the serpents, I invoke." Having sprinkled three ladles, and having filled the fourth, he says, "I offer nectar on the earth, svāhā." Having carried it around the Ahavaniya fire, he gives the remaining water to his wife in her cupped hands, saying, "I invoke the houses for you, for the houses."
6.12.5	If the wife is not present, one should offer at the wife's place with the verse, "I offer nectar to the wives of the gods."
6.12.6	Having brought another ladle, one should offer with the verse, "May there be peace for the drops." Having offered at the place of pouring, one should heat the ladle in the fire and offer with the verse. The hand should be offered, or the hand should be heated and the ladle offered.
6.12.7	He offers to the seven Rsis with the verse, "To the seven Rsis I offer, may they be pleased."
6.13.1	With the ladle, he offers to the Garhapatya with the verse, "O Agni, lord of the house, enjoy the assembly. Svāhā." He offers one, two, three, or four times.
6.13.2	Some recite this verse: "To Agni, lord of house, lord of wealth, lord of nourishment, for desire and food, Svāhā."
6.13.3	Some say that it is to be offered with the Samābhū-cup.
6.13.4	One offers one, two, three or four oblations with the spoon in the Anvāhāryapacana pot, reciting the verse, "O Agni, do thou accept the oblation, svāhā."
6.13.5	The second oblation is offered with the verse, "Lord of food, do thou give us food."
6.13.6	If one has not eaten, one should offer the oblations in the Ahavaniya fire, not in the other fires.
6.13.7	The oblation is offered in the Ahavaniye fire, not in other fires.
6.13.8	When one offers in the Ahavaniya fire and then offers in the other two fires, it is known that one descends from heaven.
6.13.9	All these are meant for the Homa. Four are offered in the Garhapatya, four in the Anvāhāryapacani, two in the Āhavanīya. Thus ten are completed. The Viraj has ten syllables. The sacrifice is commensurate with the Viraj. This is the Brāhmaṇa of the Bahvṛca.
6.13.10	"The recitation is: "Shine, shine, may shine." This is the recitation for kindling the fire.
6.13.11	"Let it shine, let it shine, let us shine, let us be shining, let it shine."
6.13.12	As they are arranged, so they proceed from the Āhavanīya.
6.13.13	Having sprinkled water within the altar,
6.14.1	he sprinkles the fires as before, not in a stream.
6.14.2	"O Agni, thou hast come to thy own body. O Heaven and Earth, bestow on us strength." Having smeared the Agnihotra vessel with grass, he strikes it.
6.14.3	For that is the completion of the Agnihotra.
6.14.4	One should not strike the grass. It has been said that the Agnihotra is an incomplete sacrifice.
6.14.5	Having washed the Agnihotra pot, he places it in the place of raising, saying, "I offer to Akṣit, to Akṣiti, svāhā." Within the altar or outside.
6.14.6	"Thou art the rain. Pour down on me the evil. I have come to truth from falsehood. In the water, in faith." Having sipped water, the sacrificer performs the sprinkling within the altar with the formula, "Thou art the eater of food. May I be the eater of food; thou art fame. May I be famous; thou art faith. May I be faithful."
6.14.7	The waters first became phlegm, by which Varuna and Mitra were sustained, by which the gods anointed Indra for kingship. By that I anoint myself for prosperity. He brings it to the head, saying, "For prosperity."
6.14.8	One desiring cattle should offer with the milk of two (cows).
6.14.9	One should milk the eastern cow first, and the western cow last, with the milking (verse).
6.14.10	Having placed the former, he brings the latter.
6.14.11	If Rudra were to afflict the cattle, one should offer the milk of two animals, covered with this (mantra), in the evening and morning.
6.14.12	If one were to kill more than that, one should offer clarified butter in the evening and the morning with the mantra, "O Jatavedas, do thou accept this oblation of ghee from heaven and earth. Svāhā!"
6.14.13	"O Agni, do not be angry with me, O Agni, whose body is difficult to control. Accept (the oblation) with svāhā." Having offered oblations of ghee for twelve days, one should not be cautious thereafter.
6.15.1	One who desires cattle should offer with milk, one who desires power with curds, one who desires a village with barley-gruel, one who desires food with cooked rice, one who desires strength with rice, one who seeks strength with meat, one who desires fame with Soma, one who desires brahmic glory with ghee, one who desires brilliance with oil.
6.15.2	One should cook barley-gruel for sprinkling.
6.15.3	One sprinkles the cooked gruel with a Yajus.
6.15.4	So also meat.
6.15.5	He does not pour out ghee, saying, "May I not be without thee." He puts two blades of grass together, or one.
6.15.6	He does no put curd on it, because it is cooked. He does not pour it out, because it is already poured out. This is known from the injunction.
6.15.7	So also rice, cooked food, and Soma.
6.15.8	One should offer with ghee, rice, cooked food, or Soma, if one's offering is not to be poured out.
6.15.9	One who desires brilliance should offer with ghee for a year or twelve days.
6.15.10	One should not offer for a king.
6.15.11	At the time of offering, one should send food from one's house to a brahmin. By that, one's offering becomes offered.
6.15.12	The Agnihotra should be offered every day.
6.15.13	One who is a Soma-sacrificer and truthful should offer it.
6.15.14	The sacrificer himself should offer the Agnihotra every day.
6.15.15	Or on a Parvan day.
6.15.16	One who is a student should offer, for he is bought with Brahman. One who is a priest should offer, for one is bought with wealth. Thus the Brāhmaṇa of the Bahvṛca.
6.16.1	We shall explain the attending of the fire.
6.16.2	When urged to attend, one should attend only the Āhavanīya, as per the injunction, not any other.
6.16.3	Having risen from the northern oblation, one should stand like a horse.
6.16.4	With six verses beginning with "Approaching the sacrifice"
6.16.5	With the seventh verse, "O Agni-Soma, do this for us," in the bright fortnight, and with the seventh verse, "O Indra-Agni, do this for me," in the dark fortnight.
6.16.6	With the eighth verse, "I have done what is to be done for Dadhikravan," in both fortnights.
6.16.7	"May my lustre be in the contests" (thus) four (verses) before the Agni-Soma sacrifice in the bright fortnight, and similarly the Indra-Agni verses in the dark fortnight.
6.16.8	"O Agni, do thou purify the life-breaths" (thus) with six (verses) every year.
6.16.9	One should offer the Pavamana oblations every year in place of these.
6.16.10	The verse "O Agni, giver of life" is well-known.
6.16.11	One should stand facing the west three times in the evening with the verse "O Citravasu, three times in the morning with the verse "Arvagh Vasu, O Vasu, may you be well. May I attain your other shore."
6.16.12	"The kindlers have placed thee, a hundred winters, as the kindlers have placed me, a hundred winters. Thou art the kindling of Agni, protect me from the curse. Thou art the Soma-kindling, thou art the kindling for Parasu. Thou art the Yama-kindling, protect me from death." Having placed four kindling-sticks on each one, he should attend with the remainder of the Anuvaka, "Thou hast attained the radiance of Surya, O Agni. We, O Soma, bearing thy mind in our bodies, may we be prosperous." When the mouth is cleansed.
6.17.1	"I see the creatures," he looks at the houses.
6.17.2	"May I eat the water and the grass," he stands near the cowshed.
6.17.3	"May the Revatīs rejoice," he stands between the fires and mutters.
6.17.4	"You are united, of universal form," he touches the calf.
6.17.5	"You (are) united, of universal forms," the calf.
6.17.6	You are the universe, the thousand-nourishing, nourishing the calf.
6.17.7	He worships the Garhapatya with three Gāyatrī verses beginning with "O Agni, come to us from heaven" and with four verses in two feet beginning with "O Agn, you are our last refuge".
6.17.8	"Do thou, O Agni, be our protector, do thou, O Agni" - this is the fourth verse.
6.17.9	"I see you with energy; may you see me with energy." Thus he looks at the houses, looking at the cattle.
6.17.10	May the greatness of the three be auspicious, the power of Mitra, the noble one, the hard to assail of Varuna, for none of them is there any sin. For in the battles, in the contests, the enemy, the evil-wisher, has no power. For they are the sons of Aditi, they constantly bestow the gift of wealth. He stands with the third verse of Prajapati, saying, "May they give to the one who gives, the one who seeks, the one who desires."
6.17.11	If one wishes that he may return safely, one should look at him with these (verses). He returns safely. This is a rite not connected with sacrifice.
6.17.12	May the Shansus not strike us, may the weapon of the Ararut not strike us. Protect us, O Brahmanaspati, the one who is strong, the one who brings no harm, the one who bestows wealth and increases prosperity. May he protect us, the one who gives, the one who protects. May your swift chariot protect us from all sides, by which you protect the giver.
6.18.1	That which is most excellent of Savitar, Soma, the one to be praised, the one held by Mitra, the leader of the people, that Mitra, never, never do you fall away. We have come around thee, O Agni, to thy house.
6.18.2	"Thou art the treader, I am the trod upon. I tread down him who hates us and whom we hate." He should tread down the right foot with the left heel if he were to compete with an inferior. "Thou art the lord, I am the servant. I serve him who hates us, and whom we hate." He should hold the right foot with his left if he were to serve an equal. "Thou art superior, I am inferior. I am inferior to him who hates us whom we hate." With the heel if he were serving a superior.
6.18.3	May Pūṣan, the protector of cattle, protect me; may Pūṣan the protector of the path protect me; may the lord of the path protect; may the lord and master of the path protect. Having approached the directions, the eastern direction is Agni, the deity. May he approach Agni, whomsoever may offend this direction. The southern direction is Indra, the deity. The western direction is Soma, the deity. Soma may he approach, whomsoever may offence this direction. The northern direction is Mitra-Varuna, the deity. Mitra-Varuna may he approach, whomever may offend this direction, the upward direction is Brihaspati, the deity. Brihaspati may he approach, whoever may offend this direction; this direction is Aditi, the deity. Aditi may he approach, whichever may offend this direction." Having approached the directions according to their signs.
6.19.1	Having placed the fires in order, let Dharma protect me from Dharma, let Vidharma protect me from Vidharma, let Ayus and Prayus protect me, let Chaksus and Vichaksus protect me, and let Praan and Awan protect me. Let us go together with our speech and devotion. Having approached the Garhapatya, he stands with the Agnipavamānī verses, "Let us go together with speech and devotion."
6.19.2	He asks for the name of the son, saying, "O Agni, the householder," and hopes for that blessing. He says, "The threads" for the unborn, and "The unborn" for the born.
6.19.3	Whatever the Agnihotrī desires, he should ask the fires for it. It is known that they bow down to him.
6.19.4	It has been said, "The fires should be approached, they should not be approached."
6.19.5	He attends to them at night, not in the morning.
6.19.6	One should not descend from the fire in the morning. One should not think that the fire has been offered in the morning. This is according to the Vājasaneya school.
6.19.7	One should stand thus: "May I be well-born with offspring, well-heroic with heroes, well-shining with radiance, well-nourished with nourishment." This is according to Vājasaneyins. "May I be able to support you, may my faith not fail."
6.19.8	Some say that one should stand in the evening and morning with the Vatsapra mantra.
6.19.9	With the Goṣūkta or Aśvasūkta.
6.20.1	One should stand in the morning with the Prātaravaneka mantra.
6.20.2	Having recited four times, "May my lustre be in the disputes, O Agni, when it is being raised or deposited," and having sprinkled on the ground three times with, "The evil ones are sprinkled, the evil ones are sprinkled," and having sprinkled, "The evil enemies are sprinkled," and then having recited, "To you, O Time, to you, O Victorious One, to you, the Destroyer, to you, to the one who is to be worshipped, to you, who are well-done, I am sprinkling this for the one who is difficult to please, for my enemies, for my adversaries, may I be the best. Like water from Maitra's spring," and having washed the hands, and having recited, "O Lord of Wealth, bestow wealth on me, make me the lord of wealth, the lord of the people, Indra, the lord of wealth. May he lead me with fame," and having recited the Atharva-hymn, "The divine-born, the purifying, the destroyer of curses, the waters, like the impurities of living beings, have removed our curses," and having sipped water, "Today I am undertaking speech, long-lived, unbroken, uninjured, protected, the constant divine light, the Suparna eye, the well-heard ears, the divine-heard ears, hair, the sacrificial grass, the tuft, the sacrificial grass. Arrange the limbs according to their respective places. May there be peace to the heart. Do not harm me." Having touched the limbs according to the respective signs.
6.21.1	You are radiance, bestow radiance on me. The life-bestowing one, the life-bestower, the life-giver, the life-giving one, the life, the life-sustaining one, the life. May the protectors of the life-bestower be my protectors. May they protect me. May they guard me. May they be my life-bestowers. May no one harm me. May I not harm anyone. May I be well. May I be happy. May I be healthy. May I be strong. May I be prosperous. May I be successful. May I be wealthy. May I be glorious. May I be radiant. May I be brilliant. May I be shining. May I be bright. May I be luminous. May I be resplendent. May I be powerful. May I be mighty. May I be victorious. May I be the victor. May I be supreme. May I be foremost. May I be first. May I be chief. May I be excellent. May I be superior. May I be above. May I be below. May I be in the middle. May I be at the end. May I be without end. May I have no end. May I not be without end. Translation: You are radiance, bestows radiance on me. Life-bestowing, life-bestowal, life-giver, life-giving, life, life-sustaining. May the protectors be my protectors. Protect me, guard me. May you be my life-givers. May no one injure me. May I injure no one. May I be good. May I be fortunate. May I be sound. May I be vigorous. May I be rich. May I be triumphant. May I be illustrious. May I be splendid. May I be blazing. May I be glowing. May I be illuminating. May I be lustrous. May I be majestic. May I be potent. May I be forceful. May I be conquering. May I be a conqueror. May I be preeminent. May I be paramount. May I be primary. May I be principal. May I be outstanding. May I be exceptional. May I be higher. May I be lower. May I be central. May I be final. May I be endless. May I be unending. May I not lack an end.
6.22.1	O Agni, lord of light, salutations to thee, O light. Bestow light on me. May I be well. May I reach the other shore. May I be safe. May I reach thy other shore. May thy other shore be safe. Thou art the thread. Do not cut me off. May this be safe for thee. May this be well for thee. May thy other side be safe. He recites the names of his sons three times each. May thy other sides be safe. May thy other shores be safe. May this be for thee. May it be for thee. The sons of Pūtanā, the sons of Pūṣan, the sons of Prajāpati, the sons of the sun, the sons of Indra, the sons of Yama, the sons of Varuna, the sons of Vivasvat, the sons of Dhātā, the sons born of the womb, the sons born from the womb, the unborn sons, the sons of heaven, the sons of earth, the sons of water, the sons of plants, the sons of truth, as the Vasus, having released Gauri from the path, the performers of sacrifice, may they release us from sin. O Agni, thou art the purifier of life. I have performed the Dāḍhikrāvīti rite. O Agni, may my two kinds of splendour be in the sacrifices. Four verses to Agni and Soma. This is the verse, "We choose the boon of Savitr, the god, the best, the most excellent, the most rapid, the most brilliant. For this is the most excellent, most beloved of Savitr, which does not diminish its own kingdom."
6.23.1	May Savitar, the God, today bestow on us the good, the auspicious, the propitious, the good fortune, the good dream, the good sight, the good hearing, the good speech, the good touch, the good taste, the good smell, the good mind, the good body, the good wealth, the good cattle, the good offspring, the good life, the good fame, the good protection, the good heaven, the good earth, the good sky, the good air, the good water, the good fire, the good light, the good darkness, the good day, the good night, the good morning, the good noon, the good evening, the good dawn, the good morning twilight, the good evening twilight, the good morning and evening twilight, the auspicious, auspicious, auspicious, the good, the good, good, the good. May Savitar, the god, today bestow on me the good, the propitious. Whatever is good, may that be bestowed on me. We desire the good, the most auspicious, the good fortune of the god Savitar. He bestows the good on the one who seeks it. Savitar is the bestower of good. We desire that good, the auspicious one. May Savita bestow on us the auspicious, the good for today, for tomorrow, for every day, the good fortune and the good dream. For the good is the share of the one who seeks the good, the one who knows the good. The consecration, the austerity, the mother, the father, the great one, the knowledge, the Veda, the learning, the knowledge, may they be in me. May Agni and Soma bestow fame on us. Agni shines by which, Soma shines by which, Surya shines by which, Viraj shines by which, by that may I be here, the only one, having gone around all Viraj. Having approached Agni, he removes the grass. It is known that one becomes brilliant and endowed with brahmic glory.
6.24.1	When about to start, he instructs the fires, saying, "Prepare the fires."
6.24.2	He stands by the burning fire.
6.24.3	"Protect our cattle, O Shanshya, protect them for us, so that they may return to us." He says this to the Ahavaniya. "Protect our progeny, O Naru, protect it for us, so it may return to us," he says this to the Garhapatya. "Protect us from hunger, O Budhnya, protect it for me, so that it may return to me," he says this of the Anvähäryapacani.
6.24.4	Standing between the fires, he mutters: "May Mitra-Varuna protect our houses, may you, O two, protect them. May Pūṣan guard them, may they be unharmed and undamaged, when we return."
6.24.5	Having approached with the Viraj verses as before, having eaten, one who is going to depart says: "Make the fires ready."
6.24.6	"The Garhapatya (fire) is the first to be kindled. He stands up to it with the verse, "O Narayana, protect my progeny; protect it for me till my return." The Anvähäryapacaniya (fire) (is the next to be kindled). He stands up to him with the verse, "O Budhni, protect my food; protect it for us till our return." The Ahavaniya (fire) comes last. He stands up with the verse, "O Shansya, protect my cattle; protect them for us till ourreturn."
6.24.7	My name is first, O Jātavedas.
6.24.8	He goes forth with speech restrained, saying, "Do not go away from the path, O Indra, of those who offer Soma. Do not be within the Yajna. Do not be among us, O evil ones. Lead us beyond the northern ones. O Agni, lead us beyond the northern directions. O Agni, with ghee unoffered, unite us with prosperity and many offspring."
6.24.9	He releases speech from the Agni-s.
6.25.1	When going away, he recites the Agni-upasthāna-mantra facing the vihāra.
6.25.2	"Here am I, there am I, O Agni, I hold you with breath, speech and mind. Do not let me be hidden. Do not let my life be lost. I stand with the light of Vaisvānara Agni." If one goes away without performing the upasthāna, one performs it with this.
6.25.3	Having offered the kindling woods, one returns.
6.25.4	Just as sons run to their father when he is away, so do the fires run to him. He brings the wood in the form of chips, just as a son brings it to his father. This is known.
6.25.5	One should restrain speech from the fires.
6.25.6	If the king, father, or teacher were to come between him and the fire, he should not be concerned.
6.25.7	"They bring him the fire, with the thought, "May I not be harmed by your presence, O Agni." "May I not offend you, O Agni, the praiseworthy. May I not offend you in the house of worship." "O Agni, may I shine forth with my body. May I be united with wealth." Thus he approaches."
6.25.8	"He says, "Place the fires."
6.25.9	The blazing one stands up.
6.25.10	"He says, "Do thou proclaim the cattle; do thou conceal them; do thou again give them to us." He says, "O Agni, thou of a thousand eyes, of a hundred heads, thy breaths are a hundred, thy out-breaths a thousand, thou art the lord of a thousand-streamed wealth, of a thousand-flowing milk. Do thou bestow that on us. May we enjoy that of thine. May we be the most abundant partakers of that of thine." He says to the Ahavaniya."
6.26.1	"May Agni, the householder, protect us. May he again give us offspring." Having recited this, he says, "O Agni, the householder! May I be a good householder through you, the householder. May you be a good householder by me, the householder. For there are a hundred winters and two summers. May we be united, not separated, in our bodies." He recites this over the Garhapatya fire.
6.26.2	"He recites the Anvāhāryapacana verse, standing between the fires, facing the Anvāhārya-pacana fire, with the intention of going forward, as one who is about to go forward recites the Upasthāna verse.
6.26.3	The verse "He has protected me from harm" is recited in a subdued manner.
6.26.4	With the four verses "My name and yours, O Jātavedas," he recites the Āhavanīya fire.
6.26.5	"He then says, "My progeny has been concealed by the Narya-priest; give it back to me." Having drunk at the Garhapatya, he says, "The food has been concealed by Budhnya-priest; give that back to me." "Having drunk at the Anvähäryapacani, he says, "The cattle have been concealed by the Shansya-priest; give them back to me." Having drunk at the Ahavaniya, he says as before. He worships with the Viraj verses in the order of the Viraj. The mantra is "Concealed."
6.26.6	Here, the offering of fire and the offering of the directions are like the offering of fire.
6.26.7	If one should go beyond the ninth day, one should offer a libation with the words "Mitra punishes the people, knowing them," and then offer a libation saying "May the mind and light be enjoyed."
6.26.8	Some recite these in order: the offering of fire, the offering of the oblations, and the offering of directions.
6.27.1	They say, "One should not wake up a sleeping person who is superior to him. Who will wake up the one who is superior to me?" One should say, "Obeisance to the one who grants fearlessness! Grant me fearlessness! May there be well-being for me! May there be fearlessness for me!" The Vājasaneyins prescribe this for one who is about to depart and for one who has come for attendance.
6.27.2	"Salutations to you, I shall recite. Salutations to you, I have recited." So say the Bahvṛcas.
6.27.3	Do not be afraid, O houses, do not be frightened. Bringing nourishment, we come. Bringing nourishment, the giver of good gifts, the wise one, comes to your houses, bringing joy to the mind. To those houses where one goes when departing, where there is much joy, we invite the houses. May they know us, the knowing ones. Invited are the friends with abundant wealth, the sweet-voiced ones. May all the men in our houses be unharmed. May our houses be always unharmed. Invited here are the cows, invited are the goats. And also the mash of food is invited in the houses. Thus one approaches the houses.
6.27.4	For your welfare and peace, I resort to the auspicious and auspicious one. "He enters, saying, "For the welfare of the two, for the welfare of the one."
6.27.5	Bearing strength, with good mind and good intellect, I come to the houses, rejoicing in mind. Carrying the goddess, pouring out ghee, I enter among them with a good mind." Having entered, he recites while entering, saying, "May I enter."
6.28.1	One who is about to depart with his house performs this offering to Agni.
6.28.2	When the fire has not been offered, they load the goods on the vehicles.
6.28.3	They should not bring back what is less.
6.28.4	If there is something that cannot be brought back, they should take it first and then load it on the vehicles. They should take it back.
6.28.5	If one is going to stay for five, seven, nine or ten nights, one should offer this when departing.
6.28.6	If he has to go away after having spent one night, he should offer the sacrifice.
6.28.7	The right yoke is yoked, the left is not yoked. The right yoke of the one who is near the fire is yoked, and the left yoke is not yoked, or the yoke of the one whose yoke is removed. Or if all are yoked,
6.28.8	Having recited the Anuvāka, "O Agni, do thou be the protector of the house", having offered on the Garhapatya, having cleansed the bones, he places the fires separately on the kindling woods which are to be kept.
6.28.9	He places the kindling woods above the fire and recites, "This is thy natural place."
6.28.10	Or the sacrificer himself places them on himself.
6.28.11	O Agni, come here with that form of yours which is fit for sacrifice. O Agni, come here, with that form of thine which is fit for sacrifices. O Agni! Come here, with that body of thine which is worthy of sacrifice. O Jātavedas, having been born in thy own womb, thou art now come to thy own place. Having heated the hand, he brings it to the mouth.
6.28.12	"O Jataveda, come down again, carry our oblation to the gods, knowing, bestow on us life, progeny, and wealth, be ever-lasting, shine for us from afar." Thus he makes the domestic fire descend.
6.28.13	If one were to make the fire descend on the kindling woods,
6.28.14	If the fire were to ascend the kindling woods while being carried out, he should recite this verse:
6.29.1	This is the best end: I have come to the auspicious. May heaven and earth be auspicious to me. May the directions be free from disease for me. May there be cattle, wealth, horses, men, gold, and good heroes. Svāhā! He offers at the end of the sacrifice.
6.29.2	One who has not performed the Agrayaṇ sacrifice should not eat new grains without having offered it.
6.29.3	He should offer the first ripe grains of rice, barley and shyamaka.
6.29.4	On the new moon or full moon day.
6.29.5	The procedure for the new moon day.
6.29.6	Seventeen kindling verses.
6.29.7	At the time of sowing, he offers an oblation of eight potfuls to Agni, using old rice grains.
6.29.8	It is known that one joins the tamed with the untamed in that way.
6.29.9	If one desires to perform a sacrifice, one should perform the Agniya offering of eight potfuls. This is what is understood.
6.29.10	The other nine are the Indra-Agni offering of twelve potfuls, the Agni-Indra offering, the Visvedeva offering in milk, the Soma offering of cooked Shyamaka grains, the Dyava-Pritvi offering of one potful.
6.29.11	Some people mention the Dyava-Prithvi offering before the Soma offering.
6.29.12	The oblation, having been poured out, becomes unsprinkled. Then he offers five oblations of ghee, saying, "To the one with a hundred weapons, to the one with a thousand weapons."
6.29.13	In front of the Svishtakrit.
6.29.14	He undertakes the sprinkling and other rites.
6.29.15	One mortar, one pestle, or one seed for each.
6.29.16	The oblation-making mantra is used for all.
6.29.17	Removal of husks.
6.29.18	He utters the excellent speech.
6.29.19	This is the procedure for other seeds of different kinds.
6.29.20	At the time of adorning, he fills the one-pot with ghee.
6.29.21	Or having made the back-part, he prepares.
6.29.22	At the commencement of the rite, having taken it out and placed it on the sacrificial grass, having spread the ladle, having brought the sacrificial grass, and having poured ghee over it, he performs the Upāṁshu rite.
6.30.1	He should offer the entire oblation without turning away, standing straight and not moving his hand.
6.30.2	If the oblation turns away, he should offer it with the tip of the ladle.
6.30.3	Not with his hand.
6.30.4	When the boon is granted, he should be made to offer.
6.30.5	Some say that after placing it and pouring clarified butter over it, it should be offered again.
6.30.6	Or else, one should not make a single-pot offering, but should worship heaven and earth with clarified butter.
6.30.7	Those whose calves are born before the Ekastaka, he gives the first-born garment to the one who is black.
6.30.8	"He eats the share of the sacrificer, saying, "The gods have chosen the good and the auspicious."
6.30.9	There should be a separate injunction for all the mantras of the oblations.
6.30.10	Agni, the first, may he eat, for he knows how to eat the oblation. May the auspicious Oṣadhis be for us, the universal benefactor. Thus for the Shyamaka grains.
6.30.11	The Isti is concluded.
6.30.12	Or one may perform the Agrayaṇesti on the new moon or full moon day.
6.30.13	Or one should worship the new moon or the full moon with fresh (grains).
6.30.14	Or, having eaten the Agnihotra-oblation, or a bunch of Vrihi or Yava, one should offer oblations with its milk in the evening and morning.
6.30.15	Or, one should offer nine oblations of barley gruel in the evening and in the morning.
6.30.16	Or having cooked nine oblations in the Garhapatya fire, one should offer them in the Ahavaniya fire to the deities of the Agrayan and the Svistakrit, making them the fourth.
6.30.17	Or, having cooked four measures of rice, he should feed four Brahmins.
6.30.18	Thus one should perform the sacrifice with barley.
6.30.19	Here, there is no Agneya and Shyamaka.
6.30.20	Those whose calves are born after one-eighth of the year, he gives the first-born of them. "They have mixed this barley with honey, Sarasvati has made it on the mind. Indra was the lord of the chariot, the hundred-strong one, the Maruts were the givers of good gifts." He eats the portion for the sacrificer. The injunction of all the portions to be eaten should be done with mantras.
6.30.21	The Iṣṭi comes to an end with the Siddha (oblation).
6.31.1	If one were to perform the Śyāmāka-Iṣṭi according to different procedures, he instructs, "Take out Śyāmākas."
6.31.2	It has seventeen Sāmidhenī verses.
6.31.3	The two Ajyabhāgas are in the form of Viraj.
6.31.4	You are the Agni with good radiance, the desired, the excellent Hotṛ. With you they spread out the sacrifice. O Soma, those of yours who are bountiful. The two ending with "good" are "Agni is kindled" and "This Agni".
6.31.5	The gift is a garment. The Dakṣiṇā is curds, honey, honey-gruel, honey-cake, a tawny or reddish-brown (cow).
6.31.6	The Iṣṭi is accomplished. It is concluded.
6.31.7	The new grains, viz., barley, vegetables, Śamī, and nine kinds of fruits, may be eaten even when not desired.
6.31.8	Some prescribe a sacrifice for the bamboo-stalks.
6.31.9	When the bamboo-stalk is cooked, he orders, "Take out the bamboo-stalka."
6.31.10	The procedure is the same as before. This is the deity.
6.31.11	It is either Agni, Mitra-Varuna, or Prajapati.
6.31.12	He offers two Prāṇavats, two Dhāyyas, four Ajyabhāgas, ten Havis, two Svishtakṛt.
6.31.13	Having performed with barley, one should offer with barley. The New and Full Moon sacrifices are performed with barley. Thus, with barley. One should offer with barley even from barley. These are the most suitable for the performance of the rites, says the Brāhmaṇa of the Bahvṛca.
6.31.14	In the rainy season, one should sacrifice with shyamaka grains; in autumn, with barley; in spring, with yava grains; according to the season, with veṇuya grains. This is known.
7.1.1	One conquers all worlds by sacrificing with the animal sacrifice.
7.1.2	He, about to perform the sacrifice, having mentally followed the Hotr for six times, offers to the Ahavaniya with the Grahas, "Thy eye is the sun."
7.1.3	He offers cooked rice on eleven potsherds to Agni-Vishnu.
7.1.4	The rekindling of the fire is prescribed.
7.1.5	The Iṣṭi comes to an end with success.
7.1.6	He holds the Ahavaniya.
7.1.7	With the ladle, he offers a sacrificial offering to the sacrificial post in the fire, reciting, "O Vishnu, expand yourself."
7.1.8	Or with the ladle, taking four spoonfuls.
7.1.9	One should not offer for one who is initiated.
7.1.10	Having recited the Vedic verse dedicated to Vishnu, one should cut.
7.1.11	Or one should offer.
7.1.12	Having churned out fire near the sacrificial post, one should offer in that.
7.1.13	The Adhvaryu takes up the ladle and the remnant of clarified butter, the carpenter the axe.
7.1.14	They go to the place where the sacrificial post is to be erected.
7.1.15	The sacrificial posts are of Palasha, Khadira, Bilva and Rauhitika trees.
7.1.16	One who desires brilliance or the sacrificial fire should use Palasha wood. One who desires heaven or strength should use Khadira wood. One who seeks food or Brahmic glory should use Bael wood. One who wishes offspring or eyesight should use Rohita wood.
7.1.17	The sacrificial post is to be of the same height as the sacrificer, without branches, with many leaves, without dry ends, without holes, without bends, without twists, straight, upright, with its upper end slightly bent towards the east, towards the north, and towards the west.
7.1.18	It has been said that one should desire the sacrificial post to be without foundation.
7.1.19	Having passed beyond the sacrificial posts, he recites over the one who is to be sacrificed.
7.2.1	"He goes beyond others."
7.2.2	Then he touches him, saying, "I choose you for the sacrifice to the Vaisnava deity."
7.2.3	"May the god Savitr anoint you with honey." With the ladle, he anoints the root all around.
7.2.4	"O herb, save him!" Having covered the darbha grass with its tip pointing upwards, he strikes with the Svādhiti (kindling wood) saying, "May Svādhiti not injure him."
7.2.5	He brings the first-fallen piece of wood.
7.2.6	If it is broken at the ankle, or at the knee, or at the joint of the knee,
7.2.7	"Do not write in the sky," he says, and makes it fall towards the east. He makes it fall towards either the east or the north.
7.2.8	"O Vanaspati, grow with a hundred shoots," he says while sprinkling.
7.2.9	"May we grow with a thousand shoots," he says, touching himself. "This is your own share," he says, cutting off the grass in front.
7.2.10	"The ray of wealth is not cut off, O Suvira," he says while placing the first (brick).
7.2.11	"Five cubits," he says while laying the bricks for the desired (objects).
7.2.12	From one cubit to thirty-three cubits, they count as one without interruption.
7.2.13	As long as the sacrificer stands with arms raised.
7.2.14	Or as long as he stands on a chariot.
7.2.15	Or as high as the arms are raised.
7.2.16	The minimum size of the post is that of a man. Some say that it should be bigger than that.
7.2.17	The post is three or four cubits in length. It is made of Palāśa wood. It is for the animal sacrifice. The post for the Soma sacrifice is different. This is according to the Vājasaneyins.
7.3.1	It is not carved at the base.
7.3.2	The fire-pan is eight-cornered, gradually tapering towards the top, with the last corner slightly smaller, not too thick, not too thin.
7.3.3	The Avakṣaṇānas are the fire-pans, and the Śakala is the fire-pan used for churning.
7.3.4	The fire-pan is to be made eight-cornered with the middle part concave, and the top part to be of the size of a palm.
7.3.5	If one wishes that another should ascend his world, one should perform the rite with the cup of another tree.
7.3.6	The height of the sacrificial post above the cup should be two, three, or four finger-widths more than the height of the best finger-width.
7.3.7	The altar for the binding of the sacrificial animal should be the size of a chariot.
7.3.8	The altar is to be of the size of a yoke, and is to be drawn towards the east by means of a rope, and is to extend towards the west by means of two pieces of wood, or as far as the external hole.
7.3.9	Or it may be four cubits long towards the west, six towards the east, and three towards the front.
7.3.10	Having made the altar in the form of a Veda, he makes the northern part of the altar, leaving out the area for the Soma-pressing stones, and then makes the southern part. Having left out the area for Soma-pressing stones and the area for the sacrificial post, he makes the altar with ten steps towards the north.
7.3.11	Some say that it should be smaller in front.
7.3.12	Having measured the altar with the yoke or the steps of the sacrificer, he marks it with the Samya grass.
7.3.13	The Uttaravedi is of the size of a palm-leaf for the animal-sacrifice.
7.3.14	Having placed the palm-leaf towards the east with its tip towards the north, he draws a line towards the north with the wooden sword, saying, "Thou art mine to be conquered." Similarly towards the south, towards the east, saying, "thou art mine to be subdued." Towards the west, towards the north, saying, "Do thou protect me from being unprotected." Towards the north, towards the east saying, "Do Thou protect me from being afflicted.
7.4.1	The sacrificial post is to the north of the Vedi, and the sacrificial shed is to the north-east of the Vedi.
7.4.2	Then, like the Uttaravedi, he draws it silently with the Samyu-formula, "For thee, offered by the god Savitr," taking up the chalk. Having drawn it thrice clockwise, silently, he digs it down to the knee or three Vitasti-lengths for the Uttaravedi. He takes the earth for it with the verse, "May the earth be known."
7.4.3	He places the lionesses on the northern altar.
7.4.4	With the same formula, he places the second one on the second altar and the third one on the third altar.
7.4.5	Having taken the fourth silently, he says, "May the lord of sacrifice be praised." Having praised, he says, “Be firm.” Having bound with the Samyu grass, he says, “(May you) be fit for the gods.” Having sprinkled with water, he says, "(May you) be purified for the gods." Having scattered sand, he says, (May you) be pure for the gods." Taking the remaining Prokṣaṇī water to the north of the Uttaravedi, he says, "May the water flow away." Having removed the northern single-spoonful with the wooden sword, he says, "May the loud-sounding one drink the sweet Soma, bestowing life, uninterruptedly in the lord of sacrifice. The one who is protected by the wind, who nourishes the creatures with his own self, shines in many ways." He arranges the ends of the Uttaravedī.
7.4.6	Some say: It is touched.
7.5.1	Then having made a hole in the middle of it, of the size of a palm, or of a cow's hoof, or of a horse's hoof, and having made it four-cornered and four-crested, and having made the young girl with the navel pointing upwards, and having made a hole of the size of ghee, in the middle of the world, and having recited the two verses, "The gods dwell together in the two, rejoicing here in the highest heaven," and having sprinkled the Uttaravedi with the verses, "Indra's voice protects you in the east with the Vasus," according to the sequence.
7.5.2	Tvaṣṭā protects thee from above with forms.
7.5.3	The remaining water for sprinkling should be taken to the north of the southern altar with the verse, "I offer thee with the fire of hatred, thinking of the hated one in the mind."
7.5.4	Having taken up the fivefold portion in the Juhu as before, having placed gold in all places, he sprinkles the northern altar or the northern navel with the verses.
7.5.5	"He sprinkles the southern shoulder, the northern hip, the southern shoulder, and the middle with the verses, "You are a lioness."
7.5.6	Having taken up the ladle with the formula, "For the Bhūtas thee", he places the enclosing sticks of Pautidrava grass around the Uttaravedi with the formula, "Thou art the life of the universe". The middle one with the formula, "Thou art the firm one". The southern one with the formula "Thou art the one who does not fall".
7.5.7	He offers all the oblations at the junction of the enclosing sticks.
7.6.1	He puts the materials on the northern altar with the formula, "Thou art the ashes of Agni." Guggula, fragrant incense, a white woolen thread, a sheep's wool, a sheep' shorn or not shorn before.
7.6.2	Some recite the rite beginning with the pouring down of clarified butter and ending with the putting of materials on the northern half of the altar, on the fire held above.
7.6.3	Having sprinkled (the ground) with the twigs of the Udumbara or the Plaksha tree, he should cover it and stay there, if the animal is not available on that day.
7.6.4	Having kindled the sacrificial wood on the Āhavaniya fire and having sprinkled it with sand, he instructs, "Recite for Agni being led to the Āhavaniye fire" or "Recite for the Agni being led to."
7.6.5	Having taken up the fire for the Āhavaniya, he offers the Udyat-homa with the verse, "O Pavaka, whatever we have done, may it be well done. May you be the first and not the second. May you increase your body with ghee. Do not injure me. May it be well done in the east. Svāhā."
7.6.6	After reciting the first verse three times, he carries it to the Upayamanī ladle.
7.6.7	"The first one (Agni) sits down on the seat, the one with wool. This is known to the Hotṛ. O Agni, drive away the enemies, remove the evil spirits, repel the demons from this great ocean, from the sky, from the earth, from the waters, from the space. Let it be established here at the sacrifice, in the good opinion, in the good service. May many treasures enter you. Making a long life for the sacrificer, and the immortal one for the priest, the sacrifice has been established here." Having established in the materials,
7.7.1	"Thou art the excrement of Agni." Having placed the northern enclosing stick, he says, "We honour thee with Manu's honour, we honour thee with Manu-like honour, O Agni, with Manu-like favour, O Angiras, we honour the gods with the honour of the gods." Having kindled the fire, having filled the ladle with twelve spoonfuls, he offers the full oblation with the sevenfold verse, "Seven are thy kindling woods, O Agni, seven thy tongues."
7.7.2	Agni, Vayu, Aditya, Vishnu, knowing, may lead the sacrifice. May the destroyer of sacrifices not know him. May the gods proclaim the sacrifice. May he go to the lord of sacrifice. Svāhā. He offers four Ati-mukti oblations.
7.7.3	This is the Ahavaniya of the animal sacrifice. From where he offers, that is the Garhapatya.
7.7.4	If the Agnihotra-time has arrived, one should offer the Agnihotra in this (fire).
7.7.5	Similarly, if the procedure is interrupted elsewhere.
7.7.6	He brings the kindling-wood and sacrificial grass.
7.7.7	The kindling-wood is of twenty-three kinds of wood, the Prastara is of Asvalā wood, the Vidhṛti is of Ekṣavī wood, and the enclosing sticks are of Kārṣmarya wood.
7.8.1	Having arranged the fires, he undertakes the rites such as washing the hands.
7.8.2	He uses the vessels in accordance with their purpose.
7.8.3	The Sphyi, the Agnihotra-vessel, the Vasahom-vessel, the second Juhu, the vessel for the clarified butter, the second Upabhṛt, the two vessels for the clarified butter (the Hridaya and the Shula), the knife, the pot, the Plaksha-twig, the Shakhapavitra, the two Vapa-strainer-sticks made of Karṣmarya wood, the two-pronged and the one-pronged fork, the Udumbara wood, the Maitrāvaruṇa staff, the Rasana which reaches to the mouth or to the chin.
7.8.4	Having purified the sacrificial formula, he instructs the sacrificer to restrain speech.
7.8.5	Having touched the vessels with restrained speech, having purified the sprinkling water, having invited the Brāhmaṇas, he sprinkles the vessels. Here he releases speech. Taking the wooden sword, having encircled the northern boundary, as in the Darsha-Pūrnamāsa, he instructs, "Put the clarified butter and curds." He bows down at the end of the instruction.
7.8.6	At the time of cleaning the ladles, having cleaned the ladle, he cleans the ladle-cover.
7.8.7	Having poured clarified butter into the Juhu and Vasahomas, and the Upamant, he pours curds.
7.8.8	Except for the placing, the curds are prepared.
7.8.9	There is no rite for this curd, says another.
7.9.1	At the time of taking up the clarified butter, he takes four spoonfuls in the Juhu, and four in the Upamant.
7.9.2	Having brought the clarified butter, and having placed it in the vessel for the Prshad-ajya, he takes five spoonfuls of the Prshadajya, saying, "Thou art light, of universal form, the kindling wood of all the gods." Or, "Thou art the light, of universal appearance, the kindling-wood of all the gods".
7.9.3	Four spoonfuls in the Dhruva.
7.9.4	At the time of placing the clarified butter, the clarified butter is placed.
7.9.5	The vessel for the clarified butter should be like the Upabṛt.
7.9.6	Having recited the mantras over the clarified butter as before, he should draw the pit for the sacrificial post in front of the Ahavaniya fire, half within the altar and half outside the altar.
7.9.7	The taking of the clay and drawing of the lines should be done as before.
7.9.8	Then he digs it out so that there is no excess earth.
7.9.9	Having placed the sacrificial post in front of the pit, facing east, and having sprinkled it with water, the purifier should purify everything that the carpenter has cut off with his hand. The purifiers purify the pure one. Having washed the sacrificial post, he sprinkles it with barley-water, saying, "For thee, O Earth!" at the root, "For thee O Sky!" in the middle, and "For thee,O Heaven!" at the top.
7.9.10	"May the world be purified, the abode of the Fathers." Having poured the remaining water of sprinkling into a pit, he places the barley, saying, "Thou art barley." Having placed the barley, he says, "Thou art the abode of the Pitrs." Having spread the two blades of grass, he places the first and last blades of grass, saying, "You are the self-possessed ones." Having offered the two blades of barley with the ladle, he says, "May the heaven and earth be filled with ghee."
7.10.1	He instructs him (the Hotṛ) to recite the Yajus while the sacrificial post is being anointed with clarified butter, saying, "Recite the Yajus for the post being anointed with clarified buttef."
7.10.2	Then the sacrificer anoints it with uncooked clarified butter, from the front with a piece of wood.
7.10.3	Having poured the cup for Indra, having released it with the verse, "From the plants that are most excellent," having sprinkled it with the ladle with the verse, “May the god Savitr sprinkle thee with honey,” having sprinkled the Agniṣṭha altar without interruption, he sprinkles the Oparāta altar.
7.10.4	He touches the sacrificial post three times in the direction of the ropes from all sides.
7.10.5	The sacrificer does not throw away the sacrificial post with Anjana etc. until the Parivyaya (i.e. the throwing away of the sacrificial post).
7.10.6	He instructs, "Recite while the sacrificial post is being erected" or "Recite while being erected".
7.10.7	He erects it with the verse, "May it be raised to heaven, may it fill the atmosphere."
7.10.8	He places it in the hole with the verse, "These are your abodes."
7.10.9	The two verses "One sees the deeds of Vishnu" indicate that one should offer the Agniṣṭoma sacrifice on the Āhavanīya fire.
7.10.10	It has been stated that one should offer a sacrifice to the deity one desires.
7.10.11	The Āhavanīya is the foremost, and the Yūpa is the foremost of the roots.
7.11.2	The two ropes are made of darbha grass, twice the length of the post, with two joints. The rope for the animal is three times the length of the sacrificial post, with three joints.
7.11.3	Taking the rope with the formula, "By the impulse of the divine Savitr," he cleanses the post with the rope in his hand with the formula, “One sees the deeds of Visnu.”
7.11.4	"He says, 'Recite the verse, "This is the supreme abode of Vishnu," while the sacrificial post is being wrapped around.' Or he says, 'Recitate the verse while the sacrificial post being wrapped around.'
7.11.5	He wraps the sacrificial post three times clockwise with the rope, saying, 'You are being wrapped,' at the navel or in the middle region.
7.11.6	It has been said, 'He for whom one desires prosperity.'
7.11.7	Some say that one should throw it down far away for one who desires rain, and up high for one who does not desire rain.
7.11.8	If one desires that a woman should be under his control, one should throw it beyond her and not enter.
7.11.9	If a man wishes, "May he be born to him," then having entered the end of his (wife's) garment, having taken the Svara, "Thou art the son of heaven," having covered the garment of the sky with the northern one, he covers it in the middle of the two strings of the Agniṣṭha.
7.11.10	In the last or in both the lower ones, says Vājasaneyaka.
7.12.1	They sprinkle the animal, except the one with a horn on the forehead, the one with a broken horn, the one with the horn on the side, the one with seven horns, and the one with a hump.
7.12.2	If it is deficient in any limb or if it is injured in any limb,
7.12.3	Then, having offered to Viṣṇu, Agni-Viṣṇu, Sarasvatī, and Brhaspati, one should employ it.
7.12.4	It is known that the one who has fallen and defecated is of the animals.
7.12.5	"For Isha thee" (with these words) he takes up the two sacrificial grass-blades. "Thou art the Upabarhi" (with these) he takes up a branch of the Plaksha tree, having many leaves, with fresh tips, not dried up.
7.12.6	If one desires that he may be without cattle, one should make it with a leafless (branch) and with dried tips.
7.12.7	Some say that one should make it by means of grass.
7.12.8	With the two sacrificial grass-blades and with the twig of the fig-tree, he places the animal in front, facing eastwards, with the formulas, "The divine hosts are going up to the gods, being born from Prajapati." Touching with these formulas, he says, "I place thee near Indra and Agni, agreeable to them."
7.12.9	The five times of instruction by the deity are at the placing, the binding, the sprinkling, the lifting of the omentum, and the pouring of clarified butter over the heart.
7.12.10	Knowing, they accept. The first five (verses) are recited. Having offered five oblations, one churns the fire.
7.12.11	One may also churn the fire and then offer it.
7.12.12	"One places the churning stick, saying, "You are the womb of Agni." "The testicles are here," (saying this) one places two darbha-blades pointing eastwards."
7.12.13	"One takes the lower churning-stick, saying, "Thou art Urvashi." "Thou art Pururava," (saying thus) one takes the upper churning-stick."
7.13.2	When the first (verse) is recited thrice, he stirs the fire thrice, reciting, "Be born in the Gayatri metre", the first (verse), "Be born in Trishtup metre", the second, and "Be born in Jagat metre", the third.
7.13.3	Then he stirs as much as he can.
7.13.4	If the fire does not catch while being stirred, he should recite the verses against demons.
7.13.5	"Having been born, announce!" Having ordered the one who has been born, he strikes the one being driven away.
7.13.6	"May our minds be united!" Having said this, he strikes the Avāhana fire with the northern end of the enclosing sticks, either with the joint.
7.13.7	"The Agni moves in the Agni, having entered!" Having struck, he offers with the ladle.
7.13.8	Taking the rope with the Savitrī verse, he ties it to the right arm of the animal, lifts it up, and says, "With the noose of the divine oblation, I bind you." Having tied it with the noose at the right half of the head, he says, "The human beings are restrained." He ties it to the north of the sacrificial post.
7.13.9	To the south, the Ekādaśinī verses.
7.13.10	He sprinkles it, saying, "I sprinkle you from the waters and plants."
7.13.11	You are the great protector of waters. You give to drink.
7.13.12	The waters, the goddesses, make this offering of ours tasty. Having sprinkled above, below, and on all sides, he places the Veda and proceeds to the Sāmidhenī verses.
7.14.1	Having offered the Sruva-spoonful, having returned, he anoints the animal with the Juhu.
7.14.2	May your breath go with the wind. On the head, may your limbs go with the sacrificial posts. On the shoulders, may the lord of sacrifice go with the blessings. On the hips.
7.14.3	The Dhruva and Samanjana rites are performed up to the Pravara.
7.14.4	Six priests.
7.14.5	Having again called out, he directs the Maitrāvaruṇa priest to perform the Homa. The Mitra-Varuna are the rulers, the Homa is the rule.
7.14.6	He offers eleven Prayāja offerings while standing near the animal.
7.14.7	He first instructs, "Send the kindling wood," and then instructs the others, "Send, send."
7.14.8	Having taken the fourth and eighth portions, he offers ten oblations and then offers the Ajya in the eleventh.
7.14.9	The sacrificer, having recited the four original mantras, recites the fourth mantra for the four, and then recites the remaining three, starting with the Duras, with the last mantra.
7.14.10	Having returned, he anoints the Svāru and the Svadhiti with the Juhu, three times the Svāru, once the Svadhiti, each in a stream.
7.14.11	Having concealed the Svāru with the Svadhiti he anoints the animal with ghee, saying, "May you protect the animal anointed with ghee." On the head.
7.14.12	Not with the Svadhti, but only with the Svāru.
7.14.13	With the anointed one he cuts the animal, with the other he cleanses.
7.14.14	While giving the ladle to the Hotṛ, he says, "This is thy seat, O Hotṛ; be thou clear."
7.15.1	He instructs, "Recite for the Parignya (the fire-pan) being made."
7.15.2	The Agnidhra, taking the torch from the Ahavaniya, performs the Parigni-rite three times reciting the verse, "The Parapati, the wise one, has come around, the one who is the lord of wealth." Some say that he performs the Parigani-rite around the animal, the sacrificial post, the Ahavaniya fire, the Shamitra region, the sacrificial ground, and the clarified butter.
7.15.3	He returns the torch three times in the opposite direction.
7.15.4	Knowing, they accept (the animal) first. When the animal is being led around, one offers oblations to the non-gods, one, two, three or four.
7.15.5	"The animals of Pasupati are diverse, or similar. Among them, the one whom the gods have chosen, may he be pleased with me." The second.
7.15.6	"When being bound, when being released, when being led around."
7.15.7	The Adhvaryu and the sacrificer begin the animal sacrifice with the two ladles, reciting, "The Revatīs enter the lord of sacrifice, the beloved." Having called out, and having been called back, he instructs, "Do instruct, O Hotṛ, the offerings to the gods."
7.15.8	The Hotr, having known (the time), takes up the torch from the Ahavaniya fire and goes forward, followed by the Agnidhra.
7.15.9	The Sāmitā takes the animal to be sacrificed.
7.15.10	"They lead the animal towards the north, between the Cātvāla and the Utkara, reciting, "The sky is the breast."
7.15.11	The Adhvaryu mutters, "The breath of the sacrificer is different from that of the animal.
7.16.1	Having understood that the earth is to be dug up, he digs up the earth.
7.16.2	Having set fire to the place, he puts a torch there.
7.16.3	That is the fire-pit.
7.16.4	Having placed the animal facing south, he says, "Protect the earth from the fire." Having spread grass under it, he says, "For the sprinkling of the animal, for the sprinkling of the earth, for the sprinkling, for the sprinkling."
7.16.5	They make him lie down with his head towards the west and feet towards the east.
7.16.6	Having said, "Make him lie down with the life-force facing downwards," the Adhvaryu turns away.
7.16.7	You are the knower of heaven, having known heaven, go to heaven. Heaven for me, heaven for the cattle. You are the knowers of the world, having known the world, go to the world. World for me, world for the cattle. Knower of the path, having known the path, go to the path. Path for me, path for the cattle. The knower of the protector, having known the protector, go to the protector. Protector for me, protector for the cattle. Indeed, you do not die, you do not perish. You go to the gods by the good paths. Where the well-doers go, not the ill-doers, there may the god Savitar place you. I place you among the protectors of the directions. I unite all the directions with honey. May the waters and plants be free from disease. May this sacrificer be free from enemies. May all animals be free from grabbers. Having said this, the sacrificer turns away. The Adhvaryu murmurs, "The sacrificer's breath is different from that of the animal."
7.17.1	May those whose udder is four-nippled, filled with honey and ghee, be the most bountiful ones in this cattle-pen, increasing in age. Here may the animals of all forms, knowing all, the givers of ghee, approaching Agni, their home, protect us with milk and ghee. Looking at the clarified butter, the Adhvaryu and the sacrificer, both restrained in speech, sit down.
7.17.2	May Indra bestow the good fortune of the sun on this sacrificer and on the sacrificer. May he roar against him who hates us. May the heroes of the sacrificer be free from disease. When the animal is being led away, one should look at it.
7.17.3	When the animal is being taken away, one offers a Homa with the formula, "May the animal not be afflicted."
7.17.4	The Adhvaryu and the sacrificer have approached the animal with the Vapa and the Upasrapaniya (cups).
7.17.5	He releases the noose of the animal, saying, "Aditi has released the noose."
7.17.6	Having bound the rope around the neck and having placed it on one horn, he places it outside the sacrificial post, saying, "I am making the lower one for the one who is going to be hostile."
7.17.7	If he were to perform the rite against an enemy, he would say, "I make him inferior, I release the noose on him whom I hate." He should place a tree, a post, or a pillar with that (verse).
7.18.1	Then the Pratiprasthātṛ takes the wife to the Uddhāraṇa.
7.18.2	The wife worships the sun with the verse, "Salutations to the one who is stretched out."
7.18.3	"Go forward without turning back." He makes the eastern one go forward, reciting the formula. Some say, "Recite the formula."
7.18.4	The wife sprinkles water in the sacrificial pit with the verse, "O divine waters, you are pure and youthful." The priests and the sacrificer do so.
7.18.5	Some say, "Not the wife."
7.18.6	By means of water, he nourishes all the vital breaths of the animal.
7.18.7	The Adhvaryu sprinkles all the limbs. The wife nourishes. This is the opposite. "Let the speech be nourished." With these (verses) as per the sequence of the limbs.
7.18.8	"The breath which has gone from you." At the heart region.
7.18.9	"Let the penis be nourished." At the penis.
7.18.10	"The pure conduct." At the feet.
7.18.11	Having sprinkled each one, he recites the verse, "May there be peace to the waters." This is because the earth was given to the plants in the past.
7.18.12	"May there be peace for the plants, may there be peace for earth." Having led the remaining (water) on the ground, he says, "O plant, protect him." Having covered the remaining (water), which is left after the two coverings, on the right side of the navel, he says, "May the wood-cutter not harm him." The wood-cutter cuts it obliquely from the side.
7.18.13	He takes the tip of the sacrificial grass with his left hand.
7.18.14	Then he cuts off the middle part, anoints it on both sides with red (earth), and says, "This is the share of the Rakshas." Having pushed aside the upper and lower parts, he stands on it with his left foot, saying, "I am suppressing the Rakshas, I am leading the Rakshas to the lowest darkness."
7.19.1	Having taken out the Vapa with the formula, "For Isti thee," and having sprinkled the sky and earth with ghee, he covers the two-pronged Vapa with the Vapa. Having placed the last one-pronged Vāpa with the formula, “For Urge thee,” he places it at the end.
7.19.2	Having sprinkled with water, saying, "For the gods, sprinkle," and having wiped the vessel with the Svadhiti-formula, saying, "To the gods, sprinkle." Having cut off, saying, "The severed share of wealth, for the gods Indra and Agni, the most excellent, I cut off." Having cut off.
7.19.3	Having covered the vessel with the palm, having placed it near the vessel, having offered the vessel,
7.19.4-6	Having placed the Vapa in the fire, having taken the embers, having taken the Uddhāra-spoon, having taken the ladle, having taken the spoon, having taken the wooden sword, having taken the sacrificial grass, having taken the pot, having taken the strainer, having taken the vessel, having taken the water-pot, having taken the Soma-vessel, having taken the cup, having taken the two cups, having taken the three cups, having taken four cups, having taken five cups, having taken six cups, having taken seven cups, having taken eight cups, having taken nine cups, having taken ten cups, having taken eleven cups, having taken twelve cups, having taken thirteen cups, having taken fourteen cups, having taken fifteen cups, having taken sixteen cups, having taken seventeen cups, having taken eighteen cups, having taken nineteen cups, having taken twenty cups, having taken a hundred cups, having taken two hundred cups, having gone to the place of the Soma-pressing, having taken the skin of the black antelope, having taken the Prastara, having taken the Anuvāka, having taken the Pratiprasthātṛ, having taken the Adhvaryu, having taken the Brahman, having taken the Hotṛ, having taken a thousand cups, having taken one thousand and one cups, having taken three thousand cups, having gone towards the east, having gone towards all directions, having gone towards heaven, having gone towards earth, having gone towards space, having gone towards Agni, having gone towards Soma, having gone towards Indra, having gone towards Viṣṇu, having gone towards Sarasvatī, having gone towards Pūṣ
7.19.7-9	He throws the half of the fire-brand into the Āhavanīya. "Having thrown the embers into the Āhavaniya, he says, "The Rakṣas is burnt, the evil spirits are burnt." Having taken the stake and the Āhavanīyī fire to the south of the mound, he gives it to the Pratiprasthātṛ. The Pratiprasthātr, sitting to the south, cooks it in the Āhavanīyā fire.
7.20.1	"O Vayu, drive away the small ones", he places the tip of the sacrificial grass below the ladle.
7.20.2	"You have been appointed as the carrier of oblations", he offers the ladle with the ladle.
7.20.3	When the small ones have appeared, he instructs, "Recite after the small ones".
7.20.4	Having made the Alohinī (the ladle for pouring clarified butter) well-melted, and having placed the well-prepared medicinal herbs on the southern end of the altar, having taken them up on the leaf of the Plakṣa tree, having taken up the Vāpā-srapaṇī (the ladle used for pouring the clarified butter) with the words "I take up the hatreds", having placed it, having taken up clarified butter in the Juhū and Upamantā (the two ladles), having gone around along the south, having caused to announce, having caused to be announced, he directs (the Hotr) with the words, "Do thou offer to those who are invoked with Svāhā-utterance", or "Do thou offer unto those who are invoked by Svāhā-uttering".
7.20.5	Having offered the Vasat-utterance, having returned, having poured the Dhruva with the remaining (clarified butter), he pours clarified butter over the Pṛṣadājya. Then he pours the omentum. This is the reverse of that.
7.20.6	No Upāṃśu.
7.20.7	He offers the Ajyabhāgas.
7.20.8	Some say, "One should not do that in the animal sacrifice, not in Soma."
7.20.9	Having offered the first oblation to the gods, having placed the ladle on the fire, having placed a piece of gold, having covered the entire oblation, having placed a gold piece on top, he pours it.
7.20.10	Thus it becomes five-edged.
7.20.11	Even those with four edges should be five-edged.
7.21.1	"O Indra-Agni, recite the Anubrūhi formula over the fat of the goat's omentum." "O Indra-Agnis, recite the Prāṣaṅgiya formula over the fat." These are the two formulas.
7.21.2	"O Jātavedas, go to the gods with the omentum." Having offered the omentum after reciting the Vasat call, he steps back and offers the Uttarapāyinya omentum with the formula, "To the gods Svāhā." Standing to the north, he pours the omentum-draining ladle over the omentum.
7.21.3	The Pratiprasthātṛ pours the Vapa and the Shrāmaṇī into the Havaniya with the verse, "May the Maruts go to the heaven above, the Maruts who are the lords of heaven." The eastern one has two points and the western one has one point. This is the opposite.
7.21.4	Here the Adhvaryu offers the Srasrava.
7.21.5	Here the sacrificer gives a gift, a bull, or three cows or three Dakṣiṇās.
7.21.6	Having gone out, they sprinkle themselves with their wives, reciting the three verses, "The waters are firm, the waters are mighty." "Let these waters carry away my sin and impurity, whatever wrong I have done, whatever untruth I have spoken, whatever evil I have uttered." "May the waters release me from that sin, from all sins. I release you from the curses, from Varuna, from Yama's noose, from all divine and human sins."
7.22.1	He performs the rites of placing the vessel etc. of the Pasupurodāśa.
7.22.2	The vessel is joined with the substance as per the meaning.
7.22.3	At the time of offering, he offers the Pasupuroḍāśa made of grains, in eleven or twelve potsherds.
7.22.4	It becomes of the deity to which the animal belongs.
7.22.5	Having released speech with the Havishkṛt formula, he instructs the animal.
7.22.6	The heart, the tongue, the chest, the liver, the lungs, the left arm, both sides, the right hip, the anus, the third part of the buttocks, these are the deities. The right arm, the left hip, the third part (of the buttocks) are the Sauvīṣṭakṛt deities. The spleen, the intestines, the small intestines, the omentum, the kidneys, the fat, the thighs, these are the Uddhāra deities.
7.22.7	"He says, "Do not let the anus be burnt."
7.22.8	The meaning is, "Do not be turned upside down."
7.22.9	Having placed the animal on the stake to the north of the pot of water, having roasted the heart in the ladle, he cooks it in the ladle.
7.22.10	He performs the rites of carrying away, etc.
7.22.11	Having performed with the oblation, he performs with the cake, or with the cooked animal.
7.22.12	"The two injunctions are: 'Recite for the cake to Indra-Agni; send forth the cake to Indra Agni.' The two injunctions are : 'Recite for Indra-Agni when the cake is being taken down; send forth the Indra-Agni cake.'
7.22.13	The two injunctions for the Svishtakrit are: 'Recites for Agni; send forth Agni.'
7.23.1	Having taken up the Prastara, he offers the Iḍā, but not the portion for the sacrificer.
7.23.2	The offering of oblations begins with the Iḍā and ends with the Iḍa.
7.23.3	Having eaten the Upāhuta portion along with the Maitrāvaruṇa, having sprinkled the Prāstara on the barhis as before, having offered clarified butter with the spoon and having bound it with the Veda, he asks three times, "Are the oblations cooked?" "Are they cooked?"
7.23.4	The other replies, "They are cooked."
7.23.5	Having reached the second half of the path, he reaches the third.
7.23.6	"One goes forward with the words, "May Pūṣan, the protector of cattle, protect me." In the second, "May the protector of the path protect me." And in the third, "May he who protects the path protect me."
7.23.7-9	Having taken out the heart from the stake, having placed it in the pot, he anoints the heart with clarified butter with the verse, "May thy mind be united with my mind." Having gone around along the north, he anoints it with the verse, “The animal is clarified butter, the Self is present in the animals.” “Svāhā to the heat, may it not fail.” He recites this verse while the sun is rising.
7.23.10	The animal-sacrificer, while taking the animal, holds the heart-wood in his side, and does not touch himself or others.
7.23.11	Having taken the animal between the sacrificial post and the Āhavanīya fire, and having placed it on the southern part of the altar, he spreads it on four places, namely, the Juhū, the Upamūrvīya, the Vasahomas, and the Havaniyas.
7.24.4	As it is taken out.
7.24.5	Having taken out twice for the deities, he puts it in the ladle, and once for the Sauviṣṭakṛt in the Upabhṛt.
7.24.6	Having divided the anus three times, having placed the largest part for the Upadā, having divided the middle part into two, he puts it for the deities, and the smallest part for the Sauvișṭakṛt.
7.24.7	Or else, having divided it into two parts, he places the larger part in the Sthavimata and the other part in the Upayata. Having divided it into three parts, he places one part in the middle, divides it into two parts and places it in the deities. The smallest part in the Sauvisthakrit, the largest part in the Ida.
7.24.8	The fat is divided into three parts, two parts in the ladle, the third part in the Samavarttadhana.
7.24.9	Having covered the ladle with fat, having placed two pieces of gold above, he pours over (the ladle).
7.24.10	He offers the first six Iḍās with grains of equal size, and the seventh with Vaniṣṭha. The seventh is from the six, the seventh from the sixth.
7.24.11	He increases the Iḍā with bones.
7.24.12	Having ascertained the spleen, the liver, and the intestines, he pours clarified butter over them while they are being heated.
7.25.1	"He takes the Vasahom in the Vasahom-offering vessel, saying, "I take the juice of water and plants."
7.25.2	He cuts off the stream with a ladle.
7.25.3	There are two sets of five ladlefuls.
7.25.4	"He offers the Vasahom, saying, "Thou art prosperity."
7.25.5	"With the swiftness of the wind," (he offers) with this (verse). He offers with the same (verse). Some say, "He offers with the Svadhâ-verse."
7.25.6	When he does not offer on the head, on the shoulders, on the neck, or on the other thighs, they are the offerings that are not to be offered.
7.25.7	Having placed them together with the cooked oblations, he touches them with the verse, "Indra is the breath in every limb."
7.25.8	Then he proceeds with the oblation.
7.25.9	"O Indra-Agni, recite the offering of the goat. O Indra-Agni," this is the instruction for the offering of the meat of the goat.
7.25.10	The Pratiprasthātṛ offers the Vasahomas with half of the Yajya verse, saying, "The drinkers of ghee drink ghee."
7.25.11	He offers in each direction with the Udrekā formula, "To the directions and sub-directions." In the middle, he offers with the fifth formula.
7.25.12	Having placed the Prañca (the ladle) in the proper position, he stands up with the formula, "Salutations to the directions."
7.25.13	He offers with the Vasat-utterance.
7.25.14	Here one should offer to the directions or above the Vanaspati or at the Sviṣṭakṛt.
7.25.15	Having returned, having spread the Juhu, having poured clarified butter once, having poured twice, he says, "Recite for Vanaspati, recite for Vanaspati." At the Vaṣaṭ-call, he offers.
7.25.16	The sacrificer recites the Svishtakṛt-formula.
7.25.17	Having turned the ladle and the spoon upside down on the Ahavaniya fire, he says, "Do you recite the Anubrūha for Agni Sviṣṭakṛt; do you recite the Prāṣaṇī for Agni Svișṭakṛt." These are the two announcements.
7.25.18	Having offered at the Vasat-utterance, he steps back and places the ladles in their places.
7.26.1	Some prescribe the offering of the Idā without the Avadāna.
7.26.2	He offers the Avadāna of the Idā.
7.26.3	Having spread clarified butter, he pours clarified butter over it.
7.26.4	If one desires (the sacrificer) to be without cattle, one should say, "It is without clarified butter."
7.26.5	The Maitrāvaruṇa and the sixth one consume the oblation after having invoked it; the Pratiprasthātṛ consumes the seventh.
7.26.6	He gives the Vanisthuka to the Agnīdhra, having added six Avantas.
7.26.7	He carries the Adhyūdhni to the Hotṛ.
7.26.8	The Agnidh priest brings the sacrificial embers from the fire-house, the Upayashtri priest approaches, the Brahman priest says, "We are about to depart," having placed the kindling wood, the Agnidh priest touches the enclosing sticks and the fire each time separately.
7.26.9	The Agnidh priest brings sacrificial embers from the Agnidhra fire-house, and the Hotri priest offers them.
7.26.10	The shamitras are tied to the animal to be sacrificed, on the northern side of the altar.
7.26.11	Having cut the anus into eleven pieces across, and having sprinkled them, and having turned them back, the Pratiprasthātṛ offers each piece of the anus with the formula, "Go to the ocean, svāhā" at each formula, when the Anuyājas are offered with the Vasat-utterance.
7.26.12	Having offered all the oblations, he sprinkles the Barhiṣi with water, reciting the verse, "May my mind be in my heart." Having brought the clarified butter to the Juhu ladle and making the Upabhṛt ladle as the vessel for clarified butter, he offers eleven Anuyājas with it.
7.26.13	He first instructs, "For the gods," and then instructs the others, "Offer, offer."
7.26.14	The sacrificer recites the original formulas.
7.27.1	With the first one, he recites the first four and the tenth; with the second one, the one before the Vanaspati; with the last one, the remaining ones.
7.27.2	In the two northern rites, the Adhvaryu and the Maitrāvaruṇa recite the Hotr.
7.27.3	Here some prescribe the recitation of the Svara.
7.27.4	Having returned, having placed the Svāru in the Juhu, he offers at the end of the Anuyājas with the formula, "May your smoke go to heaven, the flame to the atmosphere, and the ashes to the earth. Svāhā."
7.27.5	Up to the announcement of the Hotr.
7.27.6	The Sūktavāka-invitation is modified.
7.27.7	The Maitrāvaruṇa should say, "Today we have chosen Agni as the Hotṛ."
7.27.8-11	He offers the four enclosing sticks, except the Dhruva. Having taken the thigh-bone to the south of the dwelling, they perform the sacrifice with it. Having offered to Soma and Tvashtra with clarified butter, he offers to the thigh-bone lying on its back to the wives of the gods, with the formula, "To Agni, the lord of the house." The Hotri offers the Ida to the thigh- bone lying on its back, with the formula "To Agni, the Adhvaryu offers the Ida to Agni, the lord
7.27.12	He gives that wife to his wife or to another Brahman.
7.27.13	The arm to the friend.
7.27.14	If he is not a Brahman, then that to a Brahman.
7.27.15	Having offered three Samitsya-formulas, without touching, he goes to the Yajna-place, having gone to the north of the heart-stone, and having brought water from the Apas, he deposits it in the junction of the dry and wet (places). Thinking of the hated one, he says, "You are a thorn."
7.27.16	"Sūmitrā nāpā oṣadhayaḥ" (RV 10, 97, 1) Having performed the sprinkling in the sacrificial pit along with his wife, and having worshipped the sun with the verse "O king, from one abode to another, the highest," having placed the kindling woods on the Āhavaniya fire, and having followed the water, they stand up with the verse "May we prosper through your prosperity."
7.28.1	The animal sacrifice is of the nature of an Iṣṭi, and the Soma sacrifice is of a different nature. When he offers water in a full vessel and moves in the steps of Viṣṇu, it is of the nature an Iṣṭhi. Other than this is of the nature Soma. This is the view of the Vājasaneyins.
7.28.2	The sacrificer stands by the sacrificial post. Obeisance to the Swerus. May I not go to the Sweruses who are behind. May I be food for the Sweruses. The Sweruses, having horns, were seen by those having horns. The Swerus are on the earth with cups. Those Sweruses, the gods, are standing. Obeisance to friends. May I not approach the friends who are behind. Desiring good heroism.
7.28.3	Having worshipped, he recites, "May the sacrifice be auspicious for me."
7.28.4	The men, having offered oblations, send forth this (tree) to the trees. Having offered oblations, the men go away. The sacrificial post releases the evil of the sacrifice. If one touches the sacrificial post, one releases the evil of sacrifice. One should recite this (verse): "This is for you, O Vayu. This is for you, Vayu." One (verse) for one, two (verses) for two, many (verses) for many.
7.28.5	The sacrifice of Indra-Agni is the sacrifice of the firmly bound animal, or the sacrifice of the Sun, or the sacrifice to Prajapati.
7.28.6	One should perform it every year, or in six months, according to some.
7.28.7	In the case of the change of seasons, one should perform the Suyavasa sacrifice, or the Avrittimukha sacrifice, or the Ava-Avrittimukha.
7.28.8	The fires of the sacrificer, not offering, are indeed consumed. They think of the sacrificer alone, they intend the sacrificer. They cook the meat of the others in vain. But there is no other hope of meat for them. He who has these (fires) should not pass a year without sacrificing. This is his life-saving ransom. So says the Vājasaneyaka.
8.1.1	The merit of one who performs the Cāturmāsya sacrifice is inexhaustible.
8.1.2	One performs the Vaiśvadeva sacrifice on the full moon day of Phālguna or Caitra.
8.1.3	On the first day of the Parvan, having followed the Pañcahotṛ in the mind, one offers the Anvarambhaṇīya Iṣṭi with Grahas in the Havaniye, offering the Vaiśvānara oblation with twelve potsherds and the Pārvana oblation.
8.1.4	The verse "Vaisvânara, with thy help, thou art invoked in heaven" is the Yâjyâ and Anuvâkyâ of Vaisvânara. "Sing to Parjanya, the son of heaven, the nourisher, he may grant us food." "Sing to Parganya with these praises, with reverence. The bull, the roaring one, has deposited the seed in the plants." One gives gold to Vaisvânarâ, a cow to Parjanya. The Iṣṭi comes to an end with success.
8.1.5	He performs the Vaisvadev sacrifice on a ground sloping towards the east.
8.1.6	Like the animal sacrifice, he takes the fire from the Garhapatya and offers the oblations without raising them.
8.1.7	Having placed the woolen cover on the place of the Ahavaniya fire, as known to the Hotṛ, he establishes the fire on it, with the verse, "The first one, having wool, sits on his own place."
8.1.8	There is no such thing as a ritualistic act in the supreme Veda. This is another reason.
8.1.9	Having kindled the fires, having brought the branches, he releases the calves of the animals for the Visvedeva offering of milk.
8.1.10	The sacrificial grass is fresh, and the sacrificial grass-holder is fresh.
8.1.11	It is arranged in three ways and then in one way.
8.1.12	There is a mantra in that.
8.1.13	So is the kindling wood.
8.1.14	It is made of twenty-three kinds of wood.
8.1.15	He puts on three garments, and again puts on one garment.
8.1.16	He milks the evening milking of the Visvedevā deities as before.
8.2.1	At the time of placing the vessels on the next day, he places the Palāśa vessel for the horse sacrifice or the ladle.
8.2.2	At the offering time, he offers eight oblations to Agni as prescribed, namely eight oblations.
8.2.3	The five sacrificial sessions beginning with that of Pūṣan are the ones to be performed.
8.2.4	One should cook the Pūṣan oblation from the flour.
8.2.5	In the morning, one should bring the evening milk when it is heated.
8.2.6	Whatever is cooked is for Sāman and whatever is cooked separately is for Vājin.
8.2.7	The instruction is like that for animals. The oblations are similar.
8.2.8	The modification in the case of Pṛṣadājya is that one says, "Thou art the milk of the earth." One takes up the Pṛṣadājy twice, curd twice, and ghee once.
8.2.9	At the time of pouring out, having mixed the curds and milk together, one takes it up in two vessels and sprinkles it with the Vājinī portion.
8.2.10	At the time of adorning, he fills the single pot with ghee, or having made the back part of the fire, he places the oblations with the Vyagriti verses.
8.2.11	The horse sacrifice is on the mound.
8.2.12	The sacrificer touches all the oblations near the five Hotr priests.
8.2.13	The oblations are to be churned like animals and the Samidheni verses.
8.2.14	There are nine Prayajas.
8.2.15	The fourth and the fifth are the two intermediate ones. The four animals beginning with Dura are offered with the Prāṣa and Pratiṣṭa formulas.
8.2.16	The animals are offered in the same manner as the animal sacrifice.
8.2.17	One should perform the Pracaraṇa rite in a low voice with the Savitrī verse. Having performed the Pracaraṇa, one performs the Ekakapāla rite as before.
8.2.18	One offers the Ekakapala with the names of the four months - Madhu, Mādhava, etc.
8.2.19	At the time of giving the Dakṣiṇā, he gives the first-born calf or a pair of cows.
8.2.20	Having brought the fresh ghee to the Juhu, having made the Upamant vessel with fresh ghee, he offers the nine Anuyājas with it.
8.3.1	The first eight are the Pasukas, except the Prāṣa.
8.3.2	With the last one, the last one.
8.3.3	He first instructs, "Offer to the gods," and then the others, "Offer, offer."
8.3.4	The Hotṛ recites the benediction of the Sūktavāka, "May there be welfare to those who are a year old; may there be the divine abode."
8.3.5	The sacrificer murmurs the formula, "May there (be welfare)."
8.3.6	Having struck the Paridhīs and having poured down the Srasrava, having placed the Vājinapātra, having sprinkled the sacrificial grass within the altar, he takes up the Vājinī vessel.
8.3.7	He does not pour the oblation.
8.3.8	The two announcements are "Recite the Vājasaneya hymn" and "Sacrifice to the Vājas." At the Vasat-utterance, he offers with the goblet or with the spoon being poured over. At the second Vasat-utterence, he offers.
8.3.9	The Hotṛ offers while sitting with knees raised.
8.3.10	He offers with the formula, "O Agni, do thou offer to the Vājin."
8.3.11	At the Svishtakrit offering, he distributes the three kinds of oblations, namely, Soma, Vaji and Gharma.
8.3.12	After the offering to the directions as in the animal sacrifice, they consume the remaining oblations within the altar, all together, after inviting them.
8.3.13	He invites them by the names of the rites, saying, "This one, that one, invite."
8.3.14	The reply is, "Invited."
8.3.15	The Hotṛ first eats, the sacrificer last. Some say that the sacrificer is the first and the last.
8.3.16	May the consuming of the horses protect us. May the horse, the semen deposited, the immortal, for strength, bestow power and wealth. May we not be injured while consuming the horse. "Having consumed the horse, he says, "I consume the one who has been consumed by the horses, the one who has drunk the Soma, the one who is the horse, the one who was invoked, having been invoked." He consumes it."
8.3.17	The concluding verses are like those for an animal sacrifice.
8.4.2	The truth is indeed the highest, the truth does not transgress anything. The ocean is in the truth, this earth is established in the truth. Agni with his sharp radiance has enveloped the glowing head, which is established in the heat, by the brilliance of Vaisvânara. With truth I turn him away, with truth I turn him around, with heat I follow him, with peace I approach him, with strength I advance him. Thus he turns him away.
8.4.3	The sacrificer mutters, "That is truth, that is truth, that vow, that I am able to do, by that I am able, by that I shall prosper." The Brahman recites the Anuvaka, "One-day sacrifice."
8.4.4	On its days, there are vows between the days.
8.4.5	He does not eat meat, does not approach a woman.
8.4.6	Or approaches his wife during the season.
8.4.7	Does not sleep above.
8.4.8	Despises untruth.
8.4.9	Sleeps facing east.
8.4.10	He eats honey.
8.4.11	One says that it is the eating of honey, another says that it is for the sake of the letter.
8.4.12	One performs the Rtuyaha sacrifice, another performs the Catu-r-masya sacrifice.
8.4.13	He who performs the sacrifice in the spring, the rainy season and the autumn is called the Rtu-yaji. He who performs the sacrifices in the four seasons is called the Catu-rma-sya-yaji. It is known that he performs the sacrifice in spring with the Vaisva-deva sacrifice, in the rainy season with the Varuna-prastha sacrifices, and in the autumn with the Sa-ka-medha sacrifices.
8.5.1	Then, after four months, on the full moon day of Āṣāḍha, when the moon is in the constellation Śravaṇa, he performs the Varuna-Prāghasa sacrifice.
8.5.2	The Brāhmaṇa of the Bahvṛca says, "One should perform the sacrifice when the grass has grown."
8.5.3	Its procedure is like that of the Visvedevī (sacrifice).
8.5.4	Having made two altars equal to the front of the Garhapatya, the altar becomes facing east.
8.5.5	The Adhvaryu performs the Uttara rites, the Pratiprasthātṛ the Dakṣiṇa rites. The Adhvaryū moves in the northern part of the hall, the Pratiprathātṛ in the southern part.
8.5.6	The entire procedure is performed in both the parts.
8.5.7	The Patnīsaṁyājas are also performed.
8.5.8	The instruction is given in one way.
8.5.9	The Brahman gives the instruction in two ways.
8.5.10-14	The altar may be of two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven, twelve, thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, sixteen, seventeen, eighteen, nineteen, twenty, twenty-one, twenty-two, twenty-three, twenty-four, twenty-five, twenty-six, twenty-seven, twenty-eight, twenty-nine, thirty, thirty-one, thirty-two, thirty-three, thirty-four, thirty-five, thirty-six, thirty-seven, thirty-eight, thirty-nine, forty, forty-one, forty-two, forty-three, forty-four, forty-five, forty-six, forty-seven, forty-eight, forty-nine, fifty, fifty-one, fifty-two, fifty-three, fifty-four, fifty-five, fifty-six, fifty-seven, fifty-eight, fifty-nine, sixty, sixty-one, sixty-two, sixty-three, sixty-four, sixty-five, sixty-six, sixty-seven, sixty-eight, sixty-nine, seventy, seventy-one, seventy-two, seventy-three, seventy-four, seventy-five, seventy-six, seventy-seven, seventy-eight, seventy-nine, eighty, eighty-one, eighty-two, eighty-three, eighty-four, eighty-five, eighty-six, eighty-seven, eighty-eight, eighty-nine, ninety, ninety-one, ninety-two, ninety-three, ninety-four, ninety-five, ninety-six, ninety-seven, ninety-eight, ninety-nine, one hundred, one hundred and one, one hundred and two, one hundred and three, one hundred and
8.5.15	The five priests.
8.5.16	Whatever the Adhvaryu does, the Pratiprasthātṛ does.
8.5.17	Whatever is not done by speech, the Adhvaryū alone should do.
8.5.18	At the same time, the Nigadas.
8.5.19	The rites of common substances.
8.5.20	Having made the altar with one spade, he makes it touch the northern edge of the altar from the eastern side. Having gone to the northern edge of Dakṣiṇā, he makes it reach the northern edge of Uttara.
8.5.21	On the northern altar, he pours out the northern altar as in the animal sacrifice.
8.5.22	At the proper time, he carries the fires from the Garhapatya as in the animal-sacrifice.
8.5.23	One should not offer oblations with raised hands.
8.5.24	The Pratiprasthātṛ places the fire between the two altars, the Adhvaryu on the northern side of the northern altar.
8.5.25	The Adhvaryu places the fire on the northern altar, the Pratiprasthātr on the southern altar.
8.5.26	Having placed the fires, they bring the separate branches.
8.5.27	So also the kindling woods and sacrificial grass.
8.5.28-33	The Marut-priest takes away the calves (from their mothers) for the Varuna-oblation. The ladles are of Sami wood or of gold. They milk the cows for the evening-oblation according to the deities. The Varuna-oblations are eaten at the same time. If it is so, then the Iksakarma would be done with ordinary curd. Some say that the morning milking is a modification of the evening milking. It is a mixture of milk and curd.
8.5.34	At the time of offering, he offers the Agniya cake on eight potsherds. Thus he offers nine additional oblations.
8.5.35	All of them are barley.
8.5.36	Or the Pusha oblation in the form of curds and the two rams. The other oblations are of barley and rice.
8.5.37	At this time, the Pratiprasthātṛ silently offers barley for the curds oblation.
8.5.38-42	The Adhvaryu offers the sheep-sacrifices with the Yajus, the Pratiprasthātṛ with the Mesya-sacrifices. Their deities are the same as those of the Āmīkṣā-sacrifices. The wife of the Ām-pāṣa-sacrifices prepares the Karambha-vessels. As many as the advisers of the sacrificer are, including their wives, so many plus one are the vessels. The sheep-sacrifices are performed with the replicas of the sheep.
8.5.43	The Adhvaryu makes the ram, the Pratiprasthātṛ makes the ewe.
8.6.1	The signs of a woman are three.
8.6.2	The signs for a man are four.
8.6.3	Or else, on the previous day, having made the barley grains like melted butter in the Anvāhāryapachana, the wife makes the Karambha vessels of those slightly heated grains.
8.6.4	Here also, the Vājasaneya says, "He makes the ram and the ewe."
8.6.5	Having placed the oblations for Indra-Agni and others, he places a lamb on eleven potsherds, and a ram on eight.
8.6.6	Or they may be cooked in a pot.
8.6.7	Having placed a single potsherd for Ka, one should take them away and place the fires, says the Vajasaneyaka.
8.6.8	The injunction is like that for an animal sacrifice. The sacrificial formulas are similar.
8.6.9	The modification of the clarified butter is "Thou art the milk of the earth." He takes clarified butter once, curd twice, and clarified butter twice.
8.6.10	If one were to take it after mixing it with the milk of a cow,
8.6.11	At the time of removal, they make two sheep-shaped dolls with wool from a ewe.
8.6.12	If that is not available, he places the sheep in the wind direction and the ewe in the water direction, after having placed the wool.
8.6.13	Then he sows the acacia leaves and the karīra fruits in hundreds or thousands.
8.6.14	And in the Karambha vessels, he places the oblations in eight places on the northern altar.
8.6.15	The Pratiprasthātṛ places the single Marutī (cake) and the Karambha vessels on the south.
8.6.16	Here the Pratiprasthātr places the effigies of sheep.
8.6.17	He places the sheep-female on the Marutī (fire) and the sheep-male on the Varuṇī (fire).
8.6.18	The Pratiprasthätṛ makes the two fires to be churned, the Sāmidhenī verses, the nine Prayāja and Anuyāja offerings.
8.6.19	The Pratiprathātṛ makes the wife recite the verse, "We invoke the Prāghasa offerings."
8.6.20	She asks her, "How many husbands do you have?"
8.6.21	She tells him, and he points out, "May Varuna seize them!"
8.6.22	If one does not tell about a husband one knows to be such, one would obstruct a dear relative. One should point him out, saying, "This is my husband." It is understood that by pointing him out one makes him be seized by Varuna's noose.
8.6.23	The northern fire is well-swept, the southern one is not. Then having gone between the two sacrificial posts, the sacrificer and his wife, going towards the north, place the Karambha-vessels on the northern sacrificial post, and having placed them with their mouths downwards, they stand facing each other and offer on the southern fire with the ladle.
8.6.24	The sacrificer recites the Puronuvākyā verse "O Indra, O Indra" and the Yajyās verse "If there is a village" both.
8.6.25	They recite the verse "He who has done the deed, he who has not done the deed" while moving away.
8.6.26	Or the Adhvaryu or the Pratiprasthātṛ may offer, while the other two assist.
8.6.27	Here he cleans the southern fire.
8.6.28-31	The Adhvaryu having performed the rites upto the Iḍā and Agni, (the Pratiprasthātṛ) having performed the rites with the eastern Avadāna, offers the entire sheep of Maruts with the northern Avadāna, the leaves of Śamī and Karira. Then having performed the rites, he concludes. Then the Adhvaryu, having performed the rites of the eastern Avadana, offers the entire ram of Varuṇa with the northern Avadanā, the leaves of Samī and Karira, then he proceeds.
8.7.1	"The Adhvaryu says, 'Recite the hymn to the body, whom shall I offer?' These are the two instructions for the one-pot offering.
8.7.2	He offers the one-pot with the names of the four months, 'Heaven' and 'Heavenly'.
8.7.3	Some indeed offer the seven oblations separately. One should not do so. Having collected the seven oblations, the Adhvaryu gives them to the Pratiprasthātṛ. The Pratiprasthātr adds the Marutīya oblation to it.
8.7.4	They eat the food after invoking it.
8.7.5	The one who is like a bull in the herd is the Dakṣiṇā.
8.7.6	One should give more than that if one wishes.
8.7.7	Some say that a cow is the Dakṣinā.
8.7.8	The Hotr recites the verses of the Sūktavāka for the blessing of the calves, saying "May there be well-being" and "May there be the divine abode." The Yajamāna recites the mantra "May there be prosperity" and concludes it.
8.7.9	Both of them proceed with the Vājinī verses.
8.7.10	The two remaining ones, having bowed down together, consume in the northern chamber as before, with the verse, "May the drops enter me, may the drops come to me. May my sap be nourished by the juice of the Galgā and Dhavanī plants. May the sap of that which has been consumed by the Vājinīs be nourished by the sap of the Galgās and Dhavanīs." The rest is similar.
8.7.11	He establishes the Iṣṭi as before, except for the full vessel.
8.7.12	In place of the full vessel, there is the Saumaic Avabhrtha.
8.7.13	The oblations are taken up four times.
8.7.14	They perform the Avabhṛtha rite with the Varuṇa rite and chaff.
8.7.15	The chaff obtains the property of the Rīṣis.
8.7.16	Some prescribe the Varuṇa offering on one potsherd.
8.7.17	He does not recite the Ayurdaṃ mantra, the Abhipravarjanamantra, or sing the Sāman.
8.7.18	All directions are mentioned as Avabhṛtha rites.
8.7.19	Some say: (the Hotr) should not go beyond the northern direction.
8.7.20	Some say: (the priests) should move facing the direction in which they are going.
8.7.21	The moving rivers are the ones that flow beyond the fixed ones.
8.7.22	In their absence, as one wishes.
8.7.23	Having made a sacrificial grass-covered altar at the edge of water, he places the oblations on it.
8.7.24	Or there is no altar.
8.7.25-29	"O king, a hundred physicians, a thousand physicians!" Looking at the water, he mutters this. "The noose of Varuna is bound," they stand at the edge of the water. Having entered the water, they stand and perform the Avabhrtha rite. Having struck the grass, he offers the Sruva-graha. If there is grass before that, one should offer on it.
8.8.1	He instructs, "Agni, may the waters be thrice agreeable to you."
8.8.2	He recites the mantra, "The waters are victorious in the race, they will flow for victory, they are victorious in the races, for victory in the races, I anoint the waters for the eater of food, for the eater of the food."
8.8.3	He pours the oblation with the ladle, reciting, "I have entered the army of Agni."
8.8.4	The sacrificer recites the verse, "Her speech is Agni's."
8.8.5	The Pravara is lost.
8.8.6	Having offered the Apasusa Apurva offerings, one offers the Apasumant Apurva offerings.
8.8.7	"In the waters, O Agni," this is the verse. "Soma told me in the waters, all the remedies, Agni, the all-pervading, and the waters, all-healing." These are the Apasumantas.
8.8.8	Having performed the Varuna-offering for the exclusion of the Soma-juice, he offers Agni and Varuna in the Svishtakrit offering for the exclusion of all the Soma-juice.
8.8.9	No further offering is made.
8.8.10	Having brought the Upabṛt to the Juhu, he offers the Anuyājas on the two Barhis.
8.8.11	He first instructs, "Offer to the gods", and then "Offer".
8.8.12	Having filled a pot with husks, he sprinkles water over them, saying, "In the sea is your heart, in the water."
8.8.13	Or else, without the Sauma offering, he sprinkles water on the husks silently.
8.8.14	The wife releases the yoke-rope, saying, "I am releasing this."
8.8.15-16	The sacrificer, having recited the verse "The goddesses are the waters", and having entered the water with the verse "The waters and plants are friendly", he and his wife, having bathed with their heads, and without looking back, run towards each other.
8.8.17	"These garments, O ye two, may be given to him whomsoever one may desire. They are not to be worn by one who is consecrated." This is the view of the Vājasaneyins.
8.8.18	Having gone to the Aditya, having stood up, having gone to the water's edge, having made the kindling woods, having come back silently, having said, "May I be prosperous, may we be prosperous," having placed the kindling woods in the Ahavaniya, having followed the water, they stand up.
8.8.19	Here, having performed the Full Moon sacrifice, the churning etc. is as before, and the return.
8.8.20	One should sow everything.
8.8.21	The mantra is recited, and the heat is turned around, the ends of the earth and heaven. Agni is the lord of power, Varuna with wisdom, Indra with his friends the Maruts. Agni with sharp power. The same is said.
8.8.22	Or having bathed and shaved, having deposited the fires on the kindling woods, having churned out fire, he performs the Full-moon sacrifice.
8.8.23	This is indeed a sacrifice, namely Varunaparaghasa. It is not proper to offer Agnihotra on the northern altar. This is according to the Vājasaneyins.
8.9.1	Then, having begun in the first half of the four months, he offers for two days with the Sākamedhas.
8.9.2	He offers a cake on eight potsherds to Agni, the leader, at sunrise together with the sun.
8.9.3	They proceed together with the rays.
8.9.4	The Iṣṭi is concluded successfully.
8.9.5	At midday, a rice-pap to the Maruts with heat.
8.9.6	He does not throw the sacrificial grass.
8.9.7	The Iṣṭi comes to an end with success.
8.9.8	For the Maruts, the householders, one should offer a cooked rice-gruel in the evening, milked from all (cows).
8.9.9	The sacrificial grass of Sāntapana is that of the householders.
8.9.10	Or else, there is no sacrificial grass, no kindling wood, no kindling woods, no oblations are offered, no Anuyājas are offered.
8.9.11	Having driven away the calves with a twig of the Parna tree and with a strainer, he milks the cows.
8.9.12	He drives away the calves with the twig of the Parṇa tree and purifies them. After milking, he cooks the rice-gruel as it is done on the new-moon day. Some say that he cooks the rice gruel.
8.9.13	Having placed the fires, having performed the Veda, having strewn the fires, having taken up the rites of washing the hands etc., he prepares the vessels as per the prescribed manner.
8.9.14	The pot is placed in the place of the potsherds.
8.9.15	At the time of offering the oblations.
8.10.1	Having offered four handfuls, he offers many oblations.
8.10.2	At the time of placing the skull, he places the rice-gruel with the first mantra of the skull, reciting the mantra "You are firm." At the time of winnowing the flour, he winnows the rice.
8.10.3	At the time of spreading, he spreads it like the morning milking, having milked all the cows belonging to the sacrificer. He cooks it in that.
8.10.4	At the time of the injunction, he instructs about anything else except the sacrificial grass and wood. At the time of taking up the clarified butter, he takes it from the Dhruva vessel only.
8.10.5	Having sprinkled the Prokṣaṇī water, having invited the Brahman, having sprinkled the altar, having poured the remaining Prokṣaṇa water, having sprinkled the Pavitra water, having placed the Dhruva and the ladle within the altar, he places the Dhruva.
8.10.6	The sacrificer, having recited the formula, "May these two be true," offers the oblation.
8.10.7	At the time of dismissal, having placed the arrow, he takes out as many balls of rice as there are advisers of the sacrificer.
8.10.8	If there is a lot of rice, more than that.
8.10.9	He places the taken out, cooked, adorned, and sprinkled balls of rice.
8.10.10	In the southern fire, he cooks a ball of rice for the wife's share.
8.10.11	He does not pour over it.
8.10.12	The Vājasaneyins prescribe the taking out of the two (cakes) from the southern and northern sides respectively. The sacrificer of the Maruts performs the rite from the southern side.
8.11.1	From the northern side the Svishtakrit.
8.11.2	Having made a depression between the two cooked rice-balls, having brought clarified butter there, they prepare the offerings of clarified butter from the vessel of clarified butter. This is according to the Vājasaneya school.
8.11.3	Thus performing, he should not take (the oblations) in the Dhruva vessel.
8.11.4	Having performed with the two portions of clarified butter, having spread the Juhu all around, he offers to the Maruts, the householders.
8.11.5	Taking from the northern half of all (the oblations), he offers to Agni Sviṣṭakṛt.
8.11.6	There is no Praśitra nor Yajamāna share.
8.11.7	The Iḍā-oblation concludes.
8.11.8	Those who are the sacrificer's advisers, and those who are the eaters of the remnants of the oblations, they eat the remnants of the rice-gruel, the priests or other Brahmanas.
8.11.9	The Brahmanas eat the rice-gruels that are in the pots.
8.11.10	They spend that night in peace, without turning back.
8.11.11	Even the neighbours cook.
8.11.12	They kill the cows.
8.11.13	They anoint, they are anointed.
8.11.14	They make the calves graze after them.
8.11.15	He places the pot with the milk that has not been churned.
8.11.16	He places a ladle with the grass that has not been shaken.
8.11.17	At the end of the night, he ties the calves to the Agnihotri cow.
8.11.18	When it is dawn, they perform with the full ladle before the Agnihotra, or after the Agnihotra has been offered.
8.11.19	Having filled the ladle with the grass for the casting of the arrow, having called the bull, and having followed the utterance of the bull, "The ladle is full, let it fall down", he should offer on the Garhapatya with the subsequent verse.
8.11.20	If the bull does not bellow, the Brahman should say, "Offer!"
8.11.21	He gives that Dakṣiṇā to the one whose bull bellows.
8.11.22	He offers a cake on seven potsherds to the Maruts, the sportive, the self-luminous, together with the sun, when it rises, or together with the rays, when they move. The Iṣṭi comes to an end.
8.12.1	Then he commences the rite of the Mahāhaviṣa.
8.12.2	The rite of the Vāruṇapraghāsika is explained in the northern section.
8.12.3	At the time of offering, he offers the Agniya eight-spoon oblation. He offers eight oblations in succession.
8.12.4	Some recite the verse, "O Indra, the slayer of Vrtra, the oblation for thee is placed in the Indra-cup." "O Agni, be the Hotri, be the messenger, be thou present at the sacrifice. May heaven and earth protect thee. Thou art heaven and earth, the bestower of gifts. Be thou pleased with this oblation of Indra and the gods. Accept it, O Agni, with pleasure. Svāhā." He pours the oblation with the ladle, and the sacrificer recites the verse, "May Agni be thy tongue."
8.12.5	And with the four names of the months, Sahas and Sahasya, he offers on one potsherd. The cow is the Dakshina, the bull is the Pravaya. He prays for the welfare of the calves. He prays for heaven. The Hotri recites the benediction in the verses of the Suktavaka. The sacrificer murmurs thus: "He prays." The mantra is concluded.
8.12.6	He places the Indra-Agni-Tusha in water.
8.12.7	The Iṣṭi comes to an end with the Siddha-homa.
8.13.1	At that very time he begins the procedure of the Pitryajña.
8.13.2	Having made the Veda, he makes the altar measuring the height of the sacrificer in front of the Anvāhāryapacana, with four corners.
8.13.3	The corners are in the intermediate directions. The middle ones are in the directions.
8.13.4	The pit is dug up.
8.13.5	The Veda is not to be recited in the east, because the sacrifice to the Pitrs is not to be performed in the east. The sacrifice is to be performed in both directions, because the gods and the Pitrs are to be worshipped in both directions.
8.13.6	Those mantras which are connected with the gods and the ancestors, they are connected with the ancestors. As it is said, "O earth, you are worshipped by the gods and the Ancestors."
8.13.7	There is no change, because of hearing the words of others.
8.13.8	Having taken the fire from the southern fire, he places it in the middle of the altar, having taken it from the eastern fire.
8.13.9	In this (fire) the rites of the Āhavanīya are performed in the Pitryajña.
8.13.10	Having placed the fires, he brings the kindling wood and sacrificial grass.
8.13.11	He gives the sacrificial grass with its roots.
8.13.12	Or with its roots cut off.
8.13.13	The Agni-bricks are to be placed in the order of their seniority and length.
8.13.14	Having spread the fires, he performs the rites of washing the hands, etc., as prescribed. The offering of the vessels is done as per the prescribed order.
8.13.15	At the time of offering, having surrounded the altar from all sides and making the door in the north, he offers the oblations facing the east, either from the right or the left, as per the prescribed text, saying "To Soma, the father of the fathers."
8.13.16	Then for some, the Soma-offering is to Soma, the father of the Fathers, the six-pot-offering to the Fathers, the Barhis-possessors, the cooked rice to the Fathers, Agni-sva-tans, the cooked rice for Agni, the conveyor of oblations, the gruel for Yama, the Angiras-father, the father of Fathers.
8.13.17	The pot of water and the sprinkling vessel are used.
8.13.18	Having mixed the barley with the sprinkling water, having divided the rice into three parts with the Vibhāga mantra, having placed the rice for cooking, having ground the other rice, having placed six potsherds in the southern half of the Garhapatya, he places the potsherd for cooking in the southern fire with the first potsherd mantra.
8.13.19	At the time of placing (the oblations) on the fire, he places the rice grains with the Anatra formula and makes many kinds of oblations.
8.13.20	It is understood that they are being cooked and being eaten.
8.14.1	At the time of the announcement, he announces to all except the wife.
8.14.2	At the taking of ghee, he takes four spoonfuls of ghee towards the north of the Garhapatya.
8.14.3	He performs the rites of sprinkling and reciting the Praushani verses.
8.14.4	At the time of spreading, he spreads the sacrificial grass over the altar three times, moving clockwise.
8.14.5	Holding the Uddhava grass, he spreads it three times, moving counterclockwise.
8.14.6	The Uddhava grass is the Prastara.
8.14.7	Taking the Prastara and placing it silently.
8.14.8	There is no Vidhriti.
8.14.9	He places two Paridhis.
8.14.10	The middle and upper ones.
8.14.11	all of them.
8.14.12	If all, then at the time of invocation, having understood that the boundaries are to be removed, one should remove the southern boundary from the middle boundary.
8.14.13	At the time of dismissal, having dismissed the oblations, one should divide them with the Vibhāga mantra and mix half with ghee.
8.14.14	Having made a heap of half the quantity of flour, having covered it with the dough, having put half the quantity of barley in a vessel of milk, having put the barley in a vessel with a bamboo or sugarcane stalk facing south, he grinds it three times without beginning.
8.14.15	Having made the churned rice into a bamboo, he collects the oblations one by one.
8.14.16	Having placed the Veda to the right, having placed the Kasi-pupa, the brush, the unguent, the unguent-stick, and the water-pot, one by one, he proceeds to the Samidheni verses.
8.14.17	He instructs, "Recite to Agni, to the gods, to the ancestors, to the kindling."
8.14.18	He recites the one Samidheni verse three times, "We invoke you, O Ushanas."
8.14.19-23	Having kept aside one Anūyāj-kindling-wood, he divides the wood into three parts and puts it in three times. It is equal to the Pravara. He does not choose an Arṣeya or a Hotr. Having announced, he says, "Sit down, O Hotr." This much is the Pravara. Having offered the Apabara-kindling-woods, he offers the Ajyabhāgas with the Jīva-mantra.
8.14.24	O Agni, with thy good auspice, do thou bestow on us wealth, with long life, and easy to be enjoyed, for life. Thou, O Soma, dost bestow great prosperity, thou, O young one, dost bestow the right, the power of life. Both are endowed with life.
8.14.25	Some recite the Parishraya of the Veda here.
8.15.1	The priests, having loosened their sacrificial threads, and having put them on the right shoulder, move around and carry the ladles and oblations.
8.15.2	He places the Juhu ladle to the right of the Upamant, the Upamant to the right of Dhruva, the Puronamant to the left of the Upamana, the Dhruva to the right of Puronamant, the rice-cake to the right of Upamant, and the cooked rice to the right of Mantha.
8.15.3	The Juhu and the Sata-kapala are equal.
8.15.4	Some say, "Brahma and Yajama."
8.15.5	The one with six Avattas (cups) for those with five Avattas, and the one with five Avatt for those with four Avatt.
8.15.6	He cuts the Purorasa while cutting the Avadyati.
8.15.7	He should cut the first twice for those with five avattas.
8.15.8	Having placed the Juhu, he instructs, "To Soma, the father, according to one's own nature."
8.15.9-10	He offers the Puronuvākyā-verses, then the Yajyās. Having offered the Puronuvākya-verses, he offers the Yajya-verses. Having offered to the east, he offers to the south, then to the west, then to the north. Having offered in the north, he offers to himself. Having offered, he offers to Agni. Having offered again, he offers to Indra. Having offered once more, he offers to Varuṇa. Having offered yet again, he offers in the fire. Having offered for the last time, he offers to all the gods.
8.15.11	"Be it so, O ye Fathers!" he says in reply. "O ye Fathers, who are endowed with Soma!" he says in sending forth. "Ye who are endowed with the Svāhā-call!" he says in offering. "Svāhā to the Fathers!" he says when pronouncing the Vasat-call.
8.15.12	Having thus prohibited the Svāhā call, he prescribes the hearing and replying of the Bahvṛcas and the Vājasaneyins.
8.15.13	He recites two Puronuvākyās.
8.15.14	Having recited a verse, he recites another.
8.15.15	These are mentioned as "You, O Soma, are the knower of all."
8.15.16	One is the Yajya.
8.15.17	"The Fathers who are Agni-possessed, the Fathers who are not Agni-possessed, those Fathers who are freed from sin, the Fathers who belong to Soma, the Fathers who have died, the Fathers who will die, may they proclaim to us. May they protect us, the Fathers who drink the milk of the cow, who enjoy the fermented rice-gruel, the Fathers who lie below and above. The Fathers who are Agni possessed, who are in accord with the seasons, may they enjoy this oblation along with Indra." Thus to the Fathers who are Agnipossessed.
8.15.18	They perform the Pitryajña rite with the Upāṁśu and Pariśrita rites.
8.15.19	In this very manner, one offers to the Pitrs who are the recipients of sacrificial grass and to the Agniṣvāttas.
8.15.20	One offers to Agni Kavya-vāhan and Svishtakṛt.
8.15.21	One offers the first portion of the oblation to the deity to whom one is going to offer.
8.15.22	This is the procedure for offering.
8.15.23	One offers a ladleful of oblation to the Ida. The ladleful is for Vaiva.
8.15.24	The Hotṛ puts the churned butter.
8.15.25	The Hotṛ smells it.
8.16.1	The Brahman, Adhvaryu, Agnīdhra and the sacrificer.
8.16.2	Or the sacrificer alone.
8.16.3	Having divided the butter equally, they smell it and eat it. Having smeared the butter on the sacrificial grass, they rub it.
8.16.4	Taking the water-pot, the sacrificer sprinkles the altar three times, reciting, "May the Fathers be purified."
8.16.5	Placing the pot down, he recites, "May the offspring be born, may the offspring be born," and sprinkles the altar three more times, reciting, "
8.16.6	Having made the balls of the remaining oblations, he places them in three directions, in the east, south and west. With these mantras, one by one: "This is your share, and those who follow you."
8.16.7	He mentions three distant ancestors, the sixth in the first ball, the fifth in the second, and the fourth in the third.
8.16.8	Having said, "Having wiped off the smear of oil on the northern corner, do you, O Pitrs, distribute yourselves according to your share," and having gone out facing north, they stand by the Āhavaniya with the verse addressed to Indra, "We, O Indra, have come to you."
8.16.9	Having approached him from the north, they stand with the verse, "Having approached him from here, they praise him." The Pankti stands by the Garhapatya.
8.16.10	They enter with this very (verse).
8.16.11	Here some prescribe the act of eating and sprinkling.
8.16.12	All eating is done with the Avagraha.
8.16.13	Anointing etc. is like the Piṇḍapitryajña, up to the Paṅktyā.
8.16.14	The verse "What is in the sky" again comes to the Paṅktiya.
8.16.15	The priests, having loosened their upper garments and made them into the sacrificial thread, move around and carry the ladles.
8.16.16	They remove the covering-sticks.
8.16.17	Having brought the Upabhrti-spoon to the Juhu, he offers the Anuyajas on the two ends of the sacrificial grass. He first instructs, "Offer to the gods" and then "Offer".
8.16.18	They make the lower garments into the sacrificial thread in response to the Sookta-vaka.
8.16.19	The wives do not offer libations.
8.16.20	The Samitsya-yajus is not offered.
8.16.21	Everything else is done.
8.16.22	The Pitryajna is concluded.
8.17.1	For each person, he offers one-kumbha oblations, as many as the advisers of the sacrificer, including their wives, plus one extra.
8.17.2	When the oblations are being offered, the sacrificer mutters: "I have done this for those who are householders."
8.17.3	They are served silently.
8.17.4	He places them on the northern half of the Garhapatya.
8.17.5	Having poured them over, or without pouring them over, having taken them out, having placed them within the altar, he pours them into the pot with the words, "Be the protection of the animals."
8.17.6	Into the pot or into the pots.
8.17.7	Some say, "They are carried away by the sheath."
8.17.8	"One only is Rudra, he does not stand for a second." He offers incense to the southern fire with one wick.
8.17.9	Having gone to the north-east corner, he offers a cake to the north-eastern fire, saying, "This is your animal, O Rudra."
8.17.10	Or, "This is the animal for you," thinking of the hated one in his mind.
8.17.11	If he does not hate, he should say, "This is an animal for you, O Rudra.
8.17.12	Having placed the four-wayed fire-brand in a place and having spread it, he offers with a Palāśa leaf, taking the half of each cake, either with the middle or the last one.
8.18.1	"This is your share, O Rudra, with your sister Ambika. Accept it. Svāhā." With these two verses, he sprinkles the fire at the crossroads. The sacrificer mutters, "May we not offend Rudra."
8.18.2	They circumambulate the fire three times to the right, reciting, "We worship Tryambaka."
8.18.3	We worship Tryambaka, the fragrant one, the knower of the husband. Like a gourd from its bondage, may I be released from this. Do not let me fall. Thus, a woman who desires a husband should approach the sacrificer.
8.18.4	Having placed the upward-pointing oblations aside, having obtained them, having mixed them together in the palms of the sacrificer with the formula, "We worship Tryambaka, the bestower of boons," having taken them away with the formula, “May you be the bestower of blessings,” they should pour them down three times with this same procedure.
8.18.5	Those who pour them down for the sake of a husband should recite the mantra in the same way.
8.18.6	Some say, "Having gone around and gone around, they pour them down."
8.18.7	He pours them into the Mūta-vessel, into the Mūtas, or into the Mūṭas.
8.18.8	He attaches the wood to the wood, to the woods, or to the trees.
8.18.9	Or else, having mixed them together in the Mūta vessel, having made a bundle, having tied it to a dry post, to a mound, the archer with the Pināka in his hand, wearing a hide garment, they go three times.
8.18.10	Having sprinkled water, they return silently, saying, "May we be prosperous." Having placed the kindling woods in the Āhavanīya fire, they stand up, saying, "I have followed the water."
8.19.1	He offers a cake on eight potsherds to Agni, a cake to Aditya in ghee, as before.
8.19.2	A white horse is the Dakṣiṇā.
8.19.3	Or a white cow or a white-colored animal.
8.19.4	The Iṣṭi is concluded successfully.
8.19.5	One desiring sight should offer a cake on eleven potsherds to Agni-Vishnu, one desiring Brahmic glory should offer rice to Brhaspati, one desiring cattle should offer to Indra, one desiring offspring should offer to Sarasvat, one desiring prosperity should offer to Pusan.
8.19.6	One should offer these according to one's desire.
8.19.7	The Iṣṭi is concluded with success.
8.19.8	The Sākamedhas are concluded.
8.19.9	Here, having performed the Full-moon sacrifice, one should perform the Nivartana rite as before. One should offer all the oblations. The mantra and other rites are modified. "He who turns back the plants in the skin of this earth, Agni is the lord of power, Varuna with wisdom, Indra with his friends, the Maruts, Agni with sharp power." The rest is the same.
8.20.1	Then after two days, three days, four days, half a month, a month, or four months, he performs the Śunāsīrīya sacrifice.
8.20.2	Its procedure is like that of the Vaiśvadeva.
8.20.3	The time for offering is the Agniya eight-vessel oblation. He offers oblations in increasing numbers of ten.
8.20.4	The procedure for the Vāyavya milk is like that of morning milking.
8.20.5	Then, having described the five kinds of offerings for the single-offering sacrifice, the oblation of barley-gruel for Indra-Suna-Sira, the cake on twelve potsherds for Indra-Sune-Sira, and the ladle-offering for Indra-Suni-Sira, they offer the oblation to Indra-SunaSira, may he accept it, the wise one. The bearers of oblations to Hari-Asva, accompanied by the Suras, offer oblations to him, accompanied by the seasons, increased by the Brahman. O Suna-Sira-i, accept this oblation. The Suna-Sirajya's invitatory and offering verses are "The one potsherd for Surya."
8.20.6	The nine Prayājas and Anuyājas.
8.20.7	Some say that there are five Prayājas and three Anuyājas
8.20.8	He offers a single-spoon oblation to the name of the month, saying, "For the one who moves in the sky."
8.20.9	The sacrificial fee is a twelve-year-old bull.
8.20.10	Or six-year-old.
8.20.11	Some say a bull and a cow.
8.20.12	Or a bull.
8.20.13	A white horse or a white cow for the single-spoon oblations.
8.21.1	The Hotr recites the benedictions of the Suktavaka in the form "May there be welfare to those who have a calf for a year, may there be the divine abode." The sacrificer murmurs the verse "May there be prosperity" and the Iști comes to an end. The Cāturmāsya rites come to an end. Here, having performed the Full Moon Iṣṭi, the sprinkling etc. is done as before. One should sow everything. The mantra etc. is modified. "Parameṣṭhin released one month for the sake of creatures, by that he brought great immortality to mortals, you are born after the creatures. That is your mortal and immortal (nature). By which the months, fortnights, seasons, and years, by which you, O Prajapati, turned back the one who was performing the sacrifice, by that I turn you back with this Brahman for life. Agni with sharp (rays), etc. is the same."
8.21.2-6	Having performed the Cāturmāsya sacrifices, one performs the Soma sacrifice with animals. One consecrates oneself for Soma on the Uddṛṣṭa day of Phālguna. One should not let the other Phālguna pass without performing the Soma sacrifice. This is indeed said for one who is abandoning the Soma sacrifice. Now for one who is resuming the Soma sacrifice, having performed the Śunāsīrīya sacrifice on the fourteenth day of Phāalguna,
8.22.1	He performs the Vaisvadev sacrifice on the fifteenth day.
8.22.2	One desiring cattle should perform this sacrifice in the month in which there is the most milk in the cows.
8.22.3	One desiring offspring or cattle should perform this.
8.22.4	Now, if one desires cattle, one should offer at the place of the Parvan sacrifices with the Vaishvadev rite. One would obtain as many cattle as one desires. Then one should offer at their proper times.
8.22.5	If one desires a village, one should offer with the Shunashīrīya rite in rainy water.
8.22.6	Having settled in rainy water, one makes it serve the purpose of water.
8.22.7	One who desires offspring, cattle, prosperity, brahmic glory, or food should perform this sacrifice.
8.22.8	One should perform the Parva sacrifices during the Cāturmāsya season to complete the year.
8.22.9	We shall now explain the five-year-long sacrifices.
8.22.10	Having performed three seasons and years, one does not perform the monthly sacrifice. Having performed two seasons, one stops.
8.22.11	Having performed two sacrifices in the month of Caitra, and having performed three sacrifices in the next three months, one may desist.
8.22.12	Now the fifteen-year cycle.
8.22.13	One should perform these two sacrifices twice.
8.22.14	Or one should practice them three times or indefinitely.
8.22.15	And it is known that one does not perform a sacrifice in every three years. This is a statement of practice.
8.22.16	The five-year-old Vaisvānara and Parjanya should not be rotated in the five-year-long sacrifices.
8.22.17	Because of the single-beginning rule.
8.22.18	As in the Anvarambhaniya (Sutra).
9.1.1	The expiation prescribed by the Veda is prescribed in case of transgression of the injunctions.
9.1.2	If there are several expiations mentioned in one place, they should be performed together, because of the difference in meaning.
9.1.3	Recitation, Homa, and worship.
9.1.4	They are for the purpose of removing faults.
9.1.5	After that, they should be performed for the removal of faults.
9.1.6	When the faults have been removed, the entire rite is performed again.
9.1.7	Since it is not mentioned again, it is performed again. Here is the corrected and aligned text:
9.1.8	One who is about to depart should offer oblations to Agni, saying, "To you, O Agni, the Angiras, I am going."
9.1.9	Having separately deposited the fires in the kindling woods, he departs.
9.1.10	Wherever he may stay, he should establish this Iṣṭi there.
9.1.11	If the Āhavanīya fire of one who has been initiated goes out, one should take up another fire, recite the verse, "Agni has proclaimed the dawn," and then perform the full oblation with the verse, "To him who offers Agni as a guest, O Agni, be kind and gracious." One should then offer the oblation with the words, "This Vishnu has pervaded."
9.1.12	Some say that one should recite.
9.1.13	One should recite the Yajus of the Vrata-upayanīya with the mind.
9.1.14	Whoever follows this should turn back, except for the Pranayana.
9.1.15	One should churn the Garhapatya.
9.1.16	The nature of the Dakshina Agni.
9.1.17	If the fire of one who has established the sacred fires goes out, he should collect it from the place where it has gone out, reciting three times, "The wise Agni, the lord of strength, has gone out." Having circumambulated three times to the right, he should collect the fire, saying, "This is one, that is one. Enter into the third light. May you be united with your own form. May you be beautiful. May you be dear to the gods, the supreme creator."
9.1.18	If he were to go beyond, he should follow him and return.
9.1.19	He should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Pathicrita.
9.1.20	He should bring the sacrificial grass from the edge of the path.
9.1.21	A bull is the sacrificial fee. The Isti comes to an end with success.
9.1.22	The next day, he returns to his house.
9.1.23	If the calves of the animals whose oblations are to be offered, have been driven away, he should offer a barley-gruel in the place of that oblation.
9.1.24	Then, having driven away the calves of the animal whose oblation is to be offered next, one should observe fast.
9.1.25	If the oblation of milk offered in the evening is afflicted by some calamity, one should offer cooked rice to Indra and observe fast.
9.1.26	What is to be offered in the morning, one should cook it.
9.1.27	If the Indra-offering cake is to be offered,
9.1.28	then one should proceed after having mixed it with the morning milk.
9.1.29	This is the expiation for the morning milk when it is afflicted.
9.1.30	One should proceed after having blended it with the evening milk.
9.1.31	If both the milks are afflicted, one should offer an oblation of eight potfuls to Agni and a rice-offering of five potfuls to Indra.
9.1.32	One should worship Agni with a cake and Indra with five-pronged oblations.
9.1.33	One should worship both the deities with five-prong-ed oblations.  
9.1.34	Then, having taken away the calves from the northern oblation, one should observe fast.
9.2.1	If the wife of one observing a vow becomes pregnant, one should worship after covering her.
9.2.2	He should spread the covering of the skin towards the north of the altar or within the altar.
9.2.3	When it becomes three nights, then he should invoke her thus: "I am the earth, you are the sky, you are the Sama Veda, I am the Rig Veda, you are the two, let us come together and generate the semen for a son, for the sake of wealth, for progeny, for good offspring, for good strength."
9.2.4	If the Agnihotra or the Saṃnāyya is spilled, one should go to the east, dig out the anthill, and offer it with the Prājāpatya verse, "O Prajapati, these are not yours." Having offered it, one should stand on the ground and offer again after milking another cow.
9.2.5	If a worm should fall on the middle or the end (of the sacrificial grass), or on a Palāśa leaf, one should take the Dyāvāpṛthivī-bricks to the outer boundary, and having dug another place, offer again. If the Sānāyya should come to another place.
9.2.6	If the Agnihotra is rained upon, one should offer with the verse, "Mitra, knowing, arranges the people; Mitra supports the earth and heaven; Mitra sees the fields with his unblinking eyes. He offers the oblation for truth, with ghee." Having performed this, one should offer again after milking another cow.
9.2.7	If the subsequent oblation is spilled while the preceding one has been offered, or if the preceding one is offered with the subsequent one, then one should offer the oblation with the verse, "O Vanaspati, where you know the secret names of the gods, there may the oblations go." Having placed the oblation with a verse related to Vanaspati, then offer silently, having milked again, one should offer again.
9.2.8	If the fire of the Āhavanīya follows the oblation offered in the east, one should offer on the next piece of wood or gold, saying, "The fire is the husband, the wife is the fire."
9.2.9	If the embers should fall outside the Prajās, one should place them in the ladle with the ladle's tip, saying, "May there be no darkness, may the sacrifice not be in darkness, may the sacrificer not be in darkness. May there be peace for you when you are stretched out, O Rudra, and when you are stretched away. May there be reverence for you where you sit down. Do not injure the Adhvaryu, do not injure the sacrificer." If (they fall) in front, (he should say), "Do not injure the Brahman, do not injure (the sacrificer)." If (they fall on) the right, (he should add), "Do not injury the Hotṛ, do not injure his wife, do not injure him." If (they are on) the rear, (he should continue), "Do not harm the Agnīdhra, do not harm the cattle, do not injure them." If (they were on) the north.
9.2.10	I have performed the sacrifice at the presence of Nirriti. I offer it to the gods. Having taken it,
9.3.1	The thousand-horned bull, the knower of beings, the Stoma-backed, the ghee-possessed, the well-directed, may he not abandon us. May we not abandon him who is established here. May he bestow on us the protection of cattle and the protection of heroes. He offers it into the fire.
9.3.2	If, while striking, he should offer.
9.3.3	If the fire, being churned, does not blaze at the time of the approaching of the time, then having taken it from where he sees another, he should offer it.
9.3.4	If he is not in a hurry, he should churn again.
9.3.5	If he does not find another, he should make an offering at the right ear of a goat.
9.3.6	But he should not eat the goat.
9.3.7	If one does not find a cow, one should offer in the right hand of a brahmin.
9.3.8	One should not obstruct a brahmin who is staying.
9.3.9	If one does not find brahmins, one should offer on a clump of darbha grass.
9.3.10	One should never sit on darbha grass. 
9.3.11	If one does find darbha grass, one should offer into water.
9.3.12	Water is not mentioned as being either edible or inedible.
9.3.13	One may even take water for a year from an inedible source.
9.3.14	But one should not wash one's feet with water.
9.3.15	These are the vows for a year, says Ashmarathi; for life, says Aalekhana.
9.3.16-18	If a year has passed, he should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni, the lord of vows. If the fires of two persons are mixed up, or if there is a fire in the house, he should offer an eight-potsherd cake to Agni, the forgiver. If the fire of a person who has not established the fire is mixed with other fires, or if they are mixed with each other, he should offer to Agni, the distinguisher, a cake on eight potsherds.
9.3.19	To Agni Viprachit, the oblation of eight potfuls, if the Garhapatya and Ahavaniya fires are separated.
9.3.20	With Agni Viprachit we have composed the praise with hymns; may he grant us a thousand. The wise Agni is kindled, the sage, the performer of sacrifice, may he, separating, grant us wealth. The Yajya and Anuvakya verses are recited thus.
9.3.21	If the Garhapatya and Dakshina Agni or the Dakshina Agni and Ahavaniya are not available, then one should offer the oblation to Agni Vitatha on eight potsherds.
9.3.22	To Agni of purity, eight-vessel oblation, if it is burnt by a fire of cremation or a fire of a corpse. To Agni of the nest, eight-vessel, if it is a fire of a nest. The nest is the spreading fire and the spreading fire. With lentil-ghee and a reed-stick, we appease the ravenous fire. In this nest fire, we cleanse the faults. We have become fit for sacrifice, pure, and may the life-spans be extended. The Yajya and Anuvakya verses are to Agni of water, eight-vessel if it is burnt with lightning.
9.3.23	If all of them were to assemble, one should offer the Vratabharti, the third, the Apsumatī, the fourth, the Kṣamāvatī, and then perform the Parikrama.
9.3.24	Some mention the Vratapati as the second, and the Vratapate as the last.
9.4.1	The Agnihotra-pot, dripping, he should recite this verse: "Agni, Indra, Tvashtri, Brihaspati have placed it on the earth. It has not reached the navel. It has gone away from the Niriti." Having recited this verse over the Agnihotra-pot dripping, he should put it back with the verse: "The moon is dripping."
9.4.2-3	If it is said that one who offers the Darsha-Pūrnamāsa sacrifices should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni, the path-maker, then the principal offering should be made in the same procedure.
9.4.4	Now, it is known that the sacrifice of him whose sacrifice is being performed is cut off if they perform this Iṣṭi in between. One should offer to Agni Pathikṛt the cake on eight potsherds to Agni which is offered at the full moon or the one which is offered at new moon. By that alone he again finds the path and does not cut off the sacrifice.
9.4.5	The two should be offered in the Samyājyā. This is another view.
9.4.6	It has been said that if the moon rises before the oblation is offered.
9.4.7	Āśmarathya says that if it rises before the oblations are offered, one should offer them to the ordinary deities.
9.4.8	One should remove the rice grains.
9.4.9	Ālekhana says that one should remove the grains from the defective portions.
9.4.10	When the sun has risen, the remaining (food) is to be given to the ordinary people.
9.4.11	In the case of rice-grains, it should be removed.
9.4.12	If the oblation of one whose vow has not been taken or who does not intend to observe the vow has been offered, he should divide the rice grains into three parts as before. Then, having removed the calves from the northern oblation, one should observe a fast.
9.4.13	Now, if the oblation has been taken up when the sun has risen, that itself is the atonement and that is the observance.
9.4.14	Having united the calves with their mothers and having driven them away again, on the previous day, he should keep the curd which is the milk of the previous day for the purpose of sprinkling the oblation.
9.4.15	One who has established the sacred fire but behaves as if he has not, or goes away on a day of ritual observance, or eats meat, or approaches a woman, should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni, the lord of vows.
9.4.16	If one sheds tears due to distress, one should offer a cake to Agni, the bearer of vows.
9.4.17	O Agni, thou art the bearer of vows, pure, thou hast approached the gods. O Agni, for the carrying of oblations, bearing the vows, the protector of vows, the imperishable, the giver of good heroes, the giver of riches, the well-knowing, O Agni, protect us for life, O Jātavedas. The Yajya and Anuvākyā are recited by those who bear the vows. Some recite the Vratapati at the Asrukarman.
9.5.1	If the Agnihotra-cow is attacked by a beast of prey, one should offer the following oblation: "From the fear of which you have driven away the Vasishthas, from that make us free from fear. Make us free from fear for our cattle. Obeisance to Rudra, the nourisher." One should recite this mantra or offer the oblation.
9.5.2	If he were to sit down, he should do so with this (verse), "Because of fear, I have sat down." Having recited this, he should rise. "O Goddess Aditi, the one with the universal form, you have placed life in the sacrificial thread. Making a share for Indra, Mitra, and Varuna." Having placed it, having milked it, he should give it to a brahmin who has not eaten. It is known that he releases evil upon him.
9.5.3	Or, having made him rise, he should make him stand with the staff.
9.5.4	"May the Blessed One be from the grass, and may we also be blessed. Take the grass, O Agni, drink the pure water, going everywhere." Having plucked a bunch of darbha grass, he should eat it.
9.5.5	If one were to milk the blood, one should say, "It is departing." Having encircled the southern fire, and having burned this in it, and having offered silently with the Vyāhṛtis, one should give that to a brahmin who is not coming.
9.5.6	If it should be milked and spill, then he should recite this verse: "Whatever milk was milked today, whatever milk was not spilled on the earth, whatever milk was in the plants, whatever milk was spilled in the houses, whatever milk was with the calves, may that milk be mine." Having recited this, he should sprinkle it with water, saying, "I send you to the ocean."
9.5.7	If the pot is broken while being milked, one should milk another pot and offer that.
9.5.8	If the milk is stolen while being milked or carried, or if it is stolen while being stored, or if it has been stored, or if the milk is spilled while being poured, or if it was poured, or if the curd is spoiled while being churned, or if it had been churned, one should offer it as it is. One should milk another pot.
9.5.9	If it is poured once and spills twice or thrice, one should not mind it. But if it spills four times, one should pour the remaining water into a vessel, pour four times more, and offer it. Or one should offer it with another ladle.
9.6.1	If it spills while being poured out, one should sit down, take it again, and offer it as it was. Or one should offer it with another (cow). Or one should recite the Varuna verse with ghee and offer it with the Varuna verse.
9.6.2	If it spills while being offered, one should offer it as it is. Or one should do it with another (verse).
9.6.3	Now, if the milk is spilled while being taken forward, one should recite the mantra, "You are offered in the fire of Prajapati, the sustainer of the universe. Svāhā!" and then offer it. This is the Agnihotra offering, says Āśmarathya. One should offer again after milking another cow, says Ālekhanaka.
9.6.4	If it is spilled before the offering, then after taking it back, it should be offered after taking four portions. Or it should be milked with another cow.
9.6.5	If it is spilled while being offered, then it should be offered as it is, or it should be milched with another cow.
9.6.6	Now, if the oblation offered to Skanda is spilled before it is offered, then it should be offered as it is. If it is spilled after it is offered, it should be offered again after milking another cow. Then with ghee, the Varuni offering. This is common.
9.6.7	May the sky and earth be filled, may the young bull be filled, may all these worlds be filled. May the sacrifice be filled, may it generate. The bull is born from the filled, the bull is born from what is filled. May we be born from what is born from the Filled. Having recited this mantra over the filled (vessel), one should sprinkle the earth with water, saying, "May the earth be filled."
9.6.8	If it is only a non-offering, then it is indeed a mistake.
9.6.9	If it were to fall in the evening, one should not eat in the morning. If it were to fall at dawn, one should not have breakfast.
9.6.10	If the Agnihotra falls on the head of one who is ill, then one should say, "May the divine thunderbolt strike him whom one hates."
9.6.11	If a dog should run between the fire and the Agnihotra oblation, one should take ash from the Garhapatya fire and sprinkle the dog's foot with that ash, reciting the verse "Vishnu has wandered," and "May Vishnu protect us."
9.6.12-14	If the sun rises before the fire is brought in, and one sees it burning elsewhere, then one should bring it from there and enter with it. This is the prescribed method for the installation of the southern fire. This is the prescribed method of installation for the southern fire. If the sun rises while the fire is not yet brought in,
9.7.1	The Brāhmaṇa who knows the Veda should take up the fire, holding the gold with Darbha grass in front. One should follow the Agnihotra fire. Having established the fire in the sacrificial place, one should always offer the Agnihotra. Having sat down without breathing, having offered the Samani oblation, having recited the verses "Bhūr Bhuvah Suvar," one should offer the Varuna oblation.
9.7.2	Some mention the second as Vratabhriti, except for the offering of gold. Some mention the offering of gold.
9.7.3	If the time for the evening Agnihotra has passed, one should offer the Homa to be offered at the time of the Agnihotra, saying "Om, to the faultless Agni, Svāhā." Having offered the Agnihotra regularly, having sat without breathing until the time has passed, having offered the Samani Homa, one should stand up, saying "Bhūr Bhuvah Suvar"
9.7.4	If one offers the Agnihotra oblation every morning, saying "Salutations to the garment, svāhā," and then sits down without breathing, having offered the oblation to the ancestors, one should stand up, saying "Bhūr Bhuvaḥ Suvaḥ."
9.7.5	The gift is the Dakṣiṇā.
9.7.6	Having offered the Ahavaniya fire, having taken it down, having placed it in the fire-pan, having recited the verse, "Agni has proclaimed the foremost of the dawns," one should offer the Maitra oblation to the sun.
9.7.7	Some prescribe a one-pot offering to Surya.
9.7.8	When the Iṣṭi is over, the sacrificer and his wife, having eaten the embers of the Āhavaniya fire, lie down on the ground.
9.7.9	One should offer the evening Agnihotra with the milk of two cows as before.
9.7.10	If the fire is not taken out, one should offer the four-spoonfuls of clarified butter in front of the rising sun. A learned brahmin should take out the fire. One should follow the Agnihotra with the fire. Having established the fire in its place, one should offer oblations with the verse, "May the gods enjoy the sacrifice with the banner of the dawn, the most sweet to the gods." Sitting facing the east, one should offer clarified butter with the verse, "
9.7.11	The same rules apply to the Agnihotra-oblation. The expiation is the same as for the omission of the morning oblation.
9.7.12	This is the only difference here.
9.7.13	Now, if the sun rises or sets while the fire is not yet taken out,
9.8.1	one should offer two spoonfuls with the verses, "O Agni, do thou be the light of the mind, the thirty-three threads."
9.8.2	If the Agnihotra has been performed before sunrise, then the birth of the child would be like that of one who is about to be born. The sacrificer may bind himself or be conquered by all enemies. Having prepared the Agnihotra regularly, having sat down without breathing, having offered the Agnihotra, one should stand with the formulas, "Earth, Ether, Heaven." The Dakshina is one year.
9.8.3	Having offered it, and having withdrawn it, one should again offer it. This is the expiation, says Aśmarathya.
9.8.4	Now, if one of them should be at the end, then having taken it forward, one should run towards the east. Having approached him, one should sit down. When he becomes calm, then one should offer with the verse, "O Earth, svāhā!" Prajapati is indeed the Being; one approaches him. He alone takes him forward from there. The sacrificer does not suffer any harm. This is known.
9.8.5	If the Agnihotra is interrupted for two, three or four days, one should offer to Agni Tantumata cooked rice in eight potsherds.
9.8.6	Making himself easy to approach, the sharp-horned bull, shining, looking at the ancient abode, Agni has stretched the divine thread. You are our thread and bridge, O Agni, you are the path leading to the gods. By you, O Agni, may we ascend the back and then enjoy the feast with the gods. This is the Anuvāka of the Yajya and Anuvāka.
9.8.7	"Weaving the thread, awaken! O Agni, rise up, rise up the highest, rise up from darkness, rise up the bright one." These are the offerings.
9.8.8	We invoke Agni, the bearer of oblations, the conqueror of foes, the slayer of demons, the victor in battles, the shining, the brilliant, the male, the well-offered. O Agni, do thou fill up that which is well-offered. Thou art the god who conquers all foes. Thou extendest our path in the four directions. Bring us the shining, the imperishable life. At the Samyājyā.
9.9.1	If the Garhapatya were to be extinguished while the Ahavaniya is not, one should extinguish the Ahavaniya and churn out the Garhapaty. Having churned out the Garhapayya with the verse, "Agni was born first," and having recited the verse, "O Agni, the king, enjoy the food, the prosperity, the strength, the radiance, the life," one should offer the Samit with the verse, "Thou art the king, thou art the Viraj, thou art the lord of Sarasvati, thou art the distributor of food, thou art the eater of food." Having offered the Samit, one should offer another oblation with the verse, "Agni has proclaimed the foremost of the dawns." One should offer an oblation to Agni Tapasyant, Janantu, and Pavakavant with eight potsherds.
9.9.2	All the others recite this Isti which is common to all.
9.9.3	Come, O Agni, with thy lustre, to the people, with thy heat, to this my praise. Come to us, O Agni, to the people with thy heat, with thy lustre. Thou who shinest, thou who givest oblations to the gods. This is the Yajya and Anuvakya.
9.9.4	Having gone to the Ahavaniya fire, he offers the oblation of eight potfuls to Agni Jyotishmati.
9.9.5	Not to Tapasvati.
9.9.6	If the Agnihotra-fire is not offered in the evening, and the previous fire goes out, one should light the Agnihotra- fire after placing it, and follow it with the fire and the Agnihotra. A learned brahmin should recite it. If he had borrowed money earlier, he should give it back. It is known that one makes him go out by going out.
9.9.7	If another fire should follow the Agnihotra fire that has not been offered in the morning, having followed it, one should churn out another fire as before, take it out as before, and offer it.
9.9.8	If one is in a hurry, one should first take possession of it, then take it out and offer it.
9.9.9	If he has a brother who is older than he, he should make him the younger. Having made the younger one the elder, he should offer the oblation as before. On the next day, he should offer to Agni Tapasvin, Janadvat.
9.9.10	If the fire of one of them goes out, he should not determine the time. Having followed it, he should first churn out another fire as before, and having extracted it as before, he should offer it. He should offer a cake on twelve potsherds to Agni, and a rice-gruel to Varuna.
9.9.11	If the Garhapatya or the Ahavaniya fire goes out, one should kindle it from the ashes of the sacrificial grass. If there are no such ashes, one should kindle the fire by touching the ashes and the kindling wood. It is known that one generates it from its own source.
9.9.12	In the case of the Shaka and the Tridha fires, it is the same.
9.9.13	"The same applies to the Agni Taptashta and Janadvat fires."
9.9.14	One should offer these oblations to the following deities: to Mitra, Svāhā! To Varuna, Svāhā ! To Agni, Svāhā. To Agni, the lord of vows, Svāhā; to Agni, the ascetic, the generator, the purifier, Svāhā ; to Agni, the pure, Svāhā, to Agni, the luminous, Svāhā to Surya, Svāhā . One should offer with the Vyāhṛtis, the Praṇavas, and all together.
9.10.1	If the Prāṇa goes to the Udāna before the time of Homa, one should offer in the Garhapatya.
9.10.2	If the Prāṇa has gone to the Udāna at the time of Homad, one should offer into the Garhapaty.
9.10.3	If the Udāna has gone to the Prāṇa, one should offer it into the Āhavanīya.
9.10.4	If Vāyu has gone to the Uḍāna in the Dakṣiṇāgni, one should offer to the Garhapatyā.
9.10.5	If all (the priests) were to follow (the sacrificer), having churned out fire, he should offer it in the direction where the wind blows, saying, "To Vayu, svāhā."
9.10.6	If, however, having churned in a windless place, having prepared a resting place, the sacrificer sits down behind the Āhavanīya and drinks the Agnihotra himself, it is understood that it is a rule for the Agnihotra.
9.10.7	If he offers before sunset, he should offer again after sunset and then stand up with the verse, "May we be of one mind."
9.10.8	If it is in the middle of the night, he should offer once more at dawn and then stand up.
9.10.9-11	If he were to sprinkle the oblation, he would sprinkle the fire. He should offer with a damaged sacrifice. The Adityas, Rudras, and Vasus should again kindle the fire. He would again kindle the fire.
9.10.12-14	As for the expiation: Āśmarathya says it should be done as per the rules of the Veda. If they do not know the rules, then they should follow the rules of the Brāhmaṇas. If they do know the rules, but do not follow them, then they should be expelled. If they do follow the rules, but are not expelled, then they should perform the expiation. If they do perform the expiation, but are not reinstated, then they should not be reinstated. If they are reinstated, but are not given a share, then they should receive a share. If they receive a share, but are not allowed to speak, then they should speak. If they speak, but are not honored, then they should honor them. If they honor them, but are not praised, then they should praise them. If they praise them, but are still not satisfied, then they should satisfy them. If they satisfy them, but are unable to satisfy them, then they are satisfied. If they are satisfied, but are unable, then they are not satisfied. If they do satisfy them, but do not know how to satisfy them, they should be satisfied. If they know how to satisfy, but do not satisfy, then they should know how to satisfy. If they know, but do not perform, then they should do so. If they do, but do not succeed, then they should succeed. If they succeed, but do not attain, then they should attain. If they attain, but do not obtain, then they should obtain. If they obtain, but do not reach, then they should reach. If they reach, but do not cross, then they should cross. If they cross,
9.10.15	When a man or a dog or a chariot passes between the fire and the oblation placed on the fire, or when a person with bad luck or a eunuch passes between them, one should sprinkle water there and then turn back the cow, saying, "May prosperity increase. May the sacrifice release the lord of sacrifice from sin. Svāhā!"
9.10.16	The sacrifice went to the gods, then may the blessing of the sacrifice come to me. The sacrifice went to men, to the ancestors, to the five peoples, to the directions, to the waters, to the plants, to the trees, to the people. Then may the blessing of sacrifice come to me." Having offered six oblations, he should mark the path with "This is Vishnu's stride" or should tempt the foot with "Step."
9.10.17	If one's chariot or horse goes beyond the Āhavanīya, one should take it from the Garhapatya. "One should offer with the verses, "O Agni, the first step that you have taken, you have stretched along the rays of the sun. There, gather the most prosperous one. Unite us with good will and strength. You, O Agni, are the one who bestows prosperity." One should then offer the Path-making cake as before."
9.10.18	He should offer this very (oblation).
9.11.1	When the Stotra or Sastra is lost.
9.11.2	For him whose fires have been extinguished by fire, or for him who has extinguished them.
9.11.3	For him for whom the fires have been extinguished.
9.11.4	This (oblation) for a person who has died.
9.11.5	He should offer the Agnihotra with the milk of a cow that has calved recently, until the body comes in contact with fire.
9.11.6	Everything is done silently.
9.11.7	The one who is facing east milks.
9.11.8	Having placed the darbha grass that are in front with their tips towards the south, on the southern half of the Garhapatya fire, in the cold season, having placed them on the ashes, having moved to the right, having taken up everything silently only once, holding the kindling wood below, he runs towards the right with the kindling wood.
9.11.9	It is known that he holds it above the gods.
9.11.10	Having placed the kindling wood, he should offer all of it silently only once.
9.11.11	Or he should offer Soma to the ancestors in the eastern offering and Agni Kavya-vahā in the northern offering.
9.11.12	There is no eating, sprinkling, or pouring around.
9.11.13	He gives the sacrificial implements to the Brahmins.
9.11.14	He gives away iron ones.
9.11.15	The clay ones are taken away by the waters.
9.11.16	The stone belongs to the son.
9.11.17	If one hears of the death of one who was not known to be dead, one should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Surabhimata.
9.11.18	If the sacrificer dies after the first oblation has been offered, one should offer the second oblation in the south, in the cold ashes.
9.11.19	Or one should take it to a heap of ashes.
9.11.20	Some say that one should perform the first oblation that is offered in the Pitrmedha here.
9.11.21	If the sacrificer dies when the Iṣṭi is not completed, then having brought together all the deities from all directions, he should offer with the Svāhā-utterance.
9.11.22	If a householder who has kindled the sacred fires goes away and dies, and his direction is not known, then they should burn his house with the fires.
9.11.23	Or else, with three hundred and sixty Palasha twigs, they make a human-shaped figure on a black antelope skin, wrapping the joints with Palasha bark or Kusha grass, and then allocate forty for the head, ten for the neck, twenty for the chest, thirty for the belly, fifty for each arm, and with those same five, five fingers. With seventy-seven, each foot, and with those five, five fingers, with eight for the penis, and with twelve for the testicles, having made a human-shaped image on the black antelope skin, having bathed and adorned it, they place it on the skin with its head towards the south and its hair facing downwards, inside the altar. Having placed it there, lying down, they cover it with a new and unworn garment. The relatives sit around it, touching it, saying, "This is his, that is his, these are his fires." The ministers of the deceased perform the rites beginning with this. Having done that, they should cremate it with the fires. This is the Vājasaneyaka.
9.11.24	If the oblations are near, and a black bird flies over them, as if shaking them with its wings, one should offer the oblation with the verse, "Vishnu has wandered through the Veda."
9.11.25	If it flies high, one should not be concerned about it.
9.11.26	If the sacrificial post is being erected and the cup falls down, one should offer the oblation with the verse, "Brahma is the support of the mind."
9.12.1	If the remnants of the oblation are not removed and the Anuyājas are offered, one should offer an oblation with the words, "If the gods have transgressed against you."
9.12.2	If the fire is extinguished, one should offer three oblations with the verse, "If the fire is extinguished or stolen, may the fire that is self-existent and self-existent again be obtained."
9.12.3	If the sun does not rise on the day of Agnihotra, one should offer oblations with the verses, "We rise above darkness, we rise above darkness, and the bright one."
9.12.4	If the jackals were to attack him, he would say, "One-horned one, you have spoken. We are touched. Make a boundary for us." Having piled up a Palāśa wood, he offers six oblations, saying, "O Varuna, that which is yours, I go to you. You are Agni. You are Agni, O Agni. You have come to Prajapati." Having offered these six oblations, he says, "I place this boundary for the living beings. May none of them go beyond this. May they live for a hundred years, looking towards the east. May they place death behind the mountain." He places a boundary stone to the south.
9.12.5	The Nyagrodha tree is the sacrificial post for a Kshatriya at the boundary of his kingdom.
9.12.6	The Ashvattha tree is the sacrificial posts for a Vaishya at the boundary of the field.
9.12.7	They should offer eight oblations with the words "To the desired ones, svāhā!" as an option for all expiations at the Darśa-Pūrṇamāsa sacrifices.
9.12.8	If one sees a bad dream or any other fear, one should offer oblations with the words "O Indra, I am afraid." Some say one should recite.
9.12.9	All the rays of heat shine forth. Therefore, having performed the Pravargya rite, one should offer with the words "Having been excluded, may he hear with the verses" and "May he hear with the words." Some say one
9.12.10	If the sacrificer eats while the fires are not yet kindled for the offering, he should offer oblations with the words, "Whatever you are, that you are." Some say he should add fuel to the kindling woods and recite.
9.12.11	One should offer or recite the mantras of the two verses, "Whatever was hidden from me, Agni has given me sight again," for one who has been afflicted by a disease that has been suppressed, suppressed, suppressed, and suppressed. Some say one should offer or recite.
9.12.12	One should offer or recite three times the mantra, "What is unknown," for one who is unknown.
9.13.1-4	If the ghee is not purified, he should give the animal that is cut. If it is purified, then a variegated (animal) should be given. Some say that a boon should be given. If there is plenty of ghee in his house, he should give that. He should sprinkle it, saying, "I sprinkle you." He should sprinkle it or recite the mantra.
9.13.5	"The gods have gone to the sacrifice" is said by some after the ghee.
9.13.6	"I take thee with the measure of the sacrifice, with the measure of Prama, with the measure that is thine own." Having taken it thus, he measures the eastern direction with "To the lord of the earth svāhā." The southern direction with "To lord of the world svāhā." The western direction with "To Lord of beings svāhā."
9.13.7	The two of them should recite the formula, "To the lord of the earth svāhā, to the lord of the world svāhā, svāhā to the lord of beings." It is heard that all oblations are offered without any distinction.
9.13.8	If a skull were to break, one should recite the formula "I join you with the Gāyatrī consisting of one hundred syllables." Having joined it, one should offer it on the Garhapatya fire with the formula "May the mind and light be enjoyed."
9.13.9	Then he should sprinkle it with water, reciting, "The heat is unbroken, the heat is unbroken."
9.13.10	Then, having prepared another one, he should sprinkle it on the potsherds, reciting, "Thirty-three threads." If it were to break before the covering.
9.13.11	If any of the covered ones were to break, he should cover it with another one, reciting the same mantra.
9.13.12	Or if any of the mantras were to break.
9.13.13	If the potsherd of the oblations offered before the principal oblation is broken, one should offer oblations to Asvins in two potsherds and to Dyāvāpṛthivi in one potsherd.
9.13.14	The officiating priest is from the Bhārgava family and the Dakṣiṇā is a one-year-old animal.
9.13.15	The Vājasaneyins prescribe the offering of a ladleful of oblation with the verse "The great heaven and earth are yours."
9.14.1	If one pot is spilled, he should turn around and say, "Follow the path of Prajapati, follow the path of heroes, follow the path with cows, follow the path (of the gods) with horses, follow the path along with all prosperity, follow the path together with offspring, follow the path according to the divine path. May the gods lead our sacrifice along the straight path." He arranges according to the proper place.
9.14.2	The sacrificer recites over him: "I stand in the Kshatriya, I stand in the kingdom, I stand in horses, I stand in cows, I stand in progeny, I stand in what is to be, I have grown over all others. That is deposited in another. To heaven and to the all-working (goddess) and to earth, I offer obeisance." Then one should offer oblations with the words, "May heaven and earth unite."
9.14.3	If one is performing a sacrifice for his wives, one should offer a cup of oblation to Vaisvānara with twelve potsherds.
9.14.4	One should offer this oblation if it is said that one is a performer of the Darsha-Pūrnamāsa sacrifices.
9.14.5	One should make this offering if one eats new grain without performing the Agrayaṇa sacrifice.
9.14.6	The one who has established the fire is brought to the gods; the gods eat his food. If one were to eat without offering the Agnayan oblation, one would be eating the share of the gods that has been set aside. One would incur misfortune.
9.14.7	One should offer a cake on thirteen potsherds to Maruts for one for whom twins are born, whether cows or men.
9.14.8	A man desires impotence, a cow desires being without cattle.
9.14.9	The Gāyatrī is the introductory verse and the Tristubh is the offering verse.
9.14.10	One should offer a cake on eleven potsherds to Agni-Viṣṇu for one whom others would offer to Agni, or for one whose Agni is offered by others.
9.14.11	One should make an oblation to Rudra and Vastu for one whose cattle are afflicted by Rudra.
9.14.12	One should perform the sacrifice of the Niṣāda-stha-pati with this very (oblation).
9.14.13	That is his Iṣṭi.
9.14.14	It is known that the sacrificial fee is a black antelope skin, or a horn, or a donkey, or a deer, or a deer-skin, or a pot of Śyāmāka grains, or a goat.
9.15.1	One who is a celibate student and approaches a woman should offer a donkey as a sacrificial animal.
9.15.2	One should cook a cake on the ground without a pot.
9.15.3	They should perform the oblations in water.
9.15.4-6	It may be dedicated to Rakshas or to Nirriti. One should offer a cake to Nirriti. When the oblation is consumed, Nirriti takes that sacrifice. Having established it, one should offer another oblation to that deity.
9.15.7-9	Now, if the cake of one (of the sacrificers) gets spoilt, then it is known that the sacrifice is taken by Nirriti. If there be any remnant, one should proceed with that. One should give the Dakṣiṇā and the remnant of the oblation to the hated one. It is known that one makes him (the hated one) taken by Nirriti.
9.15.10	If the oblation meant for a particular deity is spoilt, one should offer another oblation meant for that deity.
9.15.11	In this case, the mantras beginning with the taking of the ladle should be repeated.
9.15.12	Or, if it is spoilt at the end,
9.15.13	If the oblation meant to be offered to a particular deity is spoiled, one should offer the remaining oblation with ghee.
9.15.14	If all the oblations of one were to be lost, spoiled, or stolen, he should offer to these deities with ghee, having calculated.
9.15.15	Then one should perform another sacrifice, not weak, for a sacrifice is the atonement for a sacrifice.
9.15.16	It is known that one should offer the oblation that has been spoiled by water.
9.15.17	If something that is not fit to be eaten by the noble ones were to be used, one should not offer with it.
9.15.18-19	If the Puròàasa is ill-cooked, then that oblation goes to Yama, the godless. Having placed it there, he should cook rice in four pots in the Anvàhàryapàcana and feed four Brahmanas. Among those who eat, one should be a descendant of Bharadvaja.
9.15.20	If one were to perform a sacrifice without giving Dakṣiṇā, that sacrifice would be deficient and would not lead to longevity. One should give a field.
9.15.21	If one were to obstruct the Dakṣiṇās that have been designated, the field that has been established should be given as an expiation.
9.15.22	If one invites a deity that is not entitled to a share, one should offer it with clarified butter as if it were entitled to a share before the Svishtakṛt.
9.15.23	If one does not invoke the sister, one should remember her and then invoke her mentally, and offer the oblation saying, "Whatever the gods have given away."
9.16.1	If an oblation falls outside the enclosing sticks before the Prajās, one should tell the Agnidhra, "Offer this after collecting it." He offers it with folded hands. A full vessel should be given to him.
9.16.2	Whatever earthen vessel is broken in the sacrifice, one should pour it into water, saying, "Earth has gone to earth."
9.16.3	Wooden vessels are used in the Ahavaniya fire.
9.16.4	If the sacrifice is interrupted by a Vedic recitation, one should offer it in the Garhapatya fire, saying, "Bhūr." If it is interrupted by a Yajurveda recitation, one should perform it in the Dakshina Agni fire, saying, "Bhuvah." If it is disrupted by a Samaveda recitation, one performs it in the Ahavani ya fire, saying, "Suvar."
9.16.5	If one were to offer everything everywhere,
9.16.6	This is the general expiation. It should be performed everywhere, says Ashmarathi. Where it is not mentioned, it should be performed, says Aalekhana. There should be general accumulation everywhere, says another.
9.16.7	If one fears that he will be harmed in the hermitage, one should offer a libation, saying, "May I accomplish the deity of his mind through sacrifice. May I attain the goal of this one who has abandoned the end. May I attain an end."
9.16.8	If the oblation offered to a deity is spilled, or if it is cut, or if it were to be given to a living being, or if it has been cooked with colors, or if it should be given as a boon, according to some.
9.16.9	If the oblations offered to a deity are exchanged in the yajya and anu-yajya verses, or if what has been taken for a deity is spilled or given to another deity, or if there is much of it in his house, he should give it.
9.16.10	"You are our Agni, you are our Agni" - these two oblations are offered in all cases of reversal and error, say some.
9.16.11	If the sacrificial cake falls down or is broken, then having taken it out and placed it on the sacrificial grass, one should recite the following verses: "What have you fallen for? What have you fallen for?" "O peaceful one, come here for peace. Having become the silent one fit for the sacrifice, sit in your own abode. Sit in your own abode." "Do not harm, O god, sent by the gods. With ghee, with brilliance, with ghee, do not injure us in any way." "For the sake of prosperity and well-being, sit on the sacrificial grass." One should recite these verses and pour ghee over it.
9.16.12	The sacrificer who has become (a sinner) is able to prosper if they perform this expiation rite at the sacrifice.
9.17.1	The sky has been flooded, the earth has been flooded, this entire world has been flooded. All beings have been flooded. May the oblation be born from the flood. Here let cows be born, here horses, here men. Here may the gift of a thousand be born. May the prosperity of wealth be seated here. May this sacrifice grow with cows and horses. May this altar be well-guarded by its own lord. May this sacrificial grass be better than other sacrificial grass. May all the gods protect this sacrifice. May the plants be rich in milk. Having recited these four verses, having sipped water, having cleansed the ladle, having placed a hundred-weight of gold in the ladle, having taken another portion of clarified butter, having caused it to be smelled by a horse, one should place it in the proper place, reciting, "This Vishnu has wandered."
9.17.2	If the clarified butter in the one-pot offering is spilled, one should take up clarified butter and offer it with the verse, "May they enjoy the light of the mind."
9.17.3	Similarly, if the Soma juice is spilled, one can take up Soma juice and offer it.
9.17.4	Whatever the crow has touched with its mouth, may Agni, the bearer of oblations, the consumer of ghee, purify it all. He recites this over the black crow that has touched it. The vessel is scraped as before, starting from the pouring out.
9.17.5	Whatever has been eaten by dogs, that Agni, the bearer of oblations, the consumer of ghee, may purify it all. He recites this over the dog-eaten food. The taking up and other rites are as before. Here no vessel is used. He takes it in another vessel.
9.17.6	If the animal is taken away, one should offer a libation with the verse, "From the other side of the dust," and then recite, "From fear of you, we have settled down. Grant us safety from all beings. Be kind to all creatures. Salutations to Rudra, the nourisher." One should offer the libation or recite the mantra.
9.17.7	If one sits down, one should recite the second verse, "From fear, we have settled here."
9.17.8	If he sits down, he should make him rise with the Maitrāvaruṇa staff.
9.18.1	"Stand up, O Usra, stand firm, do not injure me, do not injure this sacrifice and the sacrificer. Place the sacrificer in the heaven world. Be auspicious to the bipeds and the quadrupeds."
9.18.2	"O Usra," for the goat, "O Usra," "O Usra" for the sheep, "O Usru" for the cow.
9.18.3	The second is used when one is trembling out of fear.
9.18.4	The second is used when fleeing out of fear. When one is fleeing out of fear, the second is used.
9.18.5	One should worship the deity of that form, complexion, and age, having taken it, when it does not come.
9.18.6	The second (is used) when one is firmly established out of fear. The second is used in the declaration of one's own desire.
9.18.7	He who did this, to him salutations, to him Svāhā. Thus in all cases the third.
9.18.8	"Do not die, O Uva. To all thy hopes, the waters stand firm, the bountiful. Having thus invoked the waters with these four verses, he should take up another form, colour and age, and worship the deity.
9.18.9-11	"Because of fear, you urinate," when he urinates a second time. "Because of fear you defecate," when he defecates a second time.
9.18.12	The Hotṛ-priest, Agni, the earth, the sky, from where it has fallen, that it does not reach, it goes to Nirṛti. Thus one recites for a cow that is leaking foetus.
9.18.13	When the animal is led away after being slaughtered.
9.18.14	If one wants to cause harm to those who have killed an animal, one should offer on the Āgnīdhra fire or on the Āhavanīya fire or on the Śamitra fire, when the animal sacrifice has been performed.
9.18.15	If the oblation or the ladle should fall down, he should say, "I give you for fame and strength. You have placed the power and nourishment in us. The drop that is yours, the dew that is yours, O divine banner, has entered the entire universe. Protect us for non-injury. Svāhā." He should offer the oblation.
9.18.16	If he knows that it is eight-footed, he says, "May the creator, the benefactor, the sun, the god, be in heaven for those who desire heaven." Having offered oblations, he binds the gold with a turban.
9.19.1	Placing it in the sheath, he places it in the second and third sheaths.
9.19.2	Having made the sheaths like a hole, the Adhvaryu then recites this mantra:
9.19.3	"Having gone round the embryo clockwise, saying, "I turn (the embryo) around," he puts the placenta aside, saying, ". I break your placenta."
9.19.4	" "He puts the embryo outside, saying, ">"Let it be outside!" Between the thighs, having put the embryo on a stake, having roasted it on a fire, he cooks it."
9.19.5	"He takes the vessel containing the embryo-juice, saying, ">"The embryo is of great form, of universal form, of the moon.
9.19.6	Having offered the Pasupurodāsa, he offers the Garbhapurodāsa with the formula, "To the pleased Heaven and Earth."
9.19.7	Having performed with the Pasupurodasa, he performs with the Garbhapuradāsa, with the formula, “To the pleased Heaven-Earth.”
9.19.8	While reciting the names of the deities, he places the embryo in front of the navel. He places the other part in the deities. He places the upper part in the Sauviṣṭakṛt deities.
9.19.9	He distributes the embryo into three parts, in the deities, Sauviṣṭakartis and Iḍas.
9.19.10	He offers to the east of the Sauviṣkṛt deities, reciting, "One-footed, two-footed."
9.19.11	The Dakṣiṇā is a golden coin with eight prongs.
9.19.12	Having cut off the right foot of the foetus, he offers to Vishnu Sipivista, with the verse, "May that be yours today, O Sipivista." With the verse, "O Sipivista, may this be yours today."
9.19.13	The Maruts are his (Agni's) offspring. The Garbha and the Garbha-Purorasa are placed to the north of the Garhapatya or the Samitra. Having placed them on the cold ashes, he recites the verse, "The earth and the heaven are great." Having covered them with cold ashes, he worships with five verses beginning with "This young one."
9.19.14	Now, Āśmarathya says that this expiation for a pregnant woman should be performed everywhere. Ālekhaṇa says that it should be performed where it is not mentioned.
9.19.15	If the sacrificial post, whose purpose has not been accomplished, grows, one should perform the Tvaṣṭra-sacrifice, the Saṇḍa-sacrifice, the Lomaśa-sacrifice, and the Savanīya-sacrifice.
9.19.16	The Vājasaneyins mention the oblation to Tvashtri.
9.19.17	Some say that one should offer the oblations to Tvashtrii.
9.20.1	If the sacrificial post has a hole, the sacrificer may die of diarrhea. Having offered with the Vyāhṛtis to Viṣṇu and the Prajapatya oblation, one should cut it and throw it into the fire, and then prepare another one.
9.20.2	If the worms were to eat him, the expiation is as before.
9.20.3	If he were to fall from the ladder, one should know that his wife will transgress him. The subsequent part is the same as the Vyāhṛtis.
9.20.4	If he falls on the right side or if he were to fall or if he were attached to the branches, or if the sacrificer were to die, the subsequent part is the Vaisnava place and the Yamī.
9.20.5	If he falls into water and dies in water, the northern one is common to the Vaisnava and Varuna.
9.20.6	If they take away all his possessions by force, the northern one belongs to the Vaisnavas and Indra.
9.20.7	If the root is dry, one should know that he will not perform the rites for the ancestors as before. If he dies of hunger in the middle, if he will not go to the heavenly world at the beginning, if the Agniṣṭoma rite is interrupted and the sacrificer dies, if the eastern wife is the opposite, if the southern wife is the goat-wife, if the son is the eldest, if the southern and eastern wife is the Brahman, if the southern is the Hotṛ, if the northern is the Adhvaryu, if the northern and eastern is the Agnīdhra.
9.20.8	In all cases of dryness etc., the northern direction is the same as in the case of Yama etc.
9.20.9	If the lines are red, it means that the sacrificial post will be avoided and one will not be able to perform the thousandfold sacrifice. If they are white, it means that one will soon be able to perform a thousandfold sacrifice.
9.20.10	If the fire is offered and the smoke goes to the south, or if the wind encircles the smoke, or if the sacrificer dies, one should offer the entire expiation.
10.1.1-2	When about to perform the Soma sacrifice, he chooses Brahmanas as priests, young or old, who are learned, speak in a high voice, and are not defective.
10.1.3	He asks, "Who are the priests? Who are the officiating priests? Are they not deficient? Are they not appointed? Are the sacrificial fees good?" This is the Chāndogya Brāhmaṇa.
10.1.4	Then he recites: "You have told me the great, you have told me the bright, you have told the fame, you have told my praise, you have told us the arrangement, you have told enjoyment, you have told everything to me. May that protect me, may that enter me, may I enjoy with that."
10.1.5	The path is called the "way of the Soma" and "the way to go to Soma."
10.1.6	He sets out on the path, saying, "May the god Soma go to the god Soma, going by the path of truth, leaving behind evil."
10.1.7	He approaches the Fathers, turning to the right, saying, "The Fathers are the earth."
10.1.8	He chooses them, four at a time, all of them individually.
10.1.9	The Adhvaryu, the Pratiprasthātṛ, the Neṣṭṛ, the Unneṣṭṛ, these are the Adhvaryus. The Brahman, the Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin, the Āgnīdhra, the Potṛ, these are Brahmins. The Hotr, the Maitrāvaruṇa, the Acchāvāka, the Grāvastut, these are the Hotṛs. The Udgātṛ, the Prastotṛ, the Pratihārin, the Subrahmaṇya, these are the Udgātṛs.
10.1.10	The Kauṣītakas mention a seventeenth member.
10.1.11	He becomes the overseer of the rites.
10.1.12	If the first four are performed,
10.1.13	Then the rites of consecration.
10.1.14	Agni is my Hotṛ, Aditya is my Adhvaryu, Soma is my Brahman, Parjanya is my Udgātṛ, Ākāśa is my Sadasya, the waters are my Hotrāśansins, the rays are my Camasādhvaryus. This is the instruction of the deities in a low voice. This is the human one in a loud voice.
10.2.1	One desiring heaven should offer the Jyotiṣṭoma sacrifice, either for one desire or for all desires, simultaneously, or for the separation of food.
10.2.2	One should perform the Jyotiṣṭoma sacrifice in spring.
10.2.3	The Agniṣṭoma is the first sacrifice.
10.2.4	Some people mention the Atiratra as the first.
10.2.5	The Chandogabrahmana says, "One should perform the Jyotisṭoma sacrifice in the spring. It has three Dakṣiṇās."
10.2.6	One should perform the first sacrifice with the Rathantara Sāman or the Brihat Sāman or both.
10.2.7	Some say that one should not recite the Brhat-saman without reciting the Rathantara-saman.
10.2.8	If one wishes to perform a sacrifice with an Isti, with an animal sacrifice, or with Soma, one should perform it on the new moon or full moon day.
10.2.9	If the sacrificer asks the king for the divine sacrifice, saying, "O god Varuna, give me the divine sacrifice,"
10.2.10	If he gives, he says, "May you have a divine sacrifice." If he does not give, he says, “I know the divine sacrifice. I place you in that divine sacrifice.
10.2.11	Then they address him thus: "The mind has been restrained, the mind will restrain thee." The Brahman says: "Speech has been restrained, speech will restrain thee." "The breath has been restrained, breath will restrain thee," says the Adhvaryu. "The eye has been restrained, eye will restrain thee," the Udgātṛ says. "The self has been restrained, self will restrain thee," a member of the assembly says. "Progeny has been restrained, progeny will restrain thee," (says) the sacrificer. "The limbs have been restrained, the limbs will restrain thee," say the Hotrakas. "The beings have been restrained, beings will restrain thee," all the priests say.
10.3.1	The king asks for the divine worship. Agni is the Hotṛ, he is my Hotṛ. O Hotṛ, give me the divine worship. He asks for the Hotṛ. Āditya is the Adhvaryu, he is my Adhvaryu. O Adhvaryu give me the divine worshiop. He asks for an Adhvaryu; Candrama is the Brahman, he is my Brahman. O Brahman, give me the divne worship. He asks the Brahman; Parjanya is the Udgātṛ, he is the Udgätṛ. O Udgātṛ give me the divine worhsip. He asks for a Udgātṛ; Ākāśa is the Sadasya, he is my Sadasya. O Sadasya, give me the divie worship. He asks a Sadasya; the waters are the Hotrāśansins, they are my Hotrāśamsins. O Hotrāśāmsins, give me the dvive worship. He asks Hotrāśaṃsins; the rays are the Camasādhvaryus, they are my Camasādhvarus. O Camasādhvarya, give me thedivine worship. He asks Camasādhvāryus.
10.3.2	Or else he may not request the divine assembly, but may approach the gods himself. He should say, "Do you see this, O Creator? Do you see this, in the sky? Do you see? The most excellent, the most excellent, the immortal ones, whom they call the sun, the most excellent one shines with the rays, following the heaven and earth, the divine son."
10.3.3	"We have come to this divine assembly of the earth." He approaches the divine assembly.
10.3.4	Beginning with the middle pillar of the eastern row, one recites the Vājasaneyaka.
10.3.5	Then he offers the Sambharya formulas.
10.3.6	The text is recited as "Agni with the Yajus, Savitar with the Stoma."
10.3.7	Here, having brought the king, they perform the pariveviṣa rite with milk and rice, until the purchase.
10.3.8	May the gods be pleased with me, the gods who are in my right hand, the gods who belong to my right hand. May the gods be satisfied with me, the great gods, for the great sacrifice. May you be seated in your own place, may you lie down with your body. Like a father to his sons, may you be well-disposed. May the auspicious one enter me. May the truth be my Self, may faith be my foundation, may Tapas be my support. May the directions consecrated by Savitar bless me. I am truth. Thus the sacrificer stands by the Ahavaniya fire before the consecration, following the seven Hotars with his mind. Having offered with Grahas at the Ahavaniya,
10.4.1	He begins the ritual of the Diksaniyā.
10.4.2	He offers a cake on eleven potsherds to Agni-Vishnu, or a rice-pap in ghee to Agni-Vishņu.
10.4.3	A cake is for one desiring Brahmic glory, rice-pap in ghce for one desiring offspring or cattle.
10.4.4	Some know that the second offering is to Aditya in ghee, for one desiring offspring and cattle.
10.4.5	The Sāmidhenī verses are fifteen or seventeen in number.
10.4.6	Some perform the Diksaniyā rite before the Pravaṃśa rite.
10.4.7	The Diksaniyā is concluded with the Patnīsaṃyājas.
10.4.8	He holds the Dhruva vessel containing clarified butter.
10.4.9	He performs the Upāṁśu rite before the Agniṣṭoma rite.
10.4.10	Now, in the case of some, he recites as many verses as there are in the Dīkṣaṇīyā; then fewer in the Prāyaṇīyā, still fewer in the Ātithya, and in the Upāṃśu and Upaṣṭa, and in the Agnīṣomīya, more.
10.4.11	In the Diksaniya sacrifice, the chanting is done in a low tone; in the Prayaniya sacrifice, in a still lower tone; in the Atithya sacrifice, in an even lower tone; in Upasads, in a high tone; in the Agnisomiya sacrifice, in a low tone. In the Diksaniya sacrifice, the chanting may be done in a low or in a still lower or in an even lower or in a high tone;
10.4.12	The rites of the Darsha-Pūrnamāsa are not found in the Soma sacrifice, such as the setting up of the fire, the offering of the Vrata-food, the eating of the Āraṇya-food, the keeping awake, the giving of the Anvāhārya-food, the binding of the wife, and the releasing of her.
10.4.13	The setting up of the sacrificial fire should be done at the Dikshaniya ceremony, and the binding of the sacrificer's wife.
10.4.14	At the consecration ceremonies, the sacrificer makes the sacrificial post.
10.4.15	When the king is bought, or at the Upavasatha ceremony.
10.5.1	He makes the eastern section of the house high and the western section low, and all around he makes it sloping.
10.5.2	The corners are the directions between the directions.
10.5.3	He makes the corners high.
10.5.4	There are doors in each direction.
10.5.5	The gate to the east is for one who desires heaven. The gate to the south is for one who wishes, "May I prosper in the world of the ancestors." The gate to the west is for one who longs for the world of humans. The gate to north is for one who wants, "May I succeed in the world of gods." The gate to north-east is for one who seeks, "May I be successful in both worlds." The gate to all directions is for one who aspires, "May I attain success in all directions."
10.5.6	The sacrificer shaves his hair and beard outside the northern door, having covered the front door.
10.5.7	First the cheeks, then the beard, then the hair. Or first the beard, then cheeks, then the hair.
10.5.8	"May you be nourished." Thus he offers the gift of the cow to the right. Having placed a darbha grass with its tip towards the east, he says, "O plant, protect him." Having placed it with the svadhiti (a kind of grass), he says, "May the svadhiti not harm him." Having placed the seed, he says, "May the gods hear."
10.5.9	Thus he offers the gift to the left.
10.5.10	The sacrificer mutters, "O plant! Protect me. May the svadhiti! not harm me. May the northern directions be auspicious."
10.5.11	He makes the nails of his body grow.
10.5.12	From the little finger of the left hand.
10.5.13	The elephant is in front, then the feet.
10.5.14	He cleans the teeth with a twig, not letting blood flow.
10.5.15	He bathes in the standing waters, in the waters of the conch-shells, in the waters with hair, in the sacred place with hair.
10.5.16	Having placed gold in a pot, he bathes in it. This is according to the Vājasaneya school.
10.6.1	"May the waters, our mothers, purify us." "The golden-coloured, pure, shining ones have set out, having abandoned sin. The waters are a hundred purifiers, for they are spread out. May that god Savitr purify us with them." "The golden coloured, pure, shining."
10.6.2	"He recites the verse, 'I have come forth from them pure and purified', while going out. He eats the water."
10.6.3	The wife does the same, except for the hair.
10.6.4	Then he gives him a new, large, silken garment.
10.6.5	He accepts it, saying, "Thou art the initiation, the source of penance; thou art penance, the source of Brahman; thou art Brahman, the source of the Kshatra; thou art the Kshatra, the source of truth; thou art truth. I undertake the earth, the initiation with faith, the source of all worlds, the mistress of all, may all desires of the sacrificer be fulfilled."
10.6.6	"Thou art the body of Soma, protect my body. Thou art the body of consecration, I take thee, the auspicious, the gentle, around." Having taken it around, he makes the girdle of Soma around.
10.6.7	"For strength to thee!" He eats food mixed with ghee and curd, and sprinkles it.
10.6.8	He eats what is agreeable to his mind.
10.6.9	It is known that the same thing exists in the other world. One should eat in such a way that one would be able to undertake the lesser and lesser vows in the future.
10.6.10	Some people say that eating should be done before shaving the head or wearing the clothes.
10.6.11	One should offer ghee with two bundles of darbha grass, saying, "You are the milk of the earth."
10.6.12	"Thou art the bestower of lustre," (with these words) he anoints the face three times, first.
10.6.13	The limbs in the direction of their growth. He becomes well-anointed.
10.7.1	"Thou art the tip of Vritra," (with these) he anoints with Trikakuda unguent.
10.7.2	If one does not obtain Trikakuda, then with whatever unguent one anoints, says Vājasaneyaka.
10.7.3	With a tuft of darbha grass, with a darbha grass-bunch, or with a darbha-grass-tuft, he cleanses the inside twice with the right hand, once with the left.
10.7.4	Or twice with the right, three times with the left, or three times with both.
10.7.5	Then he cleanses him outside to the north of the front-end of the sacrificial post with darbha grass-tufts.
10.7.6	It has been said that one purifies with two, and one purifies by three.
10.7.7	One purifies with twenty-one, divided into three, with seven, seven, twice above the navel, once below.
10.7.8	Some say one purifies in a straight line.
10.7.9	One should purify one whom one hates in a slanting line, or with a needle.
10.7.10	"May Citpati purify you." Thus he recites each verse.
10.7.11	"With the flawless purifying (water)." Thus he recites at every place.
10.7.12	"May Citpati purify me, may Vakpati purify me, the god Savitar may purify me." Thus he recitess while being purified.
10.7.13	"His is the purifying path." Thus Pavamana. "The purifier, the giver of wealth, the purifier, the one with great strength, the one who purifies, may he purify me." "The purifying Brahma-knowledge, the one hundred-year-old golden (purifier), by that we, knowing Brahma, purify the purified Brahma." Thus.
10.7.14	"Whatever the gods do to harm the gods, O Agni, you have gone." Thus purified.
10.7.15	Some say that one should offer before the Diksaniyā.
10.8.1	Having entered through the eastern door with the verse, "We invoke you, O gods, for our welfare," and having gone around the Avabhṛtha fire to the south, he sits down near the Ahavaniya fire, saying, "You are the lord of those who are consecrated."
10.8.2	From now on, this is the regular practice for the sacrificer.
10.8.3	Here some recite the Diksaniya (hymn).
10.8.4	Some recite the Sambharya-formulas before the oblations at the initiation.
10.8.5	The ghee for the Diksaniyesti is kept aside. From that, he offers four oblations with the ladle and the fifth with the spoon, reciting the mantras beginning with "To Akriti, to Agni Svāhā" and ending with "To Prajñā, to Agni Svāhà".
10.8.6	Having filled the ladle with twelve spoonfuls, he offers the sixth full oblation with the verse, "To the universal lord of the gods..."
10.8.7	Where the Adhvaryu offers the Audgrahana oblations, there the sacrificer, following the Adhvaryus, offers five oblations: "May my speech be consecrated with speech, svāhā. May my breath be consecrated with breath, svāhā, May my eye be consecrated with eye, svāhā; May my ear be consecrated with ear, svāhā ; May my mind be consecrated with mind, svāhā."
10.8.8-11	He recites the Anuvāka to the Adhvaryu who is offering. He recites the Anuvaaka to the full oblation being offered, "We have united with the wind, the breath, the mind, Prajapati, the protector of the world. May he protect us from death, from sin. May we live long and attain old age." Some recite the Sanbhara verses here. He consecrates the sacrificer with a black antelope skin.
10.8.12	One should consecrate with two (kinds of) grass, with the inner ones having flesh and the outer ones having hair.
10.8.13	If there is one (kind of) grass, one should sew the right foot or the eastern foot.
10.8.14	One should release two straight (kinds of) grasses or one should sew the foot, so say some.
10.8.15	On the inner side of the altar, he spreads a black antelope skin with its neck towards the east and with the hair pointing upwards.
10.8.16	They are fixed in the art of the Ṛg and Sāman verses. One should offer the white and black (cows) with the formula, "They are being touched." Some say, "They are touched."
10.9.1	I take refuge in the Gāyatrī of Indra Śākvara, I unite with it. I take refuge in Indra Śākvara's Tristubh, I unite with that. I take refuge Indra Śākvara Jagatī, I unite with her. I take refuge with Indra Śākvara Anushtubh, I unite that. I take shelter with Indra Śākvaras Paṅkti, I unite with them. With each verse, he touches the black antelope skin in each direction, with the middle and the last.
10.9.2	Then, facing east, he approaches the knees.
10.9.3	"He ascends the black antelope skin, saying, "This is the wisdom of the one who is learning."
10.9.4	"He says, 'I have ascended the boat of the Veda.' Having ascended, he says, 'I ascended the initiation, the wife of truth, with the Gayatri metre and Brahma. I have placed truth in truth, and truth in me. May truth and truth be mine. I have become light, I have attained heaven, the heavenly world, the back of the sky, the expanse of the firmament.'
10.9.5	Here the wife places the pot-grass on the head.
10.9.6	"The Vājasaneyins say, "The life-thread is black."
10.9.7	They call the pot-grass a net.
10.9.8	The sacrificer touches his right shoulder with an untorn cloth, saying, "May I be the protection of Viṣṇu." On the head he says, "Protect me from the brilliance of the stars."
10.9.9	The Vājasaneyins say that the head should be covered with the Uṣṇīṣa.
10.9.10	It has been said that one should not wear the garment before the purchase of Soma.
10.9.11	The wife is initiated with the garment having the eastern end.
10.9.12	They say that the face should be turned upwards.
10.9.13	The girdle is made of reeds or muñja grass, with three strands, and with a noose at one end. With this the sacrificer is initiated, and with the yoke the wife.
10.9.14	"He makes the offering with the verse, "Thou art energy," thinking of the enemy in his mind."
10.9.15	Having made a knot on the northern side of the navel, and having encircled it clockwise, he places it on the southern side of the navel.
10.9.16	Here, as in the Darsha-Paurnamasa, he binds the wife with the verse, "I bind thee together." This is a variant.
10.9.17	"This is the womb of Indra, do not injure me." He gives the black-horned one to the sacrificer.
10.9.18	Some (performers) say, "He should bind it."
10.9.19	It is turned to the right, with three or five folds. Some say, "It is turned to left."
10.10.1	"For thee, O agriculture, for abundant harvest," with this (verse) he digs out a clod of earth with it.
10.10.2	When the meaning is understood as "from the well-grown medicinal herbs", one scratches the head.
10.10.3	The joints of his body are like the joints of a tree, and the heart is like the heart of a tree.
10.10.4	"Thou art the one who is above, thou art the one who belongs to the tree, thou art Sudyumna, give splendour to the sacrificer." Thus he gives the sacrificial staff made of Udumbara wood to the sacrificer. The tree which is fit for sacrifice and bears fruit.
10.10.5	It should be of the height of the face or the chin.
10.10.6	The deity is the tree. The sacrificer, having taken it, says, "You are the thigh-bone, the giver of offspring, the eater of oblations. Protect me." Having recited the vow-giving formula over the ladle, he recites the initiation formula: "Agni is initiated, earth is initiation. May that initiation initiate me. With that initiation, I am initiated. Vayu is initiated, space is initiation. May it initiate me. With it, I am initiated." "Aditya is initiated, heaven is initiation. May heaven initiate me. With heaven, I am initiated." "The moon is initiated, hearing is initiation. May hearing initiate me. With hearing, I am initiated." "Prajapati is initiated, mind is initiation. May mind initiate me. With mind, I am initiated.” “May my speech be initiated for Agni. May my breath be initiated for Vayu. May my sight be initiated for Surya. May my hearing be initiated for the moon. May my mind be initiated for Prajapati. May my mind, earth, heaven, and heaven be initiated for Prajapatis. May my mind and truth be initiated for Prajapa
10.11.1	Earth is consecration. By it Agni is consecrated. By that by which Agni is consecrated, by that consecration I consecrate you. Heaven is consecration. By that Indra is consecrated. By him by whom Indra is consecrated, by him I consecrate you, O Indra. The quarters are consecration. By that the Moon is consecrated. By whom the Moon is consecrated, by whom the Moon is con- secrated, by that I consecrate you by that consecration. The waters are consecration. By them Varuna is consecrated. By them Varuni is consecrated. By her by whom Varuni is consecrated, by her I consecrate you in consecration. The plants are consecration. By him Soma is consecrated. By which Soma is consecrated, by which Soma is consecrated. Translation: Earth is consecration. Him by it Agni is consecrated, him by that by which Agni was consecrated, by that I now consecrate you. The heaven is consecration. By him Indra is consecrated. Him by whom Indra is con- secrate, by him I now consecrate thee, O Indra. Heaven is consecration, by it Indra is consecrated. The quarters are consecra- tion. By them the Moon is consecrated; by whom the Moon was consecrated, by whom he is consecrated, by them I now consecrate him. The waters are consecra-tion. By them Varupa is consecrated. By it Varuni is consecrated; by her by whom Varuna was consecrated, by her now I consecrate you for consecration. The plants were consecration. By them Soma was consecrated. By whom Soma was consecrated, by which he is consecrated, 
10.11.2	The Adhvaryu makes him recite the Säm-barasa verses.
10.11.3	Then he places the fingers.
10.11.4	"Svāhā to the sacrifice in the mind," two times; "Svāhā to heaven," two times; "Svāhā to earth," two times; "Svāhā to space," two times; “Svāhā to sacrifice from the wind," he makes a fist and restrains speech.
10.11.5	Then he informs him three times in a low voice and three times aloud: "This Brahman has been initiated, he is the son of so and so, the grandson of so and so and the great-grandson of so and so; he is the son, grandson and great-grandson."
10.11.6	He who is initiated is born from Brahman. Therefore, even the Kṣatriyas and Vaiśyas are called Brahmins.
10.12.1	One should initiate in the afternoon.
10.12.2	One should do so in the morning if one wishes that he should be ascetic.
10.12.3	He, restraining his speech, performs penance, until the rising of the stars.
10.12.4	Having milked the cows, except one for the calf, and having made the bull bellow, he says, "Those sounds of the cows, the Sun first, the Moon first, may they send them forth according to their share. May they be auspicious for us here. May those sounds return." Having recited this, he releases the speech, saying, "Perform the vow."
10.12.5	He releases four fingers, two on one side and two on the other.
10.12.6	He keeps awake this night, the second night after the king has been bought, and the third night on the day of the Sutyā.
10.12.7	He places them in the names ending with 'Chanasi' and 'Vicaksana'.
10.12.8	'Chanasi' is for a Brahmin, 'Vicaksana' is for a Kshatriya and a Vaishya.
10.12.9	He speaks human speech with the addition of the word "human".
10.12.10	One should not speak with a woman or a Śūdra.
10.12.11	One should not approach him.
10.12.12	If one has to speak with a Śūdra, one should tell one of the Brahmins, Kṣatriyas, or Vaiśyas, "Tell him thus." This is according to the Vājasaneya.
10.12.13	If one speaks to a Śūdra, it is not a sin, if he is not known for his sinful deeds. This is the opinion of Śāṭyāyana.
10.12.14	One does not greet the teacher, father-in-law, or king. This is the view of Śāṭhyāyana.
10.13.1	Agni is the consecrated one, therefore one should not touch him.
10.13.2	One should not take his name.
10.13.3	One should not use a black-horned cow for the purpose of giving Dakshina.
10.13.4	One should not show one's teeth.
10.13.5	One should smile even by holding the hand.
10.13.6	One should avoid honey, meat, women, falsehood, sleeping on the upper bed, spitting, going out at an improper time, and going away from the initiated and measured.
10.13.7	One should neither urinate nor defecate during the day.
10.13.8	If he is going to do it in the shade, he should say:
10.13.9	"This is your sacrificial body." Having taken up a blade of grass or a clod of earth, he should say, "I release the waters, not the offspring, for the sake of freedom from sin. Svāhā! They enter the earth." Having released urine and sipped water, he should place the water that was taken up back on the earth, saying, "May I be united with the earth."
10.13.10	Whatever of my semen has been lost, that I offer to you, like the Agnihotra. I take it back again." He recites this verse over the semen that has been lost.
10.13.11	Whatever poison of the Rasas has been forgotten here, may Agni, Soma, and the Earth again bestow it upon me. Having vomited or praised, whatever food is eaten at night, it does not suffice in the morning. May all that not harm us, for it was not seen by the Sun. Having eaten food in a dream, seeing red blood falling from the Rudriya waters, one should say "Svāhā!"
10.14.1	The name of the place is "Bībhatsa". The oblations made with "Svāhā" enter the earth. The name of the oblation is "Snūhāna". The oblations with "Svāha" enter the earth, and the tears. The name of oblation is "Tapasyā". The oblations are made with "Svāhâ" and enter the earth, the sweat.
10.14.2	One does not go out through the western door.
10.14.3	One does offer oblations connected with rites.
10.14.4	One does perform the Agnihotra.
10.14.5-8	He does not perform the Darśa and Pūrṇamāsa sacrifices. He does not give. He does one who is consecrated for twelve days, or for a month, or for a year, or until he becomes thin, or until he is able to perform the sacrifice.
10.14.9	When the initiated one becomes emaciated, then he becomes fit for sacrifice. When nothing remains inside him, then he becomes suitable for sacrifice. When his skin and bones are joined together, then he becomes worthy of sacrifice. When his black eyes disappear, then he becomes eligible for sacrifice.
10.14.10	The one who is emaciated performs the initiation, the one who is strong performs the sacrifice. Whatever is measured of his limbs, it is known that he offers it.
10.15.1	There is one initiation, three Upasads, and the fifth is the Prasut. There are three initiations, three Upasad, and the seventh is the Prasut, or four initiations, three upasad, and eighth is the Prasut.
10.15.2	The consecration should be done on the new-moon day or on the full-moon day, if the sacrifice is to be performed on the new- moon day or on the new-moom day.
10.15.3	This is the opposite.
10.15.4	The consecration should be done either on the new-m oon day or on the day of the sacrifice, if the sacrifice has to be performed on that day. The consecration should be performed either on the full-m oon day, or on the day when the sacrifice is to take place.
10.15.5	He should not let it be seen or heard by anyone other than the initiated.
10.15.6	One should recite the Vāruṇī verses when the sun is setting, and the Sūrya verses when it is rising.
10.15.7	When one sees something unclean, one recites, "The mind is unfettered."
10.15.8	When it rains, one recites "It gives strength to the flowing."
10.15.9	One should lie down facing east, with the Āhavanīya fire on the right side, neither too stretched out nor too close to the fire.
10.15.10	If he were to turn back, he should recite, "May all the gods protect me."
10.15.11	One should not sit anywhere else except on the black antelope skin. If one sits elsewhere, one should recite, "The gods have gone to the people, the sacrifice."
10.15.12	One should avoid cutting off the black antelope skin and the staff. Having placed both, one should do urination and defecation.
10.15.13	As much as has been said by the wife, the consecration should be done.
10.15.14	The life of celibacy is the same.
10.15.15	One should not wear the clothes of a person who has been initiated, nor should one recite his sins, nor should one eat his food.
10.15.16	If the purpose of the sacrifice is specified, one should eat the leftovers. If the Agniṣṭoma sacrifice is completed, or if the omentum has been offered.
10.16.1	One should not speak before the stars. If one does speak, one should restrain speech after reciting, "This is Vishnu, you are the guardian of vows, O Agni."
10.16.2	One may re-initiate.
10.16.3	Some say that one should restrain speech by reciting the Vaishnavi, Agniavaishnavi, Sarasvati, and Barhaspati mantras in sequence.
10.16.4	One should offer only milk, says Ālekhana.
10.16.5	It has been said that barley-gruel is for a Kṣatriya.
10.16.6	Some teach that one should offer barley-gruel with milk, or with one kind of milk, by combining the two.
10.16.7	Some offer milk alone. One should not do that. One should offer barley-grue! cooked in milk.
10.16.8	If the cow gives little milk, one should milk from another cow.
10.16.9	If there is no other cow, one should mix it with water and cook it.
10.16.10	If there were no milk, one should cook barley-gruel in water and observe the vow.
10.16.11	Even if one has only a few myrobalan fruits, one should not not observe the vow, for the continuity of the Agnihotra.
10.16.12	If he were to die, they should give him curd.
10.16.13	If he were to die of hunger, they should give cooked barley, fried grains, or ghee.
10.16.14	One should observe the vow of eating only Agnihotra oblations, excluding meat.
10.16.15	This is the Vedic injunction, they say. At all the Upasads, the rules for the sucking child are prescribed.
10.16.16	In the afternoon or when the sun is above the tree, the Vrata-giver restrains speech. He makes the fires bright. The initiated one restrains speech. The wife is ordered to restrain speech.
10.17.1	When the stars have risen, he should utter words as before.
10.17.2	Thus he performs the Upodaya rite when the sun has risen, and releases (the cow).
10.17.3	At midday and midnight, he performs the Vrata rite.
10.17.4	Having passed the human time.
10.17.5	Some say that milk is given in the evening, in the last part of the night, in the morning, and in the afternoon.
10.17.6	The sacrificer's vow is cooked on the Garhapatya fire, that of the wife on the Dakshina fire.
10.17.7	The expiation for the Agnihotra being spilled is the same as that of the vow.
10.17.8	Like the Agnihotra, silently taking it up, having brought the vow across the Ahavaniya fire, while giving it, he says, "O Vraty, observe the vow, approach."
10.17.9	"He who has the divine mind, I have the mind," having rubbed his hands, he performs the Vrata rite with the verse, "Those gods who are born of mind, who are united with mind," moving around the Havaniya fire from the right.
10.17.10	The uninitiated do not see him performing the Vrata rite.
10.17.11	"May the waters be auspicious to us, may they be auspicious in our womb, in our belly. May they be auspicious to us in our life, the waters that are rich, without disease, without sin." Having thus taken the vow, he touches the region of the navel.
10.17.12	Having drunk water, he mutters:
10.17.13	The wife silently takes the vow in her own place.
10.18.1	"O Agni, thou art well awake," he says while going to sleep, addressing the Āhavanīya fire.
10.18.2	"Thou art the guardian of vows, O Agni," he says on waking up, either releasing his speech after binding it or after having spoken to the initiated.
10.18.3	The All-gods have covered me. Thus he recites on waking up. The mind has returned, the life has returned, the breath has returned, the intention has returned. May the all-gods, the invincible, the body-protectors, remove all evils. Thus he recitates.
10.18.4	Therefore, one who is consecrated should seek sustenance for twelve days. It is known that he is gathering the sacrifice.
10.18.5	"Pūṣa, the giver, gives the dead to the sun.
10.18.6	"The moon is yours." With these (verses) he receives them according to their signs.
10.18.7	"The god Savitr, the giver of wealth, gives wealth." With these (he receives) the others.
10.18.8	"To Vayu, to you." He directs the dead to the direction where they were lost.
10.18.9	"To Varuna, to you." The dead in water.
10.18.10	"To Nirriti, to you." To the dead who have fallen or are scattered.
10.19.1	"To the Maruts thee!" (thus) one should offer the sheep killed by a lion or drowned in water.
10.19.2	"To Rudra thee!" (thus one should offer) the sheep killed by Mahadeva.
10.19.3	"To Indra thee, O strong one!" (thus one) should offer the sheep which is found by a soldier.
10.19.4	"To Yama thee!" (thus should one offer) the sheep that has died of an unknown disease.
10.19.5	One should not graze the sheep that has been designated as dead in the pasture.
10.19.6	Having placed the fires separately in the kindling woods, he proceeds with a chariot.
10.19.7	In its absence, taking a chariot part.
10.19.8	"Going forth with the words, 'From the good to the better.'
10.19.9	"He crosses the waters with the words, "The divine waters."
10.19.10	"He crushes a clod with his hand with the words, "The unbroken thread, following the earth," up to the other shore.
10.19.11	"He places sand or a stone in the middle and on the other side of the earth."
10.19.12	"One sitting in a boat crosses thus."
10.19.13	Some say, "With kindling woods, with kindling woods."
10.19.14	"One should not be separated from a chariot or a chariot part."
10.19.15	Here some mention the determination of the divine sacrifice.
10.19.16	"One who determines here should go, he who does not go at the beginning."
10.19.17	The places of sacrifice to the gods are permanent.
10.20.1	The place of sacrifice should be higher on the south, lower on the north, sloping towards the east, or sloping towards the east and north.
10.20.2	Or where many Brahmins may be pleased.
10.20.3	The places of sacrifice are indeed the fires. Wherever one installs the fires and performs sacrifices, it is known that one is performing sacrifices at the places of sacrifice.
10.20.4	The Dakshina is indeed the divine sacrifice. If one gives Dakshina, then one performs the divine sacrifice. So say some.
10.20.5	The Puronahvisis are the desired ones.
10.20.6	One should perform the sacrifice for one who is being attacked.
10.20.7	If anthills are removed from a tree, then it should be dug up.
10.20.8	One should sacrifice in a hidden forest for one who is accused.
10.20.9	Those who desire to go to the other world should perform the rites in the back, all rites should be performed in a low voice, and one should offer sacrifices on the ground.
10.20.10	One who desires to go to the light of both gods and men should not abandon the rites of the gods before the rites of the manes.
10.20.11	Where the path is between the water and the place of sacrifice, one should perform the sacrifice there for the one whom one desires, saying, "May no other sacrifice approach him."
10.20.12	Having said, "One should buy a king from a Kautsa or another Brahmin," he says, "Or from a non-Brahmin."
10.20.13	On the northern part of the altar or on the eastern part of the northern part of it, he spreads a red hide of an ox with its neck towards the east and with its hair towards the north. On the southern part of the hide he places the king and sits down on the northern part. The buyer of Soma sits down.
10.20.14	Having placed the pitcher of water, the king and the buyer of Soma, he encloses them on all sides and makes the northern door. It is said, "Soma is variegated."
10.20.15	The Soma-seller, having said, "Purify the Soma," turns away.
10.20.16	The sacrificer should not look at the Soma.
10.20.17	There should be no man, no Adhvaryu, no Adhvaryu-man.
10.20.18	Those who are looking at the Soma being examined by the king should be.
10.21.4	At the time of offering, there is a rice-cake in milk for Aditi. This is the Pravargya offering.
10.21.5	Before the announcement, having performed the Pravargya, he announces, excluding the wife.
10.21.6	Those who are announced when the altar is prepared, that itself is their altar. Those who are announced when grass is spread, that itself is the grass for them.
10.21.7	At the time of taking up the clarified butter, he takes four spoonfuls in the Juhu at the Pravargya and four in the Upamant for the purpose of equalizing.
10.21.8	At the Udayaniya, he does not take four spoonfuls in Juhu, but takes four in the Upaman for the purpose of Anuyaja.
10.21.9	The Pravargya is performed with six Hotr priests.
10.21.10	It has been said that the Anuyaja is like the Prayaja.
10.21.11	He offers four portions of clarified butter in the four directions, Pathya, Svashti in front, Agni in the south, Soma in the west, Savitar in the north, Aditi in the middle with oblation.
10.21.12	Having offered to Aditi, having recited the Marut hymn, having filled the rice with clarified butter, he offers to these deities. The sixth is Svishtakrit from Dhruva.
10.21.13	The Sāṁyavya rite is performed.
10.21.14	One should not offer the Patnīvatsa oblations.
10.21.15	One should offer the Patnīvat oblations at the Udayanīya rite.
10.21.16	Or at a similar rite.
10.21.17	One holds the Dhruva ladle with clarified butter.
10.21.18	He places the sacrificial grass, the pot, the ladle, and the strainer for the Udayanîya rite in the eastern corner.
10.22.1	Having taken eight or four spoonfuls from the Dhruva vessel of the Prayaniya (Soma-cup), he should place a piece of gold tied with a Darbha-grass in it, and offer it with the verse, "This is thy bright body."
10.22.2	The Soma-purchasing cow should be standing facing east, one-year-old, two-year-old or three-year-old.
10.22.3	"Without horns, without ears" are the forms.
10.22.4	The cow which is tawny-coloured, with tawny hair, with tawny spots, with tawny hoofs, with pure eyes, and white in appearance, with her one should buy, say some.
10.22.5	With a cow of two colours, one should buy for a Kṣatriya.
10.22.6	With a black cow, one should buy a sixteen-year-old cow.
10.22.7	Looking at the Soma-purchasing cow, he offers ghee, saying, "Thou art Jū."
10.22.8	Having taken another four handfuls, and having taken out the gold with the formula, "Thou art Sukra," and having taken out (the Soma) with the formula, "This is the oblation for Visve Devāḥ," and having looked at the clarified butter, and having approached the sun with the formula, "Thou art the eye of the sun," and having recited the formula, "Thou art the mind, thou art the intellect," he recites over the Soma-purchasing cow.
10.22.9	She is bound with a rope tied to her ear.
10.22.10	"May Mitra bind thee to the place." He looks at the right front foot. "May Pūṣan protect the path." He recites this verse while following the path going eastwards.
10.22.11	He goes forward six steps, with the right foot, reciting each verse in turn, "Thou art Vasu, thou art Rudra."
10.22.12	May Vishnu follow thee for one (portion) for food, may Vishnu follow thee for two (portions) for strength, may Vishnu follow three (portions) of thee for the vow, may Vishnu follow four (portions) to thee for the origin of the Mayas, may Vishnu follow five (portions) in thee for the cattle, may Vishnu follow six (portions) thee for the prosperity of the kingdom, may Vishnu follow seven (portions) thy for the seven offices. Having thus recited, the sacrificer should follow the steps of the sacrificer.
10.23.1	"The seven steps are friends. May I go to your friendship. May I not be a woman in your friendship. May you not be a woman to me." He mutters this on the seventh step.
10.23.2	"May Brihaspati make thee happy." The Adhvaryu, having taken the seventh step with his hands cupped together, having placed gold on the step, having offered on the gold, having taken it, having taken the wooden sword with the formula, "For thee, for thee, for thee," having traced the step thrice in a clockwise direction as far as the ghee has spread.
10.23.3	Having written the name of the sacrificer with the black antelope-hair brush, having mixed the milk in the vessel with the formula, "May I be united with wealth," he gives it to the sacrificer.
10.23.4	"May I be united to wealth" to the wife.
10.23.5	The wife, being given a step, recites, "May I not be separated from wealth."
10.23.6	The wife, having been counted by the Soma-purchasing wife, says, "O divine one, do thou see the divine one."
10.23.7	"May the wife of Soma-purchasing be blessed by you." The wife of Soma-purchase is invoked by the sacrificer.
10.23.8	"May the sacrificer be blessed by you who are blessed by Tvashtri."
10.23.9	Having sprinkled the place with water, having divided it into three parts, he puts the third part in the cold ashes to the north of the Garhapatya, the third part to the Ahavaniya, and gives the third part to his wife.
10.23.10	She puts it in her house.
10.24.1	Here some people mention the ceremony of the sun-worship and the king's offering of oblations etc.
10.24.2	But they go to Soma with their faces towards the east, with a cart having a raised platform and a covering, saying, "We have gone along the path."
10.24.3	They carry the Soma bought from the mountain with their heads.
10.24.4	With the king facing east or north, the chariot is yoked with the yoke-halter fastened to the axle.
10.24.5	The sacrificer recites over the king, "May your rays be released."
10.24.6	If one desires him to be without cattle, one should say, "From the constellation."
10.24.7	He spreads the skin with the garment of silk, doubled or tripled, towards the east, towards the north, or towards the north.
10.24.8	On it, holding the ends of the threads with the thumb and the little finger, he arranges them, saying, "To that god Savitar, the controller, I offer this oblation." He recites the Atichhandas verse.
10.24.9	In this way, he offers each one by one.
10.24.10	In all (the fingers) he holds the thumb.
10.24.11	With which (finger) he first (measures), not with that (he measures) the fifth; with that (finger) he measures the last.
10.24.12	He measures five times with the Yajus, five times silently.
10.24.13	Thus twice, thrice, or an unlimited number of times.
10.24.14	Having placed the remaining portions of the Soma-juice, having put on a garment of Kshauma-wool, having tied the turban with the formula, "For Prāṇa thee", having looked at the Vīra-sāra with the formula, “For Vyāna thee”, he says, “May the creatures follow thee; may the creatures follow thee”.
10.24.15	"This is thy share in the Gayatra-verse" - thus the sacrificer approaches the king with these formulas.
10.25.1	O god, we are buying Soma from you. We tell you that. You, having made the sacrifices for the All-gods, make the Dakshina offerings as per season and as per deity. Having approached the sun, having given the king to the Soma-seller, he makes the purchase.
10.25.2	O Soma-seller, the Soma is for sale to you.
10.25.3	The other one replies, "For sale."
10.25.4-7	Having said, "I buy Soma from you, full of strength and milk," he says to him, "I buy it from you for a cow." "Soma, the king, is worth more than this," says the Soma-seller in all the bargaining, in reply to the buyer. "I buy it from your wife," "I buy it for a goat," "I buy from your foot," "I buy for a cow." Thus three times.
10.25.8	One by one, or three times each.
10.25.9	"At the least, one should say, "I am buying your cow."
10.25.10	Or one may say, "I buy your cow," indicating it, and recite, "Her soul, her form, her offspring, her milk, her kinsman."
10.25.11	Having recited, "I buy with semen, your semen," one buys with gold.
10.25.12	Having recited, "You are the body of austerity," one buys by conquering."
10.25.13	The remaining ones are to be bought by each of them.
10.25.14	If one buys with a bull, one should buy with Prajapati. In place of that, a young bull or a bull.
10.25.15	With two pairs, one should buy a young bull and a young cow.
10.25.16	Having bought them together, one should make them enter the house together.
10.26.1	With ten, one should buy one worth twelve hundred.
10.26.2	Or with more.
10.26.3	Some say that it is done with four (cows), gold, and garments.
10.26.4	For one with twenty-one Dakshina, it is done with three (cows), for one with sixty Dakshina, and for one with unlimited Dakshina, with unlimited (cows).
10.26.5	With twenty-four thousand (cows) for one with all the Vedas, or
10.26.6	With thirty thousand (cows) as Dakshina.
10.26.7	Twenty-seven cows, gold, sheep, and garments, make thirty.
10.26.8	One hundred for the Vājapeya, two for the Rājasūya,
10.26.9	and one thousand for the Aśvamedha.
10.26.10	"He takes gold from the seller of Soma, saying, "May the moon be ours."
10.26.11	"He gives to the sacrificer a white woolen thread, saying, 'This is light for us.' At the proper time he makes the navel of the ten-fold filter.
10.26.12	The filter of the white cow is not torn.
10.26.13	If one hates someone, one should make the filter of that person black and red.
10.26.14	Having moistened the black-edged woolen cloth with water, he ties it around the neck of the serpents and scorpions, saying, "I tie this around the necks of the serpents and venomous snakes." Having tied it, he strikes the Soma-seller with it, saying, "O Soma-seller, you are darkness."
10.26.15	"He says to the Soma-sellers, 'You are our own, you are our own, for this rite, born with truth, I take you with truth, protect me with truth.' The king is handed over to the Soma-seller.
10.26.16	If he is in difficulty, he should take it back.
10.26.17	Here the sacrificer takes it.
10.27.1	'The birds of heaven.'
10.27.2	He gives the staff of the initiated to the Maitrāvaruṇa. "He says, "I give you over to Mitra-Varuna, the rulers, in accordance with their instructions. May I be without crookedness and without injury."
10.27.3	The sacrificer, having taken the king, says, "Come, O Mitra!" Having approached the right thigh of Indra, he stands holding it with both hands.
10.27.4	Here some prescribe the presence of the Adityas, the giving of the staff, and the instruction of the Soma-purchasing cows.
10.27.5	Having turned the Soma-purchaser to the right, he releases her in the cowpen of the sacrificer, having bought her with another cow, saying, "May Rudra turn you."
10.27.6	If the Soma-seller disputes, they should destroy him with a young he-goat and a stick.
10.27.7	Some say that they strike with clubs.
10.27.8	Some say that they kill him constantly.
10.27.9	Taking the king, the sacrificer rises up with the verse, "With life, with my life," and goes towards the cart with the verse, “I go along the sky.”
10.27.10	"The Adhvaryu, having placed the skin of a black antelope on the cart-shed, with its neck towards the east and with the hairy side upwards, says (to the king), "Sit in the seat of Aditi." Having approached the king and having sat down in the seat of Āditi, he says, "I have spread the sky over the forests." Having put on the garment, he says, "I have put on the garment of the born Jātavedas." With the Sūrya verse, he puts on the skin of a kṛṣṇājina in front, with its neck upwards and with the hairy part outside, and with the cutting (of the skin) outside.
10.28.1	Here, having touched the yoke like the Darsha-Pūrnamāsa, having placed the chariot of Varuna with the words "Thou art Varuna's chariot", having pressed it down with the words "May Varuna press thee down", having thrown the wooden wedge with the words "thou art Varuna'skambhana", having yoked the oxen with the words "This is the yoke of Varuna", having taken up the yoke-halter and having thrown it with the words "Varuna's yoke-halter", having thrown the halter with the words "this is the yoke-halter of Varuna", he throws the halter with the word "Varuna' s yoke-halter".
10.28.2	Thus he yokes the northernmost animal.
10.28.3	Bearing a twig of the Ficus glomerata, the Subrahmaṇya moves in between the two animals, on a twig of the Butea frondosa or of the Acacia catechu.
10.28.4	Then the Adhvaryu, having started following the cart, instructs (the Subrahmanya), "Recite for Soma, the king, bought and being offered. Call out to Subrahmanya in the Subrahmanya (chant)."
10.28.5	The sacrificer recites the Subrahmanya verses in connection with all the Subrahmanya rites. "The earth is thy Subrahmanya. The sky is thy Subrahmaṇya. The heaven is thy Subrahmāṇya. The directions are thy Subrahmanya." The ether is thy fifth foot. Do thou yield us food, strength, brilliance, power, and Brahmic glory. Food is thy Subrahmaya.
10.28.6	Thus she is called three times.
10.28.7	When the first one is recited three times,
10.29.1	"One should say, "O Lord of the Earth, fall down!" The priests go forward facing east and then turn clockwise."
10.29.2	The Adhvaryu recites, "May you fall down as a hawk," addressing the king.
10.29.3	The Adhvaryu and the sacrificer cross the king either by the southern or the northern path, saying, "We have crossed the path."
10.29.4	The sacrificer, holding the horn of the goat for Agni-Soma, waits for the king to be led away, saying, "Salutations to Mitra."
10.29.5	It is made of iron, or without a top, or a black antelope skin or a red antelope skin.
10.29.6	Thick, with a beard.
10.29.7	The Udumbara-wood stool, with a head a span in height, with its feet reaching to the navel, and with a string, is taken up by all the Adhvaryus, when the king is being led forward towards the east, with the verse, "The Udumbara stool, with a string, has been brought forward by the Adhvaryu."
10.29.8	They kindle the fires, the fire or the fires.
10.29.9	Having placed the cart in front of the eastern axle, having fastened it as before, having loosened the Varuna-noose with the formula, "Thou art the Varuna-skambhana," having loosened the yoke-noose with "The Varuna-nouse is loosened," having loosened the halter with "The Varune-noose is released,"
10.29.10	Thus he releases the northern animal.
10.29.11	The released one is on the left, or the unreleased one.
10.30.1	Now he begins the rites for the Atithya.
10.30.2	The sacrificial grass is of twenty-two kinds.
10.30.3	The sacrificial post is of ashvattha wood, the support of ikshu wood, the enclosing sticks of karasmarya wood. Having placed the Veda and having strewn the fires, he undertakes the rites beginning with washing of hands.
10.30.4	The offering of the vessel is in accordance with the truth.
10.30.5	At the time of offering, having made the wife follow the cart, he offers hospitality.
10.30.6	Or with the wife's hand.
10.30.7	Or offering from hand to hand, he should recite all the cart mantras in the hand.
10.30.8	"You are Agni's hospitality." With these, each mantra.
10.30.9	There is a repetition of the instruction of the deity.
10.30.10	The Savitrī verse is recited over the five (oblations).
10.30.11	Some say that it is not recited over the last two.
10.30.12	The cake to Vishnu is offered in nine potsherds.
10.30.13	From here onwards, the rites are performed as in the case of Vishnu.
10.30.14	Having released the speech and having released the northern animal, one should release the southern animal.
10.30.15	"Thou art Varuna." Having taken off the garment, he says, "Thou art Varunad, the upholder of vows." Having taken the king, he says, "The plants are without holes. The subjects have descended. The auspicious ones have descended. O Soma, O king, all thy subjects have descended. All thy subjects have descended." Having taken down, he says, "Do thou go along the sky." He proceeds forward.
10.31.1	The Pratiprasthātṛ, having taken the seat, goes out first.
10.31.2	Having entered the eastern door with the verse, "Those are thy abodes," and having gone to the south of the Ahavaniya, he places the royal seat to the south of Ahavaniya with the verse, "This is the abode of Varuna."
10.31.3	On it is spread a covering of black antelope skin like a cart and the king's seat.
10.31.4	"You are Varuna, the one who upholds the vow," he recites over the king.
10.31.5	"You are Varuna," he says while covering him with a garment.
10.31.6	"Bow down to Varuna, the great, the wise, the guardian of immortality, who provides us with three-fold protection. May the heaven and earth protect us from above." With this verse, he should approach the king everywhere.
10.31.7	"He says, 'Do not move between Agni and the king.'
10.31.8	He undertakes the work of carrying (the fire).
10.31.9	The oblations of ghee are taken in four spoonfuls.
10.31.10	Having approached the hospitality of the four Hotr priests, he recites the preparatory verses.
10.31.11	Some say, 'He makes the sacrificer recite.'
10.31.12	Like the animal sacrifice, the Nirmanthya and the Samidheni verses.
10.31.13	There are five Prayājas.
10.31.14	In the fourth (Saman) he pours down all the Upabhṛt-grahas.
10.31.15	The Iḍā-graha is concluded.
10.31.16	He holds the Dhruva-graha.
11.1.1	At the Atithya-graha, he pours down the Tānūnaptrī-graha from the Dhruva into the ladle or the cup, four times or five times, with the formulas, "I take thee for Apati."
11.1.2	"Thou art not to be despised." The seventeen priests, including the sacrificer, perform the rite of Taanunaptra.
11.1.3	"May my consecration be followed." The sacrificer says.
11.1.4	If one desires, "May I attain fame through sacrifice," then he should be the first to be touched. If one desires, "All of them," then all should be touched together.
11.1.5	Therefore it is said, "He who is the best among those who have performed the Taanunaptras"
11.1.6	The sacrificer thrice inhales the Tānūnaptrā-oblation with the formula, "I offer thee in Prajapati, in the mind."
11.1.7	He makes it enter every day in the rites.
11.1.8	He asks, "Do the fires drink?"
11.1.9	The Agnidhra replies, "The divine drinkers drink, the immortal ones, the truth-increasing."
11.1.10	He directs, "Come with them."
11.1.11	Having touched the Madanti waters, the Tanunaptras, having relaxed, they fill up the king with golden hands, saying, "May the shining one shine, O god Soma, may you grow."
11.1.12	Then they make the offering, placing the Prastara at the end of the southern altar, and stretching out the right hands, with the left ones below, saying, "Desiring wealth, may we be sent to Bhaga."
11.1.13	Then the sacrificer approaches the intermediate consecration.
11.1.14	"He stands by the Ahavaniya fire, saying, "O Agni, lord of vows, you are the lord of vows."
11.1.15	He places the kindling wood on it with the same formula." This is according to the Vājasaneyins.
11.2.1	He puts on the girdle belt, and draws the two fists together.
11.2.2	He becomes one who has undergone the consecration.
11.2.3	He cleanses himself with the Madanti verses.
11.2.4	"The one who is thy Rudra-like form, O Agni," - with this (verse) he performs the vow from now onwards.
11.2.5	Having performed the Pravargya and the Upasads, they perform the Vratas. This is the reverse order.
11.2.6	One should not perform the Pravargya at the first sacrifice.
11.2.7	One should perform it.
11.2.8	One should perforin it for a bad Brahman.
11.2.9	Some say: "For one desiring Brahmic glory."
11.2.10	The one who is learned in the Veda should offer it to the one who is learned. This is the Brāhmaṇa of the Bahvṛca.
11.2.11	The Atithya grass and the enclosing sticks are for the Upasads and the Agniṣṭoma. The same are the enclosing sticks.
11.2.12	Some say that the grass is spread and the enclosing sticks enclose.
11.2.13	He begins the ritual of the Upasads.
11.2.14	The natural wood or wood with ten parts.
11.2.15	Having performed the Agnihotra rites, having placed the fires, having performed the rites of washing the hands etc., he takes up the vessels in the proper order.
11.2.16	Having taken up the sacrificial grass, the Agnihotra ladle, the spoon, the Juhu, the Upabhṛt, the Dhruva, the Veda, and the vessel for keeping clarified butter, having made them into pairs, having purified them, he instructs the sacrificer to restrain speech.
11.2.17	Having touched the vessels with speech, having purified the Prokṣaṇī water, having invited the Brahman, he sprinkles the vessels.
11.2.18	Here he releases speech.
11.2.19	Taking up the sacrificial grass,
11.3.1	Having taken the Stambayajus from the hair, having taken the Uttaravedi, having taken the Parigraha, he instructs (the sacrificer), "Do thou place the Prokṣaṇī water, do thou place the kindling wood, do thou cleanse the spoon and the ladles, do thou heat the clarified butter."
11.3.2	At the time of taking up the clarified butter, he takes it from the Dhruva vessel itself. Having sprinkled the Prokṣaṇī water and invoked the Brahman, he sprinkles the sacrificial grass and the altar. Having poured the remaining Prokṣaṇa water, he sprinkles the Pavitra water and places the sacrificial grass. Having placed the Dhruva and the ladle within the altar, he recites the mantra "May these two be placed."
11.3.3	Having placed the Veda, one proceeds from the Sāmidhenī verses.
11.3.4	One recites nine Sāmidhenīs.
11.3.5	Three verses are recited three times, and nine are recited in the reverse order.
11.3.6	One should not offer any other oblation before (the Sāmidheni verses). One should only offer the Srauva oblation.
11.3.7	The same (procedure) up to the Pravara.
11.3.8	He does not choose the officiating priest or the Hotṛ. Having called out, he says, "O Hotṛ, sit down." This much is the Pravara.
11.3.9	From the Dhruva vessel, he takes eight spoonfuls in the Juhu and four in the Upabhṛt.
11.3.10	Taking the Juhu and Upabhṛti vessels filled with ghee, he proceeds towards the south, crossing once, like the Upāṁśuyāja.
11.3.11	He offers to Agni with half of the Juhu and to Soma with the other half.
11.3.12	Having brought the Upabhrti ladle to the Juhu, having worshipped Vishnu, having returned, he offers the Upavasatha with the Sruva, reciting, "That form of yours, O Agni, which is not consumed."
11.3.13	"The priests are drinking Soma," thus they begin. Having made the Agnihotra oblations, the Adhvaryu says, "O Agni, do thou proclaim the wives of the gods. O Subrahmanya, do thou proclaim in the Subrahmanya."
11.3.14	The Adhvaryu, having sat down to the south of the Garhapatya, recites the names of the wives of gods, "Indra's cow, the giver of wealth." He calls out to Subrahmanya on the heap of ashes. The sacrificer follows him as before.
11.4.1	In the forenoon they perform the forenoon Pravargya and Upasads; in the afternoon they perform the afternoon Pravargya and the Upasads.
11.4.2	The offering is made with the left hand stretched out in the evening.
11.4.3	This is the first one.
11.4.4	The same procedure is followed in the case of the northern ones.
11.4.5	The offering is made in the evening with the right hand stretched out, and in the morning with the left hand.
11.4.6	It has been said that the offerings are made in the morning.
11.4.7	There are three Upasads for the Sahna sacrifice and twelve for the Aahina sacrifice.
11.4.8	If they were to fight in front of the battle, one should offer iron in the first, silver in the second, and copper in the last.
11.4.9	"The verse "Aragramam". The verse is about the shape of the breasts."
11.4.10	If they were to buy Soma on that day, they should milk four cows in the evening, three in the morning, two in the evening, one in the evening, and all in the evening.
11.4.11	In the middle of the two Upasads, they make the altar.
11.4.12	From the middle of the front-end, having gone three steps towards the east from the forehead, he drives in a peg.
11.4.13	Therefore, from the fifteen on the right side, so on the left side, those two hips are thirty-six from the first-struck shank. Therefore, from the twelve on the right side so on the left, those two shoulders.
11.4.14	"O Indra, may you drink Soma, may it be peaceful for us. The gods have milked you, the milker of wealth, the cow of the gods, the one who yields milk, the one who does not tremble, the one who is not shaken. The one who is not agitated."
11.4.15	He extends it in all directions with the Spandyā.
11.4.16	In the middle, the Pṛṣṭyā.
11.5.1	Having come to this altar, the men make it rich in wealth, rich in Rudra, rich in Aditya, the expanse of heaven, the navel of the earth, so that this sacrificer may not be harmed by the Savana of the god Savitar. He instructs thus.
11.5.2	They make the altar with the Sphayo, the Vighaṇa, and the Parshu.
11.5.3	Having made a four-stranded braid, a young woman with good hair, with a golden streak, in the middle of the world, on which two Suparnas are established, having recited the mantra "The share of the gods is above them,"
11.5.4	The Uttaravedi is twelve steps from the Catvāla. The Uttaravedi should be placed in the same direction as the Catvāla, twelve steps away from it.
11.5.5	The Catvāla and the Uttaravedi have been explained.
11.5.6	One should live under a canopy of Udumbara or Plaksha branches.
11.5.7	On the next day, after the Prāvargya and Upasads, one should perform the Prāvargyas.
11.5.8	Having performed the morning rites, he performs the evening rites at the same time.
11.5.9	Here, having dismissed the Pravargya, he carries the fire as in the animal-sacrifice.
11.5.10	This is the Soma-fire from which he carries it. That is the Garhapatya.
11.5.11	He takes up the northern enclosing stick with the Agni-verse.
11.5.12	Here, having brought the branch of the sacrificial post, he removes the calves of the Maitrāvaruṇa's Payasyā.
11.6.1	Having sprinkled the sacrificial grass, he sprinkles the altar three times.
11.6.2	They do not perform the rite on an unsprinkled (altar).
11.6.3	Then having spread out the sacrificial grass in abundance towards the east, having washed the knots of the first binding of the two yokes of the chariot which had been used before, having made new and well-known knots, having placed the sacrificial grass towards the front end of the eastern pole, having placed it on the rear end of the sacrificial grass, having placed it in a well-covered place, he places it.
11.6.4	Then he anoints the wife with the formula beginning with "padatritīya" and mixed with ghee.
11.6.5	"May a hero be born to us" - twice, the axle of the southern chariot with the right hand stretched out towards the east.
11.6.6	He does not turn the hand.
11.6.7	Similarly the other one.
11.6.8	Or once.
11.6.9	He anoints the northern Havirdhāna in the same way.
11.6.10	Having offered the Savitrī-verses at the Uttaravedi, he instructs (the Hotr) to recite the verses while the Havirdhāna-carriers are being turned around, or he instructs (the Hotṛ) to recite the verse while the Havirdhana-carriers are turning around.
11.6.11	When the first verse has been recited thrice, they take up the verse with the words "Pracetas praetam adhvāram" while the Havirdhãna-carriers are moving around.
11.6.12	If the word 'aksah' is used, then one should recite the mantra 'May it be a good word'.
11.6.13	Placing gold on the path of the southern sacrificial post or on the paths, the Adhvaryu offers on the gold with the mantra "This Vishnu has wandered".
11.6.14	Similarly, the Pratiprasthātṛ offers on the northern sacrificial post.
11.7.1	One offers with the mantra "May it be a giver of wealth and a giver of cattle".
11.7.2	The Adhvaryu, the Hotṛ, the Brahman, the Maitrāvaruṇa or the Udgātṛ, having gone to the third part of the altar, removes the stone or throws it outside the altar with the verse, "Remove the fear that is generated, and turn the wheels. Go to the house of Soma."
11.7.3	Having placed it on the ground with the formula, "May you be at ease here," having placed it on the spot of the fire-altar with the formula, “You are the Vaishnavamasi, may Vishnu protect you," having pressed it down with the formula, "O Vishnu, you are the heaven," the Adhvaryu strikes the southern corner of the southern Havirdhana with the formula, "May I strike the enemy." He fastens the pin in it.
11.7.4	Thus the northern priest, having recited the verse "Who is the protector of Vishnu?" and having recited the verse, "The dice are raised upwards and are placed around above,"
11.7.5	they place the dice around above.
11.7.6	It is known that the divine cows are carrying them upside down.
11.7.7	"O Vishnu, you are great," he says, examining all the pillars.
11.7.8	Having left space for the sharp-edged stone in front and inside,
11.7.9	He places the two Udanchāvas on the right and left sides, behind and in front.
11.7.10	The Samakasha, Salamaukha, Hotri and Uttara Vedaikas are equal.
11.8.1	"He places the transverse beam, holding it with the formula, "Thou art the king of Vishnu." "He makes it firm with the formula, "Thou art the thread of Vishnu." "Having made the knot of Prajnat, he places the beams facing east. He places the covering over the middle one, which is three cubits in width and nine cubits in length.
11.8.2	The others, silently, having placed the wooden chips in the hollows of the wooden chips, having placed the sharp-edged stones in the interstices of the wooden chips and having placed the stones for scraping, he places them in the interstices.
11.8.3	They become placed inside.
11.8.4	Having placed the wooden chips all around, saying, "O Girivana, may thy songs be around thee," and having placed the wooden cups at the ends, saying, "Thou art in the cup of Vishnu," some say, "having touched."
11.8.5	The Adhvaryu, having sewn the right door-post of the southern door, says, "Thou art the thread of Vishnu." Having made the knot of the Prajnatis, he says, "Thou are the firm of Vishnu."
11.8.6	Some recite the knotting of the thread before.
11.8.7	It is said, "Which knot should be tied first?"
11.8.8	So does the Pratiprasthātṛ of the northern door.
11.8.9	So do others sew.
11.8.10	The Havirdhana is elevated in front and sloping towards the rear.
11.8.11	One touches it with the formula, "Thou art Vaishnavam; thou art for Vishnu."
11.9.1	Then indeed does he praise Vishnu for his prowess, the terrible deer, the most excellent of mountains, whose three strides are the worlds, and all the worlds are dependent on his strength. The sacrificer, having stepped out from the Sammita (Sraddha), steps three steps towards the east, towards the Ahavaniya fires, with the verse, "Whose strength..."
11.9.2	The Adhvaryu should not step beyond the Havirdhana towards the east.
11.9.3	If he crosses over, he should move with the Vaisnavya verse.
11.9.4	In the six steps, he measures from the Utkara towards the Agnidhra-shed, half inside the altar and half outside the altar, with a northern-facing pole, having four pillars, surrounded on all sides, with a southern approach.
11.9.5	From the end of the western altar, he measures the Sadas diagonally in the three steps in front.
11.9.6	The Aṅgirasas are the most excellent of the gods.
11.9.7	The distance between the two is twenty-seven or unlimited.
11.9.8	As much as the priests, the sacrificial posts, and the spreading places are considered to be obtained, that is the other.
11.9.9	In the southern direction, she places the Udumbara tree in the middle of the sacrificial hall, on the Prṣṭhyā (grass).
11.9.10	He should draw the southern enclosure in such a way that there is no obstruction to the Sāṃkāśin.
11.9.11	The rite of preparing the pit for the Udumbara post, except for the chips, is like that of the sacrificial post.
11.9.12	Placing the Udumbara pot with its mouth towards the east in front of the pit, he washes it silently. Then he sprinkles it with barley grains, saying, "For the sky thee!" for the top, "For the atmosphere thee!" for the middle, and "For the earth thee!" for the root.
11.10.4	Having placed gold on the altar, he offers with the ladle, reciting, "Do thou fill heaven and earth with ghee." He pours down the gold on the gold-covered ladle.
11.10.5	This is the highest of the pillars of the assembly hall.
11.10.6	The pillars are to be placed at the navel-height, and the last one is to be placed at a distance.
11.10.7	He should make the seat low for one who desires rain, high for one who does not desire rain, say some.
11.10.8	Having placed the bamboo-poles towards the east and north, he places three pieces of wood in the middle, saying, "Thou art Indra's seat."
11.10.9	Three pieces of wood towards the south, saying, "The shade of the people," and three pieces of wood towards north, saying, "This is Indra's seat".
11.10.10	The southern ones are the northern ones, and the Audumbara ones are the foremost.
11.10.11	It is understood that one makes the southern ones the northern ones.
11.10.12	The Navacchati are the desired ones.
11.10.13	In the Agniṣṭoma there are nine, in the Pañcadaśa Ukthya there are fifteen, in the Ṣoḍaśi there are sixteen, in the Saptadaśa Vājapeya and Atiratra there are seventeen, and in the Sattrāhīna there are twenty-one.
11.10.14	The Adhvaryu and the Pratiprasthātṛ go around the Havirdhāna-shed, the Sūrya-shed, the Prāgvamsa-shed, the Parivartana-shed, the Antavarta-shed, the Pariśravan-shed, the Saṃkāśin-shed and the doorway.
11.10.15	"He sews with the formula, "Thou art the suture of Indra." Having tied the knot, he touches the end with the formula, "Thou art Indra; for Indra thee."
11.10.16	The Adhvaryu should not go beyond the Sadas towards the west, or the Hotr towards the Dhishnyas.
11.10.17	If he were to go beyond the Vedic verse of Indra, he should move to the verse, "Those who kindle Agni, spread the grass, and whose Indra is a young friend." Some recite this verse as the spreading verse.
11.10.18	One should move to the Kṣaitrapatya verse.
11.10.19	Some recite the Upravaka rite first, some the Sadahaka rite.
11.11.1	Under the southern Havirdhāna, he makes four Uparavas in the intermediate spaces, with faces towards the east and with spaces between them the size of a Pradeśa.
11.11.2	Taking up the chisel with the formula, "For thee, O god Savitr, I take up the chisel," he inscribes the Rakshas three times in the south-east direction with the formula, “The Rakshas are inscribed, the evil spirits are inscribed."
11.11.3	In the same way the others, clockwise, towards the north and west.
11.11.4	Thus the rites are performed in due order.
11.11.5	They are dug out below and are not connected above.
11.11.6	Having dug out a span's length silently, he digs with the formula, "I am digging out the Rakshas-destroying, Vala-destroying, Vishnu-destroying."
11.11.7	Some recite the formulas of Ekavd and Uparava together.
11.11.8-10	Having taken the Viraj-form, he says, "I am taking out this Vala from here." Having taken out the Vala, he says, "I have taken out the Vāla." Having taken out, he says, “I have taken out.” Having taken out, having taken out, he takes out. Having taken out, Having taken out,Having taken out, Having Taken Out, Having Taken Out. Having taken out the Valga with the Gayatri metre, he says, Having taken out the valga. He says, "I take the Vaisnava ones." Having taken out he says, "Having taken out the valgas, I take out the valgas." Having taken out all the valgas, he says, "Having taken out the Vaisnavas, I take out." Having taken out in front of the post, he says, "Having taken out the Durasyaus." Thus he does with all.
11.11.11	Having thus taken the arm with the preceding formula, he takes it with the succeeding formula.
11.11.12	The formulas mentioned are Gayatra, Traishthubha, Jagati, Anushtubha, and Pankti.
11.12.1	The first one is mentioned in all.
11.12.2	"Thou art Viraj, the slayer of enemies, the slayer of foes, the slayer of the hostile, the slayer of all hostile ones." The Adhvaryu and the sacrificer take up the arms.
11.12.3	"These (verses) are to be touched for life and lustre. Thou art the treasure of the gods, the destroyer of the Dvēṣas. Destroy all the enmities that we have committed. This is the treasure of the Gods, whatever there is. Now thou dost cover the four directions, making thy enemies inferior. Having touched the Uparavas, the sacrificer touches the southeast, the Adhvaryu the northwest."
11.12.4	Then the sacrificer asks, "O Adhvaryu, what is here?" The other replies, "Good." Having said, "That for both of us together," the sacrificer recites the eastern half, the Adhvaryu the western half. The same question and reply. The sacrificer says, "That is mine."
11.12.5-6	"He sprinkles the sacrificial grass with the formula, "I sprinkle the Vaisnava ones, the destroyers of Rakshas, the destroyers of Valagas." Having sprinkled the sacrificial grass with formulas beginning with "I sprinkle"," he pours the remnants of the sprinkling water into a pit with the formula, "Thou art barley." Having spread the sacrificial grass with "I spread the sacrificial grass,", he offers with the formula, "I offer with clarified butter." He does this with all (the offerings).
11.13.4	Then he lays down the two Uparavas (bricks) with the formulas, "I lay down the Raksha-destroying, the Vala-destroying, belonging to Vishnu."
11.13.5	He lays down two on the southern side and two on the northern side.
11.13.6	The two bricks are joined together in front, leaving a space of two fingers at the back.
11.13.7	Then he sprinkles it with the eastern formulas. Having sprinkled it, he says, "I have sprinkled it." Having sprinkled it with the dust of the Uparava grass, he says, “I have sprinkled it.” Having spread it with the sacrificial grass, he recites the supreme formula.
11.13.8	In front of the Havirdhāna shed, he makes a square mound of dust from the Uparava plants. It is suitable for the Soma vessels.
11.13.9	He moves forward and arranges.
11.13.10	The Adhvaryu and the Drishikava should move between the Cātvāla and the mound.
11.13.11	Some say that the Drishikavas should move in all directions.
11.14.1	He spreads the sacrificial grass from the Cātvā̄la.
11.14.2	Having moved forward between the Agnidhra and the Agnidhra mound, having arranged the altar on the northern side of the altar,
11.14.3	Having placed the Sadasyas and the others in the eastern half of the hall, he makes them move towards the front.
11.14.4	In the Prishthya hall, the Hotri's hall is on the right, the Prashasthri's hall on the left.
11.14.5	The other halls are on the left, the Hotri hall on the right. The Brahmanachchasa, Potri, Neishi and Acchhavasaka halls are on the north.
11.14.6	Having sprinkled the outer part of the Sadas, having sprinkled the Marjālīya (grass) at the end of the southern altar, having sprinkled the ground towards the south, having made it even with the Agnidhriya (fire-chamber),
11.14.7	"He says, "You are the ornament.", eight times for each verse.
11.14.8	Some prescribe these same offerings and sprinkling.
11.14.9	O Lord of the Path, I bow to you. May you not harm me. Thus, I am approaching you.
11.14.10	"Thou art the king, the shining one," he says to the Ahavaniya; "Thou art the assembly, the purifying one," to the Bahispavamana; "Thou art shining, the bright one," to the Catvala; "Thou art not rubbed, the carrier of oblations," to the Shamitra; "Thou art gathered, the bearer of all," to the Utkara; "Thou art Rtadhama, the golden light," to the Audumbari.
11.15.1	You are the light of Brahman, the abode of good. You are the member of the Brahman, the member of the Malimluca. You are the ocean, the bearer of all. You are the assembly hall, the bearer of the world. You are the goat, the one-footed. You are the serpent, the bearer of knowledge. You are the offering, the bearer of offerings. You are the Agni, the bearer of Agni. You are the life, the great. May I obtain that, may it protect me. In its name I shall strike him who hates us and whom we hate. You are the universal life, the Vamadeva. May I obtain it, may it protect. In its name, I shall strike him, etc. You are the lord of life, the Rathamantera. May I obtain, etc. In its name... Thus with each verse, the Havirdhana and Agnidhra seats are mentioned.
11.15.2	"With the Raudra army" is to be added everywhere.
11.15.3	"He orders, 'Spread the sacrificial grass, give the vow.'
11.15.4	He should give this order while spreading the grass in the east.
11.15.5	While spreading here, one should not spread the grass beyond the northern end of the altar.
11.15.6	Here, one gives the vow to the sacrificer in one form.
11.15.7	Here the Vājasaneyins mention the half-vow, the half between the Upasads of the Pravargya and the final one.
11.16.1	He begins the procedure of the animal-sacrifice to Agni-Soma.
11.16.2	Its procedure is like that of the animal-offering to Agni-Soma in the Nirūḍha-sacrifice.
11.16.3	The Hotṛ and the Pāśvitṛ are not present among the Angas.
11.16.4	The Ātithya-barhis silently puts on the garment.
11.16.5	and the enclosing sticks are of wood.
11.16.6	At the time of preparing the oblation-vessel, he places the ladle for sprinkling on the seventh (place).
11.16.7	Its form is like that of the Juhu.
11.16.8	At the moment of taking up the clarified butter, having silently taken four spoonfuls from the sprinkling ladle, he takes up the clarified butter of wood.
11.16.9	The Pratiprasthātṛ takes the wife to the Udanā-place with the formula, "May the wife of Brahman go."
11.16.10	Then the wife sits down at the door of the hall with the formula, “I am Anukāminī.”
11.16.11	Brahman makes the king sit down.
11.16.12	He instructs, "Call those who have taken the vow."
11.16.13	The ministers of the sacrificer are called.
11.16.14	The sacrificer follows the Adhvaryu, the wife follows the sacrificer, the sons and brothers follow the wife.
11.16.15	Having covered the priests with a new garment, having placed the ladle and the sacrificial grass at the end of the garment, he offers the Vaiśarjana offerings.
11.16.16	"With the verses, "O Soma, thou art the nourisher of the bodies, thou art the giver of strength, thou art the lord of the world." He offers half of the oblations in the Garhapatya fire.
11.16.17	They give Soma.
11.17.1	They bring the wife to the Dronakalaśa, they make the Anāsas flow, they bring the sheep to the other Gārhapatya, they anoint the Ajya, the kindling wood, the sacrificial grass, and the sprinkling water. They follow the procedure.
11.17.2	Having kindled the fire at the mouth of the house with kindling woods, having offered the oblations with sand, he directs the Āgnīṣomāyā to recite the Anuvāka. Or he directs the Āgneyāyā to recite.
11.17.3	When the first (verse) is recited thrice, they proceed towards the east, saying, "May this Agni grant us protection." They are either Agni-first or Soma-first.
11.17.4	Having established the fire in the Agnidhra chamber, he offers half of the remaining clarified butter, saying, "O Agni, lead us."
11.17.5	The Agnidhra places the Vayu-offerings on the stones and the Dronakalaśa.
11.17.6	Having gone around the Āgnīdhriya fire to the north and having gone to the Ahavanīya fire, he offers the entire remnant of clarified butter with the verse, "O Vishnu, do thou advance."
11.17.7	Having offered, the ministers return by the right, going back the way they came.
11.17.8	With the verse, "Soma, the knower of the path, ..." he introduces the king into the Havirdhāna shed through the rear door and the former queen who has lost her glory through the front door.
11.17.9	The sacrificer enters through the front door.
11.17.10	At the southern Havirdhāna, the covering of black antelope skin is spread as before, and the king is seated.
11.18.1	Then the sacrificer offers him to the deities, saying, "This Soma belongs to you, O divine Savitar."
11.18.2	Having recited the formula, "O Soma, you have approached the gods; I, a human being, have approached men," he turns to the right and makes the gesture of salutation towards the east with the formula, "Salutations to the gods." With the formula, "Svāhā to the fathers," he makes the gesture of salutations towards the south. Having gone out with the formula, "I am free from Varuna's noose," he looks towards the east with "May I be seen in heaven." Looking towards the east, he looks at the entire dwelling place with "May I look towards heaven." He says, "The fire of all beings is light." Towards the Āhavanīya.
11.18.3	Here the sacrificer releases the intermediate consecration.
11.18.4	"He stands by the Ahavaniya fire with the words, "O Agni, lord of vows, you are the lord of vows." He places the kindling wood on it with the same formula. This is according to the Vājasaneyins.
11.18.5	He loosens the girdle and pulls the fist.
11.18.6	Here some prescribe the giving of the staff."
11.18.7	"Svāhā to the sacrifice with the mind, svāhā to heaven and earth, svāhā from the sky, svāhā the sacrifice from the wind." Thus he releases the handfuls.
11.18.8	"Svāhā to speech, svāhā in the wind." Thus releases speech.
11.18.9	The vow is concluded.
11.18.10	On the Sutyah day, he consumes the Soma remnants, saying, "Soma, the remnants of the oblations."
11.18.11	To the north of the Ahavaniya fire, he places the kindling wood and the sacrificial grass with their tips towards the east, the kindling wood on the right and the sacrificial grass on the left.
11.19.1	He performs the rites beginning with the sprinkling of the Prokṣaṇī water.
11.19.2	At the time of spreading, he spreads the sacrificial grass on top of the northern altar.
11.19.3	The spreading mantra is repeated.
11.19.4	The Hotr, having performed the rites of the oblations of ghee, etc., and having taken up the rites of the Pasupata sacrifice, proceeds to the Pravargya rite.
11.19.5	Having appointed the divine and human Hotras, he appoints the Sāman priests with the Rtupraisa and other rites.
11.19.6	"He appoints Indra as the Hotr, saying, "Indra, the Hotr, has come to heaven and earth."
11.19.7	Having spread grass on the Asfya, he spreads it on the Uttaravedi.
11.19.8	Agni from the Agnidhra, the Asvins from the Adhvaryu, the Adhvaryus from the Prastotar, Mitra-Varuna from the Prastotra, Indra from the Brahman, the Brahman from the Brahmasah, the Maruts from the Potar, the Potar from the Neshtar, the Neshtar from the Garhapatya, the Garhapaty from the Gni, the Gni from the Yajamana. The Garhapatya did not burn the two of them, for they were not united. The two of them, united, were united with a hundred winters and two gifts. The Yajamana.
11.19.9	This one, the sacrificer, is pouring out for men.
11.19.10	Some recite the Varana in the Savaniya (cup). There one should say, "The sacrificer is pouring out."
11.19.11	Everywhere the name is taken in a low voice. "For men" is recited loudly.
11.20.1	He offers the Pravrit and Pravritahomas with the formulas, "May I be acceptable to speech. May I accomplish the Stoma with the Rc."
11.20.2	The Prajāpatis, having gone to the heaven by means of the Prājās, are worshipped by means of the Anūyājas.
11.20.3	Having offered the Vapa and having sprinkled, he directs (the Adhvaryu) to call the Pitaputriya Subrahmanya.
11.20.4	From now onwards the Subrahmanya is Pitaputriya.
11.20.5	When the water-carriers are called, he stands facing them and receives the water from the pitchers as they carry it.
11.20.6	He should not cross over the water-carrriers.
11.20.7	He receives the water at the junction of shade and sunlight.
11.20.8	If he does not find shade, he should receive the water in the shade of himself, a tree, or a bank.
11.20.9	Taking them in the manner of the Pratipa, he takes them with the verse, "These waters are full of oblations."
11.20.10	If they were not taken and were to be spilled, one should offer five oblations to Surya with the verse, “Svāhā to the golden heat.” Having given a boon, one should take them while holding a torch above, placing gold.
11.20.11	One should take them from the pots of a brahmin who performs many sacrifices.
11.20.12	It is understood that one who sacrifices to Soma becomes a great sacrificer.
11.20.13	He places the Svastivāri-water on the eastern side of the fire-chamber with the verse, "I place you in the seat of Agni, the lord of the house, for the sake of happiness." At all the places where the Svastivari-water is placed, the sacrificer recites the verse, "For happiness, for those who are happy, may it bestow happiness on me." He performs the rites of placing the Soma-cup and others for the Pasupurodāsa offering to Agni-Soma.
11.20.14	The sacrificer does not eat of the Agniṣṭoma. He may eat.
11.20.15	He does not offer the Svara, nor does he remove the heart-spike. So also in the Savanīya.
11.20.16	The Agniṣṭoma ends with the Patnīsaṃyājas.
11.21.1	At night, the sacrificer and his wife sit down within the altar, and the Vasatīvarī waters are taken around.
11.21.2	One should not take around the Vasatīvari waters for one who is not initiated.
11.21.3	Having placed it on the left shoulder, having gone around along the right, having taken it out through the eastern door, having gone to the southern part of the altar, having gone around the Marjālīya mound, he places it on the southern part of northern altar-line, saying, "This is your share, O Indra and Agni."
11.21.4	Having placed it on the right shoulder, having gone back by the same route by which he had gone, having taken out the door, having gone to the north of the altar, having gone around the Agni-dhri fire-altar, having gone to its north, having placed it on the northern altar-line, he says, "Thou art the share of Mitra-Varuna."
11.21.5	Having placed it on the left shoulder, he goes back and places it on the southern side of the Agnidhra-throne with the formula, "Thou art the share of all gods."
11.21.6	He recites the formula, "The sacrifice is awake."
11.21.7	Here the Pratiprasthātṛ milks the evening milking for the Payasyā.
11.21.8	The Adhvaryu instructs, "Prepare the curd for the one who is the vow-keeper of the sacrificer, the curd for the wife, the curd for one who is the Soma-drinker, the curd for him who is the Soma drinker. Prepare the curd for Maitrāvaruṇa, which is heated and not coagulated, and the curd for Sūta, which is heated." "O Subrahmaṇya, call out to Subrahmaṇyā. The member should not come forward."
11.21.9	They do it like a command.
11.21.10	Here, the Adhvaryu ties the sacrificial grass and sacrificial grass-blades for the Savanīya (Soma-drains) at the Savanīyas.
11.21.11	Or the sacrificial grass-blades alone.
11.21.12	The priests keep awake the sacrificer in the Agnidhra shed or in the Havirdhana shed, and the wife in the front-pillar.
11.21.13	The priests spend the night in the Agnidhara shed.
11.21.14	The sacrificer protects the king. He protects.
12.1.1	At midnight, having known, he touches the Agnidhra with the verse, "O Agni, lead us to the great night."
12.1.2	"This is Vishnu's stride," he touches the Havirdhana. "O Agni, you purify the life-forces," he touches the ladles. "O Vayu, you are adorned with purity," he touches the Vayu offerings. "Those who kindle Agni," he touches the assembly hall.
12.1.3	Prajapati, blind with anger, slept. The Agnidhra offers the Yajnatanu with thirty-three (oblations). Having offered with the first mantra, he offers the subsequent ones with the subsequent mantras.
12.1.4	They are of the size of a span, pointing upwards, sprinkled above, inclined in the middle, and facing the wind.
12.1.5	Those trees which are not mentioned in the Veda and are of the same kind as the Vaikankata trees, or those trees which are fit for sacrifice and bear fruits.
12.1.6	"He places the vessels on the axle, saying, 'Who yokes you? May he who yokes you yoke you.' Those mantras which are not mentioned.
12.1.7	"The deity Agni," on the right shoulder, the Upāṁshu-vessel.
12.1.8	"The god Soma," on the left shoulder, the Antaryāma-vessel.
12.1.9	"Thou art great," (thus) he touches the cup of the Upāṁsusavana with the two cups, facing the south, between the Gravaṇa and the Upāṁsusa.
12.1.10	The two-deity cups are placed on the other side of the Pratyaka.
12.1.11	"Indra is the deity," (thus) the garland of the Indra-Vayu cup. "Brihaspati is the deity," the Ajagava of the Maitravaruna. "The Asvins are the deities," the garland of the Asvin cup.
12.1.12	Those two are placed on the right and left sides of the Pravaja, in the vessels of Sukra and Manthin, with the Sun as the deity. The right one is made of Bilva wood, and the left one of Vaikankata wood, with the Moon as the deity.
12.1.13	Those two are placed on both sides of the Pravahuk, in the vessels for the seasons, made of ashvattha wood, with the horse's tail and the horse's hoof as the covering, facing both ways, the right one for the Adhvaryu and the left one for the Pratiprasthātṛ.
12.1.14	The vessel for the Agaryana oblation is placed on the right thigh with the deity Visve Devas. The vessel for the Ukthya oblation and the Ukthya vessel are placed on the left thigh with the deity Indra.
12.1.15	Three Atigrahya vessels are placed between the two vessels, namely, the Agniya, the Indraya, and the Surya.
12.2.1	The vessel for the Dadhigraha oblation is placed in the northern shoulder, made of Udumbara wood with four corners.
12.2.2	The same is the case with the two Soma-cups.
12.2.3	If one were to take up the Soma-cup, he should do so in this manner.
12.2.4	In front of the Havirdhana shed, one should place the Adityasthali and the Adityapaatra. To the north of these,
12.2.5	In front of Uttaravihara, one should place a pillar with the inscription "Pritbvi devata". To the north of this, one should place an unbaked Dhruvasthali.
12.2.6	If the sacrificial ladle is sixteen-fold, the sacrificial post is made of Khadira wood and has four corners, then the ladle is sixteen-folds.
12.2.7	In the middle, the ladle floats like a ladle.
12.2.8	According to space, there are ten cups made of Nyagrodha wood, Rauhitika wood, Vatsaruma wood, or Atasaruka wood.
12.2.9	There are ten cups for the Adhvaryu.
12.2.10-11	I unite thee with the earth and light. Under the southern Havirdhana, behind the axle, the Dronakalaśa with the filter. The assignment of the trees is done with the Vāyu offerings.
12.2.12	I yoke the wind with the atmosphere, with thee. On the upper part of the northern Havirdhana shed he places the Nidhavana vessel. I yoke speech with the sun. On the Pradhara shed he places the Putabhrita vessel.
12.2.13	Under this Havirdhana shed, behind the axle, he places three, five, seven, nine or eleven vessels of one kind.
12.2.14	The skin of the animal on which the sacrifice is performed is to be spread out on the ground, with its hairy side upwards, and with its four corners cut off, and sprinkled with water.
12.2.15	Having sprinkled the skin of the Adhiṣavaṇa-cart with the formula, "I sprinkle the Rākṣasa-destroying, Vala-destroying, Viṣṇu-related (cart)," he sprinkles the stones with the formula, “I sprinkle the Rāksasa-destroying Vala-destroyer, Viṣṇus." Having spread the skin of the upper part of the Adhiśavaṇa-cart towards the north with the formula, "May the Rākṣasadestroying, Vala destroying, Viṣṇudestroying (cart) be spread for me," he places the four stones of the size of a span, with their upper ends upwards, in the shape of a hammer, and the fifth one in the middle.
12.2.16	They face him.
12.3.1	The faces are the most prominent.
12.3.2	The waters are the womb of truth, the guardians of the world, the guests of the mountains, the corners of the sky, the yoked ones, the bearers, the ones who carry to heaven, the ones who bring the sacrificer. Having recited the Sannāni mantras, he yokes the Savanīya vessels as in the Agniṣṭoma. He takes the clarified butter as in the Agnișṭoma.
12.3.3	Now some (performers) take the clarified butter for the Agniṣṭoma and Savaniya offerings on the eastern part of the fire-altar, on the northern part of the Savaniya offering and on the northern part for the Anubandhya offering.
12.3.4	Some take the clarified butter on the northern part, on the northern side of the Savaniya and Anubandhya offerings.
12.3.5	If the wood is to be piled up on that day, he should sprinkle it along with the embers.
12.3.6	The pouring of the spoons is common.
12.3.7	He recites the verse, "I yoke the three rays of the sun, they are the spoons," while pouring the spoons.
12.3.8	Some prescribe the placing of the Soma-cups here.
12.3.9	One should offer before the morning recitation with the verse, "Protect me from the curse of anyone."
12.3.10	The five Hotr priests and the Agnidh priest for one who desires heaven.
12.3.11	Some recite it as in the Nitya-homa.
12.3.12	He offers oblations of ghee, oblations of animals, and oblations of rice cakes in the middle of the fire, and oblations to Soma on both sides.
12.3.13	Here he places the king in the middle of a pit, saying, "To your heart, O Soma, king!" with these two verses.
12.3.14	The Prastôttr recites the Prastôttr-sâman at the morning pressing, after the recitation of the morning Sâman.
12.3.15	The Adhvaryu says, "O Brahman, recite the morning Sâmans to the morning deities; restrain speech; the Prastôttrs are reciting; the Savanîya oblations are being poured out; do thou call out to the Subrahmaṇya and the Subrahmaṇaṇyā."
12.3.16	Some recite, "Do thou call out to Subrahmaṇyā and Subrahmaṇyâ."
12.3.17	The Adhvaryu says to the Hotṛ, "I receive your speech with my mind."
12.3.18	Here the Pratiprasthātṛ performs the rites of washing the hands and so on for the Savanīya vessels.
12.3.19	He arranges the vessels according to their purpose.
12.4.1	Two vessels for roasting, eight vessels for Pūroḍāśa, eleven for the Madhyandina Savana, twelve for the third Savana.
12.4.2-5	All the offerings to Indra are made in eleven potsherds. Some prescribe the offering of the Savaniya cake at the morning milking. The vessels for the morning milking. The Pratiprasthātṛ pours out the Savanīya oblations on the eastern side of the fire. All of them are barley grains, except those for the Laḍḍus.
12.4.6	To Indra, the giver of wealth, cooked rice; to Indra, the giver, the giver of food, the cake; to Sarasvati, the giver of prosperity, the offering of parivap; to Indra, a cake; to Mitra and Varuna, milk-rice.
12.4.7	When the oblations have been placed, he should offer this, the beginning of the rites of the gods.
12.4.8	At the time of carrying away, having removed the grains for the oblations, he carries away the others.
12.4.9	At the time of placing the skull, he places rice for cooking and rice for roasting in the skull with the first skull mantra.
12.4.10	At the time of placing, he cooks rice for cooking and cooks rice for roasting with the placing mantra.
12.4.11	Having placed the sacrificial cake, he prepares the milk-rice like the Amikṣā.
12.4.12	At the time of the Udvāsana, having mixed the Dhānas with the Vibhāga mantra, he mixes half with ghee and half with flour. He covers the barley with flour.
12.4.13	They call the mixture of curd and barley as Karamba and the parched barley as Parivāpa.
12.4.14	He removes the husks from the barley with his nails.
12.4.15	He makes the nails and the pestle have the characteristics of a pestle.
12.5.1	Where he knows that the dawn was called Rusat, there he offers the Pracaraniya oblation with the verse, "May Agni listen to my invocation with the kindling wood."
12.5.2	Having taken up another four spoonfuls, he instructs (the Maitrāvaruṇa and the Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin) to run, saying, "Run, O Maitrāvaruṇa, O Brāhmaṇacchaṃsin, run together, O Adravik, run, O Adravikin, O Nestr, O Udanin, O Unnetr, with the Hotr's goblet and the Vasatīvari waters, run towards the Cātvāla."
12.5.3	"Come, O rising one!" (thus) the Adhvaryu makes the sacrificer lead the wife. "Come, O arising one!" (thus he makes her) carry the ladle and the pot.
12.5.4	They proceed to the sacred place.
12.5.5	The Adhvaryu takes up the water when the Hotṛ recites the Prātaranuvāka at a place where it can be heard.
12.5.6	If he does not hear, he becomes deaf and his speech is cut off.
12.5.7	If they are far away, he should take them after having brought them back.
12.5.8	He offers the grass, covering it with the words "The divine waters."
12.5.9	If there is grass before that, he should offer on that.
12.5.10	Having sprinkled the oblation with Darbha grass, he takes it up with the formula, "Thou art the ocean, thou art the inexhaustible. Thou art taken up for the Vasus, Rudras and Adityas."
12.5.11	He takes it up in the Maitravaruna cup with the formula, “I take up thy Soma juice, the vital essence, for the Vasus.”
12.5.12	The wife takes up the Panni-grass with the formula, standing towards the east, “For the Vasus, the Rudras and the Adityas.”
12.5.13	"Come, O Neṣṭrī, lead the wife forward!" (says the Adhvaryu). "Come, O Udeṣṭrī, bring the wife forward!"
12.5.14	The wife, with the Panniyajani-vessel, sits down behind the Neṣṭriya, facing towards the east, with the words, "Standing towards the east, for the Vasus, Rudras and Adityas."
12.5.15	The wives of the priests sit down in the same way as the Adhvaryus.
12.6.1	Having sprinkled the Vasatīvarī waters with the Hotr's goblet, he places them on the Catvāla. Having touched the Hotr' s goblet and the Maitrāvaruṇa's goblet, the Vasatīvari waters are taken away.
12.6.2	"Having understood that they are moving together," he takes the Hotr' goblet to the Maitrāvaruṇacup, and the Maitrāvaruna's goblet to the Hotr' cup. This is the opposite.
12.6.3	And having placed the two Prācaṇyā-spoons above the Ātala-spoon, he anoints them with the formula, "May Varuna, Indra, Pūṣan, Dhātar, Brihaspati, Tvaṣṭr, Viṣṇu, the protector of progeny, bestow wealth on the sacrificer." They should be arranged in the order of their names.
12.6.4	The Hotṛ asks the Adhvaryu, "Are you free from enmity?"
12.6.5	Having replied, "We are free from enmity," he offers the Kratukaraṇa (oblation) from the remaining of the Pracaraṇa, with the verse, "O Agni, you who are free from enmity among men."
12.6.6	If it is not available, then with four spoonfuls.
12.6.7	If it is said that one should offer in the Agniṣṭoma,
12.6.8	Now, if one performs the Agniṣṭoma, if one performs an Ukthya, if one performs a Sodashin, if one performs Vājapeya, if one perform an Atiratra, then one recites this mantra and proceeds with effort.
12.6.9	With the other (verse) he makes the oblations enter the Havirdhāna; with the former (verse) the one who has lost his glory.
12.6.10	The sacrificer enters with the former (verses).
12.6.11	On the right side of the Havirdhānā, he places the Pracarani.
12.7.1	If one desires that he should be a eunuch, one should touch him with the Pracarani.
12.7.2	Under this very Havirdhāna, in front of the axle, the Maitrāvaruṇa goblet, on the northern axle, the Purāścara Hotr goblet, under the northern Havirdhāna in front of the Purāścarya Hotr goblet, the Vasatīvari goblets, behind the axle, the Ekadhana goblets.
12.7.3	This is the opposite.
12.7.4	The sacrificer approaches the waters, he attains fame, it is known.
12.7.5	Here one performs with the Dadhigraha.
12.7.6	One takes it with the Audumbara.
12.7.7	"One takes it with, 'Thou art taken with a motive; for Prajapati thee, shining, I take thee, shining.' Having taken the curd, one carries it with, 'For Indra, for the hater of mind.' One offers it with, 'To thy breath, to thy out-breath.'
12.7.8	The Dadhigraha is obligatory and optional. The other two are optional.
12.7.9	The taking of the ladleful of clarified butter is prescribed for one who desires brilliance.
12.7.10	If he were to take Soma, having placed the king who has been brought in one draught, on the Uparī, and having sprinkled him with the Vasatīvarī waters, having recited the formula, "May your mind be increased, well-born," and having placed three kindling woods of the sun, the gods made them for the immortal ones, they placed one of them in the mortal world, the two went to the world of the mortals. He sprinkles with the Soma-pressing formulas.
12.7.11	He recites the first half of the verse "Ā māskān" with the first half of "Aṃśuṃ" and the verse "Drapsas ca skandate" with the drops.
12.7.12	He recites "Hiranyapāṇi" while sprinkling, "Gṛhṇāti" while taking up, and "Juhoti" while offering. This is the extreme limit.
12.7.13	"Tisro yahavyasya" is the exception.
12.7.14	Having offered it, he eats facing away from the assembly, reciting "Bhakṣehi" according to the appropriate form.
12.7.15	Or, since it is a modification of the taking of curd, it is not entitled to the Soma rites.
12.7.16	Those rites which are not connected with the Soma are the Soma rites. Here is the text:
12.7.17	He takes the first portion of the Soma, either the Anśu or the Ādābhya.
12.7.18	He takes the Sukra with the Sukra, saying, "I take the Sukra with Sukra."
12.7.19	He takes three portions of the Soma that has been deposited for the king.
12.8.1-2	The Vasus should carry you with the Gayatri metre. With these mantras he carries him four times, five times or seven times. Having divided them thus, he says,
12.8.3	Having taken up the Kakuhā form with the verse, "The fierce ones have been placed in this (Soma)," he offers with the verse, "O Soma, thy name is Adābhya, thou art awake."
12.8.4	Having placed the known portions of the Soma in the pressing stones, he sprinkles each portion one by one at the Maha-Abhiṣava rites with the verses, "O divine Soma, thou art the Gayatri metre."
12.8.5	Taking the Anśu, he takes the king of Soma which has been brought to him by one person, and having placed it on the raised platform, having sprinkled it once, and singing with the mind the Vamadevya hymn, he takes the Anāvan Soma. "The Vamadevya verse is: "By what splendour of yours did we become bright?"
12.8.6	It should be taken with the verse facing the east or with the verse facing west or with the verse "Prāṇāpāna, Prāṇāpāni, Prāṇapāni, Prānāpāni."
12.8.7	If the wind should blow us away, let our life-breath return to us." The Adhvaryu and the sacrificer should give away a hundred pieces of gold.
12.8.8	Then the Pratiprasthātṛ, having touched them with gold, sprinkles them with water.
12.8.9	The Adhvaryu, having touched the water, offers with the verse, "May Indra and Agni grant me lustre." He offers with the verse beginning with "If he does not know" and ending with "If he knows not," which is not specified and is not related to Prajapati. He offers with the verses for inhalation and exhalation.
12.8.10	If one is unable to grasp or offer, one should offer or grasp after giving a boon.
12.8.11	The two shares are the first-born calves, and the cow with the calf, and the house with the door-sill. Thus one should give to the Adabhya.
12.8.12	One who is desirous of prosperity should take them from one who has an enemy.
12.8.13	They should not be taken everywhere. At the Vājapeya, Rājasūya, Sattra, or Sarva-veda-saṃhitā.
12.8.14	They should be taken from one who is dear to him and well-known.
12.9.1	On the northern Vartani, having filled the Hotr's cup with the Vasatavari waters, he makes the sacrificer recite the Nigraha verses, "Nigraha, O Devashruta."
12.9.2	Taking up the Grava water for Upamshu-savan, he recites, "By the impulse of the god Savitar," and then takes it up, reciting, "Grava, the performer of sacrifice." Taking up the Agrayaṇa, he releases speech.
12.9.3	Then having placed it on the upper (part of the altar), he measures it with the rays, as in the case of purchase.
12.9.4	"With the formula, "For Indra, the slayer of Vrtra, thee!" he measures it five times with each formula."
12.9.5	He measures it five times reciting the formula and five times silently.
12.9.6	He collects the rays.
12.9.7	He assigns a larger quantity of Soma for the morning pressing and a smaller quantity for the midday pressing.
12.9.8	Having put on the Upavasana garment, having placed the king of Soma on the Uttaravedi, having placed the Soma on the Hotr's goblet, having placed the shoots in it, having placed the stone on the Upahamsusavana, having sprinkled it three times clockwise, he goes to the Nigraha, towards the east, towards the west, towards the north, towards the south.
12.9.9	The wife whom one desires, one should mentally contemplate her, saying, "O Amba, be mine." She indeed desires him.
12.9.10	"O you with white teeth, O you who conquer Vritra," having approached with one part of them, having taken six moist and joined strands of hair from the king who has been touched, and having placed them on the skin, one recites the mantra, "The light that is yours in heaven..."
12.10.1	The arrow-head is called Dhishana.
12.10.2	"May your mind grow with the well-born one." Having thus invoked the king, he takes up the stone with the formula, "Do not be afraid, do not be frightened." "We have been sent by Indra. May you be near Vayu. May Mitra be your share. May Varuna be your share. Soma, the king, has been struck." He sprinkles the grass with the formula.
12.10.3	Or if it were grass, wood, or a root, he should strike it.
12.10.4	He sprinkles eight times at the beginning.
12.10.5	Then the Pratiprasthātṛ, holding the Upāṃśu vessel, places two portions above the untasted portions.
12.10.6	The Adhvaryu takes it in a cup, reciting, "O Vāji, do thou flow for Vācaspati."
12.10.7	The strainer and the vessel are not available.
12.10.8	This is the first permutation. The second and the third are also like this.
12.10.9	One may sprinkle the second time eleven times and the third time twelve times.
12.10.10	The Nigraha and Upayana are performed twice at the beginning and at the end.
12.10.11	The Hotr takes up the Ansiyas in the last Pravara.
12.10.12	The Pratiprasthata puts two Ansiyas each in the remaining ones.
12.10.13	Having taken up the cup, the Adhvaryu says, "Thou art taken up for the heaven." He goes around the Hotar by the right.
12.10.14	Or the Hotṛ may offer it.
12.10.15	Standing to the south, having moved along the southern joint of the enclosing sticks, he offers with the formula, "Thou art the mind, thou art the mind."
12.11.1	Having offered to the south, facing east, a long, straight and continuous oblation with the formula, “Thou art Svāhā, thou art Svāhā to the rising sun," he smears the paste on the middle enclosing stick with the formula, "For the gods who are the rays, for thee."
12.11.2	He should offer to the one whom he hates.
12.11.3	If one desires, "May it rain and be fertile," one should rub inside the vessel and inside the boundary, rubbing downwards with the hand.
12.11.4	If one wishes, "May it not rain," one should rub outside the vessel and above the boundary, rubbing upwards with the outstretched hand.
12.11.5-6	Having poured out the entire contents of the Āgrayana vessel, he should place the empty vessel in the Āyatanā with the formula, "This is your womb. For Prāṇa." Having placed the Anśu in it, he should sprinkle it at the third pressing.
12.11.7	Having taken up the Upāṁśu, he should place it on the breath of the deceased with the verse, "I place thee on the breath of deceased." Having taken it up with the verse, “With the impulse of the divine Savitr,” he should cover it with his hand with the verse, "I place thee on thy breath of the deceased." He should say, "I shall offer thee now."
12.11.8	If it is far away, he should stand near it.
12.11.9	One who is pleased, drunk with wine, and standing crookedly, should say, "Let there be a lie." Having offered to the breath, one should offer, saying, "I offer you to the breath."
12.11.10	Some say, "One should offer to the one who is embraced by the garment, the arms, and the chest." The truth is that which is offered to the one who has been struck by the Devamasha. "He is struck by the Devamasha. Phaḍ!"
12.11.11	The two Soma-cups called Ādābhya and Jāgṛvī are the two Soma-cups which are poured down in the pouring down of the Upāṁśu-cups. Two by two the cups are poured down in Maha-Abhiṣava.
12.12.1	The two cups called Ādābhyā and Upāṁśupāvan are poured down. All the Adhvaryus pour down the Maha-Abhiṣav in the directions.
12.12.2	The Adhvaryu is in front, the Pratiprasthātṛ to the right, the Nestr to the rear, the Unnetr to the left, the Adhvaryu to the rear, and the Nestr to front, so say some.
12.12.3	Having placed the king on the Uparaja vessel and having poured the Anśus into the Hotr vessel, they sprinkle silently with the other Gravas, except the Upāṃśusavana.
12.12.4	Thus having sprinkled the second and third time, they sprinkle.
12.12.5	The Adhvaryu sprinkles the Soma that has been sprinkled with a handful.
12.12.6	The Unnetr, having taken it out with the Antareša ladle, pours it into the Ādhavanīya on the north.
12.12.7	This is indeed the path of the Soma and water.
12.12.8	This is the first round.
12.12.9	Thus the second and third rounds are also prescribed.
12.12.10	The Triparaya.
12.12.11	Having collected the king, having placed the stones on the ground, having turned them towards the east, having pressed the barley, they pour it into the mouths of the animals, and give them grass, it is known.
12.12.12	The Udgātṛs, having placed the Dronakalaśa, spread the Udicīnadasa Pavitra on it.
12.12.13	"O Brahmanaspati, thy purifying (cup) is spread out. Thou, the Lord, searchest through all thy limbs. The one whose body is not heated does not attain it. The heated ones, flowing, hope for it." The sacrificer recites this verse over the spread out (cup).
12.13.1	Having made the navel of the purifying (cup), the sacrificer causes the stream to flow into it with the Hotr's cup.
12.13.2	The Hotṛ-cup is brought from the Udumbara-cup.
12.13.3	It is understood that the stream of Soma should flow continuously, as it is desired that the Soma should be abundant.
12.13.4	One should cut off the stream for the one whom he hates.
12.13.5	He takes the Antaryāma cup at the end of the stream and all the cups from Dhruva.
12.13.6	The two Brahmanas, Upamsu and Antaryama, are the same, except that the latter is accompanied by the Abhicharaṇa.
12.13.7	The Upāmaṅgṛhīta is taken thus: "I take thee, O Antaryama, for the Hotr." Having taken it, he passes beyond the Hotr on the north, and stands on the north of the Hotr, and having gone round the northern end of the altar, offers in the northern half.
12.13.8	Some prescribe the opposite directions.
12.13.9-10	Having poured the entire contents of the Āgrayana vessel into the receptacle, he places the vessel, not empty, in the receptacle, with the formula, "This is thy place; for the downward movement." With the formula, "For the upward movement," he touches the Upāṁśusavana with the two vessels, facing south, without touching the stone.
12.13.11	If the sun has not risen, one should offer the Upāṁshu offering; if it has risen, the Antaryāma offering.
12.13.12	If one is in a hurry, one should offer Upāṁshu if the sun has not yet risen, and Antaryāma if it has risen.
12.13.13	Some say: Both should be offered when the sun has not arisen.
12.14.1	If the Soma-sacrifice is to be performed with the Rathantara-sāman, one should take up the Indra-Vayu-cup first; if with the Brihat-sāman the Sukra-cup first; and if with the Jagat-sāman then the Aghamarana-cup first.
12.14.2	If it is to be performed according to both the Sāmans, then as one pleases.
12.14.3	One should take up the cup of Indra-Vayu first.
12.14.4	One who desires that his progeny may be in the same order as before should take the cups beginning with Indra-Vayu. The cups are taken in the order of one's desire.
12.14.5	Those which were mentioned before the Aggrayaṇa are taken.
12.14.6	If one takes the cup of Indra-Vayu before the one desired, one should not place it.
12.14.7	The placing of the Indra-Vayu cup is done after the placing of the desired cup.
12.14.8	One takes the Indra-Vāyu cup.
12.14.9	"O Vayu, do thou be adorned with pure gifts." Having recited this, he takes up the Soma with the formula, "Thou art taken up with a view to being offered to Vayu." Having taken it up, he recites, "These are pressed for Indra and Vayu." Having recited this he takes up the soma with the formula, “Thou art taken up for being offered to Indra and Vayu.” Having taken it up and having wiped it with the Pavitras, he places it with the formula, "This is thy birth-place; for Indra and Vāyu who are in unison with thee."
12.14.10	Having wiped all the planets with the tenfold purity, he places them in their respective places, saying, "This is your birthplace."
12.14.11	Or, for this purpose, a second purity may be used in ten ways.
12.14.12	This is for you, O Mitra-Varuna. Having taken the Mitra-Varuna cup, we, with the desire to drink, shall drink with the Soma juice, the cows with the grass. That milch cow, O Mitra- Varuna, you two, the protectors of all, give us, not trembling. Having sprinkled with the milk of the Śṛtaśīta (cow), he places it with the verse, "This is your place, for the truthful ones."
12.14.13	This is Venas's (the son of Manu) invocation. Taking the semen, he places it with the words, "This is your womb, protect the heroism."
12.14.14	"For your enemy" is for the one who is hated.
12.14.15	Taking the pressing stone, he says, "Do ye press that which is to be pressed." The mind of those who offer at the invocations, the pressing stones, running with the help of Śacī, the strong one, the one who is to be praised, has brought the ladle to the place. With the cakes he presses himself and the other Grahas, not being destroyed.
12.14.16	"This is your birthplace. Protect the creatures." He places it.
12.15.1	"For your enemy, for your hatred."
12.15.2	If he should wish, "I would make him who is in the village to be outside the village, and him who is outside the village to be in the village," then he should say, "I am making so-and-so, the son of so-and- so, the member of so-and so, to be in the sky." Having made the offering, he should say, "I am placing so-and-son, the son ofso-and-so. the member of so and so, on the earth." He should place the churning stick on it.
12.15.3	The gods who are in heaven, he takes up the Aggrayaṇa vessel with two streams, either from above or from the front, with the Upāṁśu formula.
12.15.4	The Soma which is in the Aggrayaṇā vessel, he takes it into another vessel and makes that the second stream.
12.15.5-6	The verse of thirty-three syllables is to be recited by one who is afflicted or by one who is practising against an enemy. "He who knows the afflicted, the dog, the great path of the mountain, the ancient, the place of union, he leads the foremost of the unerring ones, the shining, the first, the knowing, the going, the sound, the first." This is to be recited against an enemy.
12.15.7	Having taken the Āgrayaṇa, he releases speech after thrice reciting the formula.
12.15.8	Soma is flowing, Soma is flowing, flowing for the good, flowing for Brahmic glory, flowing for this Brahman, flowing for this Kshatra, flowing for this clan, flowing for the waters, flowing for the plants, flowing for the trees, flowing for heaven and earth, flowing for the pressing, flowing for the sacrificer, flowing for me, the eldest, flow for me as you flow for the gods. He recites three times slowly, loudly, and very loudly.
12.15.9	Having placed it with the formula, "This is thy womb for all the gods," he takes three Agniṣṭoma-grahyas - the one pertaining to Agni, the one pertaining to Indra and the one pertaining to Surya.
12.15.10	"O Agni, rising up, O healer, thou art the saviour." These are the formulas for taking and placing.
12.15.11	He takes up the Sthālīya cup with the formula, "Thou art taken with a support; for Indra thee, for the bountiful, for the giver." The taking up and placing are done with these formulas.
12.16.1	"The head of heaven, the desire of earth," with this formula he takes up the Dhruva cup full from the Sthālū.
12.16.2	He should take a small portion of the fire from the fire-pit of one whom he desires to be short-lived. He should take half of the fire from one whom he desires that he may live longer.
12.16.3	"He should place it in the receptacle of gold with the formula, "This is thy place; for thee, O Agni, for Vaisvānara." He should place it for one who desires life.
12.16.4	The prince protects it from being taken away.
12.16.5	If he wishes to make one who is not yet known to be known, or one who is known to be unknown, he should say, "I am driving out so-and-so, the son of so-and- so, from the clan of so-and so." He should drive him out from the firm ground. Then he should say, “I am placing so-and-son, the son ofso-and-so in the clan of so and so.” He should place him there again.
12.16.6	If one were to do so, one would disturb the life of the people. One should move it upwards with this mantra.
12.16.7	If one were to perform a curse, one should say, "I am diverting the life of so-and-so, the son of so-and so." One should divert the life of the one who is firm.
12.16.8	One should say, "You are firm, you are firm on the earth. I am diverting this one from his place." One should divert it.
12.16.9	Here the flow ceases.
12.16.10	Having pressed the sacred thread, he places it.
12.16.11	The vessels of the Maitrāvaruṇa and the Camasādhvaryus are to be poured into the Ādhavanīya. The Pūtabhṛt should pour the Ādhavaneya into the Bil, having spread the strainer with the ten fingers pointing upwards. The Pūta-bhṛt should pour into the Dronakalaśa, saying, "Thou art taken for Indra." The Ādhavanīyaka, saying, "For the Visve Devas." The Pūtabhaṛt, saying, "Thee for the Visve Devatas."
12.16.12	Those are the Pavamāna cups.
12.16.13	All the cups are taken up in front.
12.16.14	The sacrificer touches all the cups with the fivefold Hotr-chant.
12.16.15	He offers oblations of Vāruṇa kind with the mantras, "The drop has fallen, that drop of yours, that drop of you."
12.16.16	The first is always connected with the others. Some recite the three subsequent ones as a single Sāman.
12.16.17	Having offered the Saptāhotṛ-oblation in the Āhavanīya fire, following the mind and with the Grahas, they move towards the Bahispavamāna with bowed heads. The five priests move together.
12.17.1	The Adhvaryu takes up the Pratihartṛ, the Pratihartar takes up the Udgātṛ, the Udgātā takes up the Brahman, the Brahman takes up the Yajamāna.
12.17.2	If the Hotṛ himself is the Yajamana, he should move around. Because it is his own place.
12.17.3	They move like serpents, like snakes, with their heads bent down.
12.17.4	Like a deer is the sacrifice, the Adhvaryu moves first, shaking the grass-bunch, saying, "May speech lead the way." The path is Gayatri, the deities are the Vasus. "May I go safely along the path which is not obstructed by wolves."
12.17.5	Looking at the sacrificial ground, they praise on the northern side of the altar.
12.17.6	Then the Adhvaryu begins the Stotra.
12.17.7	He gives the handful of sacrificial grass to the Prastotar, saying, "Vayu is the one who makes the sound 'him'."
12.17.8	This is the beginning of all the Pavamana verses.
12.17.9-10	The Brāhmaṇas should be present at the Bahispavamāna. For one who hates him is excluded from the Bahispavamaṇa. This is known.
12.17.11	The sacrificer sings the praise of the one being praised. Four Upagātaras sing in the lower half.
12.17.12	No Adhvaryu.
12.17.13	The sacrificer mutters the formula, "Do you hum for Vasvi, do you sing for her, do you praise her, may I be protected by her." before the Bahispavamāna.
12.17.14	He recites the Dashotr and mutters the Dashotr while being praised.
12.17.15	"Thou art the hawk, the Gayatri metre." Thus he recites the middle Stotriya verse in the Anvarohana mode.
12.17.16	In the second Pavamana, with the second verse; in the third, with the third verse.
12.17.17	Then the final section: "Thou art the praised of the praised," he recites the Stotra verse; "Thou art the praise of the praised," the Shastra verse.
12.17.18	"We praise you with all our strength," he recites at both places.
12.17.19	The Adhvaryu, having praised, instructs: "O Agni-bearer, arrange the fires, spread the sacrificial grass, and decorate the sacrificial cakes."
12.17.20	In some cases, while rising from the praise, he says: "O Agnibearer, arrange the fire, spread the sacrificial grasse, decorate the sacrificial cakes, and bring the animal, O Pratiprasthātṛ."
12.17.21	They perform as instructed.
12.18.1	The Adhvaryu moves from the Agnidhra-chamber to the Dhishnya-chamber.
12.18.2	At two Savanas he puts down the embers, at the third Savana he puts down the wooden chips.
12.18.3	He puts down the embers in the Dhishnya chambers.
12.18.4	In this way they are put down in order.
12.18.5	Having taken up the Soma from the Pracāniya vessel and from the Dronakalaśa, he pours it down in front of the king, sitting facing the east, on the Dhishnya-cups, with the same formulas or silently.
12.18.6	He pours down the Soma on the Ahavaniya, Agnidhra, Hotr and Marjālīya cups with the Soma and clarified butter on the other cups.
12.18.7	You are the continuity of the sacrifice. For the continuity of the sacrificer, I spread you for the continuity of the continuity of the Yajna. Having moved away from the Garhapatya, he spreads the unbroken sacrificial grass in the direction of the Ahavaniya.
12.18.8	Returning with the Vaisnavya verse, the sacrificer stands near the king, saying, "O Vishnu, you are our last refuge."
12.18.9	The Adhvaryu, having touched the vessels with this (verse), takes up the Asvin cup.
12.18.10	"The two verses, "O ye two, who are in the goad, etc." are for taking up and placing (the cups).
12.18.11	The cups are taken up from the Dronakalaśa with the Pariplavya verse, or at another place on being told.
12.18.12	Having encircled the sacrificial post with the Trivṛt verse, he prepares the animal for Agni Savaniya.
12.18.13	The Agniṣṭoma is dedicated to Agni, the Ukthya to Indra-Agni, the Ṣoḍaśin to Indra, and the Atiratra to Sarasvati.
12.18.14	Some recite the Sāman in a manner of equal elevation. One offers the Agniṣṭoma dedicated to Agni, then the Ukthya dedicated to Indra-Agnī, then the Ṣoḷaśin dedicated to Indra, then the Atiratra dedicated to Sarasvatī.
12.18.15	Having performed the Vapa sacrifice and having purified himself after the Vapa sacrifice, they proceed towards the morning pressing.
12.18.16	They look at the Grahas while proceeding.
12.18.17	"The two oceans" - the Pūtabhṛt and Ādhavanīya jars.
12.18.18	"The pair of streams" - the Dronakalaśa jar.
12.18.19	"The all-encompassing Agni" - the entire king.
12.18.20	For Prāṇa, for me, he offers the Upāṁshu; for Apāna, for me, the Antaryāma; for Vyāna, for me the Upāṁshusavana; for Vāc, for me, Indra-Vāyu; for Dakṣa and Kratu, for me, Maitrāvaruṇa; for the eyes, for me, Śukra and Amānta; for Śrotra, for me, Aśvin; for Ātman, for me, Āgrayaṇa; for the limbs, for me, Ukthya; for Āyuṣa, for me, Dhruva; for Tejas, for me, Varcoda, Varcas, he purifies for me; for Vāg, for me, Vācaspati; for Pāṇi, for me, Pavamāna; for Pāda, for me, Pāvamāna; for the two feet, for me, Paśukṛt; for the two hands, for me, Puṣṭi; for the two ears, for me, Pratiṣṭhāt; for the two eyes, for me; for the two nostrils, for me; the two thighs, for me; for the two knees, for me; all the Grahas, for me, are Varcodas, Varcas, they purify for me; for my two breasts, for me, they are Varcodas; for my Varcas, they are Pavathas; for the Ritu vessel, for me, Tejas; for my strength, for me, for my Varcas; for my valour, for me, it is Varcoda, it purifies for Varcas; for these, each according to his mantra, the Atigrahyas; for the Sodashin, for me, is Varcoda; for Varcas, it purifieth; for Vishnu's belly, for me, thou art; for the Drona-pot, for me, Thou art Indra's; for the Adhavanīya, for me, all the Gods; for the Pūtabhṛt, for me,
12.19.1	Who are you? What is your name? (he says) to the Ahavaniya.
12.19.2	"I choose you, O Soma, as the Udgātṛ, O you with human eyes, for crossing over to safety, for all my forms." The king is addressed thus.
12.19.3	One who desires to shine, one who desires Brahmic glory, one who is afflicted by disease, or one who is practising sorcery, should look (at the Soma).
12.19.4	The sacrificer stands near all the cups with the Śṛtaṃkāra formulas.
12.19.5	"You are cooked, O Prāṇāpāna, you have made me prosperous." (Thus he says) to the Upāṁśu and Antaryāma cups. "You are cooked. You have made me prosperous," (thus he says) to Vyāna. "You are Cooked. You have made my speech prosperous," (thus be says) to the Indra-Vayu cup. "You arecooked. You have made Dakṣa-kratu prosperous," (thushe says) to the Maitrāvaruṇa cup. "You have made my eyes prosperous," (thusbe says) to the Sukra and Amāntin cups. "Youare cooked. You have madc my hearing prosperous," (thushesays) to the Āṣāḍha cup. "You arc cooked. You havemade my self prosperous," (thus hc says) to the Āgrayaṇa cup. " You are cooked. You havc made my limbs prosperous," (thushc says) to the Ukthya cup. "Youarecooked. You have mademy life prosperous," (thus hesays) to the Dhruva cup. "Youarc cooked. You havemadc my lustre prosperous," (thus hcsays) to the Ajya cups. "Youarccooked. You havemademy cattle prosperous," (thushcsays) to Pṛṣadājya. "You are cookcd. You have madcmysustenance prosperous," (thus) to all the cups. "You arethe belly of Prajāpati. You are cooked. Make meprosperous," (thus he savs) to the Droṇakalaśa. "You arethe belly of Indra. You are cooked, make me prosperous,"(thus he says) lo the Ādhavanīya. "You arc the belly ofall the gods. You are cooked; make me prosperous," (thussays) to the Pūtabhṛt. "You are the cooked one, I am thecooked one. My Prāṇa is cooked, my Apāna is cooked, myVyāna is cooked, the eye is cooked, the ear is cooked, my speechis cooked, my self is cooked, my oblation is cooked, my Soma iscooked, my cups are cooked." "O Indra, drink this pressed Soma, the best, immortal, the most brilliant. The streams of Soma have flowed forth for thee in the abode of truth. Thou art the shining bull, O Soma, the bull, O god, the bull, the bull of vows, thou hast established the bull-like laws. Thy strength is bull-like, the bull is in the forest, the bull is the maddening juice. Thou art the bull, O bull, the bull that moves like a horse. O Indra, thou art the bull that unites the songs. Grant us wealth."
12.19.6	Agni, the purifier, may he purify me. Soma, the purifier, May he purify me. Surya, the purifier, He may purify me. The cows have been invoked, I have been invoked for the cows. Having stood thus in accordance with the prescribed order, he stands by the mound with the formula, "May there be welfare." The rites for the construction of the altar are concluded.
12.19.7	"May the heaven and earth be near me." The Bahispavamāna hymns are to be recited thus.
12.20.1	"The pot," "Soma," "Agni," "The gods," "The sacrifice," "The Hotr priests" are to be recited.
12.20.2	"May they call, may they call, may he call" - in all cases the suffix is to be added according to the gender.
12.20.3	"Salutations to Agni, the destroyer of sacrifices." Thus he recites at the Ahavaniya fire. "Salutations to Rudra, the destroyer of sacrifice." Thus he recits at the Agnidhra fire. "Salutatioins to Indra, the destroyer of sacrifiice." Thus he recitcs at the Hotra fire.
12.20.4	"You are firm, you are loose, you are in harmony." Thus he stands up to the Sun, Wind, Fire, Yama, Sarasvati, and the doors of the assembly hall.
12.20.5	He recites the verse "Protect, protect" in accordance with the context.
12.20.6	He recites "Salutations to the seer" while about to enter, and "Salutations to those who are about to enter" after entering.
12.20.7	The place of the sacrificer is to the west of the Brahma-seat or to the east.
12.20.8	"Salutations to the assembly of gods." Thus he salutes the assembly of gods. "Salutations to Brahma, the lord of the assembly of gods," thus he salutes Brahma. "Salutations, O leaders of the friends," thus he saloutes the priests. "Salutations unto heaven, salutations unto earth," thus he salotes heaven and earth. Having approached the place of sacrifice, he removes the grass from the place of sacrifice and sits down, saying, "I am going to the place of sacrifice."
12.20.9-13	"May the heaven and earth not fall today." He sits down and mutters. "He looks towards the southern half, saying, "May the fathers come, the fathers who are worthy of being fathers." Both the Adhvaryu and the sacrificer mutter these. Or the sacrificer alone. Here the Pratiprasthātṛ collects the Savanīya (cups). The Adhvaryu proceeds with them.
12.20.14	The deities of all the cakes are offered in the Juhu and those of the Sauvishtkrits in the Upabhu.
12.20.15	"Recite the Puronuvākyās for Indra, the morning-savourer, of the morning-savouring oblations." "Recite the puronuvākyā for Indra, the saviour of the morning, of the morning savouring oblations." These are the two instructions. "Recite the yajyās for Indra, saviour of the mornings, of the morning oblations being offered." "Recite yajyās to Indra, saviour, of the morning, for the morning oblations which are being offered."
12.20.16	The call to Agni is "O Agni, do thou proclaim; O Agni, do thou send forth." This is the call to Svishtakrit.
12.20.17	Having taken the Prastara, he takes the Iḍa, not the share of the sacrificer.
12.20.18	Having taken away the Iḍa for the Hotṛ, he goes to the Havirdhāna and calls out, "Do you proclaim to Vayu and Indra-Vayu."
12.20.19	The Adhvaryu, having taken up the Indra-Vayu cup from the Dronakalaśa with the formula, "Thou art taken with a support; thou art the abode of speech," does not place it.
12.20.20	Having taken the Indra-Vayu cup and having taken the king from the cauldron, the Adhvaryu and the Pratiprasthātṛ go out. Having stood to the south, having gone along the southern junction of the enclosing sticks, having offered the Āghāra offering with the formula, "May this be the sacrifice, may this be the offering, may this be for the gods," he offers the Āghāra with the formula, “May the offering be made as if in a low voice."
12.20.21	Here he offers all the Soma-offerings.
12.20.22	If one thinks, “I will not go forward and offer,” then standing with the ladle or the Vāyu vessel, one should call out. Or having taken up the cup, one should pour out the Soma and commence the praise. This is the extreme limit.
12.20.23	Having called out, when the response is given, one instructs, “Send to Vāyu, send to Indra-Vāyu.”
12.21.2	When the oblation has been offered, he attends upon the sun with the formula, "Thou art the best of rays, the protector of life. Protect my life."
12.21.3	Then the Pratiprasthātṛ pours the remnants into the Adhvaryu's vessel. This is the opposite of what the Adhvaryus does to the Pratiprasthatṛ.
12.21.4	The Pratiprasthātr pours the remnants into Āditya's vessel with the formula, “For the gods thee.”
12.21.5	Having taken the cup, the Adhvaryu quickly approaches the Hotṛ and hands over the cup to him with the formula, "May Vasu be in me."
12.21.6	Having received it thus, the Hotṛ places it on his right thigh and holds it with both hands.
12.21.7	In this way, the two cups are handled.
12.21.8	There is no Āghāra and Punar-vaṣaṭkāra.
12.21.9	The instructions are given according to the deity.
12.21.10	The sun-worship is performed with the mantras, "Do thou protect me from the evil spirits", "Do thou protect us from the evil spirits" and "Do thou protect the sacrificer from the evil spirits".
12.21.11	"Thou art the best of rays, thou art the best of breaths. Do thou protect my breath." This is the third sun-worship.
12.21.12	The Pratiprasthātṛ puts the sun-vessel into the sun-pan with the verse, "This Soma belongs to thee, O Viṣṇu of large strides. Do thou protect it."
12.21.13	Having given the Āsvina cup to the Hotṛ, he goes to the Havirdhāna hall, and instructs (the Hotr), "Recite after the cups are being filled."
12.21.14	He fills nine cups, beginning with the Hotṛ's cup.
12.21.15	Having poured from the Dronakalaśa, he fills the Pūtabhṛt cup and pours over it from the Dronakalaśa.
12.21.16	This is the procedure for all the cups.
12.21.17	At the time of taking up the stream, the rites of the two deities are desirable.
12.21.18	If the sacrificer thinks that his enemy has gone before him, then taking it first, offering it first, and placing it first, he should do so.
12.21.19	If one desires, "May my enemy be deprived of his strength," then one should offer with the Prābhāṅga (kindling) wood and should place the Prābhūṅga (kindled) wood.
12.21.20	The meaning is equality.
12.21.21	If he wishes to make the one who is not yet known to be known, or the one who is known to be known again, then he should take up the Adhvaryu's vessel with the formula, "I am taking up this one, the son of so-and-so, the descendant of so-andso, from the family of so-and so." Then he should place the Pratiprasthātṛ's vessel in it with the formula, “I am placing this one, the descendant of such-and-such, the son of such-and such, in the family of such-and so.”
12.21.22	If the Kamyas were to be performed separately, they would be excluded.
12.22.1	Then, when one proceeds with Sukra and Manthin, the Adhvaryu takes up Sukra with the verse, "You are praised by the people, the gods may lead you with Sukra." The Pratiprasthātṛ takes up Manthin with the verse, “You are praised by people, the gods lead you with Manthin.” The Camasādhvaryus take up the bowls.
12.22.2	Having covered them with the two pieces of wood sprinkled, they remove the dust with the two pieces not sprinkled. The Adhvaryu, thinking of the hated one in his mind, says, "The Sandha has been removed." The Pratiprasthātṛ says, "The Marka has been removed."
12.22.3	Having taken them, they go out facing east.
12.22.4	"O Urva, follow the sky," (thus) he says to one who is going forth.
12.22.5	"O Indra, join with wrath, destroy the enemies, slay the forts, be invincible," thus the sacrificer followed (Indra) after the offering.
12.22.6	The Brahmanas and the Kshatriyas, the Grahas and the Aratnis, the Brahmanas and the Grahas, the Brahmanas, the Kshatriys, the Grahas, and the Aratni, the Brahmanas (and the rest) have united; may they prosper me. The Brahmanas and Kshatriyas have united; may the Brahmanas and Kshtriyas prosper me. The Grahas and Aratnis have united; may Grahas and Arantnis prosper me. The Brahmaṇas and Grahas have united; may Brahmanas and Grahas prosper me. The Kshatriyas and Grahas have uniteḍ; may Kshatriyas (and Grahas) prosper me. The Aratnis and Grahas have uniṭed; may Aratnis and Grāhas prosper me. Food has united; may food prosper me. Nourishment has united; may nourishment prosper me. Wealth has united; may wealth prosper me. Prosperity has united; may prosperity prosper me. Children have united; may children prosper me. Cattle have united; may cattle prosper me.
12.22.7	Holding the Uttaravedi with the thumbs, they circumambulate the Uttaravedi as if turning it around.
12.22.8	"May the gods, the drinkers of Soma, grant you life. May the gods, the eaters of Soma, grant us life. May the god Savitr grant you life. The gods, the drinkers, grant you life." "May the gods, eaters of Soma, give us life. May Savitr, the god, grant us life." "The gods, the drinkers grant you life. Grant us life." The Adhvaryu takes up the Grahas with the verse, "May the gods grant you life. Let the gods grant us life. Let Savitr, the God, grant you life, the gods, the Soma-drinkers, grant you life," "Let the gods, the consumers of Soma, grant life to us. Let Savitr the God grant us life."
12.22.9	Then the Adhvaryu recites over them: "Be ye life, give me life, give life to the sacrifice, give life to (the) lord of sacrifice. Be ye breath, give me breath, give breath to the sacrifice, (give breath) to the lord of sacrifice. Ye are sight, give me sight, give sight to the sacrifice, to (the) the lord of sacrifice." Be ye hearing, give me hearing, give hearing to the sacrifice, hearing to (the) Lord of sacrifice.
12.23.1	May the two gods Shukra and Manthin create the divine classes, may they create the human classes. May they bestow strength and energy upon us, life upon the cattle, offspring upon me, and the sacrificer.
12.23.2	The two pieces of wood, not yet sprinkled, are thrown outside the altar. The two pieces of firewood, thrown away, are called Śaṇḍa and Mārkā. The Adhvaryu, thinking of the hated one in his mind, throws away the Śaṇḍā. The Pratiprasthātā throws away the Mārkā.
12.23.3	The two pieces of wood are sprinkled. The Adhvaryu says, "You are the kindling wood of Sukra." The Pratiprasthatā says, "You ar the kindling wood for churning."
12.23.4	Having called out and having been called back, he instructs (the Hotr) to offer the Soma-juice of the Savanīya cup to Indra, which is being brought forward, to the Savitr, the bright one, the giver of sweetness, to the Savitrs, the bright ones, the givers of sweetness, to Savitr, the giver of brightness, to Savitr the giver of sweetness. The Hotr offers the Savanīyas, the Savanīyās, the Savanīs, the Savanīt, the Savanîya, the Savaneya, the Savaneyas, the Savaneye, the Savanēya, the Savaneys, the Savanêyas, the Savane, the Savanês, the Savanā, the Savanās, the Savana, the Savan, the Savanām, the Savanān, the Savanāt, the Savanād, the Savanāya, the Savanayā, the Savanaṃ, the Savanayaṃ, the Savanaḥ, the Savanayo, the Savanaye, the Savanayas, the Savanayam, the Savanameyaṃ, the Savanemeyaṃ, the Sāvanīyaṃ, the Savaṇīyaṃ, and the Savanīyam. Having offered the Savanīyā, the Savanītā, the Savanīm, the Savaniti, the Savanem, the Savanemi, the Savanēm, the Savanime, the Savanimes, the Savanim, the Savanima, the Savanir, the Savanira, the Savanire, the Savaniru, the Savaniry, the Savaniri,
12.23.5	They perform as if they were giving instructions.
12.23.6	The Adhvaryu and Pratiprasthātṛ priests offer from the front, facing east. The Camasādhvaryus offer from the rear, facing west, with the cups.
12.23.7	The offering is made after reciting the names of Sukra and Manthin.
12.23.8	The first is Samkrti, the first is Vishvakarman, the first is Mitra, Varuna, Agni, the first is Brihaspati, the healer. To him I offer the Soma, svāhā. The Adhvaryu offers thus. To him Surya, I offer the Soma svāhā. Thus the Pratiprasthātṛ.
12.23.9	They are with or without the Vasat call.
12.23.10	They are offered in all the fires.
12.23.11	Or else, having placed the vessel of semen in the shrine like a cook, the Pratiprasthātṛ, having performed the external Paridhi rite, having burnt the embers, offers the dripping of the churned (Soma) on it with the verse, "This is your share, O Rudra, which you have begged for."
12.23.12	This is the vessel of distress, which is the vessel of the Manthin. One who hates the priests should take it. It is known that one gets distressed here itself.
12.23.13	Then he instructs, "Let the Hotr's vessel go, let the Brahman's go, let the Udgātṛ's go, and let the sacrificer's go." Some recite, "Let the Sadasyas' go, let the Sadasyas go."
12.23.14	Then the Hotr priests offer the oblations.
12.23.15	The Camasādhvaryus, having poured their respective cups from the Dronakalaśa, carry them.
12.23.16	Taking the Maitrāvaruṇa cup, going to the Havaniya fire, after proclaiming, when the response is given, he instructs, "O Hotr, do you offer" or "O Praśāstr, do you offer."
12.23.17	Having offered at the Vasat and Anuvṣat calls, he carries the cup for the Bhaks.
12.23.18	Thus he proceeds with the subsequent ones. This much is the difference.
12.24.1	In the second he says, "Brahman, offer"; in the third, "Potat, offer"; in fourth, "Neṣṭṛ, offer"; in fifth, "Agnīd, offer".
12.24.2	In all cases, there is Anuvṣaṭkāra, except in the case of the Grahas of two deities, Rtu, Aditya, Savitr, and Pātnivat.
12.24.3	Taking the cup of Agni, he comes to the assembly and says, "O Agni, I have come."
12.24.4	The others reply, "He who will make us drink Soma has done well."
12.24.5	If he were to sacrifice to a Kṣatriya or a Vaiśya, if he were to eat Soma, having brought the Nyagrodha-sticks, having pounded them, having sprinkled them, when the cups are being offered, having placed the embers within the enclosing sticks, having offered on the embers with the Darbha-grass, having said, "I am yours, you are mine," having offered on the coals, he should give him the portion to eat.
12.24.6	The one who utters the Vasat-call eats first among those who are seated in the vessel.
12.24.7	Having waited for the food to be brought, he says, "Eat." Having received it, he says, “I have taken thee with the arms of the Asvins.” Having looked at it, he says at the morning pressing, “Thou art the food of Indra.” He eats all the Indra-offerings. At the midday pressing, he says, “(Thou art) the food of Indra, the food of the Narasamsa.” He eats all Indra-offerings and the Narasamsa-offerings. He eats all the Narasamsa offerings. At the third pressing, he says (to the Soma-pours), “Thou art the drink of Indra, the drink of the Narasamsas.” He eats all Narasamsa offerings.
12.24.8	Whatever is first taken from the Vasumat group, that is followed everywhere.
12.24.9	If it is Indra-drunk, then it is of another deity.
12.24.10	Or according to the deity.
12.24.11	Some prescribe the consumption of all Soma with the words "May the goddess of speech be satisfied with Soma."
12.24.12	Or with the words "The goddess of speech may be satisfied with Soma".
12.24.13	Having eaten, they touch the region of the navel, saying, "Do you stimulate my limbs."
12.24.14	"May Soma be drunk without being invoked. One becomes deficient by drinking Soma."
12.24.15	He invites with the name of the rite, saying, "This one, that one, do you invoke." The reply is, "Invoked."
12.24.16	Those who eat at the same time, they desire to be invoked.
12.24.17	Those who eat from the same vessel.
12.25.1	The Maitrāvaruṇa (officiating) first consumes the Indra-Vāyu (cup) for the purpose of controlling the vital airs; the Maitrāvaruṇa consumes the Indra-Varuna (cup) for controlling the eyes; the Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin (officiating), the Asvin (cup) for controling the ears.
12.25.2	The two (officiating priests) consume the Indra-Vayu (cup) twice without relinquishing the vessel. The other two (officiates) consume (the cups) once each.
12.25.3	"Those who eat it" means the Adhvaryu and the Hotṛ. "They eat it" means both the Adhvaryus and the Hotṛ; "He eats it" means the Sadas.
12.25.4	Having eaten, they pour the remnants into the Hotṛ's goblet. The eaten ones are poured into the uneaten ones.
12.25.5	Here, one should release the vessel.
12.25.6	He puts the portion of the cake in the vessel of Indra-Vayu, the Payasyā in the vessel of Mitra-Varuna, and the cooked rice in the vessel of Asvins.
12.25.7	He places them on the northern side of the southern Havirdhāna-shed with the verse, "May they be present till the third pressing, for the continuity of the sacrifice." This is known.
12.25.8	Some prescribe the offering of the Idā without pouring out.
12.25.9	Here the Hotṛ calls out to the Idā, and the Camasins take up the cups. The Hotṛ's cup is touched by the Idā.
12.25.10	They eat the Idā which has been called out.
12.25.11	He places a piece of the Purorāśa for the Acchavaka.
12.25.12	The Agni-dhr eats the remnants of the oblations.
12.25.13	Here, the cutting of the branches of the Savanīya trees, the conduct of the horses, the touching of the Veda by the sacrificer within the altar, the offering of the paste of barley grains, the Veda-recitation by the wife, the sweeping of the Praṇītā vessels, the placing of the Upaveṣa, and the releasing of the skull are performed.
12.25.14	Because these do not lead to any special or incidental superiority.
12.25.15	Another view is that they should be performed.
12.25.16	The Hotṛ obtains the share by means of the Vasat-call.
12.25.17	The Adhvaryu obtains the share by the Homa and Abhiṣava.
12.25.18	They also obtain the share by means the Samakhyāna.
12.25.19	The Hotṛ consumes all the cups once.
12.25.20	One's own cup twice.
12.25.21	The Hotrkas consume their own cups twice.
12.25.22	The Adhvaryu makes them eat again as before, those who have eaten.
12.25.23	At the end, the others.
12.25.24	They make those who have eaten and have been made to swell, swell further, with the verse, "Do thou swell, do thou be united."
12.25.25	These are the Nārāśaṃsa verses.
12.25.26	The first two Savanas have two Nārāśamsa verses each, and the third Savana has one Nārāśamsa verse.
12.25.27	They place those who have eaten, and have been made and have been made further to swell, under the southern Havirdhana cart, on the ground.
12.26.1	The Acchāvāka sits down outside the Sadas, in front of his own Dhishnya.
12.26.2	He places a piece of the sacrificial cake on it and says, "O Acchāvākas, speak what you have to say."
12.26.3	When he knows that, he says to the Brahmanas, "Call us," and then the Hotr informs him, "This Acchāvāka desires to be called. O Hotr, call him."
12.26.4-6	"Having taken it, having gone to the Āhavanīya fire, having announced, and having been announced, he instructs (the Adhvaryu) to offer, saying, 'O Acchavāka, offer!' Having offered at the Vasat and Anuvṣat calls, he takes the oblation for eating."
12.26.7	He does not eat it, nor does he desire to offer it in it. If he were to desire to offer it, he should say, "Eat it."
12.26.8	Having eaten and nourished, the two cups are placed between the Hotṛ and the Agnīdhra. The chanting of the Rtugrahas is performed.
12.26.9	They are taken from the Dronakalaśa and are not offered.
12.26.10	The former (Adhvaryu) takes the remaining (Soma) in the remaining (cups).
12.26.11	The Adhvaryu takes first, the Pratiprasthātṛ takes last. "He takes (the Soma) with the formula, "Thou art taken with a portion for offering; thou art sweet."
12.26.12	Some recite the formula, "For thee who art sweet, for thee who art sweet."
12.26.13	All the portions are taken from the front.
12.26.14	The Adhvaryu and the Pratiprasthātṛ should not go to each other's side. The Adhvaryū goes to the right side and the Pratiprathatṛ to the left side.
12.26.15	He (the Adhvaryu) goes beyond the door.
12.26.16	As the Adhvaryu enters, the Pratiprasthatṛ seizes him by the cup; as he comes out, by the vessel.
12.27.2	The first and the last are taken together in the twelve.
12.27.3	The first and the last together are given in the thirteen and fourteen.
12.27.4	So also in the fourteen, the first and the last.
12.27.5	The thirteenth and fourteenth are taken together with the formula, "O Anaspatiya, do thou."
12.27.6	The Adhvaryu and the Pratiprasthātṛ, having known that the householder has said, "Obeisance to Indra-Agni", they both send forth the Pratiprasthatṛ with the instruction, "O Hotr, do this offering."
12.27.7	Thus the householder at his own instruction.
12.27.8	The Adhvaryu takes up the Indra-Agni cup with the formula, "Indra-Agni have come to the pressed Soma" and the Prati-prasthātṛ carries the cup for eating the share.
12.27.9	Both Adhvaryus partake of the Vasat-utterance as per rule.
12.27.10	All the Soma-cups having been consumed, the rinsing is done in the Marjālīya vessel.
12.27.11	Taking this vessel, the Adhvaryu sits down facing east in the Sadas-hole and murmurs the formula "O gods, do you listen" while preparing to respond to the chanting.
12.27.12	"O Adhvaryu, O Hotṛ, O Somas!" Thus, turning to the right, he responds to the Hotṛ's invocation, saying "O Somas, rejoice!" or "O Somas rejoice!"
12.27.13	Holding the Rtu-vessel, standing towards the west in the Sadas-pit, he responds, bowing down.
12.27.14	"O Somas, O Hotṛ!" Thus, in the middle of the verses, and "O Somas!" at the end, the Pranava is within.
12.27.15	The Hotṛ and the Udgātṛ chant alternately, "Otha, Otha, Otha!"
12.27.16	The Ardvīci does not omit the half-verse, nor does he respond to it.
12.27.17	In the two invocations, "Shonsa, Shonsa" and "Otha, Utha," he performs both.
12.27.18	Having responded to the Sastra, the Adhvaryu takes up the Grahas and the Camasadhvaryus take up the cups.
12.27.19	Having called out, and having been called back, he instructs the Udgātṛ to recite the Sāman at the Uktā-recitation. At the Vasat-utterance, he offers.
12.28.1	They shake the Nārāśaṃsa-cups. The Vasat-utterances and the Anuvṣat-utterances follow.
12.28.2	The portions are taken.
12.28.3	The taking of the Graha and the Nārāsaṃsa-cups has been explained. The following are the means of taking, filling and pouring down the Nārāṃsaṃsa-cup.
12.28.4	He takes the Visvadevya cup with the formula, "Omasas are held by the Rsis." The taking and placing of the cup is done with this formula.
12.28.5	He recites the Stotra with the two verses, "Asarji, Asarji."
12.28.6	The sacrificer murmurs the formula, "Idaya, Hin kuru, Prati stuhi, Stuhi, May I be protected by her." He also recites the four Hotr verses.
12.28.7	And when the Hotr is being praised, he mutters the Caturhotar.
12.28.8	It is known that the Hotr recites with the Ajya after explaining the Caturhotars.
12.28.9	The Sastra-pratigraha and the Graha-nara-samsa are like the Indra-Agni-sutra, except for the Rtu-patra.
12.28.10	All the cups are to be consumed.
12.28.11	You are taken with the Upayāma formula. I take you agreeable to Mitra and Varuna, for the gods, for the divine life, for the Utkhyas, for the Uktbya life. Having taken the third ladleful with the Utkhya ladle, he places it with the formula, "This is your womb, for Mitra and Varuna." Having placed it, he touches the pot with the formula, “You are the offering again.”
12.28.12	The chief cups are those of the Maitrāvaruṇa. He takes them and consumes them.
12.28.13	Having brought the chief cups of the Maitrāvaruna, he performs the Stotra as before.
12.28.14-15	Having praised as before, the Adhvaryu takes up the weapons and the cups. Having caused to announce, and having announced in return, he instructs (the Hotṛ) to recite the Uktha-verse, saying, "Recite the Uktha of the Soma-offerings." At the Vaṣaṭ-utterance and the second Vaṣaṭ utterance, they offer; the portions are taken away.
12.28.16	For the gods thee, I fill thee with the life of the gods, for the life of the sacrifice. He places the main oblation in the fire.
12.29.1	If one desires that the Adhvaryu should dedicate himself to the fame of the sacrifice, it is said.
12.29.2	Thus the two subsequent rites are prescribed.
12.29.3	The Pratiprasthātṛ performs these two rites separately.
12.29.4	In the second cup, while reciting the verse "Indrāya tvā", he pours half of the remaining Ukthya portion. He touches the pot as before. He takes up the cups beginning with the cup for the Brahman-priest.
12.29.5	He offers the cup that has not been consumed with the Stotra.
12.29.6	The Pratiprasthātṛ does not consume the cup that has been raised.
12.29.7	He pours the main portion of the Soma.
12.29.8	"With Indra and Agni thee" (he says) at the third cup. The taking and placing of the cup is concluded. He takes up all the remaining Ukthya-cups, except the Sthalipaksha.
12.29.9	The Pūtabhṛt priest, having spread out the purifying grass in the northern direction, takes up the king from the Ādhavaniya vessel. Having taken up all the king, he pours the water from the vessels beginning with the Shavāka vessel. Having taken all the king, having cleansed the ten pitchers, he places them upside down.
12.29.10	He pours the remaining water into the principal vessel.
12.29.11	The Udgātṛs chant the Upaśaṃsā at the morning pressing, after having taken up the Sastra.
12.29.12	They proceed without haste at the two earlier pressings, but with haste at the third pressing.
12.29.13	When the pressing is over, he makes an offering with the formula, "May Agni protect us at the morning pressing."
12.29.14	He gives the order, "O Praśāstra, do you cause to press; do you cause to be pressed."
12.29.15	"He says, 'It moves.'
12.29.16	They move by that by which they move."
12.29.17	The morning pressing comes to an end.
13.1.1	The midday pressing is performed with the Abhiṣava.
13.1.2	Its procedure has been explained in the morning pressing.
13.1.3	Having sprinkled from the Hotr's goblet into the Vasatīvari vessels, he makes the Nigrābha offerings.
13.1.4	The two-deity-related seasonal offerings and the Darvihoma offerings are not performed.
13.1.5	The king is entrusted to the Gravastotra, who then gives him the crown.
13.1.6	The Gravastotra is sent away after the third verse.
13.1.7	The Mahaabhisava is performed in the same way.
13.1.8	But the Ghosa-va is different.
13.1.9	The participants chant "here, here" while performing the consecration.
13.1.10	In the middle of the second section of the excellent sprinkling, they place the large (bricks) with the formula, "Large, large."
13.1.11	At the highest pressing, at the pressing of the king, the Gravas, the Moon, Indra, they have spoken. They have chosen Indra for the highest pressing. From this world, from the lower world, from the sky, they have sent forth the well-being, the Brahmic lustre. They have sent forth the Brahmic lustre, they have slain the Raksases in battle, the Brahmic fee has been removed. The Pratiprasthātṛ praises the Gravas.
13.1.12	Having offered the Pasupurodāsa, he offers the Savanīya oblations along with the Payasyā.
13.1.13	Having performed that, he proceeds with the Savanīyas.
13.1.14	The Sviṣṭakṛt and the Iḍa are similar.
13.1.15	It is performed or not performed.
13.1.16	The Adhvaryu takes up the Grahas from the time of collection till the flow (of Soma).
13.2.1	The Sukra and the Amānu, then the Aggrayaṇa from the three flows.
13.2.2-3	Having taken the Utkhya cup, he takes the Marutvatīya cups. Some take the Utkhya in the middle and the Marutvatlya on both sides.
13.2.4	The Adhvaryu first takes the Marutvatīya cup with his own cup for the Maruts, with the formula, "To Indra and Maruts." The Pratiprasthātṛ takes the next one with his own cup, with the formula "To Indra and the Maruts."
13.2.5	The cups taken by them are of different deities. Some people say that they are of the same deity.
13.2.6	The wealth of those who are united in a single cause is not exhausted. This is the first verse.
13.2.7	Having worshipped with the Graha-cups and the Srita-cups, and having offered to the seven Hotras, they proceed to the Madhyamdina Pavamana, as in the Bahispavamana.
13.2.8	The path is Trishtubha, the deity is Rudra. The path is the Vrika, the path which is not to be crossed. May we prosper by the path of Rudra. This is the variation in the proceeding.
13.2.9	Having gone to the north of the Havirdhāna, having gone around by the right side the Mārgālīya Dhishṇiya, having entered the Sadas by the eastern door, the Adhvaryu and the sacrificer stand in front of the Hotr, or by the right or left side of the Praśāstṛ Dhishṇiya. The Udgātṛs chant the Madhyandina Pavamāna.
13.3.1	"He recites the formula, "For Jyotis, do you recite, do you praise, do you praise for her, may I be united with her." "He recites this before the Madhyamdina Pavamana. He explains the four Hotras or five Hotras. He recites, "For Jyotsna, do you recite..." He recites this while the Suyamana is being recited and the four Hotras and five Hotras. At the second Anvarohani of the Madhyama Stotriya, the Adhvaryu instructs, "Agnidh, spread out the fires, spread the sacrificial grass, decorate the cakes, Pratiprasthatar, come up with the curds-pot." The Agnidhra spreads out the fires,
13.3.2	The Pratiprasthātṛ takes up the Dadhi-gharma in the Agnidhra-chamber.
13.3.3	Having placed the ladle on the Udumbara wood, having taken curd with the formula, "As much as the heaven and earth," having poured clarified butter over it, having placed it on the Āgnīdhra fire with the formula, “May speech and mind unite with thee; may Prāṇa and Apāna unite with thee; May sight and hearing unite with thee; may Dakṣa and strength unite with thee; Ojas and Sahas unite with thee; life and old age unite with thee; Self and body unite with thee; thou art cooked, thou art cooked, for the cooked, for thee who art cooked." Having placed it on the Agnidhra fire, he says, "O Hotṛ, speak what is to be spoken by thee."
13.3.4	When he knows that it is cooked, or when he hears that it is cooked or when he knows that it has been cooked, then at that time having said, "The oblation is cooked," and having taken it, he goes to the Āhavanīya fire, announces, and when announced in return, he instructs.
13.4.1	"One should offer the cooked curds."
13.4.2	He offers with "To that Indra whom they call Varuna, whom they call Mitra, whom they call Satya, the deity of the gods, born of Tapas, to him I offer this Soma-juice. Svāhā!" At the Vasat-utterance he offers, and at the Anuvṣat-utterance, having offered, he takes the portion for eating.
13.4.3	Those who eat the Pravargya eat it.
13.4.4	The Anuvāka in the forest is the mantra for eating.
13.4.5	There is another view that it should not be in the Apurvarg.
13.4.6	Having eaten with the mantra "Mitra, the people, he who is in Mitra," they touch the navel region.
13.4.7	The procedure of the Savaniya offering has been explained.
13.4.8	"This much is different for the Madhyandina Sāman. For Indra, the Purorasa offerings." The instruction and bowing are as before.
13.4.9	Having taken the Idā-cup, while going to the Havirdhāna-shed, he instructs (the Hotr), "Recite after the reciting of the verses."
13.4.10	From the reciting of the Nārāśaṃsa verses till the placing of the Nārāsamsa cups.
13.4.11	There is a modification.
13.4.12	The Dasma cup is carried by the Acchavaka.
13.4.13	Having called out, and having been called back, he instructs (Hotr), "Reciting after the reciting of verses."
13.4.14	The call to the Soma-pressing is "O Soma-pressers, press the Soma for Indra."
13.4.15	There are six Hotr-priests.
13.4.16	They move from the Agnidhra-cup to the Acchavaka-cup.
13.4.17	These are the same Hotr-priesthoods at the third pressing.
13.5.1	When the Nārāśaṃsa verses have been recited, he gives away a large number of gifts, unlimited, twenty-seven, sixty, one hundred, twelve hundred, one thousand, or all the Vedas.
13.5.2	Or he gives away all the Vedas after dividing the eldest son.
13.5.3	He gives away a donkey and a thousand to one who possesses all the Vedas.
13.5.4	He gives a cow, a goat, a horse, a man, an elephant, a garment, a bed, a chariot, cooked rice, curds, beans, sesamum, barley, wheat, a donkey. These are the additional irregular gifts.
13.5.5	The number of cows is given.
13.5.6	Having gone to the south of the altar, having gone to the north of the Havirdhāna, having gone around the Agni-dhri-yagni, having entered the eastern door, having entered the house with the eastern ridge, having made the Yajamana and his advisers call out, having put down the ladle and the spoon, having sprinkled, he offers the southern oblations.
13.5.7	Having bound the gold and having placed it in ghee, he offers it on the Garhapatya with two verses, "May it go to heaven, O Lord of wealth." Having offered the gold, he takes it up.
13.5.8	"May it go to Heaven, O Lord of Wealth." Having offered the golden piece, he takes it.
13.5.9	"Holding both, I approach your form with my form." The Dakshina approaches.
13.5.10	Some prescribe the division after having taken it.
13.5.11	"May the knower of all things divide them for you." The sacrificer, having spread them on a black antelope skin, divides them into four parts. He gives the fourth part to the Adhvaryu.
13.5.12	He gives half of it to the Adhvaryu, a third to the Pratiprasthâtri, a fourth to the Nestr and a fourth to the Unnetr.
13.5.13	This is the rule for giving to the others.
13.6.1	He gives the golden vessel, the full vessel, the covering, and the universal thread to the Agnidh priest first.
13.6.2	To the Pratihartri priest last.
13.6.3	He should give the Dakshina to the Brahman priest as per the prescribed manner and not think about it.
13.6.4	Having given the limbs, he redeems them with that and that according to the signs, if he is going to give.
13.6.5	"O Hotṛ, I give you speech; I redeem it with this (cow)."
13.6.6	Thus to the Brahman, the mind; to the Adhvaryu, the breath; to the Udgātṛ, the eye; to the Hotṛ priests, the ear; to the Camasādhvaryus, the limbs; to the Prasarpaka priests, the hair; to the Sadasyas, the body.
13.6.7	Except for the fees to the Camasādhrus, Prasarpakas and Sadasyas.
13.6.8	With his right hand holding the gold, he carries the Garhapatya in front, the Sadas behind, between the Agnidhra and the Sadas. He releases it on the path going towards the north.
13.6.9	"He says, "This is your gift, O Agni." He releases it towards the south."
13.6.10	Similarly, when the rites are performed together or separately, he offers at the Agnidhra with the words, "O Agni, lead."
13.6.11	If a chariot, a garment, or a robe is given, or if it is to be given, then the second verse is recited: "He spread out the sky in the forests." If a man or an elephant is given, or is to be given,
13.6.12	"He gives gold to the first Ātreya, saying, 'May I be blessed today.' He gives it to the second or third Ātreya.
13.6.13	If he is not available, he should give it to one who belongs to the Ātreya lineage and is learned in the Vedas.
13.6.14	Having taken the gold, he says, 'May you go to the gods with our gifts.' Having followed the gold, he returns to the assembly and looks at it, saying, 'Look at the gold.' If he divides it after taking it away,
13.6.15	He should give the oblations to the Adhvaryus who are seated within the assembly and are seated on the sacrificial grass.
13.6.16	He salutes the priests.
13.6.17	It is known that one should approach the one who has come to the sacrifice.
13.7.1	He gives to the approchers who are seated to the right of the assembly.
13.7.2	Not outside the altar.
13.7.3	Not when asked.
13.7.4	Not out of fear.
13.7.5	Not to Kanva and Kashyapa.
13.7.6	Not to a non-Brahmin.
13.7.7	One should not give to a non-Brāhmaṇa who knows, but one should give to a Brāhmaṇa who does not know. One obtains that knowledge which he knows.
13.7.8	One should give to a student who knows, or to a non-sacrificer who has approached, that knowledge which he possesses.
13.7.9	The one by which he goes to the highest state, that he obtains by that deity.
13.7.10	The one by which the learned Brāhmaṇa attains heaven, that he obtains.
13.7.11	One should give to one whom others do not desire, to one whom one hates, along with other wealth.
13.7.12	If one were to let loose the cattle after having given away the Dakṣiṇā, or if one were to take it back, one should become a thief and go away.
13.7.13	If he thinks that the gift is not to be given, he should recite this verse: "This is not for me to be given." He should give a cow to a brahmin.
13.7.14	When the Maruts are mentioned, then it is not to be offered and not to be accepted.
13.7.15	When the Anūbandhyāvapat has been offered, they should give and receive in return.
13.7.16	Having taken the southern (gifts), he places the horns of the black antelope in the Catvāla. The remedy for the head of the deer is on the top of the Rgūṣya. He removes the disease of the field with the horn. The deer has gone away from you with its four feet. It has bound the knot with the horn, which is tied to its heart. What is tied to its mind? With these two.
13.7.17	The Rishis have made Yajnapati their lord.
13.8.1	Having offered the five oblations to Visvakarman, one proceeds with the Marutvatiya hymns.
13.8.2	"The two invitations are with and without the Vasat call. The Adhvaryu takes the third cup for Indra-Maruts, with the formula, "For Indra-Maruts I invite; for Indra-Marut I pray." The Pratiprasthātṛ carries the cup for Indra- Maruts. Both the Adhvaryus consume the oblation.
13.8.3	Having taken this vessel, he offers the Sastra-pratigraha and the Grahanarasamsa offerings as in the case of Indra and Agni.
13.8.4	He takes the Maheendra Soma with the Sukra vessel, reciting the verse, "The great Indra who is the source of strength." The Grahanasadanau verses are recited.
13.8.5	The Stotra for Maheendra is performed.
13.8.6	The Sastra-pratinigraha and the Graha-narasamsa offerings are made as in the case for Visvedevas.
13.8.7	The Atigrahyas are invoked for Maheendra.
13.8.8	The Pratiprasthātṛ takes the Agnēya (cake) along with the Adhvaryu, the Neṣṭṛ takes the Aindra (cake), and the Unnetr takes the Saurya (cake).
13.8.9	The Pratiprasthātṛ, having offered the Agni-tejāsvī (oblation), says, "Thou art the knower of brilliance." The Neṣṭṛ, having offered Indra-ojasvī (oblation) says, "Thou are the knower of strength." The Unneṣṭṛ, offering Sūrya-bhrajāsvī (offering) says, "thou art the knower if wealth."
13.8.10	Having offered them, they eat them with their faces turned away, saying, "May I have wisdom in you." Each one eats according to his own ritual.
13.8.11	In the same way, the Ukthya verses.
13.8.12	The only difference is that everywhere it says "Indra to you" and "Indra to us". The offering and the pressing are performed together.
13.8.13	Having offered the Uktha-cup, having offered the cup of Soma, having offered the cups of the Maruts, having offered the Vasat-cup, having recited the Sastra at the Madhyamdina pressing, having offered the oblation at the conclusion of the pressing, he offers the oblation at each pressing.
13.8.14	The invitation and the moving forward are similar.
13.8.15	The Madhyamdina pressings come to an end.
13.9.1	The third pressing begins with the Aditya-cup.
13.9.2	Having covered both the doors of the Havirdhāna, in the Veda-place, in the midst of many people.
13.9.3	If his enemy has entered, he should take it within the Veda-place.
13.9.4	But if the enemy is taken in the enemy-sacrifice, he should stand outside the Veda-place.
13.9.5	The Soma-graha which is taken in the Aditya-vessel from the Aditya-sthali, which is a mixture of two deities, is taken by him at times. "Thou art the strainer."
13.9.6	"Thou art the strainer at times." The curd is strained.
13.9.7	"The sacrifice is of the gods." Having again taken Soma, he says, "To Vivasvat, the sun." Having placed the stone for the Upāṃśusavana rite, he sprinkles it with that.
13.9.8	"With the heavenly rain, I sprinkle you." Having sprinkled with curd or milk, one who desires rain, takes up the stone.
13.9.9	If the drop of the newly-grasped (Soma) were to fall, there would be a heavy rain; if it were to fall after a long time, there would be no rain.
13.9.10	He does not settle it.
13.9.11	If one desires that the animals should be impregnated, one should grasp and look at the sun.
13.9.12	Placing the darbha grass or the hand on the ground, one rises, saying, "May the sun god protect me from the gods."
13.9.13	The sacrificer follows the sun with the formula, "I am beyond that."
13.9.14	"The poet extends the path of the sacrifice" - he carries (the oblations).
13.9.15	"From the ocean" - he mixes with darbha grass.
13.10.1	"Recite to the Adityas, to the beloved, to those who have a beloved abode, to those who are of a beloved vow, to the lords of the great ocean, to the overlords of the sky, to the Adityan, to the beloveds, to those who possess a beloved abode, and to those who are in a beloved vow, the lords of the vast ocean, the overlords of space." This is the invitation. "Recite to (the Adityas), recite to the Adityans."
13.10.2	"Those of thine, O Agni, are all the kindling-sticks," so he says, placing Darbha-grass in the Āhavanīya fire. He offers elsewhere, looking at the sun.
13.10.3	"Stretch out the earth," he should offer for one who desires rain.
13.10.4	One should not look back after offering.
13.10.5	Having placed the Āditya vessel in the Āyatanā, having poured the Āṃśu and Upāṃśu into the Upāṃśupātra, having poured them into the Rājīsa, they are like the Mahābiṣava at the morning pressing.
13.10.6	They sprinkle only the Rājīṣa.
13.10.7	The Payasyāvarja is the Savanīya.
13.10.8	Having churned the head of the wife in the Āgnīdhra, he causes the Havirdhāna to be brought in by the other (wife). The one who has gone to glory goes by the former (wife).
13.10.9	The sacrificer goes by the former.
13.10.10	Having spread the strainer with four corners towards the north, the Pūtabhṛt priest, standing in front, facing west, together with the wife, lowers the head with four verses, "The gods have healed us for beauty."
13.10.11	The Graha-cup and the Āgrayana-cup are taken from the four streams.
13.10.12	After having taken the Āgrayana cup, he takes the second stream, the third from the Āditya-vessel, and the fourth from the meeting of the Āditya and Graha cups.
13.10.13	If the Utkhya is to be performed, he takes the Utkhya cup.
13.10.14	The taking of the cups from the four streams is concluded. The taking of the cups in the case of those who have only one stream is as prescribed. This is the beginning.
13.11.1	The path of the Adityas is the path of the sun. One should recite, "May I be well by the path of the Aditvas." This is a variation in the recitation. "For life, O Hina, I praise her. For her, I praise her." This is what the sacrificer murmurs before the Pavamana of the Arbhava. He explains either the five or seven Hotars. "For life I praise her. I praise her. May I be protected by her." This is also what he murmurs while the five or seven Hotrs are being praised. He murmurs this also while the middle Stotriya is being praised. The Adhvaryu instructs at the end of the praise, "Agnidh, spread the fires. Spread the sacrificial grass." "Adorn the oblations." "O Pratiprasthata, exchange with the animal."
13.11.2	Here, having moved the Dhishnya fires burning with the wooden chips, one should not sprinkle them. Sprinkling is done above.
13.11.3	Having cooked the oblations, one undertakes the Paashuka rite beginning with "Srita havishamitah" (RV 10.9.1).
13.11.4	One carries the Ida to the right or left of the Havirdhana.
13.11.5	When the Ida has been eaten, one places the Savaniya and other oblations until the Narshansa oblations.
13.11.6	There the modification is for the third pressing, for Indra, the cakes. The instruction begins with "Indra".
13.12.1	At the time of proceeding, the Adhvaryu takes up the Hotr's goblet and the goblets of the Camasādhvaryus.
13.12.2	Having called out and having been called back, he instructs (the Hotr) for the third pressing, saying, "For the pressing of Bhṛma, Vibhu, Prabu, Vāja, Savitr, Brihaspati, Visvedevas, the fierce, the one with blessings, Soma for Indra." This is the instruction.
13.12.3	Then he offers the cups.
13.12.4	When the Vasat-call is made, he offers with "To the hawk, the finder, svāhā." When the Anuvṣat-call is pronounced, he offers with “Salutations to the self-bestowed, svāhā.”
13.12.5	Having offered, he takes the oblation.
13.12.6	He proceeds thus with the subsequent ones.
13.12.7	He offers with the preceding mantras at the Vasat-calls and with the subsequent mantras at the Anuvṣaṭ-calls.
13.12.8	Having offered all the oblations, he recites the verse, "May the Hotr be satisfied."
13.12.9	When the Nārāśamsa oblations have been placed, the Camasins go to their respective bowls and offer three pieces of Purorasa each, reciting the verses, "This is yours, and those who follow you."
13.12.10	They recite the verses, "Salutations to you, O fathers, for the drink."
13.12.11	The sacrificer recites the six Hotr verses.
13.12.12	"They stand with the formula, "O Prajapati, these are not yours."
13.13.1	"He takes up the Savitr draught from the Agrayaṇa vessel with the verse, "O Vama, O Savitr today..." and does not place it down."
13.13.2	The two announcements are, "Do you recite to Savitr, the divine Savitr."
13.13.3	One does not respond with Vasat.
13.13.4	With this very same (cup) which has a remnant, the Pūtabhṛt graha is taken.
13.13.5	"Thou art taken with a motive; thou art well-protected." The taking and placing (of the cup) are done.
13.13.6	There is no Stotra.
13.13.7	The Vaishvadev graha is taken in return.
13.13.8	"Pra Dyaus and Pṛthivi have increased the truth by sacrifices." The taking in return is done with the Abhijña and the Ubhayatamodā verses, "Madā madā, as if madā, madā as if madā."
13.13.9	The word “modam” is used in the sense of “modam iva” or “modam iva otham”.
13.13.10	Some people use the word “modam iva”, “modam iva atham” and “modam iva modam” in a hidden manner.
13.13.11	It is used up to the end of the discourse.
13.13.12	The Pratiprasthātṛ, having ascertained, releases them with the formula, "May the winds release them here." Having released them through the other door, having taken them out, having washed them in the Marjālīya (Mānuṣa) mound, having taken them back, he places them in their respective places.
13.13.13	The Grahas and Nārāśaṃsas are like the Vaiśvadeva rite.
13.13.14	He commences the procedure of the Soma-charu.
13.13.15	The rite of the cake has been explained.
13.13.16	Having roasted, he proceeds towards the east, reciting the Somiya verse.
13.13.17	He first pours down with his hand, and then with the ladle. This is the order.
13.13.18	Having poured down from the right side, he pours clarified butter over it. Having gone around along the north, standing facing the south, having announced, and having been announced in return, he instructs, "Recite the Somiya verse."
13.13.19	At the Vasat-call, he offers in the southern half.
13.13.20	He anoints the Soma-cup with clarified butter on both sides, or on one side.
13.13.21	Having called out and having been called out, he directs (the Hotṛ) to offer with the formula, "Do thou offer clarified butter."
13.13.22	Having offered at the Vasat- call, having returned, having filled the rice with clarified butter,
13.14.1	they take it to the Udgātṛs.
13.14.2	The Udgātṛs look at him. That is why they say, "What is that here?"
13.14.3	One who does not see his own self should look at it after anointing it with ghee.
13.14.4	One who is absent-minded should look at it, saying, "My mind has gone away."
13.14.5	Here again, having removed the Dhishnyas from the burning of the splinters, he sprinkles them with ghee taken in eight portions.
13.14.6	If he were to say, "Please pour the Agni-dhrīya (oblation) again," then taking it up with nine spoonfuls, he pours the Agni-dhyriya at the beginning and end, and keeps it with the Dhishnya oblations and the remaining ghee.
13.14.7	"You are taken with the Upāṁshu-graha for the son of Brihaspati." Taking the Pātnīvata from the Āgrayana with the Upāmshu-vessel, he does not place it.
13.14.8	The Adhvaryu, having recited the Vyāghāraṇa, having called out to the Pratiprasthātṛ, having been called out to by the Pratiprasthatṛ, instructs the Agnīdhra to offer the Pātnīvata cake. He says, "O Agnīdhra, do thou offer the Pāṭnīvata cake." At the Vaṣaṭ-call he offers.
13.14.9	He does not make an Anuvṣṭ-call.
13.14.10	One may make an Anuvṛṣṭi-call in a low voice.
13.14.11	Then the Adhvaryu, having ordered the fires, approaches the place of the Nestr, the Nestr approaches the place of his wife, the Udgātṛ approaches the Hotr's goblet, the Hotr approaches the Dhruva goblet, the Udgātr approaches the Hotr, the Hotr gives the Dhruva to the Udgātā, the Udgätṛ gives the Dhruvā to the Hotr, then the Hotr gives it to the Pratiprasthātṛ, the Pratiprasthatṛ gives it to the Agnidh, the Agnidh gives it to the Nestr, then the Nestr gives it to the Udgätā, the Udagätṛ gives it to his wife, the Nestr gives the Dhruvà to the Udgāta, the Udgäta gives it to his own wife, the Nester gives the Dhruvä to the Udgätr, the Udgata gives it to his Pratiprasthätṛ, the Prātiprasthätṛ gives it back to the Nester, the Nester then gives it to the Hotr.
13.14.12	They do as they are told.
13.14.13	The Agnidh, having gone between the Nester and the Dhishnya, eats.
13.14.14	The Hotr, having recited the formula "Agni-pita" etc., offers the oblation.
13.15.1	One should not sit on the seat, for if one sits on the seat, one becomes a eunuch.
13.15.2	Taking the cups of the Hotr and other priests, he takes all the Soma juice and presses it ten times in the pot. Then he pours it down.
13.15.3	He performs the Stotra of the Yajñāyajñiya hymn.
13.15.4	They kindle the Dhishnya fires.
13.15.5	Those who are to be covered with ears or with the Avakarna (mantra) should praise with the Yagyasya Yagniya (Sutra).
13.15.6	Those who have fallen behind should all sing the Agnistoma.
13.15.7	The sacrificer describes the seven Hotras.
13.15.8	"He makes the Udgata recite the Patni-sankhya (mantra) up to the three Stotriya verses, saying, "He has gone to the gods."
13.15.9	The wife moves forward with her right thigh bare, with the two thighs facing each other.
13.15.10	Some say, one should move forward with the thighs.
13.15.11	One should throw it far above, for the sake of the disclosure of the womb, for the birth of the unborn chief.
13.15.12	One recites the Agni-Marut hymn facing the fire.
13.15.13	"The waters are firm, the waters are bountiful," thus he recites, knowing the waters, and then recites in response.
13.15.14	"This is indeed sweet, this is indeed honey," thus he recits, knowing both, and then recits in response. "Let us rejoice, let us rejoice," thus he recitcs until the end of the recitation.
13.15.15	The sacrificer does not urinate during the recitation of Dhruva, because of the removal.
13.16.1	"Thou art the past, thou art the future." Having looked at the Dhruva, the Pratiprasthātṛ, having taken it in his hands, says, "I take thee in the embrace of heaven and earth." Having taken it in his hand, he says, "May all the gods, the Vaishvanaras, spread thee." Having taken the Dhruva in the Dhruva vessel, he pours it into the Hotr's vessel, while sitting facing the east.
13.16.2	The Avanyā is to be recited before the Ukthya, in the middle or at the end.
13.16.3	"Or, may the serpent of the earth listen to us, the one-footed goat." This is to be recited when the verse of the Vaishvadevya is being recited.
13.16.4	Or when the Pari-dhāniyā is being recited. It is to be recited once.
13.16.5	In the middle or at last.
13.16.6	Having offered the third pressing, one says, "The Uktha is for Indra."
13.16.7	At the time of the Pracaraṇa, the Adhvaryu takes up the Hotr's goblet and the Camasadhvaryus take up the goblets. Having caused to announce and having been announced, he instructs (the Hotr) with the words, "Recite the eulogy of the Soma offerings." At the Vaṣaṭ-utterance and the second Vaṣaṭ utterance, they offer. The portions are taken.
13.16.8	The Adhvaryu consumes the Hotr's goblet, saying, "Thou art the best, the most beloved of the rays, the most agreeable to the gods. The gods have entered thee, O Su-bha. Thou art the shining one, thou art the shining one. Thou art the heroic, thou art the youthful, thou art the vow, thou art the self, thou art the protector. I consume thee, the shining one, the shining one. The heroic, the youthful, the vow, the self, the protector, the Shudra and the noble one."
13.16.9	"Just as you are the all-seeing Sun, so may I be the all-seeing one." The sacrificer approaches the Sun.
13.16.10	"Give me life and strength; may it come to me." He says this to the Ahavaniya fire.
13.16.11	He takes the name of whatever he desires.
13.16.12	"The Agni-bearer brings the sacrificial embers." He undertakes this and other ritual acts related to the Paashuka rite.
13.17.1	When the boundary stones are struck, the leader takes the boundary stones.
13.17.2	Having taken up the entire Āgrayana-graha in the Dronakalaśa with the formula, "Thou art taken up with a support. Thou art Harivaha," he does not place it down. Having cooked the Dhānās with many grains, having placed them on the head and having gone out, he says, "Do thou recite for Indra Harivaha; do thou recite for Indra who is going to be Harivaha." These are the two announcements.
13.17.3	Having offered the oblations with the formula, "O Hari, O Hari, the oblations of Hari", having offered the oblations at the Vasat and Anuvṣat calls, he takes the oblation.
13.17.4	Having placed the Dronakalaśa beyond the northern altar, having offered the Upāhuta oblation to the Unnetṛ, all of them consume the oblation of Hariyajana with the formula, “O god Soma, you are the first among the gods.”
13.17.5	They do not break the oblations. They make the low places. Having made the low places, they drink.
13.17.6	They consume it with the form of the desire.
13.17.7	Having consumed it with the formula, "For the field, for prosperity, for wealth, for nourishment," they recite.
13.17.8	Having filled the northern altar, having placed the remaining (bricks) on it, they stand by the Ahavaniya with the formula, "Whatever evil has befallen me from my self,
13.17.9	"You are the remover of the sin committed by gods, you are the remover of sin committed by men, you are the destroyer of sin committed by ancestors, you are the destructor of sin committed by oneself, you are the Destroyer of sin committed by others, you are the Remover of sin committed by the sin itself." Having placed the pieces on the Ahavaniya fire, and having placed the tender Darbha grass in the remaining part of the oblation, having made it sharp with the Samploma, having spread it like a ladle, having placed it on the other side of the sacrificial post, the Camasins, having taken their respective Soma-juices, consume them with the Avagheya formula, having washed it in water, saying, "O Soma, the god..."
13.18.1	I send you to the ocean, may you go to your own birthplace. May our heroes be unharmed, may they not be lost to us. May you, O Maruts, come to our shade, to Vishnu, the one who is sprinkled with the waters, for the sake of offspring, for the one who praises. You protect us with your blessings always. Having offered the remaining oblations inside the altar, I have done the Dadhikravan. At the Agnidhra, they consume the drops of curd.
13.18.2	Both the poets are young, true to their duty, the lords of truth. O lord of truth and duty, we shall now separate our friendships. The Tānūnaptrins separate their friendships.
13.18.3	The Patnisamyājas are like animals.
13.18.4	Having taken the nine-fold portion on the spread out Veda, the ladle, Dhātā Rati stands above the altar, standing upright, and offers the nine Samitsya-yajus offerings continuously.
13.18.5	If one wishes, "May he be worse," one should offer each of them separately, standing crookedly with the spoon, or in a quarrel.
13.18.6	"This is the third pressing of the sages," one offers the oblation when the pressing is over.
13.18.7	Here the Vājasaneyins prescribe the placing of the girdle and the black antelope skin in the Cātvāla, saying, "May the earth be mine, may the sky be mine."
13.18.8	The sacrificer, reciting the Jagatī verses, "I conquer the battle with Agni, the god," proceeds in the steps of Viṣṇu.
13.18.9	May I conquer all the enemies with all the gods, with the Anushtubh metre, with the Ekavimsa stoma, with the Vairaja Saman, with the Vasatkara, with the thunderbolt. May I strike down all my enemies, may I strike them down, may I drive them away, may I destroy them in this world of the earth, he who hates us and whom we hate. With Vishnu's step may I step over them. Some recite the fourth verse thus.
13.18.10	The sacrificer stands by the Ahavaniya fire reciting the verse, "We are united with Indra."
13.19.1	He begins the rites of the Avabhrtha.
13.19.2	Having performed the Veda-recitation and spreading the fires, he performs the rites of washing the hands etc. The arrangement of the vessels is as per the prescribed order.
13.19.3	At the time of offering, he offers a single-pot offering to Varuna.
13.19.4	Having taken up four spoonfuls of clarified butter, and having adorned the Varuna-vessel, he places it on the northern half of the altar.
13.19.5	Here the sacrificer, while digging out the Udumbara-post, says, "May the nourisher, the lord of nourishment, may he, the nourisher, nourish me here, may he, lord of nourishment, bestow nourishment, food and strength upon us."
13.19.6	He places the skin of the animal for sacrifice on the wooden plank for pressing, and all the Soma-stained things between the two mounds of the Catvāla, or on the northern side of the Vedi, on the wooden stool of Udumbara wood, except the four Soma-vessels.
13.19.7	The sacrificer throws the black antelope skin into the Catvāla with the verse, "By thy grace, O Varuna, I shall be free from bondage."
13.19.8	If one has to perform the consecration again, one should perform it with the same (materials). If one has lost the materials, one should make them with the same (material). The ladle is for pouring the oblation.
13.19.9	Some say that one should give it to one's son who is a student after rising from the Avabhṛtha.
13.19.10	One should offer the Avabhṛth oblation with the verse, "O Agni, giver of life, accepting the oblation," and also with the verse, "Avabhṛtha, the ladle."
13.20.1	Homage to Rudra, the lord of the house, the protector, the one who runs away, the one who is in the garden, the one who goes to the highest, the one who revolves, the one who reverses, the one who protects, and the one who is praised.
13.20.2	The king Varuna has indeed made a great (mistake), they say when going towards the altar. From the sacrificial post.
13.20.3	The Prastotar recites the Samaveda.
13.20.4	All the priests together with their wives chant the Nidhanas three times. Having reached the second half of the path, they reach the third.
13.20.5	It is prescribed everywhere.
13.20.6	All directions are mentioned as the Avabhrtha-going. This is the beginning of the rites.
13.20.7	Does one offer the Anuyajas with the Varuna-rite or not?
13.20.8	With five, seven, or thirteen Sūmi-formulas containing the word "drops", he sprinkles the Rgīsa-grass with curd and the branch of the Udumbara tree.
13.20.9	Having struck it, he should offer it.
13.20.10	Having filled the ladle with Rgīsa grass, he sprinkles it in water, saying, "Your heart is in the ocean, in the water."
13.20.11	Then he should touch or consume the drops that flow out, saying, "O Soma, the god, you are washed in water."
13.20.12	"I send you to the ocean," he says, and cuts off all the Soma-stained objects at the Avabhrtha.
13.20.13	"The noose of Varuna is cut off," says the sacrificer, loosening the girdle. "I am binding this," says the wife, loosening the yoke.
13.20.14	Here, the sacrificial thread and the garment are worn, the net and the black antelope skin are worn in the water.
13.21.1	Having recited the verse "The goddesses are the waters" while entering the water, the sacrificer recites the verse "The waters and plants are friendly" while entering the waters. The wife and the sacrificer bathe with their heads and without touching each other.
13.21.2	Running on each other's backs.
13.21.3	Whatever one has desired with the mind, with speech, with the breath, with the eye, with the ear, with semen, with the union of the two, with the self, the worlds have taken from the waters, the brilliance, the power. The waters are the liberators of the penance of the consecration. The waters are liberators of the brilliance, the strength in me. Whatever one has desired by means of the Rg Veda, the Sama Veda, the Yajur Veda, the skin of animals, the oblation, by means of the Vedas, the plants, the trees, the worlds have been taken from the waters. The brilliance, the power, the waters are the liberator of the penance of consecration. The waters liberate the brilliance, the energy in me. By which the Brahman, by which the Kshatra, by which Indra-Agni, by which Prajapati, by which Soma, by which Varuna, by which the king, by which the Vishva devas, by which the Rishis, by which the vital airs, the worlds have attained from the waters, brilliance, power, the waters liberate the penance of consecration, the waters liberate brilliance, the energy of me. Thus three times, the one who is to be offered should offer with the Anjali. The one who is to offer should say, "May the one who is superior to me offer. Your praises, O Soma, are the most prosperous. The Stotras are praised. The Soma-pressers are victorious, the Soma-pressers who are victorious in battle, the Soma-drinkers who are victorious, the ones who are victorious in battles, the ones who have attained the wealth of the Soma-drink, the ones who attain the wealth of the battles, the ones whose battles are inexhaustible, the ones who conquer the battles, the Soma-drinking ones who are victorious, those who are victorious in the battles, the victorious ones, the ones who win the battles, the winners of the battles, those who are to be offered, the ones who offer, the ones who will offer, the ones to be offered, those who are offering, those who will offer, those who are being offered, those who will be offered, those to be offered, and those who will be to be offered." Thus the one who is being offered should instruct.
13.22.1-2	May they come forth, bestowing progeny, life, and splendour, may they be in both houses, the gods and the Asuras, may they be united with the Gayatri metre. May the Rsis, the divine seers, be united with the metres. May the Rishis, the divine seerders, be united. May the Rshis, the divine seer-sages, be united. Let the Rshis be united. May they be united. May we be united. May our friends be united. May those who are friendly to us be united. May all beings be united. May I be united. May my friends be united. Let those who are friendly towards us be united. Let all beings be united with the Rshis. May the Rshi-s be united. May there be union. May there be unity. May there be harmony. May there be concord. May there be peace. May there be prosperity. May there be happiness. May there be welfare. May there be good fortune. May there be auspiciousness. May there be bliss. May there be joy. May there be delight. May there be pleasure. May there be satisfaction. May there be contentment. May there be abundance. May there be plenty. May there be fullness. May there be sufficiency. May there be success. May there be victory. May there be triumph. May there be conquest. May there be supremacy. May there be pre
13.22.3	The sacrificer wears the Soma-crown, the wife the Soma-garment, and the Soma-covering.
13.22.4	They are given to the Adhvaryu at the Upavasatha.
13.22.5	Having gone up from the darkness, having approached the sun, having gone to the end of the water, having gone to where Varuna's noose is, with the water-pot in hand, having placed the Udgātṛ in front, they go without waiting, saying, "The Soma of the waters," "The waters," "The Soma of waters," "The water," "The waters." "The waters," they say, "The waters," those who are not waited upon, "I am not waited upon." "I am not waiting upon Yama." "I am waiting upon Yama." Here we are, we have come back to that. We are alive, we have brought life from the living. We are free from debt here, we are free from debt there, we are free in the third world. We are free. Those who go to the gods, those who go to the fathers, may all be free from debt and may they come to the path.
13.22.6	Having placed the kindling wood in the Ahavaniya fire, he follows the water with the formula, "May we prosper through your prosperity."
13.23.1	The Prayaniya and Udayaniya (sacrifices) are performed on the same day.
13.23.2	He cooks it in the same pot without removing the ashes. That is the sacrificial grass. That is the ladle.
13.23.3	They perform the rites at the door of the house.
13.23.4	In those very places, he offers Agni first, and the Svāstī of the Pathya as the last.
13.23.5	It has been said that these are the yajyas of the Prayaniya.
13.23.6	He offers the cow of Mitra-Varuna as the Anubandhya.
13.23.7	Its rites are like those of the animal sacrifice.
13.23.8-11	"Recite the offering-prayer for the fat of the cow to Mitra-Varuna." "Recite the prayer for the fat of cow to Mitra-varuna." "Recitation of the prayer for the offering of the fat of the animal to Mitra-Varuṇa." "Recitation for the offering of fat of the animal." "The two prayers are recited thus." "The two verses are recited thus." "The three Anubandhya verses are recited thus. Some recite thus." "Recite the Maitravaruni, the Vaishvadev and the Barhaspatya verses."
13.23.12	The two-formed Maitravaruni, the many-formed Vaishvadevi, the red Rohini, and the Bhaspati.
13.23.13	The Vaishvadevi is performed in a low voice in the middle.
13.23.14	One should not offer them everywhere, except at the Vajapeya, Rajasuya, Sattra, or Sahasra Sarva Veda.
13.23.15	One who desires, "May my sacrifice be complete and prosperous," should offer these three as concluding offerings.
13.23.16	When the Anūbandhyā oblation has been offered, the sacrificer shaves his hair and beard at the end of the southern half of the altar.
13.23.17	The Pasupurodāsa oblation of the Anūbandhya.
13.24.1	He offers the oblations to the goddesses.
13.24.2	Five oblations, namely, to Dhatri, a cake on twelve potshards,
13.24.3	In the pots in which Soma is placed, he cooks the four northern oblations.
13.24.4	The Svishtakrit is the same.
13.24.5	One who desires offspring should offer the Devaki oblation. These are the optional oblations.
13.24.6	At the Anubandhya (rite) one offers the Svāru oblation and removes the pain in the heart.
13.24.7	One proceeds in the steps of Vishnu.
13.24.8	For the king who is worthy of being a king, or for the Anubandhyā rite, one offers eight oblations to the gods, beginning with Agni, the lord of the house.
13.24.9-11	The Svishtakrit is common to all. The Bahvrcas recite the Maitravaruni offering of curds in place of the Anubandhya. The Hotri, seated in front of the Havirdhana, offers the oblations beginning with the Prayaga and ending with the Idas. Some recite the oblations beginning from the Prayaga and the Ajyabhaga. Some recite the oblations ending with the Idam. Some recite all the oblations.
13.24.12	He offers the oblations of the gods.
13.24.13	The Svishtakrit is common to both.
13.24.14	Having loosened the knots of the Sadas and Havirdhana, he places them outside the altar towards the north.
13.24.15	Taking a torch from the Ahavaniya, the sacrificer stands on the altar, reciting, "Whatever is the sin of idleness, whatever is the sin of not being known."
13.24.16	If he were to move as if mixed, he should offer the parched barley with the Anjali-sutra, reciting, "May the world be destroyed, may the world be destroyed."
13.24.17	With the three verses beginning with "From the fire of the world," he recites while inhaling smoke.
13.24.18	It is said, "For the arrangement of days."
13.24.19	Having recited the verses beginning with "This city of ours in the sky," he should recite as per the Brahmana.
13.25.1	Having placed the Veda on his lap, he sits in the Veda and recites the Atimocas.
13.25.2	Here some recite the Vishnu steps.
13.25.3	Having placed the Prajita (the sacrificial post) on the Salāmukhi (the altar), having gone to the second (altar) with the fallen glory, having gone to the east, having gone to heaven, we have come to this better place of rest. May the two heaven and earth be auspicious to us. May we move with the heroes, with the cattle, with the wealth, with the horses, with the strength, with the heroes. Having decided on the divine sacrifice, he begins the procedure of the Nirmanthya (the churning of fire) for the Udasanīya (the final oblation).
13.25.4	Having placed the fires, having performed the Veda, having strewn the fires, he performs the rites of washing the hands etc. The offering of the vessels is in accordance with the truth.
13.25.5	At the time of offering, he offers the Agniya cake on five potsherds or on eight potsherds. If it is on five potsherads, the Gayatri verses are the Samyajya verses. If it is an eight potsherd cake, the Pankti verses are the Samya jya verses.
13.25.6	The sacrificial animal is the Dakṣiṇā. The gold is the Dakṣinā.
13.25.7	The Iṣṭi comes to an end with the Vaiṣṇavī Pūrṇāhuti. In the place of the Udavasāniyā, they offer the Vājasneya.
13.25.8	Having filled the ladle with twelve spoonfuls, he offers standing above the altar with the verse, "This Viṣṇu has wandered."
13.25.9	When the Ratrst-sacrifice is concluded, he offers the evening Agnihotra at the proper time and the morning Agnihotra in the morning.
14.1.1	The Ukthya, Sodashin, Atiratra and Aptoryama are the modifications of the Agnistoma.
14.1.2	One desiring cattle should offer the Ukthya sacrifice, one desiring power the Sodashin, one desiring offspring the Atiratra, one desiring cattle the Aptogyama Atiratra. One desiring all desires should offer the Aptogyam Atiratra.
14.1.3	Their rites are like those of the Agnistoma.
14.1.4	The variations have been mentioned.
14.1.5	As the Sadas, the performance of the sacrifice, the Soma-purchasing animal, the Soma-vessel, etc.
14.1.6	If it is an Ukthya, then while taking up the cups for the Agniṣṭoma, he takes up the king from three groups of cups.
14.1.7	The Nestr goes to the place of the Adhvaryu. The Nestr makes the wife recite. The Udgātṛ takes up the Hotr's cup. The Dhruva is placed in the Hotr' s cup. The Udgätṛ makes the wife recite and makes her proceed. This is the instruction.
14.1.8	Having performed the Agniṣṭoma-cups, he takes up the Ukthya-cup in the manner of the morning pressing.
14.1.9	The first two cups are taken up with the formula, "For Indra and Varuna thee." The third one is taken up with the verse, "For Indra-Viṣṇu thee."
14.1.10	The Uddhatar (priest) should lead the king to the highest position. Having cleansed the ten pots, he should place them. This is the order given to the best group of priests.
14.2.1	"The Agnid (priest) should bring the sacrificial embers. This is the first Agniṣṭoma rite common to all the rites."
14.2.2	If one were to pour out the last group of the Sodashin cups, and were to pour out an extra king for one group of cups,
14.2.3	then there would be the Sodashin cup.
14.2.4	The last cup at the morning pressing is the Dhara cup.
14.2.5	At each pressing.
14.2.6	Now, if one were to take up the Ukthya from the first of the two former Savanas, before the Ukthya-cup of the last Savana, then one should take it up when all have proceeded to the third Savana, from the Aggrayanasavana.
14.2.7	Or, one should take it from the Aggrayaṇasavana itself at the third Savana for one desiring cattle.
14.2.8	One should not take it up at the Ukthya; or one should take it.
14.2.9	At the Atiratra for one desiring cattle, at the Atiratra of one desiring Brahmic glory.
14.2.10	One should take up (Soma) at the Agnistoma of a king.
14.2.11	He becomes one who is praised and praised.
14.2.12	"Stand up, O slayer of Vritra!" are the two verses for taking up and placing (the Soma).
14.2.13	Because no other one is born, who has entered all the worlds, the Prajapati, who is united with offspring, he moves in the three luminaries, he is the sixteen. This is Brahman, who is the seasonal one, Indra is known by name in the group. I praise you in your great assembly, O Indra, who is the Seasonal One. I seek your intoxicating drink, O Indra, which is drunk by the tawny ones. Indra, who is known by name, who anoints with ghee, which is charming, with the tawny ones, may your praise enter you, O Indra, the giver of tawny boons. Having recited these four verses, one should recite the following verse:
14.3.1	When the sun has entered the sign of Virgo, he recites the Stotra of the sixteen verses with gold.
14.3.2	It is performed in the place of the sacrificial grass.
14.3.3	They place a white horse in front, or one that is reddish-brown.
14.3.4	Otha, Mod, and Mad are connected together. Mod is like a Mad, and Otha is like a Mod. The Pratigara is in the Anushtubh metre.
14.3.5	Indra is the lord of lords, you are the lord of gods. Make me the lord of men, long-lived and radiant. Having offered, Indra and Varuna, the king, they ate his share first. I eat the share after them. May the speech of the Soma be pleased. He eats the sixteen-fold share. The goblets are like the sun.
14.3.6	The oblation-formula is in the Anushtubh metre.
14.3.7	The horse offered is reddish-brown or a mare.
14.3.8	If it is an Atiratra, then having taken up sixteen cups, he makes the king to exceed from the group of thirteen cups.
14.3.9	Having performed with the Sodashin, he performs with the night-courses.
14.3.10	The first group is led by the Hotr's goblet, the second by the Maitrāvaruṇa's goblet, third by the Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin's goblet, and fourth by the Acchāvāka's goblet.
14.3.11	He offers the principal goblets with the formula, "To Indra, to Apishavaras."
14.3.12	The night is dedicated to Indra.
14.3.13	At every offering he bows down with the formula, “Anushtubh is the metre.”
14.3.14	The Adhvaryu performs the first two groups of rites, the Pratiprasthātṛ the second two.
14.3.15	This is the first sequence.
14.3.16	The second and third sequences are similar.
14.4.1	Then the Pratiprasthatṛ offers the two-potted oblation to Asvins.
14.4.2	He takes the Hotr's goblet and the goblets of the junctions.
14.4.3	The junction is Trivṛt Rāthantara.
14.4.4	The Aśvina is the highest thousand.
14.4.5	It is placed when the sun has risen.
14.4.6	When it is placed, the Adhvaryu takes the Hotr's goblet, the Camasādhvaryus take the goblets, and the Pratiprasthātṛ takes the cake.
14.4.7	The Adhvaryu says, "Do you recite the Yajus for the Soma-juices to be pressed for the Asvins." "Do you recite for the Soma-juice to be pressed for Asvins." These are the two announcements.
14.4.8	Or one may say, "Do you press the Soma-jucies to be pressed for (the Asvins) who have started."
14.4.9	Or one may not send them off.
14.4.10	The Pratiprasthātṛ offers the entire oblation of the Puronuvākyā together with the Soma-juises.
14.4.11	The mantra for the meal is "The verse is the metre."
14.4.12	If it is the Apto-ryamah, then while raising the sacrificial vessels at the junction, he makes the king exceed the group of four sacrificial vessels.
14.4.13	As in the first part of the night, so they become prominent.
14.4.14	He raises the first ones dedicated to Agni, the second ones dedicated to Indra, the third ones dedicated to the Visve Devas, and the fourth ones dedicated to Vishnu.
14.4.15	Some say that the procedure of the Soma-drinking vessels is like the procedure of the sacrificial vessels.
14.4.16	The chanting of the mantra for eating is done everywhere.
14.5.1	The animals of the Kratu and the Ekadasin are optional.
14.5.2	Their rites are performed as prescribed when they are combined.
14.5.3	The rites of the limbs are performed according to their capacity.
14.5.4	The rites are performed again according to the prescribed rules.
14.5.5	The inference is based on the actual meaning.
14.5.6	Having offered the oblation to the sacrificial post, he cuts down the first thirteen sacrificial posts with a mantra.
14.5.7	All the cutting of the pieces, scraping, and offering of oblations are done.
14.5.8	He cuts all the wood to size.
14.5.9	He cuts the Pātnīvata post in such a way that it will be equal to the height below the navel.
14.5.10	Having measured the distance from the altar, he measures the rope of eleven spans of Dasaratha's span. With its twenty-fourth part, he measures the altar.
14.5.11	It becomes the position of the advance.
14.5.12	Having bound the Agniṣṭha with two ropes, he binds the eleven ropes. He binds the Agniṣṭham with the Vāsayati.
14.5.13	The sacrificial posts have two ropes.
14.5.14	The next day, having taken up the Aśvin graha, he marks out the sacrificial posts.
14.5.15	Together with the Agniṣṭha graha.
14.5.16	The procedure is to mark out the posts in the sky, and then to draw the lines on the ground.
14.5.17	The spaces between the posts are of the size of a chariot's axle.
14.5.18	Having drawn the line to the south of the Agniṣṭhā post, he draws the line to the north of the Agniṣthā post.
14.5.19	Thus, alternating, he marks out posts going towards the north.
14.5.20	The sounds are in front of the sacrificial posts.
14.5.21	It should be raised on the right side.
14.5.22	One should dig down on the left side for one who desires the world of the fathers.
14.6.1	All of them should be equal for one who desires stability.
14.6.2	One should make the three middle ones equal and separate the others for one who desires cattle.
14.6.3	One should do it for one who desires to conquer.
14.6.4	The middle one should be raised, and the others should be dug down in order.
14.6.5	The one that is poured out together, for one who desires rain, should be bent in the middle, and should be raised at the ends in succession.
14.6.6	The one that is interspersed, for one who has an enemy.
14.6.7	The one with a pit has been described.
14.6.8	If one desires, "May the clan be stronger than the nobility," one should dig the younger one to the south of the Agni.
14.6.9	The clan is stronger than the nobility - this is the opposite.
14.6.10	One should make the height of the altar equal to the height of the sacrificial post for one who desires the world of the fathers, equal to the middle for one who desires human world, and equal to the height for one who desires Indra's world.
14.6.11	The heights should be equal, the middle ones should be equal to the height, and the cups should be equal to their width.
14.6.12	Having bound the two ends of the rope to the two ends of a wooden post, he places the southern sacrificial post facing east, with the formula, "With Indra's thunderbolt I am placing this one, the son of so and so, against so and so." Thinking of the hated one in his mind.
14.6.13	He places the Agniṣṭha animal, a black-necked goat, on the north, the Sarasvatī animal, a sheep, on the south, and the Saumya animal, a tawny goat, on the east.
14.6.14	Thus he places the animals in the reverse order, moving towards the south.
14.6.15	The Varuṇa animal is placed at the end, facing the north.
14.6.16	If one desires, "May the one who has gone away be obstructed," it is said.
14.7.1-4	He should point out the wild animal, the animal, or the rat as the victim. "Or, thinking of the one he hates, he should say, "This is your animal." If he does not hate anyone, he should say "The rat is your animal." The grass for each animal, the ladles, the pots, and the skewers are for the heart.
14.7.5	The rites of Agni, the carrying of the fire, the Adhrigu, the offering of the name, the placing of the ropes, the placing of Vapa and Parivap, the taking of the Vapa and Parvapani, the offering of Abhihoma, and the sprinkling.
14.7.6	The Manota rite is repeated.
14.7.7	Or the rites.
14.7.8	All have three limbs and the same procedure.
14.7.9	He offers to the directions after combining the excess.
14.7.10	At the best animal, he offers to Vanaspati and to Svistakrit.
14.7.11	At all (animals) he offers to Upāñjya with the anus and the thighs. The wives offer to Patnīvat.
14.7.12	When the Anūbandhyāvpayā has been offered, he places the Patnīvat in front of the door of the hall, below the navel, without a cover, without a cup.
14.7.13	Having prepared the animal belonging to Tvashtri, having a black body, having tawny hair, having set it afire, having released it, one should establish the remaining (animal) with ghee.
14.7.14	One should offer ghee as many times as there are cuttings of the animal.
14.7.15	The ghee is for the animal.
14.7.16	It is known that it is practised in the Salāmukhiya.
14.7.17	Or he may throw it into the fire, but not keep it.
14.7.18	The remainder of the Anūbandhyā should be kept after the Pasupuroḍāśa.
14.7.19	If the animal sacrifice is to be performed on the eleventh day, then the animals dedicated to Agni and Indra are placed on the right side, those dedicated to Sarasvati, Soma, Pusan and Brihaspati on the left side, those dedicated Savitr, Visvedevas, Maruts and Varuna on the right side.
14.7.20	The Kapeyas know this. One should offer the animal sacrifice at the end of the Atiratra.
14.7.21	Because of the combination of words in the Sahikas.
14.7.22	He is the one who is not a warrior.
14.8.1	Vasishtha is the Brahman in the Jyotishtoma.
14.8.2	One who knows the Stoma parts.
14.8.3	In the Adhvaryu rites, one restrains speech during the chanting of the Stomas and the Shatras, and during the Antar-dhau.
14.8.4	If one speaks carelessly, one should recite the Vaishnavi verse and the Vyahrtis and then restrain speech.
14.8.5	When the king is being measured, when the great altar and the northern altar are being made, when the fire is being measured, and when the soil is being taken out, when the bricks are being laid, when the rites of the piled-up altar are being performed, he sits to the south.
14.8.6	When the fire is being carried away, when the cauldron is being carried away (from the house), when the Vasatīvarī waters are being carried away, and when the Savanīya vessels are being carried away (to the Sāvitra fire), he goes to the place where the Nirrīti fires are being placed, and where the fires for the sacrificial posts are being carried away. He goes to the south.
14.8.7	When the sacrificial grass and wood are being spread out between the Cātvāla and the Utkara, having gone along them, he sits down beyond the northern altar, having gone around it from the south.
14.8.8	He sits down from the time of the dismissal.
14.8.9	Having gone to the north of the Havirdhāna, having gone around the Agni-dhriyan-throne, having entered the eastern shed through the eastern door, having gone around to the south, he sits down.
14.9.1	"He says, "Bow down!" He makes the king sit down on the eastern side."
14.9.2	Having offered the oblation, he comes out and goes to the north of Agni.
14.9.3	Having reached the Āgnīdhra, having handed over the king to the Pratiprasthātṛ, he sits down after going around along the north of the Āgnīdhrā, and then along the south. He makes the king sit down as before. Having gone out after the Homa of the Prāṇāyāma, having handed over to the Adhvaryu the king who has been taken to the Havirdhāna, having gone around along the north, and then along south of the Havirdhānā, he sits down. He sits down after the Homa to Agni-Soma of the Vapa. Having performed the Marjālīya rite after the Homa, he sits down to the south when the Vasatīvarī waters are being taken around. When the Mahāratra is about to dawn, he becomes awake. Having restrained speech at the Prātaranuvāka which has been performed, having entered the Havirdhâna by the eastern door, having gone around the Kharo along the south, he sits down.
14.9.4	When the king is being anointed, when the Grahas are being taken, he restrains speech until the taking of the Āgrayana Graha.
14.9.5	When the Vaiparusha oblations are being offered, he offers.
14.9.6	When the Pavamāna verses are being chanted, he moves along with them.
14.9.7	When it is said, "O Brahman, we shall praise you, O instructor," he recites after it, "O god Savitar, this is told to you."
14.10.1	You are a ray, for destruction. I invoke you for destruction.
14.10.2	This is the rite for all hymns.
14.10.3	He places the Stoma-parts in an ascending order.
14.10.4	Twelve in the Agniṣṭoma, fifteen in the Ukthya, sixteen in the Ṣoḍaśī, seventeen in the Vājapeya, thirty-one in the Atiratra, and thirty-three in the Apto-ryāma.
14.10.5	Having praised the Pavamāna (hymn), he goes away as before, and sitting down on the northern part of the altar, beyond the southern part, he waits for the offering of the Savaniya cake.
14.10.6	Having offered the oblations, and having cleansed himself, when the Grahas are being taken to the morning pressing, having gone to the northern side of the Havirdhana, having gone around the Marjalyan Dhishniya by the right, having entered the Sadas by the eastern door, having gone around by the right of the Adhvaryu's Dhishniya, he sits down.
14.10.7	When he brings him the Brahma-cup, he receives it and eats it as he does the other cups.
14.10.8	When the Stotra has been begun, he restrains his speech until the Shastra and Yajya.
14.10.9	When the Savana is over, he goes out as he came.
14.10.10	Thus the procedure of the two Savanas is laid down, and the Brahmahood.
14.10.11	The other rites are prescribed for the Adhvaryu.
14.10.12	One who is going to the Avabhṛtha rite goes to the right side of the Adhvaryus.
14.10.13	Thus the Brahminship of all Soma rites is prescribed.
14.11.1	One who intends to receive the Dakṣiṇā should receive it after turning away seventeen times.
14.11.2	With the impulse of the divine Savitr, with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of Pusan, I receive thee. May Varuna, the king, lead thee. O goddess, to the right. To Agni, gold. May I attain immortality by it. To the giver, may life be mine. To the receiver. Who gave this? What? For what? Desire is the giver. Desire is the receiver. Desire enters the ocean. With desire I receive thee. This is thine, O Desire. This is thy gift. Uttānāṅgīrasa receives thee.
14.11.3	To Soma a garment, to Rudra a cow, to Varuna a horse, to Prajapati a man, to Manu a bed, to Tvashtri a goat, to Agni or to Pusan a sheep, to Nirriti a mule and an ass, to the Himala a tusker, to the Gandharvas and Apsarases a garland and ornaments, to the All-gods grain, to speech food, to energy a cooked meal, to the ocean water, to Uttana Angiras a bull, to Vaishvanara a chariot.
14.11.4	One should take the chariot with the verse to Vaisvānara: "Vaisvānara, having ascended the ancient heaven, shines on the back of heaven with good thoughts."
14.12.1	He generates wealth as before for the one who is born, the one who is awake, the one who goes around equally.
14.12.2	Whatever is not breathed, all that Angiras, the outstretched one, may receive." Thus one should receive. Or with a mantra not mentioned by name.
14.12.3	In all cases, Savitri is recited first, and Anvadi is recited afterwards.
14.12.4	The Gnas have cut you, the Apasas have stretched you, the Varutras have bound you. This is the blessing. He spreads it in front of the deity.
14.12.5	These are the acceptances of the three Dakshina cows.
14.12.6	And the gods, knowing this, made Varuna perform the sacrifice. The Dakshina went to whichever deity he gave it to, and that deity was afflicted. They said, "Let us receive it after turning away. Then the Dakshina will not afflict us." They received it after turning away, and then the Dakshina did not afflict them. He who, knowing this, receives the Dakshina after turning away, the Dakshina does not afflict him. He makes them more than three.
14.12.7	One should go to the cow or horse with a sacrificial grass.
14.12.8	One should go to a man or an elephant with food.
14.12.9	One should approach a bed with perfumes and pleasant speech.
14.13.1	One should not eat for a year, this is known as the vow of the four Hotr priests.
14.13.2	This is the sacrifice for one who has not established the sacred fire, namely the four Hotr-priests.
14.13.3	One who does not beget offspring or cattle should drink hot water for twelve days, wearing a garment of bark and lying down on the ground.
14.13.4	In the morning of the twelfth day, having stepped forward, he should recite "Indra, go to the out-breath, svāhā!" and then offer the four-hotr oblation with four spoonfuls of ghee, having explained the ten-hotr oblations.
14.13.5	Or half with the former and half with the latter Graha.
14.13.6	If one desires to beget offspring, he should fill the ladle with twelve spoonfuls of Soma, mentally following the Dashahotar, and offer the Graha along with the stalk of Darbha grass, half with the former Graha and half with the later Graha.
14.13.7	The Brāhmaṇa who knows the Veda and is learned, should go to a forest, tie a bunch of Darbha grass, sit to the right of the Brāhmaṇa, and recite the four Hotr verses.
14.13.8	All with their respective accessories and mantras, says Aśmarathya. Hotr verses, says Ālekhaṇa.
14.13.9	He who sits to the right is given a boon.
14.13.10	Now these are the wives of the gods. One should sacrifice for one who desires offspring or cattle with them.
14.13.11	One should sacrifice four by four, alternating between Tvashtri and the wives of the Gods.
14.13.12	If one does not conceive within a year, one should not look for another.
14.13.13	One should perform the sacrifice for one who is being attacked.
14.13.14	One should offer in a self-made pit or ravine.
14.14.1	Or, when he makes the Vasat-offering with the harsh words, he cuts off the speech with harshness; it is known that he meets with calamity.
14.14.2	If one desires, "May a hero be born to me," he should offer the four-hotr-offering with ghee taken four times. Half of the offering is made with the earlier cup and half with the later cup. A hero is born to him.
14.14.3	No one else follows him.
14.14.4	The gift is excellent.
14.14.5	One should perform the sacrifice for a king who is engaged in battle with this very (rite).
14.14.6	From whatever he obtains there, the Dakṣiṇā should be twelve hundred.
14.14.7	One should sacrifice for one who desires cattle with five Hotrás.
14.14.8	With four spoonfuls of clarified butter, or half with the former and half with the latter ladle, he gives four gifts, viz., a horse, gold, a cow, and a garment.
14.14.9	One should perform this sacrifice for one who is afflicted by disease or who desires heaven, turning to the right.
14.14.10	One should mentally offer for one who desires heaven.
14.14.11	One who has fallen from the sacrifice should be sacrificed with seven oblations, with half of the oblation taken up in four parts, or with half of the northern oblation.
14.14.12	One who desires, "May I be very wealthy," should employ the ten-hotr. One who desires, “May a hero be born to me,” should employ the four-hotr. One who desires, “I may be wealthy in cattle,” should employ the five-hotr. He who desires, “The seasons may be favourable to me,” should use the six-hotr. The one who desires, “Let me be a Soma-drinker, a Soma-sacrificer, and may a Soma-drinking, Soma-sacrificing one be born to me," should employ the seven-hotr.
14.14.13	Then there is the one called Rtuमुखीयः, who is the six-fold Hotṛ. He says, "Let me recite the Vāgहोतृ." One should offer to him at the beginning of each season. He is the one who fulfills all desires.
14.15.1	If they were to remove him while he is still in the office of officiating priest, he should offer to the Dashahotar with four spoonfuls of clarified butter, standing facing west, in the reverse order. He thus places the vital airs in him. If they were to instruct him again, he should offer the Dashahotara with four spoonfuls, standing facing east, in the forward order. He thus restores the vital airs to him.
14.15.2	Now, he who desires to be dear, or he who desires that another should be dear, having made this ornament of the Sthāgara, having explained the ten-hotr in front, the four-hotr on the right, the five-hotr behind, the six-hotr on left, the seven-hotr above, having adorned the mouth with the offerings and the wives, and having gone to the other half of the face, it is known that one becomes dear.
14.15.3	These four Hotr-priests should be employed in those places where there are offerings, with Grahas and Svāhā-utterance, and not in those places where they are not offered, without Grahas and Svāhākāra.
14.15.4	Where there are Japas and Yajamānas.
14.15.5	Those who are associated with recreation, and those of the householder, should be employed in both.
14.16.1	Men generate Agni, the praised one, from the kindling wood with the rays of the sun, the distant-seeing, the householder, the sage, Agni is generated by Agni, the kindler. O Agni, may your seven minds, your three-and-thirty lights, Whatever fault there is in my mind, whatever in my speech, and whatever in my heart, This god Brihaspati, may he sprinkle it with his power. May the all-creator, accepting this oblation, With the offspring, extend this sacrifice. Those who have risen and those who have set, I unite them with oblation and ghee. You are the Agni of the gods, O Agni, you are the Agni of men. O Agni! May we hear the good with our ears, may we see the good with our eyes, O performers of sacrifice. With firm limbs, praising with our bodies, may we enjoy the divine life. May Indra, the increaser of wealth, may Pusan, the knower of all, may the hawk-bannered one, the one with the uninjured banner, may Brihaspati grant us well-being. The Maruts with Prisni as their mother, the ones with the swift horses, the ones who have gone to the sacred places, The Manu-tongued ones with the sun as their eye, may all the gods come here for our sake. The gods live for a hundred autumns, where they have made our bodies free from old age, where the sons become the fathers. Do not let us die in the middle of our life. O Agni who is kindled, shine forth! This is it.
14.17.1	I approach the heaven with praises to Agni, the hearer, the poet, the knower, the worthy of praise. Make us free from fear, O Agni, the protector of the gods. Call Agni, the god, with the Agni-s, the most worthy messenger at the sacrifice, who is the most stable among mortals, the truthful, the blazing, the head, the eater of ghee, the purifier, the one with ghee as his face, the one with the back of ghee, Agni, kindled with ghee, ghee is his food, the one with a stream of ghee, the rivers carry you, O god, drinking ghee, you offer to the gods, O Agni, giver of life, O Agni, seven are your minds, O Agni, may the light be enjoyed by the thirty-three. The creator, Agni, I yoke. The Agni-s, Agni, have been praised by the gods, the earthly ones. May Vayu be praised by the gods in the sky. May Surya be praised by the divine gods. May Vishnu be praised by the directional gods. May Agni be praised by the Yajus-s. May Pusan be praised by the Svaga-s. May they protect this sacrifice. May they protect me. I undertake it. Undertake it. Svāhā. With these three Anuvākas, in the Soma where the expiation is unknown, he offers thirty-three oblations.
14.17.2	The thirty-three Agni-drains are the sacrificial body.
14.17.3	"O Earth, O great Earth, O Sinīvālī, O Urandhrā, O Acitta, your mind is in the sky. The seven oblations are offered in the Vasantīvarī waters, which are fit for the Savanīya sacrifice."
14.18.1	The Soma is the sacrificial butter, the most powerful, the most intoxicating, the most radiant. May I attain it. You are the sacrificial butter of the sacrifice, the light of lights. I take you with the deities of all the gods. Having recited this, let the Maruts sprinkle you together, Indra, and Brihaspati. Let this Agni sprinkle you together with life and wealth. May he bestow all life upon me. The waters are gentle, auspicious, and good. I see them. The waters are established, bountiful. One should sprinkle with these seven (verses) or recite them.
14.18.2	If he sees the Soma to be in excess before the Homa at the morning pressing, he should pour it into the cups or offer it.
14.18.3	Having seen it offered, he should make it a hymn to the enemies of the Stuta.
14.18.4	Having carried the cups beginning with the Hotr's cup, he performs the Stotra of Brihat.
14.18.5	They should praise with the verse "The cow is suckling the Maruts" in the verses containing the word "dhāyati".
14.18.6	"There is Soma, this is pressed." Thus they praise with the Brihatī and Gāyatri verses.
14.18.7	The Hotr recites the Indra-Viṣṇu verses.
14.18.8	He recites the formula for consuming the Soma, "Indra-Viṣṇus have drunk."
14.18.9	If it is the midday pressing, then this alone.
14.18.10	In the Stotra, there is a variation: "You are great, O Sun." Thus they praise the Sūryas with the Brihat and Gāyatra verses.
14.18.11	The Hotṛ recites the same formula, and the formula for consuming the oblation is also the same.
14.18.12	If there is excess at the third pressing, one should perform the Ukthya.
14.18.13	If at the Ukthya, the Sodasin; if at the Sodasin, the Atiratra; if at the Atiratra, the Dvirada; if at the Dvirada, the Ekastotra alone.
14.18.14	There, they should chant the verses addressed to Vishnu, the verses beginning with "Sipivista" and ending with "Bṛhatagaura" or "Bṛhatigaura".
14.18.15	The Hotṛ recites in the same way, and the food-offering mantra is also the same.
14.19.1	If the two Soma-plants were to be mixed together, then having offered with four Sambhara-formulas at the beginning, having taken up the Prātaranuvāka at the Mahāra-tra, and having commenced when the sacrificer has commenced, he offers with the formulas, "For lying down, for sitting down, with the Gāyatrī, with the Tristubh, with the Jagatī, with the Anushtubh, with the Paṅkti, for overpowering, svāhā."
14.19.2	In the same way, in the case of the Savanas and the Savanas, the subsequent ones are added with the subsequent four Samparaya Mantras and the subsequent one with the subsequent one from the Paṅkti.
14.19.3	The sacrifice has five Savanas, three Savanas, Avabhrtha, Anubandhya. Five are offered in the well-kindled fire: "May the Prāṇa and Apāna not fall from death; may the Prāṇa-Apāna not abandon me."
14.19.4	The Adhvaryu recites this before the Pasu-offering and the Sviṣṭakṛt offering: "The Vājyas are going and coming."
14.19.5	The Marutvati and Vrusanvati are the Pratipada.
14.19.6	The Abhivarta is the Brahma-saman.
14.19.7	Both the Brihat and Rathantara are used.
14.19.8	If the Agniṣṭoma is to be performed after the Soma, one should perform the Ukthya. If the Ukthya is to be performed, then the Ṣoḍaśin. If the Ṣoḷaśin is to be performed then the Atiratra. If the Atiratra is to be performed the Dvirātra. If the Dvirātras is to be performed one should perform the Trisātra. If Trisātra is to be performed it is the Ekastotra alone.
14.19.9	The Abhijit is for the purpose of Abhijit, the Vishvajit is for the sake of Vishvajit, the Sarvaprstha is the Sarvas toma Atiratra. It is known that it is for the attainment of all and for the securing of all.
14.19.10	The Sajaneya, the Shashi, the Vihavyasashi, the Agasthya, the Kayashubhi, the Nishkevalya - these should be chanted.
14.19.11	One should offer the Sajanīya at the morning pressing in the Vaisvadev, the Vihavyā at the midday pressing in the Marutvatiya, the Agastya's Kayāśubhiyā at the third pressing in the Vāiśvadev.
14.20.1	Here are the instructions regarding the Sāman: "One should perform the Tauraśravas, one should perform the Nihava of Vasīṣṭha, one should perform Abhivarta, one should perform a sacrifice of the Brahman, one should perform either the Abhijit or the Viśvajit sacrifice, one should perform Krosa and Anukrosa."
14.20.2	One instructs before the morning pressing.
14.20.3	One should perform the earlier one. Or one should perform the later one. Or one may perform a sacrifice of a higher kind with gifts.
14.20.4	As long as there is no river or mountain between the two chariots, or as long as there is a mountain between the two rivers, or as long when the two kings are not in conflict, or when the two kings who are in conflict are not in conflict with each other, this is said in the Kankaṭi Brahmana.
14.20.5	Where the initiated ones are afflicted, one should sleep at the place of sacrifice.
14.20.6	Having taken hold of the Agnidhra, one should lead him.
14.20.7	I give this to you, O Brahman. May the Brahman give it to the deities. May the Vasat-call heal you together with all the gods. This is your morning pressing. This is your midday pressing. This is the third pressing for you, O All-gods. Protect it, may it heal you, may it be preserved. May it not fail you. He follows everywhere.
14.20.8	Having placed the Agni-trayana fire in order, having spread it around, having seated the Brāhmaṇa to the south on the Darbha grass, having placed the water pot to the north, having placed twenty-one barley grains and a bundle of Darbha grass in it, he should say, "Jīvā (life) is here, they revive him. Jīvikā (life-giver) is here, she revives him. Saṃjīvikā (reviver) is here, it revives him."
14.21.1	The plants that have been born, with the Oṣadhisūkta, he consecrates him with these waters.
14.21.2	"They make him rinse his mouth with the verse, "The waters are the vital breaths of Prajapati, the remedy of the sacrifice."
14.21.3	Then they touch him with the verse,
14.21.4	May the Upamśu and Antaryāma protect your Prāṇa and Apāna. The Upamśu-sava may protect your Vyāna. May the Vācaṃ T (the Soma-cup) protect your speech. May the Indra-Vayu (cup) protect your Dakṣa-kratus. May the Maitrāvaruṇa (cup) protect the eyes. May the Sukra and Amāntin (cups) protect your ears. May the Āśvina (cup) protect yourself. May the Āgrayaṇa (cup) and the Utkhya (cup) protect all your limbs. May the Dhruva (cup) protect thy life. May the Asava and Asāva (cups) protect thee everywhere.
14.21.5	Then he touches himself, saying, "May the Upamśu and Antaryama protect my Prāṇa and Apāna."
14.21.6	Thus he moves up to Dhruva.
14.21.7	Having offered a libation, saying, "To the lord of nourishment, nourishment; to the eye, eye; to the breath, breath; to the self, self; to speech, speech; give it back to him. Svāhā," he touches himself as before.
14.21.8	If he dies before the Avabhṛtha, they should perform the Avabhṛta.
14.21.9	Having gone to the Avabhṛthā, having sprinkled him, having brought him out, they should cremate him with their own fires, according to their light.
14.21.10	This much is for one day.
14.21.11	Having said "Bring the fire-sticks", having brought the fire from the southern fire, and having burnt it with the Nirmanthyas, he burns the dead body in the southern Marjalyi.
14.21.12	Having completed that day silently, having collected the bones in the pot at the end of the Patnisamyaja, he places them in the Marjalyi.
14.21.13	The Udgātṛ priests should praise with the three serpents' queens, the invincible ones.
14.22.1	The priests, with the Hotṛ at their head, reciting the Yāma verses, reciting the Sarpārajñī verses, loosening the hair on the right side, loosening the left side, striking the right thighs, shaking them with the Sigs, going around three times to the right, saying, "May our sin be removed."
14.22.2	Binding the left ones and loosening the right ones, they strike the left thighs, not shaking them, they go around three times, saying, "May our sin be cleansed away."
14.22.3	When they are raised up, then the Adhvaryu places a stone on the right side, saying, "I place this boundary for the living. May it not go away. The other half of this (stone) may the hundred autumns live. We place death behind with the mountain."
14.22.4	The Agniṣṭoma Soma is the first, the Indra-Vāyu Soma is the second.
14.22.5	They praise with the Yāmya hymns.
14.22.6	At each Stotra, they place a bone-pot.
14.22.7	They carry the oblations to the Marjālīya.
14.22.8	They should recite the verse "O Agni, you purify the life-forces" at each step.
14.22.9	Their Soma should be in the Rathantara mode.
14.22.10	They go knowing that they are giving life to the Self and removing sin.
14.22.11	If the deceased had a protector, then having cremated him, the bones should be tied in a black antelope skin and placed in a place where his own kinsmen would be. Having initiated him in that place, the sacrificers should sit with him.
14.22.12	In the course of a year, the bones should offer the sacrifice.
14.22.13	Āśmarathya says that it is due to the Vyāpāta. Ālekhaṇa says that it is from the Oḍavasānīya.
14.22.14	Agniṣṭoma and Soma are the beginning of this.
14.22.15	The Dakṣiṇās are as before, i.e., one hundred and twelve.
14.23.1	If one does not perform the Sattrāyaga, one should perform the Viśvajit, Atiratra, all-Prstha, all-Stoma, and all-Veda-Dakṣiṇas.
14.23.2	Some prescribe the Tri-dhatuvīya sacrifice with a thousand as the Dakṣiṇā.
14.23.3	If one rises from the Sattr (sacrifice) before the Soma has been distributed, one should perform the Vishvajit Atiratra sacrifice as before.
14.23.4	If one were to rise from the initiation, one should dig out the pit and mix the soil with other soil, and make the pit again.
14.23.5	Having dug out the pit, one should place it silently among the heads of the animals.
14.23.6	If the fire is kindled in the Upavasatha, one should not repeat the same.
14.23.7	One should repeat it silently.
14.23.8	Some say that it should be repeated with mantras.
14.23.9	When the fire is kindled, there is no need to kindle the fire again. One should kindle the fire silently. Some say that it should also be done with mantras.
14.23.10	In the well-prepared fire, one should offer another silently, or with mantras, according to some.
14.23.11	One should take from the implements - from the Mahāveda, the Uttara Veda, the Dhishnya, the Uparava, the Sadas, and the Hotr - and one should take them from the others as well.
14.23.12	If the Hotr were to fall asleep during the entire night, they should chant with six verses addressed to Indra-Vishnu, and with three each for the other priests.
14.23.13	If the Hotr and Maitrāvaruṇa were to fall asleep in the first half, the Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin and the Acchāvāka in the second half.
14.23.14	If one were to praise the Hotr with fifteen (verses), and the others with five each.
14.23.15	One should recite the first verse of the Asvin (sutra) as "O Agni, O Vivasvat, O Dawn."
14.24.1	If the sun does not rise while the Asvins are being praised, one should offer a bull of many forms.
14.24.2	One should also recite all the ten verses.
14.24.3	If the fire of those who have been initiated is extinguished, he should take it from the Āgnīdhra fire. If the Āgnīdhrīya fire is extinguished, he takes it from the Garhapatya fire. If the Garhapatyī fire is extinguished, then he should again churn out fire from the same place.
14.24.4	If the fire of a householder is extinguished, he makes a fire-drill.
14.24.5	It is a fire-drill with a hole.
14.24.6	He should give four boons to the learned priests.
14.24.7	If Soma is stolen from him, he should cut the gold into two parts, hide one part and consecrate it with the Jīṣa, and the other part should be taken up and offered to the Grahas.
14.24.8	He should give four boons to the learned priests.
14.24.9	If Soma is stolen from one who has not bought it, he should buy it.
14.24.10	If the one who bought it is not available, then one should take it back and offer it.
14.24.11	One should give according to one's faith to the one who bought the Soma or to the one who sold the Soma.
14.24.12	If there is no Soma, one should offer Pūtikas. If there is no Pūtika, one should offer Ādāras and Phālgunas, and white wool. If there is none of that, one should offer whatever herbs are milky, red Dūrvā, or green Kuśa grass. This is according to the Vājasaneyins.
14.24.13	Even at the end, barley and wheat.
14.24.14	At the morning pressing, he should offer all Soma-juices with the Prati-dhuk-offering. At the midday pressing, with the cooked Soma-juice. At the third pressing, with the Soma-juice mixed with curds.
14.24.15	Some say that at the morning pressing, the Prati-dhuka-offering and the cooked Soma-juices are offered. At the midday-pressing, the cooked Soma- juices and curds. At the third-pressing, the Soma-juices and curds.
14.24.16	The Soma-sacrifice should be of the Agniṣṭoma type, with the Rathantara Sāman.
14.24.17	Those very priests who have been appointed should offer the sacrifice.
14.24.18	One should give a cow as a fee to them.
14.24.19	One should buy Soma again.
14.24.20	Rising from the Avabhṛtha rite, one should perform the Soma sacrifice again for that very purpose on the twelfth day.
14.24.21	One should then give what one would have given in the previous one.
14.25.1	If the Soma-pressers were to burn the Soma-pressings, the Adhvaryu should offer the Grahas, the Udgātṛ should offer the Stotras, and the Hotṛ should offer the Sastras.
14.25.2	If the Soma is not burnt, they should proceed from the Devayajana on the side, and go away from the place of death.
14.25.3	If the soma is burnt, then the expiation is the same as in the case of theft.
14.25.4	In the place of a cow, one should give five cows or five boons.
14.25.5	If one does not obtain a stone for pressing at the morning pressing, one should take a Palāśa stick and press with it. This is known to be the atonement.
14.25.6	If at midday, or at the third pressing, this is the same.
14.25.7	If the Grava-cup were to be spilled at the morning pressing, then they should chant the Brahma-saman of the Dyutana Maruts before the Pavamana hymns.
14.25.8	The Brahma-saman is indeed the foremost.
14.25.9	If it were to be spilled during the midday pressing or the third pressing, then one should chant it before the Pavamāna hymns.
14.25.10	If the pot is broken at the morning pressing, then it is said, "O Vishnu, you are the most excellent one among the gods."
14.25.11	If the pot is broken at the morning pressing, one should offer the Brahmasāman ending with Vasat-utterance. Having offered thirteen oblations of ghee, one should offer oblations to Asava, Vasava, Vibhu, Vivāsata, Shusha, Surya, Chandra, Ganashriya, Malimluca, Jyotish, Abhibhu, Adhipati, and Divampati.
14.26.1	This is Indra's cup. It has been taken up. It is to be taken up. You are the foremost of the gods. I resort to you along with the cups, along with the cups of Soma, along with offspring, along with cattle, along with the priests, along with the Soma-drinkers, along with the participants, along with the Dakshina-givers, along with the sacrifice, along with the lord of sacrifice. Indra and Agni are my boundaries. The wind is my divine city. The Brahman is my armour. The Brahman is within me. I resort to thee, O Indra-cup, along with the horse and the chariot. May heaven and earth be my armour. May Agni be my armour. The sun be my armour. Brahman-pati be my armour. Let not any fear befall me. Indra and Agni, etc. I enter thee, O Indra cup, along with the steed, the chariot and the man. Whatever I have, that is yours. The sacrificer recites this verse when he has been driven away.
14.26.2	For prosperity, for invincibility, for lying down, for sitting down, for the Gāyatrī, for overpowering, svāhā. For prosperity, for invulnerability, for lying down for sitting down, the Triṣṭubh, for overpowering, Svāhā. For prosperit, for invulnerability for lying down, sitting down, the Jagatī, for overpowering, Svaha. For prosperity, invulnerability, lying down, sitting, the Anushtup, for overpowering, svaha. For prosperity invulnerability, lying, sitting, the Paṅkti, for overpowering, savaha. Thus, with each verse, one should offer five oblations in the ladle after pouring the Soma juice. Some say this.
14.26.3	If the Prastotar recites the Bahispavamāna verse in a serpent-like manner, then the head of the sacrifice is cut off. Having given a boon to the Brahman, he should resume it again.
14.26.4	If the Pratihartar causes the sacrificer to be deprived of the animals, he should give everything that is known.
14.26.5	If the Udgatar causes the sacrificer and the sacrifice to be deprived, then the sacrifice should be established without Dakshina. Then another one should be brought.
14.26.6	There, he should give what he would have given in the previous one.
14.26.7	In the case of simultaneous cutting, the Udgātṛ should perform expiation and the Pratihartṛ should perform all expiations.
14.26.8	In the cutting of the earlier and later (parts), if the lower one is cut, that one should perform expiation.
14.26.9	If it is the Madhyandina, it is the same. If it is the Ārbhava, he should offer all expiations.
14.27.1	If a pot is broken, then having cut the gold in two, having covered one half, having poured water and having poured milk, having raised the other half, the Grahas should be offered.
14.27.2	He should give four boons to the learned priests.
14.27.3	If one were to draw from the pot, one should draw from the Āgrayana; if from the Āgrayan, from the pot.
14.27.4	If one were to draw either from the Graha or from the pot, he should draw from the Agaryana or from the Dhruva.
14.27.5	It is known that they are drawn from the Drona pot. All the Grahas, the Skannas and the Upadastas.
14.27.6	If it should break, fall or be destroyed, he should recite over it: "You are the life-giver, O Dhruva, give me life. You are the radiance-giver, O Dhrūva, give me radiance. You are the body-protector, O Dhruvā, protect my body." Having placed a hundred-weight of gold in it, he should recite: "Svāhā, may you grow from heaven! Svāhā, may yo grow from the atmosphere! Svāhā may you grow from the earth!"
14.27.7	This sacrifice is for the gods, for the plants, for the animals, for my wealth, for all beings. May this sacrifice be for the gods. Pour it out, O god, with ghee. Be here, do not fall away. Like a mountain, be unshakable. Like Indra, be firm here. Hold the sacrifice here. Indra has established it, the firm one, with firm oblation. The gods have spoken to him, and also to this Brahman-lord. The firm heaven, the firm earth, the firm universe is this. The firm mountains are these. The firm king of the people is this. Having recited these four verses, he gives a boon.
14.28.1	If the Nārāśaṃsa is to be offered, then the Adhvaryu should take up the first cup and offer it with the Vasat and Anuvṣat mantras. He should then give it to the Camasādhvaryu. By this, he is nourished. "He is nourished. May he be united."
14.28.2	If the Soma or the oblation were to be spilled at the morning pressing, then at the midday pressing, or at the third pressing, or at night, or in the twilight, or among the gods, or among men, or among the ancestors, or among the demons, or among the Rākṣasas, or among the Gandharvas, or among the serpents, or among the birds, or among the beasts, or among the trees, or among the plants, or among the grasses, or among the stones, or among the waters, or among the rivers, or among the oceans, or among the mountains, or among the forests, or among the villages, or among the cities, or among the countries, or among the continents, or among the islands, or among the directions, or among the regions, or among the worlds, or among the beings, or among the creatures, or among the living beings, or among those who are born, or among those that are not born, or among the dead, or among the unborn, or among the non-existent, or among the existent, or among the past, or among the future, or among the present, or among the visible, or among the invisible, or among the known, or among the unknown, or among the seen, or among the unseen, or among the heard
14.28.3	The thirty-three, and the drop, that drop of yours, which is the drop, which is your drop, with these mantras, he offers five oblations in the drop that has fallen. Some say this.
14.28.4	The Ritus and the Grahas, when they move, may they be confused, the rivers with their flowing streams, the seasons, Spring, Summer, Autumn, Winter, the seasons, the seasons of plenty, the seasons of water, the seasons of heaven, may they be together. May Prajapati generate our progeny, may the disposer give it, may the lord of the year, the seasons, and the seasons of plenty give me prosperity. Thou art the guardian of the vows of the gods, O Agni. We have transgressed thy sweet (vows). With these (verses) he offers separately.
14.28.5	May they protect this sacrifice, may they protect me. I undertake it. Undertake it. Svāhā. He undertakes the names of the seasons.
14.28.6	If Soma were to spill, O Brahman, Soma has spilled. Having said this, he says, "The shining god Savitr is worthy of praise." Having recited this, he measures five spans towards the east, as before.
14.29.1	If the cup has been eaten, he should make it good with a hymn. Having said, "Let us begin," he says, "May our divine physician, the Asvins, come to us from heaven, removing evil and sin. May Agni, the fire, remove evil and sin. Let the sun shine upon us, removing evil and sins. May the wind blow upon us, removing evils and sins." Having offered three oblations to Agni, having eaten it in the assembly, having covered it with the upper garment, having carried it out along the right door-post, having washed it in the Marjalis, having brought it back with the previous one, he says, "That place is not to be sought by the wise, where the dead go and return again as the living." Having offered the oblation, he says, "May the golden embryo emerge first." Having offered the oblations, he says, "May you grow, O Soma, most nourishing, with all your powers. Be our most excellent one." He makes it grow.
14.29.2	To him who desires, to him who knows all, to him who goes to the assembly, to him who is going, to him who comes, to him who has come, to him who follows, to him who leads, to him who stands, to him who sits, to him who lies down, to him who wakes, to him who sleeps, to him who sings, to him who recites, to him who praises, to him who prays, to him who worships, to him who offers, to him who receives, to him who gives, to him who takes, to him who eats, to him who drinks, to him who enjoys, to him who delights, to him who rejoices, to him who laughs, to him who cries, to him who weeps, to him who grieves, to him who loves, to him who hates, to him who fears, to him who hopes, to him who remembers, to him who forgets, to him who thinks, to him who imagines, to him who sees, to him who hears, to him who smells, to him who tastes, to him who touches, to him who speaks, to him who listens, to him who understands, to him who does not understand, to him who acts, to him who rests, to him who moves, to him who stops, to him who lives, to him who dies, to him who rises, to him who falls, to him who ascends, to him who descends, to him who enters, to him who exits, to him who appears, to him who disappears, to him who exists, to him who non-existent, to him who becomes,
14.29.3	If the initiated one were to scatter (the ashes) in the water, this is the verse: "O Agni, thou art in the waters, thou art in wood, thou art in heaven. Thou burnest the enemies between, thou burnest the enemies of the other, O Agni, thou burnest those who are not to be praised, O Agni, the unpraised, the unpraisable, the unpraisables. May they stand away from thee, the ageless, the tireless. He who, O Agni, would attack us, the givers, he who would attack our friend, the giver, him burn with thy ageless bulls, with thy own. Burn the burner with heat, O most heated. Let him make the sign, even at night, for one who is far away. The purifier, the ageless one, places the plants in the morning. The mortal man does not find thy fierce form, O Agni. Thy own heat shines like a bull, like a ram. He chews and chews again, and eats the head of the one who has the form of a woman, with his chest and with his belly. He stretches the rays with the green ones. Having offered six full oblations, one should give boons as counter-oblations.
14.30.1	If the gods are to be struck down by the gods, then having offered ten oblations, one should consecrate with this Anuvaka: "Pavamana, the giver of gold."
14.30.2	If the Soma-juice offered and not offered were to be mixed together, then having removed the embers within the enclosing sticks, he should offer on the embers, for the Soma-juice is the abode of the sacrifice. May Indra and Agni, the two priests, be satisfied with the Soma-juice that is offered and not offered, and with the Soma-juices that are offered and not offered. May Indra and Agní drink the Soma-juice of this (sacrifice) that has been drunk and enjoyed. Having offered on the embers, he should give him a portion of the Soma-juice.
14.30.3	"May the sacrificer not know darkness, may the priests not know darkness, and may these creatures not know darkness. May he who drinks this Soma not know darkness. Having made both of them united, he eats."
14.30.4	May the Fathers not injure us, may the heroes not injure us, let not our kinsmen or others injure us. Let not the evil-looking one, the ill-wisher, injure us. Let this oblation go to the Gods. He recites this verse when he sees the sacrificer eating.
14.30.5	The seven priests, the seven Sadasyas, these ten, the two Ashvins, the five Vājas, Prāṇa, Vyāna, Apāna, the mind, the intention, Agni, the oblation offered to Svāhā, may the gods eat. Having recited this benediction over the food that has been offered, one should move towards the southeast, reciting, "This is Vishnu, who moves."
14.30.6	Or towards the northeast.
14.30.7	If one is a Soma-vami, one should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Soma-Indra and a cooked meal of Shyamaka grains.
14.31.1	If a black bird flies over the sacrificial posts in the Sadas, and settles down as if it were shaking them with its wings, one should offer an oblation with the verse, "Vishnu has gone forth, knowing." If it flies high, one should not be concerned.
14.31.2	If the chariot or the two sacrificial posts were to be destroyed, one should offer the Paathinritti oblation as before.
14.31.3	If the sacrificial post falls down, one should offer on the Ahavaniya fire with the verse, "Savitar, Mitra, Aryaman, all enemies have been slain by you with the great yoke. You have made me heroic and possessing chariots. O Rathantara, may you be well-established. Svāhā."
14.31.4	If the Hotrīya is in the Sadas, then one should offer with this alone: "May you be established in Vāmadevya on this earth, svāhā."
14.31.5	If the Agnīdhriya is in the Agnidhri, then one should make the offering with this: "May you find a place in Bṛhat in the atmosphere, svāhā.”
14.31.6	If one is offering at the front of the hall with all (the priests), then one should offer at the Śālamukhiya.
14.31.7	The support of all is the same: "May I support you with Bṛhat in heaven."
14.31.8	If they were to remove him while he is still in the office of officiating priest, he should offer this oblation: "May all this sacrifice come to me. May all the gods, the Maruts, the Samaveda, the Apriya, the metres, the Nividas, the Yajus, this earth, whatever is sacrificial."
14.31.9	Having consumed Soma in another sacrifice, one should offer the remnant of the Agnihotra with clarified butter in the Ahavaniya fire.
14.32.1	The flower of the waters, the juice of the plants, the dear abode of Soma, the most dear oblation of Agni, svāhā. The flower of the water, the juice of plants, the dear dwelling of Soma, the dear abode, the most dear offering of Indra, svāhā The flower of the Waters, the juice of herbs, the dear abode Soma, the most beloved oblation of all the gods, svāhā.
14.32.2	Having eaten the remaining portion, he offers oblations to the gods, to the Pitrs, to the Soma-like Pitrs, to those who are worthy of Kavya oblations, in the southern fire, reciting the respective mantras.
14.32.3	Having placed the Darbha grass with their tips towards the south and east, he gives curds, saying, "O gods, do you rejoice here; O Soma-like ones, do you rejoice; O poets, do you rejoice."
14.32.4	He stands up, saying, "The Soma-like fathers are not far from the Soma-drink."
14.32.5	When fear arises, and it is impossible to offer all the oblations and Soma offerings, having collected them in the Drona vessel, and having offered with the Drona vessel with the formula, "To those gods whose share this is, to whom the Prajapas and Anuyajas are offered, to the gods led by Indra, to the gods ruled by Varuna, to the gods Agnihotri, svāhā," one should offer again when there is no fear.
14.32.6	If a half-verse is omitted, one should recite: "You are Agni, O Agni, you are Agni, O Prajapati." One should offer four oblations and the Vyahrtis.
14.32.7	If the sacrifice is interrupted by a verse, one should offer on the Garhapatya with the words "bhūr". If by a Yajus, on the Dakshina Agni with the words "bhuvah". If by a Sama, on the Ahavaniya with the words, "suvar". If by all, one should offer with all.
14.33.1	The Brahman should meditate mentally.
14.33.2	If the Udumbara (wood) is destroyed, then having cut another one, one should place the wood in the fire, saying, "May the energy be in me." "Stand firm, established in heaven, having stretched out the sky and earth, be firm. O supporter, supporter, generator, controller, the Adhvaryu, the Udgātṛ, and the sacrificer raise it up."
14.33.3	He touches it with a measured formula.
14.33.4	If they were to go to the Havirdhāna shed, the Adhvaryu should take up the southern (cup), the Pratiprasthātṛ should support it; the Pratiprasthatṛ should take up the northern (cup), the Adhvaryū should support it.
14.33.5	The Adhvaryu and the Pratiprasthaṭṛ support the cups of Viṣṇu. The Adhvaryu supports the cup of Viṣṇus. The Pratiprasthātr supports the cup of the Asvins.
14.33.6	"O Agni, the lord of strength and wealth, three times. Our Agni is auspicious, the auspicious gift, the auspicious sacrifice, the auspicious praises, the auspicious praises. Make the auspicious mind, O destroyer of Vritra, by which thou art victorious among thy foes, by which thou are victorious among thy foes. Stand firm, O Agni, and increase thy great zeal. We invoke thee with thy praises." With these six verses from the Uṣṇīṣa-Kakubha (Sāman) they offer at the Āgnidhriya (fire).
14.33.7	The Adhvaryu with the Uṣṇiṣ verses and the Pratiprasthātṛ with the Kakubha verses.
14.33.8	"The head of the sacrifice is being offered, may it be immortal, may it be made of divine nature, may the head be offered with the Vaisnavya verse, may it be offered with the Asvinya verse." They offer the two identical oblations with fivefold ladle.
14.33.9	If the pot for Agni gets broken, one should collect the pieces and make it again.
14.33.10	If the oven is baked, then one should mix it with other clay and make it again.
14.34.1	If the fire in the oven goes out, one should transfer it from the Gārhapatya fire to another fire. It is known that one should make it again from the same place, generating it from its own source.
14.34.2	The fee is a black garment, a black cow, or a black bull, and gold weighing one hundred māṇas.
14.34.3	By what is done on the following day, one attains the day, and by that one continues the sacrifice.
14.34.4	When on the previous day he takes the Vasatīvarī waters for the Yajñāyajñiya (cup), thereby he conforms to the day, thereby he continues the sacrifice. When on the previous evening he distributes the milk, thereby he conforms to that day, thereby he carries on the sacrifice. When he gives the order to go, thereby he conforms, thereby he carries the sacrifice.
14.34.5	If any of these is not done, one should offer oblations with the following mantras: "Om, salutations to Brahma, salutations to Agni, salutations to the earth, salutations to plants, salutations to speech, salutations to Vacaspati, salutations to Vishnu, I offer salutations to the great. Om, svāhā." Having offered oblations, one should perform the general expiation.
15.1.1	One who is going to perform the Pravargya rite, on the new-moon day or on the full-moon day or in the bright fortnight, when the moon is waxing, on an auspicious asterism, having placed silently the Kantaki twig as the kindling wood, he offers four spoonfuls of clarified butter with the verse, "One yokes the mind."
15.1.2	If one is initiated, some say that one should place the Kantaki twig alone as the kindlingwood and recite only the Yajus.
15.1.3	Taking up the chisel with the formula, "By the impulse of Savitr, the divine one," he recites, "Thou art a chisel, thou art a woman."
15.1.4	The Agni-related rites have been explained.
15.1.5	He addresses the Brahman with the formula, “O Brahmanaspati, rise up.”
15.1.6	Brahma rises up, both of them reciting the second half of the verse. They take up the black antelope skin, and they coax the goat, the ram, the donkey, and the bull.
15.1.7	"Brahmā, the lord of Brahman, may he go forth." Those who are going forward, with the horse at the head, go to the place where they will dig up the earth.
15.1.8	Or these materials are mentioned in the context of the Parisa rite.
15.1.9	The digging of the earth is done in front of the Ahavaniya fire, the earlier one being the earlier one and the later one being the later one.
15.1.10	Having dug out the earth, he spreads the skin of a black antelope with its neck towards the east and with the hairy side upwards. Having recited the formula, "O Goddesses, Heaven and Earth," he digs out the earth. Having struck the earth with the spade, he takes it up with the formula, "The head of the sacrifice." Taking it up, he carries it with the formula, “For thee, O sacrifice.” He pours it on the skin of a antelope with the formula, "For thee, O head of the sacrifice."
15.1.11	He carries the second and third portions in the same way.
15.1.12	The fourth is silent, as much as he thinks the earth is fit for the Pravargya vessels.
15.1.13	So also for the other requisites.
15.1.14	There is a change in the recitation.
15.2.1	"Thou art the best of this," (thus) the mound of earth made by a boar. "Thou art the female bees," (thus) a mound of earth made of ants. "Thou art Indra's strength," (thus) mounds of earth made of dung. Having mixed the hair of a goat and the hair of a black antelope, (thus) "Thou art the fire-born," (thus) "thou art the semen of Prajapati."
15.2.2	"He makes the horse smell (the vessel) with the formula, "Give life, give breath." " "May honey make thee sweet." " He milks with the formula, "May the goat make thee sweet."
15.2.3	Some perform the milking before the smelling.
15.2.4	Many noble ones take it after having taken it.
15.2.5	When the grass has been spread out beyond the dwelling-place, when it has been sprinkled, when it has become wet, they place it on the ground.
15.2.6	"May the honey-drinkers make thee sweet." Thus she pours down the honey-drinkings.
15.2.7	Those who are the honey-drink- ings, the materials, and whatever else is considered as a firm object,
15.2.8	Now the extreme division.
15.2.9	Whatever is done in the Pravargya rite, that is done by the honey-drink ings. No woman sees him, nor a Śūdra.
15.2.10	He does not perform while breathing out.
15.2.11	Having abandoned the mouth, he plays the flute without breathing.
15.2.12	One should not let the Pravargya and the sun go out of sight.
15.2.13	If the Pravargya or the sun goes out of sight at any point, one should stop from that point and resume the remaining rites the next day.
15.2.14	Having made the clay into a lump, he makes the head of the sacrifice by saying "You are the head of the sacrificial rite." Holding it with the thumbs, he makes the great hero, either three-raised, five-raised, or unlimited-raised, the size of a span, with an upward slope, sprinkled above, sloping in the middle, resembling the wind.
15.3.1	"With the Gayatri metre I make thee." So he makes the first one. "With the Trishtup metre." So he makes second one. "With Jagat metre." So he make the third one.
15.3.2	Or all of them with one (metre).
15.3.3	"With the grass of the sacrifice." So he makes a grass-cover for the pit.
15.3.4	"May Aditi hold thy pit." So he makes pit with a bamboo-stick.
15.3.5	He carries it beyond the third watch.
15.3.6	"As long as the gods think that the Agnihotra is offered to them for eating." This is the other (verse).
15.3.7	Having placed sand on the north side with the verse, "May the sun be pleased with my offering," he looks at it with the verse, "Thou art a sacrifice."
15.3.8	He does the same with the second and third (verses).
15.3.9	He does the others silently.
15.3.10	He makes the ladle of this very clay, with a handle and a lip, and with a pouring-hole, like a ladle, without a stick.
15.3.11	The Adhvaryu should be the eldest among the Pratiprasthātṛs.
15.3.12	The vessel for melted butter should be made of a goat's horn, round, with a pouring-lip.
15.3.13	If there is a fire-altar, then the bricks for the Gharma should be made of grass.
15.3.14	It should not be so in the case of the Aprīvargīya.
15.3.15	They make it smooth with smoothers.
15.3.16	With unwoven, with Gavidhuka, with Klitaka, with bamboo-joints, with ghee.
15.3.17	Having kindled the horse-dung of Vrishna on the Garhapatya, having taken up the first-made great hero with the two horns, he fumigates it, saying, "Thou art the horse-dung (of) Vrishna."
15.3.18	Thus he fumigates the second and third time silently.
15.3.19	He takes the great heroes with the two heels.
15.3.20	Having dug a pit in front of the Garhapatya, and having spread it with the materials for cooking blood, he places the great heroes in them.
15.4.1	"Thou art the light," is the first; "thou art the lustre," is the second; "thou art light," is the third.
15.4.2	Having silently listened to the others, he covers them with the materials for cooking red rice, and having kindled the Muñja grass on the Garhapatya fire, he observes fast, reciting the mantras "To thee, O light" in each direction.
15.4.3	Or with all the mantras in all directions.
15.4.4	While being cooked, he attends to them with friendliness, saying, "With your greatness, you make the heaven bright."
15.4.5	Or with the northern one.
15.4.6	Having taken up the ashes after removing them, he takes the first-made great hero with the two blades and carries it out.
15.4.7	"May the god Savitr sprinkle thee." Having sprinkled, he says, "Thou hast sprinkled the earth. Thou hast sprinkled the quarters." Having placed them in the sand towards the north, he says, “I look at thee with the eye of the sun.”
15.4.8	He sprinkles the second and the third one in the same way. He sprinkles the others silently.
15.4.9	Then he sprinkles them with sand, going round them from left to right, saying, "I sprinkle him, the son of so-and-so, with the cattle and with Brahmic lustre." The word "vis" is for the Kṣatriya, "cattle" for the Vaiśya.
15.4.10	Then he sprinkles them with plenty of whey, saying, "With the Gāyatrī metre I sprinkle thee." With each of these three he sprinkles each of them three times.
15.4.11	Or all of them may be done by each one in silence.
15.4.12	Then he makes them sit down on the skin of black antelope, reciting, "Thou art the divine Purāśara, thou art the divine Purăśara."
15.4.13	This is the mantra to be recited afterwards.
15.5.1	Those who are going to perform the Pravargya rite close the doors.
15.5.2	They prepare the wife's bed.
15.5.3	Then the Hotr sits down behind, the Adhvaryu in front, the Brahman to the right, the sacrificer, the Prastotar and the Pratiprasthâtr to the left, and the Agnidh to the rear.
15.5.4	Having touched the Madantîs, having performed the Sântî with the first Anuvâka, having spread Darbha-grass in front of the Garhapatya, he places the Mahâvîra-sticks on them, with the formula, "O Devapûrachara, I am thy Ghysam."
15.5.5	The mantra above this is the one that is recited at the end.
15.5.6	Here, everything is done in the proper order.
15.5.7	Here, some people mention the Uduṃbara Samrāḍāsandī, the Nitarā Rājāsandī, and the Varshīyasī, which is made of Mauñjī grass and has a single rope.
15.5.8	There are four sacrificial ladles.
15.5.9	Two are not used for pouring oblations.
15.5.10	The Prokṣaṇī-vessel and the Upāmuṣya-vessel are for the younger brother who is not subdued.
15.5.11	The two ladles, the two sacrificial grass-blades, the two sacrificial grasses, the two sacrificial twigs, the two sacrificial spoons, the two sacrificial forks, the two sacrificial pins, the two sacrificial posts, the two sacrificial stakes, the two sacrificial stones, the two sacrificial cups, the two sacrificial vessels, the two sacrificial bowls, the two sacrificial dishes, the two sacrificial pots, the two sacrificial ladles, the thirteen sacrificial stakes, the sacrificial stakes, the fire-wood, the sacrificial wood, the sacrificial grass, the sacrificial grass-blades. The sacrificial grass, the two sacrificial blades, the two sacrificial sticks, the two sacrificial needles, the two sacrificial pegs, the two sacrificial poles, the two sacrificial nails, the two sacrificial slabs, the two sacrificial goblets, the two sacrificial utensils, the two sacrificial plates, the two sacrificial jars, the two sacrificial strainers, the thirteen sacrificial posts, the sacrificial posts, the fire-sticks, the sacrificial wood.
15.5.12	Three are the Kārṣṇājina robes, with white and black wool.
15.5.13	It is known that their handles are made of bamboo, and are the length of an arm.
15.5.14	Another says that they have handles made of Udumbara wood.
15.5.15	Two are made of gold, silver and gold.
15.5.16	They are of the size of a hundred mānas.
15.5.17	Now about the Mauñjī robes.
15.5.18	Two are the Vedas.
15.5.19	One of them is suspended.
15.5.20	The three kinds of grass, the Visākhā, the Nidāne, the Abhidhāni, the many Muñja grass, the Rāuhiṇa grass, the ground barley, the sand from the heap of sand, the sand from a heap of sand, and the sand from a pile of sand.
15.5.21	Having covered the sprinkling water, he invites the Brahman with the sprinkling water.
15.6.1	"O Brahman, we shall proceed with the Pravargya rite. O Hotṛ, praise the Gharma. O Agnīdh, place the two Rāuhiṇa cakes. O Pratiprasthātṛ, move around. O Prastôtṛ, sing the Sāmans."
15.6.2	Having recited the Upamśu verse, "The Yajus-connected Sāmans are poured out," he proceeds with the words "O Indra-vowers, proceed." He permits (the Hotṛ) to recite loudly.
15.6.3	Or he proceeds with the word "Proceed."
15.6.4	"For Yama thee, for the sacrifice thee." He sprinkles all the Parigha-vessel thrice, beginning from the east.
15.6.5	He spreads out the sprinkled (Parigha-vessel).
15.6.6	The Agnidhra silently places the two Raudhina cakes.
15.6.7	At this time the Pratiprasthātṛ prepares the clarified butter with the Darsa-homa rite.
15.6.8	There is no rite for this (clarified butter).
15.6.9	Here he places the curd.
15.6.10	Then having taken this royal seat, having gone around along the front of the Ahavaniya, he places it in front of the royal seat.
15.6.11	On that he spreads the black antelope skin with its neck towards the east and with its hair upwards. On that he places the two great heroes, saying, "O god, I am performing the Purāścaraa rite."
15.6.12	The mantra to be recited above is as follows:
15.6.13	Then, taking the sacrificial grass with the rays of the sun, the sacrificial grass with rays, and the sacrificial grass with garlands, he takes it to the Hotṛ priest, placing it behind the Garhapatya fire, and then taking it to the southern door, he strikes the sacrificial grass with a southern door for the sake of the Hotṛ's observation.
15.6.14	On the right side of the eastern door, a peg for the calf.
15.6.15	On the right side of this same western door, a goat inside.
15.6.16	On the north side, a sheep.
15.6.17	He spreads the ropes of Visakha on them.
15.6.18	They become stretched by being removed.
15.6.19	At the proper time they bind them with these.
15.6.20	Then he pours out the chaff.
15.6.21	One to the north of the Garhapatya, one to the north of Āhavanīya.
15.6.22	He makes the chaff-heap to the north-east, outside the door, with water sprinkled over it.
15.6.23	To the north of the Āhavanīya he places the cooked curd.
15.7.1	The pieces of wood and the kindling wood.
15.7.2	Then, having taken the great hero who is to be led forth by the tips of the hooves, he cleans it from above with a blade of grass that is not cut off, saying, "O god, I am performing the ritual. I am pure."
15.7.3	Having offered seven or eleven oblations to the vital airs with the ladle in the Āhavanīya, he says, "May god Savitr anoint thee with honey." Having anointed the great hero in the Āhavaniya with the ladle, he says, "Protect the earth with austerity." Having placed a silver coin on the other mound and having established it, or having given the great hero to someone else, taking two bundles of Muñja grass, he says, "May the tips of the southern ones be kindled in the Garhapatya with the rays." With the tips of those, the roots of the northern ones with the light. With the roots of those, the southern roots with the radiance. With the roots, the northern tips with the heat."
15.7.4	He places them on the golden (altar) with their points turned upwards, saying, "Thou art light, thou art radiance, thou art lustre, thou art heat."
15.7.5	"Be thou settled, thou art great," having placed the great hero on them, they anoint him, saying, "He who is extended." With the ladle he anoints the great hero, filling it up.
15.7.6	The Adhvaryu, standing near the great hero, not touching him, holding the Pradesa towards the east, recites the Anādhṛṣya verses in accordance with their sequence.
15.7.7	"To the north, he touches the earth, saying, "To the horse of Manu, the son of many."
15.7.8	The Adhvaryu and the Pratiprasthātṛ take up the Dhṛti (earth) with the formula, "For success to thee."
15.7.9	Having placed the embers from the Gārhapatya towards the north, he places them around with the formula, "Thou art the Cit, thou art the Paricita." Having placed them around with the embers in a clockwise direction, he places them with the formula, “Thou art the Vaitanavat, thou art the Vaitana."
15.8.1	Thou art the Vairūna, thou art the Virūna."
15.8.2	The Adhvaryu places them towards the east with the formula, "Thou art the Ma." The Pratiprasthātṛ places them towards the west with the formula, "Thou art the Prama."
15.8.3	Thus the Adhvaryu places the remaining (bricks) with the preceding (mantra), and the Pratiprasthātṛ with the succeeding (mantra).
15.8.4	The Adhvaryu himself places the thirteenth brick on the right side, with the formula, "Thou art the covering of the atmosphere."
15.8.5	"Protect heaven by means of austerities!" Having covered it with a golden sheet, he takes up the wool-combs with three verses, "You are Gayatra," "You are Trishtubh," "You are Jagati."
15.8.6	With these he fumigates him three times upwards, "Honey, honey!"
15.8.7	He gives one to the Pratiprasthātṛ and one to the Agnīdhra.
15.8.8	They go around thrice, clockwise, holding the fire aloft.
15.8.9	They sit facing it, the Adhvaryu in front, the Pratiprasthatṛ on his right, the Agnidhra on his left.
15.8.10	The kindlers, holding the fire-sticks, are reciting the Praṇava, and are kindling the fire without touching it. They are sitting in silence.
15.8.11	It is known that the gold was taken when the fire was burning.
15.8.12	Where he knows that he has released the wick, there the Adhvaryu recites the Mahāvira verse, "Ten in the east, ten in the south" according to the Anuvaka.
15.8.13	Where he knows that the Apnasvati verse, "The Asvins have spoken to us" is recited, there the Adhvarya says, "The Gharmā is pleased."
15.8.14	The Adhvaryu and the Pratiprasthātṛ, without shaking, thrice pass around (the fire).
15.8.15	Taking the Dhiṣṇiyas, the Adhvaryu gives them to the Pratiprasthatṛ. Having taken them around in front of the Āhavanīya, the Pratiprasthaṭṛ places them on the Sāṁsīya grass.
15.8.16	Standing in the light, all the priests and the sacrificer, reciting, look at the Mahāvīra, saying, "I see the protector."
15.8.17	The remaining portion of the Anuvāka is recited by the Pratiprasthātṛ to the wife, saying, "May Tvashtri be with you."
15.9.1	Then he instructs, "O Agni-bearer, place the two Rohiṇī cakes."
15.9.2	He places the two cakes, which have been spread and sprinkled, on the two spoons, one on the junction of the southern enclosing stick, the other on the junction of northern enclosing stick.
15.9.3	Taking the girdle with the Savitrī verse, and reciting the Rasna-verse, he comes out of the door with the first verse. Then he calls the Gharma-milker three times in a low voice, saying, "O Indra, come! O Aditi, come! O Sarasvati, come!"
15.9.4	Having gone around along the right, having taken it, having gone out by the southern door, having called three times loudly, "Come, come, come," as the name may be,
15.9.5	"You are the turban of Aditi," he places the Dharmādugha (the cow for milking) with the rope. "You are the calf of Vayu,"
15.9.6	"Pūṣan has let thee loose," (thus) he lets loose. "That teat of thine which thou hast filled," (thus) having recited, he recites the Dharmādugha (verse).
15.9.7	"O Dharmā, thou art pouring, O Dharmā, do thou protect, O Dharmâ, do thou pour for Dharmâ," (thus) reciting, he puts the calf to the Dharmā. "Brihaspati has approached thee," (thus) approaching, he says,
15.9.8	"O Dānava, be firm! O Pīrava, be firm!" Having touched the breasts, he should say, "May you swell for the Asvins, for Sarasvati, for Pūshan, for Brihaspati, for Indra, for Indra." The one who is to be milked should be milked in the reverse order.
15.9.9	The Pratiprasthātṛ should silently milk the goat in the reverse order.
15.9.10	Where he knows, "Rise, O Brahmanaspati," having given the two Payas to the Agnidh, having run forward, they take the two Upayaman (cups) with the two Shaphas. The Pratiprasthātṛ takes the first (cup) with the formula, "Thou art Gayatra," the second with the formula, “Thou art Traiṣṭubha,” and the Upayaman with the formula, ”Thou art Jaghana.
15.9.11	Where the milkman knows that there is a disturbance, the Agnidhra approaches.
15.9.12	He waits for the milk being brought, saying, "Come with the share of strength."
15.10.1	He brings the milk to the great hero, saying, "Indra and Asvins, the essence of honey."
15.10.2	He recites this verse when the sun is rising: "I offer you to the ray of the sun, the rain-maker."
15.10.3	"Thou art the honey-offering." (This is) the offering of goat's milk.
15.10.4	Some recite the bringing of goat's-milk offering first.
15.10.5	"Thou art the heat of the sun." (This is the) heating.
15.10.6	"I take thee with the heaven and earth," taking the great hero by the two horns, he cleanses the ashes with a Veda-blade cut at the tip. "I take thee up with the atmosphere," the Pratiprasthātṛ takes it up with the Upayamana-spoon.
15.10.7	"Having taken it with the formula, "I am able to rule you, approved by the gods and the Pitrs,", he rises up with the formula, "Thou art brilliance, thou art brilliance, do thou approach me." He carries it.
15.10.8	Going on without stopping, he explains five names of the wind, "To thee the ocean, to thee the wind, svāhā!"
15.10.9	Five more names of the wind going upwards, "To thee Agni, to thee Agni, svāhā!”
15.10.10	At this time the Pratiprasthātṛ offers on the southern Rauhiṇa post, with the verse, "May the day, the light, the banner, be enjoyed by the Jyotis, may it be well-lighted among the lights. Svāhā!"
15.10.11	Crossing over to the south of the Ahavaniya, he looks at the Brahman with the verse, "May all the quarters be seated on the right side." He looks at the Hotṛ with the verse, “May the divine guests come here.” Having recited the verse, “Svāhā to the Hotṛ of the Agnihotra,” he recites the verse, “The two Asvins have drunk the Agnihotra.” At the Vaṣaṭ-utterance, he offers with the verse, Svāhā to Indra and Agni.” At the Anuvṣṭ-utterance,
15.10.12	The Pratiprasthātṛ, having caused the Pratiṣṭhāna-oblation to be placed on the Uttaravedi, pours it with curds mixed with ghee, reciting the Anuvāka beginning with "O Aśvins, the heat has fallen down."
15.10.13	He recites the verse, "O Iṣā, do thou pour down; O Urja, do thou pour."
15.11.1	He then directs it towards the directions, reciting, "For Tviṣā thee, for Dyumnā thee, for Indriyā thee, for Bhūtī thee."
15.11.2	Having returned, having placed the remaining (Soma) in the Upayamana vessel, having placed it within the altar, having placed the silver in the eastern mound, having placed the great hero in it, he says, "May the Dharma-sword, the good Dharma, the good Dharma be with us. May the Brahmanas hold (it). May the Kshatriyas hold (it). The Vis of the Rajanya may hold (it).
15.11.3	May not the wind scatter thee."
15.11.4	If he were to perform the rite, he should perform it with the formula, "I place thee in the breath of so-and-so."
15.11.5	Here the Pratiprasthātṛ offers the Rauhiṇa offering as before.
15.11.6	Then he offers these pieces of wood on the Upayamana ladle with the formulas, "To Pūṣan, the sharer, svāhā" and so on, in accordance with the respective formulas.
15.11.7	Having smeared the sixth piece on all the pastes, he looks at it and removes it towards the north, saying, "Svāhā to Rudra, the Rudra-priest."
15.11.8	Some people mention the pieces before the offering to Rauhiṇa.
15.11.9	Then having touched water silently, having placed a twig of Kantaki, he offers the Agnihotra from the remaining portion itself with the Upāmantrana (formula), saying "Bhuḥ svāhā" or silently.
15.11.10	All (the participants) having called out together, consume the remaining portion of the Upāmantran.
15.11.11	He invites (the participants) by saying "This one, that one, invite!" using the name of the rite. The reply is "Invited."
15.11.12	The Hotṛ, Adhvaryu, Brahman, Pratiprasthātṛ, Agnīdhra and the sacrificer.
15.11.13	All of them are directly present.
15.11.14	Or the sacrificer alone is directly present. The others are indirectly present.
15.11.15	Having eaten the oblation with the formula, "The oblation is offered, the oblation is sweet," he gives the ladle to the Pratiprasthātr.
15.12.2	Having brought the Āhavaniya fire to the front of the Abhijit sacrifice, the Samrāḍ Āsāḍha places it on the ground with the formula, "Svāhā to thee from the rays of the sun." In the morning, with the formula, Svāhā to thee, from the stars." In the evening,
15.12.3	Where he knows the grass, the Agni, the all-knowing, there he releases the cow, and having touched the cows that are drinking, they perform the peace with the highest Anuvaka.
15.12.4	Thus they perform the Pravargya and Upasad in the evening and morning.
15.12.5	In the Triyagus, it is done six times; in the Satayagus, twelve times; in the Dvadasayagus, twenty-four times.
15.12.6	This is the difference.
15.12.7	With the northern formula he offers the Rauhiṇā cake in the evening. "He offers with the formula, "Do thou protect me from the day, do thou protect me from night. This is thy Agni with the kindling wood. Do thou be kindled. Do thou give me life. Do thou nourish me with splendour." In the evening he places the kindling wood with the formula, "Do thou protect me, do thou protect from the night, do thou protect the day."
15.12.8	In the evening he offers the Agnihotra with the formula, "Agni is light, light is Agni, svāhā." In the morning he offers with the formula, “The sun is light, light the sun, svāhā.”
15.12.9	Or one may offer the Agnihotra with a combined formula.
15.12.10	One should offer the Agnihotra at the Agniṣṭoma.
15.12.11	One should not offer the Agnihotra in the Ukthya.
15.12.12	One should perform the Agnihotra in all the Pṛṣṭhas of the Viśvajit.
15.12.13	He should abstain from meat, intercourse with a woman, and drinking from a vessel made of clay for a year. The remnants of his food should not be consumed by another person. It is understood that the brilliance (of the sacrificer) is transferred to the fire.
15.13.1	While about to dismiss the Pravargya fire, he gives a goat to the Agnidhra, a sheep to the Brahma, a cow to the Hotri, and a golden vessel to the Adhvaryu.
15.13.2	Having placed the other Khara (pot) on the eastern Khara, having mixed the remnants of the Khara, having placed the Samrāḍāsandī towards the north of the Ahavanīya, having placed all the Parigha-pots in it, having taken four spoonfuls in the Udumbara ladle, he offers with the verses, "That which is thy lustre in heaven," according to their sequence.
15.13.3	Or the Pratiprasthātṛ, taking three bundles of grass and a handful of grass, lights one of them in the Āhavaniya, and holds it near his mouth. The Adhvaryu offers on it with the formula, "O Gharmā, thy heat is in heaven." Having lit another one in that (grass), and having struck it in the Āhavanīya before the former one, he holds it near his knees. The Adhvaryu offers on it with "O Gharmâ, thy heat is on the earth."
15.13.4	He strikes him down on the Ahavaniya fire.
15.13.5	The Pratiprasthātṛ leads the wife out, saying, "May Anu-matī follow us today."
15.13.6	They go out, saying, “May Anu-mat follow us.”
15.13.7	They carry out the pestle, the pestle-board, the pins, the ropes, and the two mortars.
15.13.8	He carries out the mortar to the south.
15.13.9	The Adhvaryu, having placed two feet of the Samrāḍāsaṃdyā within the altar and two outside, directs the Prastôtṛ to sing the Sâman.
15.13.10	All the priests with their wives sing the Sâmans three times, reaching the second half of the Sâman, and then the third half beyond the northern altar. Everywhere he directs.
15.14.1	"For thee the highest in heaven" they say when they go forth for the first time; "for thee the highest in Brahman" they say when going forth for the second time; "for the highest in life" they say when proceeding for the third time.
15.14.2	Having placed the Samrāḍ-seat to the north of the northern altar, he instructs, "O Prastôttr, sing the Vârsahara Sâman, sing the Iṣṭahotṛya Sâman." They conclude the Iṣṭa-hotṛya Sâmans, not the Vârsâhara Sâmans.
15.14.3	If he sprinkles from above, then he should instruct the Vârsâhâra Sâmans.
15.14.4	Taking the water-pot, the Adhvaryu sprinkles the Uttaravedi three times, turning towards the right, with the formula, "Thou art charming, thou art the friend of the good." Having placed the pot, he sprinkles three times, turning away from the right, with "Thou wilt give peace and wilt give around."
15.14.5	"Having touched the northern part of the altar with the formula, "The navel of the four-cornered altar is truth," he places the northern part of it with the formula, "The assembly is the life of the universe." Having placed the two northern parts, he arranges them in order.
15.14.6	With the formula, "May I be free from hatred, may I be free from harm," he places a piece of wood with the remnants of the oblations in the Marjālīya region.
15.14.7	Having placed gold in the northern part of that (altar), he places the great hero to be used in the rite on it.
15.14.8	Here only the other two, the eastern and western, or the southern and northern.
15.14.9	Here only he makes the entire enclosure of the sun, circular on all sides.
15.14.10	"He says, "Thou art the milk of the earth," and brings the milk of the great hero. "Thou art the light of the trees, the juice of the plants," and the honey. "Thou art Vājinī, we, the Vājinīs, bring thee down," and the curd.
15.14.11	Thus he fills the second and the third.
15.14.12	Or he may bring ghee first, honey in the second, and curds in the third.
15.14.13	He fills the vessels with curds mixed with honey, saying, "This is your food, this is your excrement." He sprinkles the other vessels, it is understood, for the sake of not being empty.
15.15.1	Now if he is going to make the image of a man, then it is the same up to the first bringing down (of the image). Having brought down the other two here, he makes the form of the head. He places the Veda with its tip uncut above. The form of the tuft is around it. The form of ears is around the two milk-vessels. The form of eyes is around the two ladles. The form of nose is around the Prokṣaṇī vessel. The form of mouth is around the ladle. The form of neck is around the two Dhṛṣṭis. The form of chest is around the two Shapas. The form of shoulders is around the two Rauraṇahāvanīyas. The form of arms is the eastern Methi. The form of back is around the two Dhavitras. The form of sides is in the middle. The form of heart is the third. The form of belly is the Upayamana. He places in it all that is made of intestines. The form of buttocks is the northern Abhri. The form of thighs is around the two pegs. The form of penis is the third in the middle. Around it are the two Rauraṇa-kapālas. The form of heels is the remaining Rauraṇa-pounded grain. The form of marrow is the Veda scattered. The form of fat is the Avaka grass. He covers it with Dhūpata grass. The form of flesh is the mixture of curd and honey. The form of blood is the black antelope skin with the hair turned upwards. The form of hair is the Samrāḍāsandī. He places it above the scattered (image). The form of sovereignty is.
15.16.1	He should consign the ashes on the northern part of the altar for one who desires brilliance. On the northern part of altar for one who seeks food.
15.16.2	He should consign the ashes in front or behind. In the middle of water. On an island in a river.
15.16.3	If he consigns the ashes on an island in a stream, he should not sprinkle.
15.16.4	He should consign the twig of the Udumbara tree in the direction where the person whom he hates is located, saying, "This is the heat of the grief of so-and-so, son of so-and so. I am burning the life of his grief." The grief indeed burns his life. It is known that he suffers distress.
15.16.5	Where there are Darbha grass with continuous sprinkling, one should remove it for one desiring rain.
15.16.6	They say that the daily ritual is performed on the northern altar.
15.16.7	The birds do not peck at it because of the offering to Agni.
15.16.8	Here some prescribe sprinkling.
15.16.9	Then they stand near it, reciting, "You are named Ranti, a divine Gandharva."
15.16.10	"Having recited the formula, "O god, you have approached the gods; I, a human, have approached humans," he circumambulates clockwise. Having recited the formula, "The friendly waters and plants," he cleanses himself in the region of the door, in the place where the ashes are thrown. Having recited the verse, "We have overcome darkness," he stands facing the sun and offers two oblations on the Garhapatya fire with the verses, "We have approached the bright one..." Some say, "They stand up." He offers on the Ahavaniya fire with the verse, "This bright one has approached us..." Some say,"
15.17.1	If the heat should fall, one should recite the two verses, "May the sky fall on the earth."
15.17.2	If lightning strikes while one is moving in the heat, one should offer oblations according to the signs with the verses, "The lightning that strikes from the front."
15.17.3	If it strikes from all directions, one should offer the oblations.
15.17.4	"To Prāṇa svāhā, to Pūṣan svāhā." These two passages are the expiations for the Gharma.
15.17.5-6	He places the summer brick with the Anuvāka, "The heat of him, the shining one, is not painful." With the Anuvāaka, "Those moist wombs of yours, O Agni," and with the Aidiya Citi, the Adhvaryu touches the Agni with the Anuvaka, "You are Agni, you are Vaishvānara." "Earth, heaven, heaven, heaven" are all the expiations.
15.17.7	If the Great Hero were to be cut, one should raise him with two verses: "If he were to be cut," and "If he were cut."
15.17.8	If it were to be cut apart, one should join it with the verse "The moon is shining." Then one should press it together with the verses for strengthening, and with the verse "Whatever is not flesh, whatever is not beans, if one were to press together."
15.17.9	If he has not gone beyond the heat, or has not gone back, then with these two verses, "With energy and wealth, again," he goes back to him.
15.17.10	"Do not let the heat afflict us," these are the eight expiations for the heat being afflicted.
15.17.11	Or else, one should recite these four verses over the heat that is afflicted.
15.17.12	If the sun were to set while one is moving in the heat, one should bind a darbha-blade with gold and recite the verse "Having gone around the darkness" and then stand up. Having offered oblations to the Garhapatya with the two verses "Having gone around" and "The bright one", one should go away. On the next day, one stands before the sun reciting the verse "The birds of heaven".
15.18.1	If the cow does not come at the time of milking, one should milk another cow and give it to the brahmin who is expected to come.
15.18.2	If there is no milk in the cow, one should make a fourth part of curd and feed it.
15.18.3	If one milks curd, one should recite the Barhaspatya hymn.
15.18.4	If one gets milk, one should recite Asvin with the moon.
15.18.5	If one were to milk blood, one should offer with the Raudrī verse.
15.18.6	If the substance were to be lost, one should offer by two verses.
15.18.7	If his calf were to die, one should offer the verse addressed to Vayu.
15.18.8	If something unclean or unfit for sacrifice were to be found, one should offer a verse addressed to Agni. Some say it should be addressed to Agni and Varuna.
15.18.9	If she is attacked by a disease, one should offer oblations to the Ashvina deities.
15.18.10	If she falls down or is defeated, or if a tiger attacks her, one should offer milk and goat's milk mixed with honey.
15.18.11	Some prescribe the sprinkling of Soma juice at the time of the Soma sacrifice.
15.18.12	Here is a discussion on that.
15.18.13	When the dawn is in front, then one should go out. One should go out at dawn, at dusk, at the time of the setting of the sun, at sunrise, or at sunset, at the morning or midday pressing, when the Pavamāna hymn has been chanted.
15.18.14	One should go out in the Āgnīdhra house.
15.18.15	It is known that one should go out only once.
15.18.16	These should be alternated with the Upavasat-pressing.
15.18.17	They eat the hot curds with the Anuvāka "Bhūr Bhuvah Suvar."
15.19.1	The terrible bodies have been explained. The two Anuvākas in the forest and the two Anuvāka-s are the northern ones.
15.19.2	If the fire should go out while the fires are being carried in the summer, one should light it with this formula, "O Indra, moving, do thou protect. Do thou protect me." Having recited this formula, he should light the fire from both sides and hand it over to him, saying, "O Agni, do thou be united with Agni."
15.19.3	Then they stand near him, reciting the remaining part of the Anuvaka, "O Agni! Thy salutations are single."
15.19.4	Now if a vulture, a crow, a heron, an owl, or a bird possessed by a demon should speak with a bloody mouth, saying, "What is this? I am a long-faced owl. What are these demons that have entered me and stretched out my legs?" One should recite these mantras according to the signs, and then perform the same rites as before, such as the Urmuka and Pratyasana.
15.19.5	If the heat-stricken insect is a worm, one should kill the worms with the Anuvāka, "I kill the worms with Atri."
15.19.6	Or this expiation could be done universally.
15.19.7	If one were to perform sorcery on someone, one should offer the blood of that person, having taken it, with the Anuvaka, "Brought from afar, cooked..."
15.19.8	If one is about to curse someone, one should perform the three-night ritual of celibacy and then curse him with the following verse: "I curse you with Brahma."
15.19.9	If one wishes to curse someone, he should bury a plant from his own house in the cowpen with the following verse, "May it be destroyed and withered."
15.19.10	Alternatively, one can shake the right doorpost of the cowpen with this same verse.
15.19.11	If the Udgātṛ does not sing the Puruṣa-sāman, then the Adhvaryu should sing it with the Anuvāka beginning with "Bhūr Bhuvaḥ Suvaḥ".
15.20.1	We shall explain the intermediate consecration.
15.20.2	On a Parvan day, in the bright fortnight, under an auspicious constellation, having shaved the head and beard, having gone out towards the east or north, having spread out the fire on the ground, having arranged everything as before, having touched the Madanti water, having performed the Shanti with the first Anuvaka, he offers four Samidh twigs of Udumbara wood, anointed with ghee, with these mantras: "Earth is the Samidh..."
15.20.3	Then the deity approaches him, saying, "O Agni, lord of vows, I shall observe the vow."
15.20.4	Then he recites the entire text, beginning with the first and ending with the last.
15.20.5	Having performed the peace with the last text, he then closes his mouth and restrains his speech.
15.20.6	Then, having covered his head with a fresh cloth, he goes to the village when the sun has set.
15.20.7	He remains silent all night, whether standing or lying down.
15.20.8	On the next day, having spread out the fire in the prescribed manner, he displays the seven sets of things, some say the seven sets of seven things: fire, sun, water pot, stone, calf, Mahānāgni, and gold as the seventh.
15.20.9	Or else, having displayed the first three, he displays the others as appropriate.
15.20.10	Here, having given this garment to the teacher, he worships the sun with the verse, "May the Suparnas (birds) give me life."
15.20.11	Now, his celibacy is explained.
15.20.12	It is eternal.
15.20.13	One should not eat at night.
15.20.14	If one eats, it should be in a burning fire.
15.20.15	One should avoid thinking about clay.
15.20.16	One should neither speak to a woman nor to a Shudra.
15.20.17	One should wear neither sandals nor an umbrella.
15.20.18	One should climb like a wheel.
15.20.19	One should not look at a dead body, nor bathe.
15.20.20	One should observe the fasts on the eighth day of the lunar month and on the Parva days, refraining from speech.
15.20.21	One should not sleep.
15.21.1	One should perform this vow for one year, and study in that very year.
15.21.2	If one does not study in that year, one should perform this vow until one studies.
15.21.3	When the year is over, when the winter is over, having kindled the fire in the prescribed manner, having spread it out, having dismissed it as before, having touched the Madanti waters, having performed the Sānti with the first Anuvāka, having offered Samidhs with repeated Mantras, having attended to the deities with repeated Mantras and having performed the Sänti with the last Anuvāka and having given a gift to the Guru, he shaves his hair and beard.
15.21.4	Now, his study is always to be done in accordance with the rules.
15.21.5	One should not study without permission.
15.21.6	Not at night.
15.21.7	Not having committed a great sin, not having eaten meat, not having shaved the hair, beard, body hair, and nails, not having combed the hair, not having washed the teeth,
15.21.8	Not at night, not when anointed, not when wet, not in a wet place, not when it is not raining, not when it has not rained, not in the shade, not when the sun has shifted, not looking at green barley, not at the end of a domestic animal, not at the edge of a wild animal, not at water.
15.21.9	Not when seeing a fallen bird, not when seeing blood, not when seeing houses, not when seeing bodies, not when seeing a corpse, not when seeing an unclean vessel.
15.21.10	Having been requested to recite, he should go out towards the east or the north, cover the fire with a grass-mat, arrange it properly, touch the Madanti water, perform the Shanti with the first Anuvaka, and then sit on the Darbha grass with the fire in front, holding Darbha grass or Durva grass, he should recite facing the east.
15.21.11	Or having given a boon, he should recite.
15.21.12	When he is about to be initiated, he should not speak any other words.
15.21.13	If he sees any disturbance anywhere, he should again perform the peace rite and study.
15.21.14	Having studied, he should study the best.
15.21.15	Having gone out for the Pravargya rite and not returning, he should not study anything else.
16.1.1	When he is about to offer Agni, he collects the materials on the new moon day, full moon day, or on the Ekadashi day.
16.1.2	Some people have mentioned the month of Āṣāḍha.
16.1.3	The gods are the priests of Brhaspati, the gods of the gods, the gods, the first-born gods, the gods. Be ye foremost among the gods, the second among the second, the third among the third, the eleventh among the eleven, the thirty-three among the thirty-three. I undertake this in accordance with the rule. May I be able to do what I am doing. May they come to me, may they inspire me. In this Brahman, in this Kshatra, in this Ashi, in this Purodha, in this Karma, in this Devahutis. He offers with four spoonfuls.
16.1.4	Having wiped the ladle and the spoon, having taken eight spoonfuls in the ladle, he offers one oblation with the eight verses beginning with "Yunjana" standing outside the altar.
16.1.5	If one desires, "May he be worse," one should offer each of his oblations while standing crooked.
16.1.6	If one wishes to offer the verses for the sake of fame and sacrifice, it has been said.
16.1.7	"Having taken another fourfold portion, he takes up the chisel with four formulas, "O god Savitr, by your impulse..." The chisel is made of bamboo, black, with holes, without holes, with two edges, with one edge, of the size of a span, of the size a cubit, of the size one can stretch, or of unlimited size. It may be made of Khadira, Palasa, Udumbara, Arka, Karsmarya, Vaikankata, or Sami wood. Any tree that is fit for sacrifice and bears fruit.
16.2.1	Taking up the rope of truth, he says, "O swift steed, run." Taking up the rope for the horse, he says, "O swift steed,
16.2.2	run." Taking up the donkey silently, he says, "Join the young donkey."
16.2.3	The three verses beginning with "In each yoga, your level" are recited by the horses as they proceed to the place where they will dig up the clay.
16.2.4	If one wishes, "May it be a sacrifice for the removal of sins," the donkeys should proceed first.
16.2.5	He recites, "May Agni, the purifier, be like Angiras."
16.2.6	"He recites the verse, "We approach Agni, the domestic, like Angiras." He recites this verse against the one with whom he has enmity. He points out (the direction of) the one whom he sees.
16.2.7	"We shall carry Agni, the domestic and like Angiras, to the anthill." Having taken up the anthill when the sun has risen, he stands over it.
16.2.8	"He moves away from the anthill reciting the verse, ". Agni has announced the dawn's foremost. "
16.2.9	Having come, O horse, having traversed the path, having traversed the earth, having approached, having mounted, having mounted the horse, having mounted the earth, having mounted the sky, having mounted the heaven, having mounted the sun, having mounted the moon, having mounted the stars, having mounted the wind, having mounted the water, having mounted the fire, having mounted the plants, having mounted the herbs, having mounted the trees, having mounted the fruits, having mounted the grains, having mounted the food, having mounted the drink, having mounted the clothes, having mounted the house, having mounted the bed, having mounted the wife, having mounted the son, having mounted the wealth, having mounted the cattle, having mounted the gold, having mounted the silver, having mounted the copper, having mounted the iron, having mounted the lead, having mounted the tin, having mounted the bronze, having mounted the stone, having mounted the wood, having mounted
16.2.10	Stand forth, O thou of the Pṛtanas! Let the enemies be below. Stand like Indra, the slayer of Vṛtra, conquering the fields. Thou art stood forth. He whom thou hatest is below. With the mind he meditates on the horse.
16.2.11	Having made the horse step out twice, saying "Step out, step out", from the pit dug for it, and having made it step towards the north, he should sprinkle water on the horse's foot, saying, "O divine waters!" Having sprinkled water on the foot, he should place gold on the foot.
16.3.1	"I am burning Agni, I am burning thee." Having offered a single oblation with the two verses beginning with "O Agni, thou art the mind," and having taken up the gold, he draws the line around the pit dug out of clay with the three verses beginning with "Agni, the wise lord of wealth." The line is drawn outside the pit, outside the pit, and outside the pit again.
16.3.2	"By the impulse of the divine Savitr," with these two verses he digs out.
16.3.3	"Having taken a lotus leaf, he spreads it with the two verses, 'You are the back of the waters' and 'May you be peaceful and protected.' Having dug the pit with the two verses and spread the black antelope skin with the neck towards the east and the fur upwards, he places the lotus leaf above it.
16.3.4	"Thou art the bearer of all burdens," having recited this, he collects thee, O Agni, from the lotus, on the black antelope skin and the lotus leaf, with four or three Gāyatrī verses for the Brāhmaṇa, with Tristubh verses for the Rājanya, and with Jagatī verses for the Vaiśya.
16.3.5	If one desires, "May he be more prosperous," one should collect it with both kinds of verses.
16.3.6	He takes up eight (measures of earth).
16.3.7	Having touched the earth with the formula, "Do thou be born for the one who is born," and having attracted the earth-digger with the formula, “May Vayu be thy protector," having brought the earth from the pit and having lifted it up, he binds the ends of the skin of black antelope with the formula, "Sujata with light."
16.3.8	"He rises with the Savitri verses, 'Rise, O self-luminous one, upward, O thou who art to be invoked.'
16.3.9	He carries (the calf) with the verse, 'Thou art the born embryo.'
16.3.10	He places it on the back of the ass with the verse, "Be firm, O Vidyanga."
16.3.11	He recites over the placed (calf) with the verse "Be auspicious to the creatures."
16.3.12	They return slowly with the three verses, 'May the horse go forth neighing,' 'May the horse, the steed, go forth neighing.'
16.3.13	"He recites, "I have taken Agni, the domestic, like Angiras," over the one with whom he has a quarrel. He points out by looking at him.
16.3.14	He collects the herbs on the northern side of the house, reciting twice, "This Agni..." He collects them among the flowering and fruit-bearing herbs.
16.4.1	"He sprinkles with the verse, "Do thou sprinkle, do thou sprinkle, the waters are settled, the waters are mighty." "With these three verses he sprinkles the waters. With the two verses, "Mitra has united with the earth," he sprinkles the waters to be united. With the verses, "The earth is the first, the heaven is the second, the sky is the third, the sun is the fourth, the moon is the fifth, the stars are the sixth, the wind is the seventh, the waters are the eighth, the fire is the ninth, the tenth is the heaven, the eleventh is the earth, the twelfth is the sun, the thirteenth is the moon, the fourteenth is the stars, the fifteenth is the wind, the sixteenth is the waters, the seventeenth is the fire, the eighteenth is the heaven, and the nineteenth is the earth," the waters are sprinkled. With the verses "The earth, the heaven, the sky, the sun, the moon, the stars, the wind, the waters, the fire, the heaven, and earth, the sun, and the moon, the heaven, earth, and the stars, the heaven, wind, and the waters, the heaven, fire, and the earth, the heaven and earth, the heaven is above, the earth is below, the heaven is in the middle, the heaven is on the right, the earth is on the left, the heaven is before, the earth is behind, the heaven is at the top, the earth is at the bottom, the heaven is below, the earth is above, the heaven is within, the earth is without, the heaven is outside, the earth is inside, the heaven is inside, the earth is outside, the heaven is without, the earth is within, the heaven is heaven, the earth is earth, the heaven has heaven
16.4.2	And whatever other firm things he thinks of.
16.4.3	Having collected the earth, the Rudras, having collected the earth, having mixed it with the three, gives it to the creator.
16.4.4	Having made a ball of the head of the sacrifice, he touches the skin of black antelope and the lotus leaf with the formula, "You are the head of the sacrificial rite." He holds it with the thumb and the index finger.
16.4.5	The Vasus make you with the Gayatri metre. With four verses, he makes the mouth of the cow, for one with many wives, the Adhvaryu makes it for one with one wife.
16.4.6	The sacrificer recites these mantras while the altar is being made.
16.4.7	It is to be made of three, five or unlimited bricks, square or circular, of the size of a span, of the size equal to the height of an arm, of the size extending to the length of a bow, of unlimited size.
16.4.8	If there are five animals, then the Vājasaneyaka.
16.4.9	He places four corners in each direction.
16.4.10	Or eight-cornered.
16.4.11	For one who is practising sorcery, he should make it nine-cornered, two inches below the hole.
16.5.1	He makes the crest with the formula, "For Aditi, the crest."
16.5.2	At the junction of the two lines of the Ashrina and Rasna, he makes four, six or eight breasts.
16.5.3	Having made a hole, he says, "Aditi may take your hole."
16.5.4	He who makes a pot makes it of this very clay, silently, with four corners and three lines.
16.5.5	The Vasus should fumigate you with the Gāyatrī metre. With seven (verses) he fumigates the hoof with the horse-sacrifice.
16.5.6	Some (say) with the horse-sacrificial verse of Vṛṣṇi.
16.5.7	The fumigation and cooking are done from the Garhapatya.
16.5.8	Having dug a pit in front of the Garhapatya with the formula, "Aditi is thee, the divine one", and having spread it with the materials for cooking blood, he places the pot in it with the formula, “The wives of the gods are thee”.
16.5.9	Having placed the Asāḍhā ladle silently, and having covered it with the materials for cooking the red rice, he places the fire in the Ukhā ladle with four verses, "The goddesses Dhīṣaṇā, etc."
16.5.10	He attends to the cooking of the Ukhā with three Maitrī verses, "May Mitra cook this Ukhā."
16.5.11	"May the god Savitr sprinkle thee when ripe." Having sprinkled it, having placed it in the sand with the verse, "May the earth, the directions, the quarters be filled," he gives it to Mitra with the verse, “I give this pot to Mitra, may it not be broken."
16.5.12	Having sprinkled the Ashadha silently.
16.6.1	The Vasus, with the Gāyatrī metre, let them bind thee. With these four verses he binds the ox-hide with the milk of a she-goat.
16.6.2	Taking seven or twenty-one beans, he goes to the head of a man who has died of a disease, or who has been killed by a king or a Vaisya, or who has died by lightning.
16.6.3	Having placed the beans, he cuts off the head of a human being with the formula, "Thou art this, this is thy head." He places the head of the anthill, cut into seven pieces, in place of the head with the formula, "Thou art the head of him who is here.
16.6.4	He who is the sole lord of this earth, the world of the dead, and whose fame is known in Yama, who is beyond the king, he who is beyond the King, whose fame is known to Yama, he who is the sole Lord of this earth, whose fame is well-known in Yama, who has gone beyond the king, by whom the waters, the rivers, the bow-like (rivers), by whom the heaven and earth are firm, the golden-backed, the very strong, the golden-eyed, the iron-hoofed horses, the horses that do not perish, the king Yama stands as a giver. With these three verses about Yama, he sings.
16.6.5	Some say, "He brings it while reciting."
16.6.6	Taking the head of a man, he says, "May this be for our enjoyment," and brings it, saying, "O Agni, on the lap of the mother earth."
16.6.7	The three-fold heaven goes to the sacrifice, Agni, like a charioteer, bringing the gods to the sacrifice, the lord of strength, the wise. This is the verse. The god Agni has gone around, the destroyer of fiends, the remover of evil. He has driven away all enemies, burning the fiends for all. Having gone around with three verses, having smeared with clay, he places it.
16.7.1	For Agni and Kama, one offers animals, sheep, goats, and a black-headed goat. Having prepared a sheep, a bull, and a bullock,
16.7.2	One recites the Samidheni verses in the reverse order, either twenty-one or twenty-four times, and then the natural verses eleven times, and the Agniki verses ten times.
16.7.3	O Agni, for the sake of great gifts we kindle thee. For thou art the great giver, O bull, of heaven and earth for the priestly office.
16.7.4	I have found this, the giver of strength, the giver of speech, the giver of wealth, the giver of food, the giver of cattle, the giver of horses, the giver of men, the giver of all good things. The giver of all good gifts, the giver of the good, the giver of good things, the giver of everything good, the giver who gives everything good, the one who gives everything good. The one who gives everything, the one who bestows everything, the one whose gifts are everything, the one with everything as his gift, the one who is everything as a gift, the one with all as his gift, he who gives all, he who gives everything, he who gives the good, he who gives good things, he who gives what is good, he who bestows the good, he bestows the good. He who gives the good. He bestows the good things. He bestows everything good. He bestoows everything good. He gives everything. He gives everything good. He who bestows everything good, he who is everything as his gift. He who gives all, the one who grants all, the one with the good as his gift, all that is good, the one with good things as his gift, everything good, the good, the good things, the good things. The one who bestows the best, the one who brings the best, the best, the good, everything good, everything good. The good, the good. The one with the good, the one bestowing the good, the best, everything good, all that is best, the best. The one who brings the good, the bestower of the good, everything, everything good, he bestowing everything good, the best. Everything good, everything good.
16.7.5	"May he be so and so in the other world" - for one who is sick.
16.7.6	"Brihaspati, Savitar, enlighten him" - for one not sick.
16.7.7	"We rise above darkness" - with the Jyotishmati verse.
16.7.8	"The golden embryo arose first" - with the Srucya verse.
16.7.9	"His kindling-sticks are upright" - the Prayajas become the Aprayajas.
16.7.10	The Agniyeya verses are in Tristubh metre. The Agniyeya hymns are in Tristubha metre.
16.7.11	The verses beginning with "He who gives life, who gives the self" are Prajapatiya.
16.7.12	Or else, having cut off the heads of those who have been designated, he places them smeared with clay.
16.8.1	They enter the water and the excrement.
16.8.2	It is known that one establishes (the dead) with the Prajapatiya (hymn).
16.8.3	Or else, in place of all these, one should offer a white goat to Vayu, the controller, on the top of a pot.
16.8.4	The Yajus and Anuvakya verses are related to Vayu and the white one. The deity is Vayu, the Controller.
16.8.5	Having cut off its head, one should smear it with clay and place it.
16.8.6	It has been said that it should be dedicated to Vayu.
16.8.7	For him he offers a cake on twelve potsherds to Agni Vaiśvānara and a Pasupuroḍāśa.
16.8.8	Some say that whatever animal is offered in the fire, it becomes his Pasupuroḍaśa on twelve potsherads to Agni Vaiśvānar.
16.8.9	Having performed this, one should not eat meat, approach a woman, or sleep above (the ground) for a year.
16.8.10	Or else one should eat meat, sleep above, but not approach a woman. This is the Vājasaneyaka view.
16.8.11	Having performed the rites prior to the consecration, one offers the consecration with three oblations.
16.8.12	The Vaiśvānara oblation with twelve potsherds, the third oblation in front of the one who has been consecrated for less than a year.
16.8.13	Having offered the five oblations to the Adhvaras, namely, "To the one who is to be worshipped, to the one who is worshipped, to the Agni of the sacrifice, to the Agni who is to be offered, to the Agni to be offered, svāhā," and having offered the six oblations to Agni, namely, "The Agni of the sacrifice," "The Agni to be offered," "The Agni who is to offer," "The Agni of oblations," "The Agni in the oblations," "Svāhā," and then having offered the seventh oblation to the full Agni, namely, "All the deities are the leaders of the sacrifice,"
16.8.14	If one wishes, "May he die," one should offer after running once. It is known that one makes his breath stop and he becomes deaf.
16.9.1	One who is consecrated carries the fire for a year, three days, six days, or twelve days.
16.9.2	Some say, "He who dies before a year is indeed dead."
16.9.3	It is said, "One is consecrated by Agni."
16.9.4	Having performed the rite of the fist, he covers the pot with a bundle of hemp and says (to the sacrificer) twice, "Do not be afraid." He spreads the embers around the pot, saying, "This pot is heated by your friends."
16.9.5	He smears the pot with the embers, saying, "The pot is heated by the friends."
16.9.6	He places a lump of clay smeared with ghee and hemp in the pot, saying,
16.9.7-10	It has been said that he who has lost his glory. One should take him from the fire of a burning tree if one desires that his country may be prosperous and have plenty of cattle. If one desires prosperity, one should take him from a burning tree. If one desires food, one should take it from a burning tree.
16.9.11	"For the one beyond the year" (he lays down) the Samidha of Vikaṅkata wood.
16.9.12	"For the one beyond that" (he lays) the Samidhas of Sami wood.
16.9.13	This is the reverse.
16.9.14	"Thou art seated on the lap of thy mother" (he says) with three (verses) he approaches the Jatamukhī.
16.10.1	"Whatever Agni, whatever" (he says), with five (verses) he lays down the kindling-wood of Udumbara wood, cut with an axe.
16.10.2	For the subjugation of an enemy, one should offer a twig of the Tivra tree.
16.10.3	One should offer a twig from the Ashvattha tree, saying, "With the fangs, the Malimbas."
16.10.4	One should offer twigs from the Vaikankata tree, saying,
16.10.5	"Whoever is hostile to us." One should offer twigs from a Sami tree, saying, Translation: for the subjugation of a hostile enemy.
16.10.6	One should not proclaim evil against one who has kindled the fire, nor against one who carries the fire, nor one who knows the fire.
16.10.7	"My Brahmanical weapon is sharpened, their arms are stretched out." Thus he recites the highest Yajamana. He silently places the two Udumbara kindling woods.
16.10.8	"Just as a mother would carry her son, the earth will carry the fire-pan, like a womb, in its own place. May Prajapati, the creator of all, unite it with all the gods and seasons." He places the fire-pan on a string made of Muñja grass, six or twelve inches long.
16.10.9-11	The twenty-one-fold Nirbodha is the golden one, the one with the golden thread, the golden one. Sitting down, the sacrificer releases the internal Nirbodha and makes the external Nirbodhas. "He releases the girdle and noose, saying, "All forms." " "He releases the black antelope skin, saying, "Night and day." " 
16.10.12	"You are Suparna, the Garutman." Having looked at the Ukhya (a kind of grass), having taken it, having risen, and placing it above the navel, he says, "You are Vishnu's step." He steps four steps towards the east.
16.10.13	Having recited the verse, "Agni cried out," and the four verses beginning with "O Agni, turning back," he turns around clockwise.
16.10.14	Having released the noose of the sling with the verse, "The highest," he says, "I have drawn it," and stands up with the verse, "The great one stands above the dawns."
16.10.15	If one desires, "May there be a kingdom," one should mentally contemplate that.
16.10.16	The sacrificial grass is of Udumbara grass, the size of a span in length, with a foot-piece the size of a palm, and bound with Muñja grass. It is spread on a wooden board or on a piece of cloth.
16.10.17	"One should sit on it, saying, "You sit on the lap of this mother." On it, one places the fire-pan with four verses."
16.10.18	"Some say, "One places it on sand with three verses, and stands up with the verse, 'May the swans be present.'"
16.11.1	With the verse, "By whom the gods went upward to the light," he kindles the fire with pieces of wood the size of a span.
16.11.2	It burns continuously.
16.11.3	At the time of the vow, having offered an Udumbara twig as kindling wood, he kindles the vow with the verse, "O Lord of Food, grant us food."
16.11.4	"In the impulse of the divine Savitr, with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of Pusan, with the Gayatri metre, I place the evening brick. May it be firm like Angiras, with that deity." In the evening he places the kindling wood.
16.11.5	"With the same Tristubh metre, he places the morning brick." In the morning.
16.11.6	He stands up with the Vatsapra formula, reciting eleven, twelve or thirteen times.
16.11.7	On the previous day he moves in the steps of Vishnu and on the next day he stands up.
16.11.8	Thus always.
16.11.9	If one were to buy Soma on a particular day, one should combine both on that day and move out and stand up.
16.11.10	He undertakes the rites beginning with the making of the fist.
16.11.11	If the god Agni, when being carried on the fire-pan, should be jealous of the creatures, he should place three kindling-sticks with the three Agni-verses, which are healing. "The healing Agni brings us health. Thou art the black-burning Hotr, the one to be praised. O Agni, be our healer among the gods, the bearer of oblations. Thou art the bearer of oblation to the gods. We invoke thee, the healer, we kindle thee, the healer. May the healer be among the gods for us."
16.11.12	If he should desire, "Let it rain," he should offer three oblations with the three rays of the sun. The sun plunges into the waters with his rays, the most powerful, the most brilliant, the most radiant, the most shining, the most luminous, the most glorious, the most excellent, the most brilliant. He who knows the praise, the most brilliant in the Stotra, has reached the ends of heaven and earth. He has encompassed both the heavens and the earth with his greatness, moving with the most excellent ones. He has spread the dark, the divine, the most excellent one. The rays of the sun have covered the darkness, as if with a shield, in the waters.
16.11.13	If he should wish, "Let it not rain," then he should offer three oblations with the three Sūrya-rays that shine.
16.12.1	We see his rays, shining forth like fires, following the people. Like the sun, he shines on all. The golden light of heaven rises in the distance. The sun, shining forth, is the goal. Now the people have been born with the sun. They have made the goals of the waters.
16.12.2	If the fire-brand is dropped while being whirled, he should stand with these four verses: "O Agni, turning back, O Agni, Angiras, again with energy and wealth."
16.12.3	It is known that they find it.
16.12.4	On the day of departure, having taken up the Ukhā with the verse, "May all the gods lead thee forth," and having placed it on the lap of this mother with the four verses, "Thou art placed on the lap of thy mother," one places the Ukhā on the cart with the four verses.
16.12.5	Some place it with three verses, and stand with the verse, "O thou who art like a swan."
16.12.6	Having placed the two fires together, having placed the fire on the back, he goes forth reciting, "O Agni, go with light."
16.12.7	He recites the verse, "Agni cried out," in the form of a sound of the eyes.
16.12.8	Having determined, he offers the fire with the verse, "Having determined," he places the fire-wood smeared with ghee.
16.12.9	With the northern Tristubh verse, with the Rajasya Jagati verse, with the Vaishya Jagati verse.
16.12.10	At the contact of the determination of the vow of fuel, he places the eastern one anointed with ghee.
16.12.11	If he were to place the embers in the ashes, then having taken the embers, having gone to the water's edge, he should say: "Enjoy this good birth, well-built, golden, thousand-streaked, descending from the buffalo, the sweet, the Urva, the ocean-like abode. Drink this sweet teat, the water-born, O Agni, the sweet, Urva, the sea-like abode." Having taken the fire from the embers with these two verses, he should place it in the ashes without stirring it. The ashes should be placed in the water with the three verses: "The ashes are this."
16.12.12	Having taken up the ashes, having pressed and having sprinkled with the formula, "May the ashes be sprinkled," having placed it back in the pot, he again comes up with the formula, “Again with energy, with wealth.”
16.12.13	He again sprinkles the pot with the formula, "May the Adityas, the Rudras and the Vasus kindle you again."
16.13.1	He attends with the formulas, "Be awake, be awake."
16.13.2	The entering of ashes into water is always done by the initiated, when the bricks are prepared, for the purpose of contact, when they are not prepared.
16.13.3	One desiring cattle should do it in excrement.
16.13.4	One desiring a gift should do it in water.
16.13.5	The bricks of the initiated are made in the rites of initiation beginning with a month, before the animal of Prajapati, and the others above it.
16.13.6	He makes bricks of clay, of the size of a foot, of the size equal to the length of an arm, of the size as the length of the thigh, of the size like a small stone, of straight lines, turning to the right, turning to the left, and of three lines.
16.13.7	They cook the bricks with the churning stick.
16.13.8	They become unbroken.
16.13.9	He should not place the broken, black, and marked bricks.
16.13.10	The lotus leaf, the gold, the golden man, the seven naturally perforated stones, the sand, the golden bricks, the five ghee bricks, the Dūrvā grass, the tortoise, the mortar, the pestle, the winnowing basket, the stones, the heads of animals, the head of a serpent, the bricks made of amṛta.
16.13.11	One who is going to perform the first sacrifice should make the altar a thousand cubits high, the second one two thousand cubits high and the third one three thousand cubits high. The higher the altar, the greater is the merit.
16.13.12	One who desires heaven should make the altar very big, very large and very high. This is the opinion of the Vājasaneyins.
16.14.1	When the limit of the consecration has been removed, when it has been removed, he draws a line for the Garhapatya fire, either square or round, and then cleans it with a twig of the Palasha tree or of the Sami tree, saying, "May the goddesses protect us." Having sprinkled it with water, he says, "The ashes of Agni," and scatters sand.
16.14.2	The Sāmnyā is the Uṣaṇs.
16.14.3	While sowing them, he mentally thinks, "Whatever black (grain) is in the moon, may it be here."
16.14.4	"Whatever forms are dear to you," while mixing sand with the Uṣaṇa grains, he spreads the abode of the Garhapatya fire with twenty-one grains, three by three, in the form of a heap.
16.14.5	Make the village. He is your king. Sew the armour. Make many large cities. Make the iron ones invincible. May the cup of good juice strengthen him. This is Agni. Having recited the mantra, he places four bricks in the middle, facing east, for the Garhapatya fire.
16.14.6	"This is thy seat, O Agni, the seasonal one." Two verses are recited in front, either in the same or in the opposite direction.
16.14.7	"Thus in the rear, thou art the enclosing, the enclosing."
16.14.8	The remaining thirteen Lokampṛṇā bricks are placed with the formula, "Thou art the Lokampṛṇās."
16.14.9	With two verses each, he places each Lokampṛṇã brick with the formulas, "Thou art Lokampṛṇă, thou art the pressing out of the cooked oblation."
16.14.10	In all the bricks he places the deity, not bending down.
16.15.1	Having brought up the dung from the place of the sacrificial pit, he arranges it in the fire-pit with the verse to Vaisvānara, "The one who is on the back of the earth."
16.15.2	That becomes the fire-pit.
16.15.3	One should build a five-layered fire-pit, the first one should be built with five layers, the second one with three layers, and the third one with one layer.
16.15.4	One should then build only one-layered fire-pits.
16.15.5	Having touched the Garhapatya fire with the formula, "The mortals have generated the nectar," he places the Ukhā on it with four formulas, "The Samit," etc.
16.15.6	It is said, "They know that these two are enemies, the one in the Ukhā and the one being piled up. The Brahmanical and Yajus formulas are the ones that are piled up. By moving around after piling up, he instructs them with Brahman."
16.15.7	"For the pure one has been born together with the pure one, the ruler, with the sacrifice. The firm observances of him who knows this follow him like a flock of birds. Having recited the two verses thus added together, he places the ladle on the fire, saying, "Like a mother to her son." Having placed the ladle on the embers, he takes up the ladle of Vaisvānara, saying, "What is beyond the world of darkness."
16.15.8	The three bricks of Nirriti are dark and baked in ashes. Taking the noose, the golden thread, and the couch, he goes to the southern and western intermediate directions, saying, "Salutations to you, O Nirriti." Having placed the noose in a pit or a ravine dug by himself, he places the noose with the bricks.
16.15.9	"To her, to thee, to her, to thee," with these three (verses) he offers in the opposite direction, not touching (the fire), and turning to the right.
16.15.10	He does not make her a deity.
16.16.1	"What the goddess Nirriti has bound thee with, having covered them with the net of the bow, having placed the golden thread and the couch beyond, may Nirriti depart from us. Let there be nothing of hers here. The entire evil, the untraversable, the unassailable, we remove all that. May the noose of Nirriti, the hundred deaths, depart from us. The nooses and the hundred deaths which have departed, may they be well. The hundred nooses and deaths which are for the mortal to destroy, we have removed them all by the magic of the sacrifice. The goddess Nirriti, I am binding, as a father his son, with words. She who knows the head of every being born, she who looks at the head of every sun." Having recited these four verses, having sprinkled with the Vaisvânara verse, having approached with "Salutations to prosperity", they go without waiting.
16.16.2	It is known that Nirriti and Antarhitti are the goddesses.
16.16.3	"The goddesses are known as 'May the goddesses be auspicious to us.' They cleanse with water."
16.16.4	Bearing strength, of good mind, of good understanding, I come to the houses, rejoicing in my mind. With the bright eye, with the auspicious eye, I look upon the houses, looking upon the houses, we shall live long. We shall live long, we shall live out the life of our houses. May they live long, may they live out the life, of the houses. I approach the houses with a good mind, the slayer of the childless, of the house of the heroic, of the very heroic.
16.16.5	The two verses, "Nivāsanaḥ, etc." are recited while approaching the Āhavaniya and Gārhapatya fires.
16.17.1	One undertakes the rites of the king's Nivapana and other rites.
16.17.2	Having performed the Prāyaniya rite, one measures out the altar.
16.17.3	Having released speech with the Havishkṛt verse, according to the Vājasaneya school.
16.17.4	One undertakes rites beginning with the Dhruva of the Prāyaniye rite.
16.17.5	Having performed the Atithya rite, one measures the fire.
16.17.6	Having released speech with the Havishkrit formula, according to the Vājasaneya school.
16.17.7	Having brought a green Darbha grass stalk with roots, and having buried it in the middle of the fire, taking five spoonfuls of clarified butter, one offers five oblations on the Darbha grass stalk, reciting the verse "The year with its seasons, with its rays, with its light, with its heat, with its smoke, with its fire, with its ashes, with its wind, with its clouds, with its rain, with its lightning, with its thunder, with its stars, with its planets, with its constellations, with its sun, with its moon, with its darkness, with its light."
16.17.8-14	The length of the bamboo should be equal to the height of the sacrificer with arms raised. Three towards the east and four towards the north. The wings and tail should be of the size of a man. The body should be four cubits in size. With a cubit, one should extend the right wing towards the south. Similarly, the left wing towards the north. The tail should be extended towards the west with a span or a vitasti.
16.17.15	The first fire is of one kind, the second of two kinds, the third of three kinds. They rise thus from the hundred kinds.
16.17.16	Now indeed, he should build it as of seven kinds. The natural fire is indeed of seven kinds. Beyond that, one by one, says the Vājasaneyaka.
16.17.17	"Thou art the gentle earth, thou art the protector of cattle, thou art the bestower of peace. Thou art the best of mountains." With these two verses they step over the measured fire.
16.18.1	"He gives the order: 'Let the rope be fastened.'
16.18.2	"Having taken out the water from the pit, he says: 'The pit has been emptied.' He sprinkles water on the places where the water was.
16.18.3	There they make the oxen drink.
16.18.4-5	He yokes the plough with two (verses), "They yoke the furrows." He yokes the furrow with two (verses). The furrow is six-fold, twelve-fold, or twenty-four-fold.
16.18.6	"The yoke-halter, the yoke-halter, and the yoke-halter of the two oxen, and the yoke of the two oxen; we know your names, O bearers, of the yoke, of the yoke-halter. Having recited the formula, he rises from the seat. The ox-winner, the wealth-winner, the horse-winner, the gold-winner, surrounded by the truthful, with the single-wheeled chariot, Savitr has come to the portion of strength, to the earth, and has filled it. He raises the plough.
16.18.7	This is the Brahmanic hymn, "Thou art born," which is not to be violated. The first of you, in which they perform their deeds, do not injure our heroes here. That he has placed before him, he has surrounded with the bow for the sake of winning the prize. He has surrounded the enemies, the destroyers, for the sake of the enemy. Thou art going with a thousand streams, they have united with thee. The honey-tongued ones are flowing in the sky of heaven. His steps do not fail, the brown ones. At every step there are the snares, the bridges. Thus he offers the Brahmanic protections.
16.18.8	You are the thirteenth month named Malimluca. You are Indra's armor, you are Indra's protection, you are Indra’s refuge. I take refuge in you.
16.19.1	I enter the Gayatri with the hairs, I enter the Tristubh with the skin, I enter the Jagati with the flesh, I enter the Anushtubh with the bones, I enter the Pankti with the marrow, I enter the Indra-Agni with the fat, the many-layered armour, which is fierce, which all the gods, the wise ones, do not pierce through, may that protect us, may that protect all of us. May we attain old age, having long life, with the gods. They enter the measured Agni.
16.19.2	He ploughs with two (verses), "The plough is the best."
16.19.3	The poor men drive the cattle.
16.19.4	He ploughs from the tail to the head.
16.19.5	"O cow, yielding what is desired, yield what is desired," turning to the right, he ploughs three times each of the three collections of verses.
16.19.6	They are mixed in the middle.
16.19.7	From the right shoulder to the left, from the left to the right, from the right shoulder to below the left shoulder, from the left shoulder to below the right shoulder. This is the opposite.
16.19.8-9	Release the cattle, O ye who are free from sin, the way to the gods. We have crossed over to the other side of this darkness. The light, the water, the heaven has gone to me. He releases the cattle on the right or left shoulder, and then releases them towards the east. He gives them to the Adhvaryu. The Vājasaneyins prescribe a square altar with sixteen parts, without any gaps.
16.19.10	He carries fifteen handfuls of seeds, twelve for the ploughed and three for the unploughed.
16.19.11	With fourteen (verses) he sows the plants, "Those plants that have been born."
16.19.12	The sowing has been described.
16.19.13	Sesamum, beans, rice, barley, Priyangu, wheat, barley, wheat, bamboo, Syāmāka, Nīvara, Jartila, Gavidhuka, wild, and Markataka are to be known.
16.19.14	The seven kinds of wild plants are to be found in cultivated fields, and the seven kinds of cultivated plants are to be obtained in uncultivated fields.
16.20.1	Where one cannot obtain any kind of plant, one should sow barley mixed with honey at various places.
16.20.2	One should think mentally, "You are raised for me."
16.20.3	When one obtains a plant, one should tie it to the first kindling wood that comes along.
16.20.4	Those who are the fruit-grabbers of the trees, he should place them in the fire-wood and sprinkle them.
16.20.5	"He collects the stones from the four directions with the words, "May the creator of the earth not harm us." Those which have fallen from the inside to the outside.
16.20.6	He should take a small stone from the direction where the person he hates is located, saying, "I take the strength and energy from here."
16.20.7	He touches the spaces between the stones with ghee, saying, "With ghee, O Sita."
16.20.8	He sows the northern altar, as big as the fire.
16.20.9	Having performed the Vyāghāraṇa rite, he places six sand-grains with the verse, "O Agni, may our voice be thy voice." Having placed the grains, he covers the place of the Āhavanīya fire with an unlimited number of sand-grains with verses such as "The well-covered one is well-covered." As in the case of the Garhapatya fire, so here also.
16.20.10	For one desiring cattle, with three sevens; for one desiring to conquer his enemies, with nine; for one desiring food, with ten; for one desiring the unlimited, with an unlimited number.
16.20.11	One for whom one desires to be without cattle, that is said to be unlimited.
16.20.12	"He arranges sand with the verse, "Grow, do thou swell,"
16.20.13	With the northern Tristubh verse, for a king.
16.20.14	The Soma, the red bull, the tawny one, like a king, has roared over the cows. Purified, he has returned to his imperishable abode, like a hawk to its nest, filled with ghee. This is the Jagati metre of Vaishasya.
16.21.1	From the Atithya and Dhruva rites, one undertakes this and other rites.
16.21.2	In the morning, he places the bricks of the first layer on the eastern side of the eastern door, on a red skin of a cow with its neck towards the east and with its hair pointing upwards, either three bricks of his own accord or three bricks of the Viśvajit sacrifice.
16.21.3	Having sprinkled them with a handful of darbha grass and clarified butter, and having lifted them up, he instructs the priests to recite the Anuvāka when the fires are being taken out.
16.21.4	When the first Anuvāka has been recited three times, the priests proceed towards the east, reciting, "Hiranyagarbha, the golden embryo, came forth first."
16.21.5	They lead a white horse in front.
16.21.6	May Prajapati place thee; mayst thou be firm like Angiras with that deity. Having touched the northern altar with this verse, he takes Agni in himself with the two verses, "I take Agni first in myself; Agni is our father." Having taken Agni in himself, he touches the naturally produced fire with the verse, "O Agni, those are thy kindling woods.
16.21.7	The Adhvaryu or the sacrificer builds up the fire with bricks.
16.21.8	When building himself, he touches the fire in himself, not the one built by himself.
16.21.9	There is a debate among the groups regarding whether to place the bricks facing east or west.
16.21.10	The statement of the performer is that one should place the bricks facing either east or west.
16.21.11-14	To the right stands a white horse. Having worshipped it, one should recite the verse "Indra, having increased all, with the northern part of the tail, one should place the bricks in the reverse order." To the north and behind is the Agni. One recites the verse "May my speech be present" while ascending and descending everywhere, reciting it once at the end.
16.22.1	"I approach you with the Brahman, bowing down." Having offered at the mouth of the house, he mounts the horse facing east. Having stepped on the darbha grass with the right foot, and having turned clockwise, he again steps on it, saying, "What you cried out."
16.22.2	"You are the back of the waters." Having placed a lotus leaf on the horse's hoof, he instructs, "Sing the abode of the waters."
16.22.3	Having placed on the lotus-leaf a golden image of Brahma, lying face upwards, and having placed on it a golden image of Hiranyagarbha, lying face downwards, and having placed a golden image of man, lying face upwards and with its head towards the east, and having placed it on the leaf, he directs the singing of the Purusha-saman.
16.22.4	Having touched the man with the verse, "Let Drapça descend", and having recited the three verses, "Salutations to the serpents", and having sprinkled the man with the five verses beginning with "Do thou sprinkle the protection", and having placed the man on the Uttaravedi as described, he places the ladles.
16.22.5	"Then he places the ladle full of ghee on the right side of the man, saying, "I place you with the brilliance of Agni." He places the ladle full with curds on the left side of the man with the words, "I settle you with the strength of Indra." The ladle full of curds is made of Udumbara wood.
16.22.6	He stands by the ladle full of cur ds with the words, "Agni is the head." He stands by the ladle made of Udumbare wood with the words, "Bhuva is the sacrifice." This is the opposite.
16.22.7	He places them with the two verses beginning with "Murdhanvatī" and says "Stand up with the Yajus".
16.22.8	Here, one should spread the golden sheet like a man.
16.23.1	Having touched the naturally perforated stone with the formula, "Thou art Dhruva, thou art Dhruva; thou art Dhruvan; thou art Dhuruṇa; thou art Dhruta," having smelt it with the horse, having placed it in the middle of the fire along with a Brāhmaṇa who does not know (the meaning of the formula), with the formula, “May Prajapati place thee on the back of the earth," with this Vyāhṛti, "Bhūḥ."
16.23.2	Having offered into the naturally perforated stone, with the formula, "I offer the Citti," he exhales.
16.23.3	The ignorant Brāhmaṇa gives one, two or three boons.
16.23.4	Seated, he lays down the first Svayamātrṇṇā; standing on tiptoe, the second; standing, the third.
16.23.5	He orders, "Sing the Sāman on the Svayamātrņṇā."
16.23.6	Having laid down the second and third, he orders thus.
16.23.7	If the sacrificer thinks that his enemy has gone before him, he should carry the eastern brick with the formula, "Thou art the foremost." If he thinks that he has gone after him, he should move the western brick with the formula "Thou art the earth." If he thinks he is equal to him, he should shake the brick with the formula "Thou art the earth, thou art the world."
16.23.8	"Thou art brilliance, grant me brilliance" - this is the golden brick.
16.23.9	"Thou art the earth and water, with food" - this is a circular brick.
16.23.10	You are the earth, the seed of the world, the brick, the heavenly world. I ascend you with speech. Agni is light, light is Agni. With that deity, be firm like Angiras. You are the sun, the seed of heaven, the brick, heavenly world. I climb you with mind. The sun is light, light the sun. With that deity be firm like Angira. Thus one climbs two.
16.24.1	The two verses, "Growing from stalk to stalk" (RV 10.189.1), are recited while taking the bricks of green grass, with soil, and the tip of the grass is not cut off so that the tip of the covering grass may reach the top.
16.24.2	The two verses, "Those rays of yours, O Agni, in the sun" (RV 8.48.1), are chanted while placing two gold pieces on the brick of the right arm.
16.24.3	Viraj, Jyoti, these are the three seed-sowing.
16.24.4	Of these two should be placed in the first layer, one in the middle layer, and one in the last layer, of the young, all in the middle layer of the old, one in the first layer and one in the upper layer.
16.24.5	One should place one of the one who is hated.
16.24.6	One places these two with the Yajus, the middle one with the mind.
16.24.7	Brihaspati should place you on the luminous surface of the earth. (Thus) the Vishvajit.
16.24.8	The two Samyanyas (verses) are those which belong to Agni.
16.24.9	Madhu and Madhava are the two Ritavyas (verses) having the same deity.
16.24.10	In all the Ritavyas, one places the Avaka in the water.
16.24.11	Some say that one should place it in the Avaka.
16.24.12	With two verses, "O Ashadha, etc." one should place the Ashadha stone above the Lakshama stone.
16.24.13	If one desires, "May he be more powerful," one should place the stone above the Lakshma stone. This is said.
16.24.14	Having placed the stone for the summer season, one should place the Kulayani stone.
16.24.15	There are two mantras for the Pravargya rite.
16.25.1	"O Soma, thou art the honey, thou art the wind, thou art the truth, the eternal." Having anointed the tortoise with honey mixed with curds with these three verses, he places it facing east, alive, with its head towards the east, in front of the naturally perforated stone.
16.25.2	"May the four directions be filled with fires." Having covered the one who is to be sacrificed with a net, having surrounded him with stakes, having gone to the deep water, may the sun not burn you. May Agni Vaisvānara, the benign one, look upon the creatures. May the heavenly rain follow you. May you move towards the three oceans, the heavenly worlds, the lord of waters, the bull, the bricks. Go there where the ancestors have gone before. Wearing the excrement, may you go to your own place according to your own way." Having covered it, he recites this.
16.26.1-2	"O Ulukhalaka, you are employed in every house. Speak out the most brilliant one, like the Dundubhi (drum) of the victorious ones." He places the Ulukhalam, made of Udumbara wood, measuring four inches and having four corners, on the left shoulder. The Musala is of unlimited size.
16.26.3	"Then, O tree, the wind blows thy top. And also, pour the Soma for Indra to drink in the mortar." Having filled the mortar with all herbs and having brought it, he places it in the middle of the fire with the verse, "This is Vishnu's wandering."
16.26.4	"This is Vishnu' s supreme abode." The pestle.
16.26.5	"This is the heaven of Vishnu." The winnowing basket.
16.26.6	The two (sisters) were joined together by nectar. The cow stood on the altar over her sister. The truth was known by the ancient sages. May Agni, the knower, do that here. He fills the ladle with ghee, curd, honey, sand, or with all (of them).
16.26.7	One should not look at the empty ladle after mixing it. It becomes pierced by a thorn.
16.26.8	Then he pours water into it.
16.26.9	Some prescribe filling it up.
16.26.10	If one desires, "May he be hungry," then one should put in less than that. This is what is said.
16.26.11	"You are the firm earth," he places in the middle of the fire.
16.26.12	Earth, be thou settled in the earth. Mother, be thou settled on the mother. The gentle one, be thou settled upon the gentle one. The ladle has been placed upon the altar, the sister of the earth. The truth which the ancient sages have spoken, Agni, the knower, may he place it here. He places the wooden ladle. This is according to the Vājasaneyins.
16.26.13	Having offered into the ladle with two verses, "O Agni, do thou yoke those that are thine, do thou yoke the invoked gods," he places the gold-plates on the head of the man.
16.27.1	"The drop has fallen" (he says) at the mouth. "This became" (he says), "of the entire world."
16.27.2	"To thee, O Richi" (he says at the right eye-socket). "To thee, O Ruci" (he says in the left eye-socket).
16.27.3	"To thee O Dyuti" (he says on the ears).
16.27.4	"In the south, in the light, in the north, in the light."
16.27.5	With the ladle of melted butter, he fills the human head with curds mixed with honey, reciting, "May they flow together."
16.27.6	The Vājasaneyins prescribe the covering of all animal heads with gold plates and filling them with melted butter.
16.27.7-8	Having taken the head of a man, the egg of the sun, and having placed it in front of the cauldron, with its chin towards the east, stretched out, facing east, having offered oblations at the corners of the eyes with the two half-verses "The bright one of the gods," he places the heads of animals.
16.27.9	"The wind's speed" (is the name) of the horse, going eastwards.
16.27.10	"The constant moon" (is the) name of the bull, going westwards.
16.27.11	"Varuni, the wife of Tvashtri" (is the), name of the bull going northwards.
16.27.12	"Who is Agni, Agni" (is the ) name of the goat, going southwards.
16.27.13	He worships them with the offerings without interruption.
16.27.14	"Do not injure this biped," for a man.
16.27.15	"Do not injure this one-hoofed animal," for a horse.
16.27.16	"This ocean," for a bull.
16.27.17	"This wool," for a cow.
16.27.18	"The goat is Agni's," for a goat.
16.27.19	If it is for Vayu, having placed all the sacrificial posts in the place of the principal post, one should worship with all the offerings.
16.27.20	Or, having placed it in the respective places, he offers it with the respective offerings.
16.27.21	If one desires, "May his food be less," one should say, "The one in between him."
16.27.22	"Salutations to the serpents!" One should place the head of the serpent on the right shoulder, with the heads of the animals facing downwards.
16.27.23	Or, one should recite the mantra and not place it.
16.28.1	May it be the Chhandas. Earth is the deity. By that Rishi, by that Brahman, by that deity, may it be firmly established like Angiras. May it be the Prama Chhandas. Space is the deity. The Pratima Chhandas. Heaven is the deity. Sun is the deity. May it be firmly established. The Asrivi Chhandas. The directions are the deity. Moon is the deity. Viraj Chhandas. Speech is the deity. Varuna is the deity. Gâyatrî Chhandas. Goat is the deity. Brihaspati is the deity. Trishtup Chhandas. Gold is the deity. Indra is the deity. Jagatî Chhandas, Cow is the deity. Prajapati is the deity. Anushtup Chhanda. Wind is the deity. Mitra is the deity. Ushnih Chhandas. Eye is the deity. Pûshan is the deity. Pankti Chhandas. Agriculture is the deity. Parjanya is the deity. Bhrîhâti Chhandas, Horse is the deity. Parame-sthî is the deity. By that Rishi, by the Brahman, by that Deity, may it be firm like Angiras. Thus he builds three times with these twelve (bricks) towards the west in the shape of a man.
16.28.2	The head of a man is her head.
16.28.3	The man who has a thousand heads, the sacrificer stands near the one who is near the man Narayana.
16.28.4	He places five bricks towards the east with the formula, "I place thee in the abode of waters." Five towards the south with the formula, "I place thee in waters." Five towards west with the formula, "I place thee in abode of waters."
16.29.1	Those who have grasped the sacrifice for the gods, may they lead us to the heavenly world, the world of the gods, the world of immortality. Those who establish the luminaries, ascending to heaven, to the world of immortality, may they know and lead us to the sacrifice, to the world that is well-done. Those animals that have become the womb of the sacrifice, the wise ones give them, knowing the sacrifice, to those who know the world that is good. The path that is spread out, the path of the gods, is taken by the metres. He stands on heaven, on the atmosphere, having taken the sacrifice, to that world that is well done. The sacrifice that has a thousand streams, that is established on heaven and earth, may the sacrificer come with it, to the world above heaven. Five golden bricks, one in each direction, one in the middle.
16.29.2	To Ayas, svāhā! To Yoṣkṛta, svāhā. To Yoṣpatvana, svāhā, to Viṣṇu, svāhā; to Bṛhaspat, svāhā." Thus, having offered five oblations to the waters, he emerged from the earth and the juice, and came forth for the sake of all beings. Tvashtri fashioned his form. This is the hymn of the universal-born Purusha. Having placed this, you are the one who exists as truth, you are the existence of truth, you are existence of brilliance, you are existence as splendor, you are existence in fame, you are the singer, you are the abode, I offer you to the abodes, I offer you for the abodes, you are the union, I offer you the union, you are the wealth, I offer you wealth, you are the power, I offer you power, you are the prosperity, I offer you prosperity, you are the work, I offer you work, you are the action, I offer you action.
16.30.1	Thou art the thunderbolt. For the thunderbolt thee! For the thunderbolts thee! Settle in the thunderbolts! Protect the nobility, swell the nobility, invigorate the nobility, grant the nobility, strengthen the nobility, thou art the nobility, for the nobility thee! For the nobles thee! Settle in nobles! I settle thee in all the earthly ones, I settle thee in the all the heavenly ones, I settle thou in all the divine ones, I settle in all the waters, I settle in the all the plants, I settle thee among all the trees, I settle thee on all the directions. Settle in heaven! Thou art the conqueror of the sky, thou art the conqueror of battle, thou art the conquerer of the earth, thou art the victor, thou art the universal victor, thou art all-conqueror, thou art the winner of the sacrifice, thou art the gainer of wealth, thou art the brother, thou art the divider, thou art the separator, I settle thee, the thunderbolt, the slayer of enemies, I settle thee the thunderbolt, the destroyer of excess, I settle thee thee thunderbolt, the destroyer or foes, I settle thee thunderbolt, the slayer or demons, I settle thee Indra, the thunderbolt, destroyer of foes, destroyer of enemies, destroyer of kinsmen, destroyer of Asuras. Thou art the rising, thou art the rising up, thou art the raising up, thou art that which is being raised up, thou art what is being raised up. Thou art the raising up. Thou art that which is raised up. Thou belongest to heaven, thou art heaven. Settle in the desire, settle in the strength, settle in the fortune, settle in the wealth, settle in the good fortune, settle in earth, fit for sacrifice, settle on Vishnu's back, settle in the place of Ida, settle in the ghee, settle in the swelling, settle in the spreading.
16.31.1	In the year, in the half-year, in the quarter-year, in half the quarter-year may I be seated. In the year, may I be seated in the year. May I be seated in one, may I be seeded in ten, may I be settled in a hundred, may I be situated in a thousand, may I be established in ten thousand, may I settle in a hundred thousand, may I find a place in a million, may I be located in ten million, may I find rest in a hundred million, may I settle down in a billion, may I be in the middle of a billion, may be in the middle, may I be at the end of a lotus, may I be on the other side of the half-year. Thou art the swelling, thee to the swelling, thee for the swellings, thee for the swelling. Thou art the truth, thee for the truth, thee to the truths, thee for the truths. Thou art the union, thee for the union, thee to the unions, thee for the unions. Thou art the joining, thee for the joining, thee to the joinings, thee for joinings. Thou art the prosperity, thee for the prosperity, thee to the prosperities, thee for the prosperities. With these two sections, with the verses of the sages, with the statements of the settling of the bricks, and with the repetitions.
16.32.1	This is the east. There are fifty beings who breathe in. Ten in each direction, ten in the middle, placing the outer ones outside and the inner ones inside.
16.32.2	The east is the direction of the fifty beings who breathe out, as with the beings who breathe in, placing the outer one outside and the inner one inside.
16.32.3	"May the life-breath be continuous from the life-breath, may the out-breath be continuous, may the through-breath be continuous. May the eye be continuous, may hearing be continuous, may mind be continuous, may speech be continuous, may self be continuous, may earth be continuous, may space be continuous, may heaven be continuous, may nectar be continuous." Thus twelve continuities.
16.32.4	Earth is the cow, the new moon is the calf, the plants are the embryo, Agni is the suckling, the Agnihotra is the milk. The sky is the cow, Dhātā is the calf, Rudra is the embryo, Vāyu is the suckling. The sun is the cow, Vṛṣṭi is the calf, Indra is the embryo, the wind is the suckling.
16.32.5	Having filled the pot and the pot-like vessel with water, he places them in front, saying, "May you be peaceful, may you be protected. I place you in the presence of the deity Savitr, may you be sweet." Having placed the two golden plates, he says, "For your light."
16.32.6	Thus, the subsequent ones are to be recited in the subsequent directions. Four in the middle.
16.32.7	"The bright ones, the vigorous ones, the powerful ones, I take with the deities of Indra."
16.33.1	Be ye true and faithful. I place the sweet ones in your eyes, in the impulse of the divine Savitr. Be ye the rulers of the Mandara. I take you, the destroyers of foes, the destroyers of enemies, of all the gods, in the impulse... Be ye the rulers over the seed. I take you the destroyers of foes... Be ye the lords of the cattle. I take you... Be ye the protectors of the cattle. Be ye the lords over the cattle. I place the sweets in your cattle, in the impulse ... Be ye the lords who protect the cattle. I have taken you, the destroyers... Be ye the owners of the cattle. Translation: Be ye true and steadfast. I place the honey-sweet ones in your eyes in the impulse of Savitr, the divine. Be ye the Mandara rulers. I take you as destroyers of foes and enemies, of all gods, in the Savitr's impulse. Be ye the owners over the seed. Be ye the cattle-owners. I take you ... Be ye the cattle protectors. Be ye the masters of the cattle. In your cattle I place the honey sweets, in the impulse. Be ye cattle-protectors. I have taken ... Be ye cattle-owners. The taking, placing, and fastening of the pot-bricks.
16.33.2	"O golden-coloured one!" he recites, placing it.
16.33.3	"May you be in heaven!" He places the barley-cake dedicated to Brhaspati and the rice-gruel in milk in the middle of the bricks.
16.33.4	"They go to another place" (RV 10.18.1) is the verse. The lord of waters is golden-coloured, he has a golden appearance. He is indeed golden-coloured, sitting on a golden-coloured womb. Those who give food to us, they give food to us. With these two verses, one should offer cooked rice.
16.33.5	"The three-fold is thy head, O Agni; that is my head. The fifteen-fold are thy arms, O Agni; those are my arms. The seventeen-fold is thy body, O Agni; this is my body. The twenty-one-fold are thy thighs, O Agni; these are my thighs. The twenty-nine-fold are thy two knees, O Agni; they are my two knees. The thirty-three-fold is thy support, O Agni; it is my support." Thus he places them on the head, on the wings, in the middle, and on the tail.
16.33.6	"O Agni, your head is three-fold; by that, do thou protect me." The sacrificer stands by the ends of the bricks while arranging them.
16.33.7	"O Agni, you are the bull." Having placed the bull, he says, "Fill up the world; these are the offerings of the Suddha-dohsa." He covers it with unlimited Lokamprana bricks.
16.33.8	One should make all the bricks of all colours.
16.34.1	The authority of the lines is known.
16.34.2	The lines which are turned to the right should be laid down on the right side, those which are turned to left on the left side, the straight lines behind and in front, the three lines drawn in the middle.
16.34.3	Having placed gold in the altar, he touches the altar with the formula, "This is the altar, this is not the altar."
16.34.4	Whatever is not thought of by you, whatever is thought of by you—O Agni, whatever is deficient or in excess, the All-gods and the Angiras have thought of it. May the Adityas fill your thought. Whatever are your kindling woods, O Agni, whether thought of or not, may we, O Agni, be rich in wealth. May we be ready for the sacrifice, for the gift, for the pressing. May the pressing stone speak. May we learn Indra with the rays of Soma, with the moon, with the son, with the prosperity of wealth. Grant us the share of strength, the sweet, the truthful. We shall prepare the sacrifice, shall press Soma. With the sacrifice we shall learn you, O Shakra, O lord of wealth, we have heard you, O lord of riches, O Agni, of cattle, of horses, of plenty, of gold, of food. Come to me. The sky and earth yield milk to you. May the serpent with water flow around you. I delight myself with Prajapati. My self is empty. The Rudra who is in the fire, who is in the water, who is in plants, who is the Rudra who has entered all worlds, to him Rudra, salutations. With these (verses) he touches himself with the Svayambhu (verses).
16.34.5	To the north stands the horse, black or grey.
16.34.6	Having offered it, he brings dung from the cattle-shed and arranges it on the pyre with the verse addressed to Vaisvānara, "May the gods arrange thee."
16.34.7	That becomes the pyre.
16.35.1	The Agni who is in the waters, who is in Vritra, who is in man, who is in stone, who has entered all the worlds, to those Agneis may this be offered. The Agni who is in Soma, who is in cows, who has entered the birds, who has entered beasts, who is in bipeds and quadrupeds, to those Agneys may this be offered: "He who is praised in heaven, by whom Indra's chariot was joined, who is Vaiśvānara, who is Vaišvadevya, who is wise, who is Sakra, who is the overlord, who is invincible," to those Agneīs may this be offered The Agni who gives gifts, whom they call the giver of desires, whom they call giver and receiver, who is the deity of the gods, who is born of Tapas, to those Agneyis may this be offering be made. With these six verses he offers on the layer of the altar.
16.35.2	"O Agni, the bountiful one!" (with this verse) he offers on the enclosing sticks of the Agni-fire. He offers on the enclosing stick of the Agni- fire.
16.35.3	Some say, "One should stand up."
16.35.4	It has been said that one should touch the first layer with the Agni-verse in the Gāyatrī metre.
16.35.5	O Agni, do thou bring the gods here, the born, to the well-spread out grass. Thou art the Hotar, the one to be praised. We have approached the most excellent one with great mind, the one who shines, the one who is kindled in his own abode, the one with variegated rays, between the two worlds, the one who has been well-offered from all sides, the one who turns towards us, the one who bestows wisdom, the one who adorns the assembly, Agni, the Hotar, Agni, the one who encompasses, Agni, the mind. You are the one who is equal to the oblation of the young. The men choose you for the great. No one else. We honour you, O Manu, we honour you, O Agni, O Manu, O Angiras, the one who worships the gods. Agni, the one with horses, the one who possesses all men, gives to the clan. Agni, the giver of wealth, the one who belongs to us, goes to the good. He bestows food on the singers. These are mentioned.
16.35.6	There are six Upasads.
16.35.7	He offers on each day with each Upasad-formula.
16.35.8	One who is not performing the Upasads erects the fire for two days.
16.35.9	The last day of the Upasads. The last day of the Cit.
16.35.10	Three Vratas with four cups, three with three cups, three with two cups, and one with one cup.
16.35.11	Having performed the Apraharana rites in the afternoon, having yoked the white horse, they stay. They stay.
17.1.1	On the next day, having performed the Prāharaṇa rites in the morning, he lays down the second Citi.
17.1.2	He lays down the five Ashvini stars with the verse, "The firm earth."
17.1.3	Having laid down the five seasonal Ashvini stars with "The seasons are united,"
17.1.4	"Protect my life!" Five verses on the five vital airs, with the Rtavya (verse) at the end.
17.1.5	"The waters flow..." Five verses on the waters, with the concluding verse.
17.1.6	"What belongs to Vayu..." Two verses on the journey.
17.1.7	"Bright and pure..." Two verses on Rtavya, with the same deity.
17.1.8	"The five (verses) beginning with "Tryaviḥ vayam" (we are three times) on the right hip, the five beginning with "Paṣṭhavāḍ vayam" on the left, the five beginning "Vastaḥ vayam" on right shoulder, the five beginning "Vṛṣṇiḥ vayam"on the left, the four beginning "Vyaghro vayam" on left wing, the four beginning "Siṃho vayam" onright, the four beginning "Puruso vayam" in the middle, the four beginning “Viṣṭambho vayam” on the right side, the four beginning ”Vyaghro vayam” on the left side, the four verses beginning “Siṃho vayama” on the right wing, the four verses begining “Puruso vayama” in the middle, and the four verses beginning Viṣṭambho vayam” on left side. These are the four verses beginning "Viṣṭambhaḥ vayam" in front, facing west.
17.1.9	He for whom one desires to be without cattle, his companions are said to be.
17.1.10	The sacrificial post and others are inside the altar.
17.1.11	On the next day, having performed the morning and midday rites, he piles up the third layer.
17.1.12	Having touched the naturally perforated stone with the formula, "O Indra-Agni, do not be distressed," and having caused the horse to smell it, he places it with the formula, “May Visvakarman place thee on the back of the firmament." With the formula, "Bhuva" and this Vyāhṛti, he places it in the middle of the fire along with the Brāhmaṇa who does not know.
17.1.13	Having offered on the naturally perforated stone, he announces with the formula, "I offer the Citti."
17.1.14	"Thou art light; grant me light." With this verse he lays down the golden brick.
17.1.15	"Thou art above the heaven," with this verse the circular brick.
17.1.16	"May Visvakarman place thee on the back of the sky, shining," with this verse he lays the brick of universal light.
17.1.17	"What thou art in the sky," with this verse two bricks of the same name.
17.2.1	"Heaven and Nabhasya," with this verse four Rituya bricks, two each of the same name.
17.2.2	"Thou art the queen of the eastern direction." Thus five in the directions and one in the middle.
17.2.3	"Protect my life," having placed ten life-bearers in front.
17.2.4	"May the Brihatī metre protect me." Thus thirty-six in the south, "The earth is the metre." Thus twelve in the west, "The fire is the deity." Thus twelve in north.
17.2.5	"The seven Valakhilyas go forward with the formula, "Thou art the head, thou art the king." The seven go backward with the formula, "Thou art the controller, thou art the lord."
17.2.6	For the growth of the hated one, for the offering, for the offering to thee, for the Kaṭa, for the ocean, for the Dharnasa, for the wealth, for the Sindhu, for the ocean; for Sarasvati, for the all-pervading, for the well-being, for the atmosphere, for thee. These are the twelve bricks for the elements.
17.2.7	The Citti is within the bull.
17.2.8	On the next day, having performed the morning rites, he lays down the fourth Citi.
17.2.9	"The two Anuvākas beginning with "Āśuḥ trivṛt, etc." are to be recited as in the Brāhmaṇa. The two Samyānyas are "Antarikṣam asy, etc."
17.2.10	"The two Rtavya verses "Sahas and Sahasya, etc." are similar in their deities.
17.2.11	The Srutis are seventeen in number.
17.2.12	This is the same which first shone forth. Thus the Vyutis are sixteen in number.
17.2.13	The Citti ends with Rishabha.
17.3.1	On the next day, having performed the morning rites, he constructs the fifth layer.
17.3.2-3	"He places the bricks in front with the verse, "O Agni, drive away our enemies born together." In the rear with the verse, "Those born together." In the south with the verse, "The Stoma is forty-four." In the north with the verse, “The Stoma is sixteen.” Having placed the earth-mould on the brick, he places it in the middle of the fire-place with the verse, "Thou art the earth-mound."
17.3.4	Thus, the four-fold Viraj, ten-ten in each direction, is diminished.
17.3.5	"You are the ray, for destruction, I invoke the destroyer." The Stoma-bhagas, seven-seven in each direction, remain in the middle.
17.3.6	"You belong to the queen, the eastern direction." The five Nakṣatras, one in each direction, are in the middle.
17.3.7	Having placed the excrement in them, he places the five-pronged thunderbolt in front, thinking of the hated one mentally, the last one towards the east.
17.3.8	Having touched the naturally perforated stone with the formula, "I place thee in thy abode", and having caused the horse to smell it, he places it in the middle of the fire along with a Brāhmaṇa who does not know (the meaning of the formula) with the formula, “Parameshthin has placed thee on the back of heaven" and with the Vyāhṛtis "Suvar".
17.3.9	"I offer the mind," having offered in the self-bestowed (bricks), "The horse has spread out elsewhere," on the left shoulder.
17.3.10	With that (brick) he lays down the other bricks.
17.4.1	"Thou art gold, bestow gold on me," (with these words) he lays down a golden brick.
17.4.2	"The sky is invincible," (with these) he lays down an oblong brick.
17.4.3	Here one (brick) is the seed-bestowing (brick) of the elder (priest).
17.4.4	May Prajapati place you on the back of heaven, shining. Thus it is the Vishvajit.
17.4.5	Tapas and Tapasya are two Rtvya deities, having the same deity.
17.4.6	You are what belongs to the gods, you are the divine path of the gods. These are two Samyana deities.
17.4.7	Some recite them in order, beginning with the Samyānyā, Rtavyā, Viśvajyotiṣa, Reta-sīca, Hirany-iṣṭakā, Maṇḍale-ṣṭakā Vikarṇī, and Svayamātrīṇā.
17.4.8	Having performed the afternoon rites, he anoints the Udumbara twigs with ghee.
17.4.9	On the next day, having performed the morning rites, he piles up the remaining portion of the fifth layer and the Yañasenī layer.
17.4.10	He places three Gāyatrī verses in front, thus also the three in the north. Three Tristubh verses on the right, Jagatī verses in the rear, Anushtubh verses in the north, Brihatī verses, Uṣṇīṣa verses, Paṅkti verses, Aksara Paṅkti verses - the forms of the metres as per their respective places. The Atichandas metre in the middle, two-footed verses at the end.
17.4.11	Elsewhere, for one desiring cattle, he constructs the Gochiti with a thousand (bricks).
17.4.12	The bricks are of the size of a foot.
17.4.13	He should place them in the first, middle or last layer.
17.5.1	With the Anuvaka "O Agni, come with cattle", he repeats each mantra again and again.
17.5.2	"With Indra and Agni, I yoke thee with the yoked ones." Eight yoked ones.
17.5.3	"I place thee in the red ones, in the red-spotted ones, in the tawny ones, in the black ones, in the blue ones, in the white ones, in the spotted ones." Five spotted ones.
17.5.4	"The name was Amba." Seven Krittikas.
17.5.5-9	"You are like the wind in front (of the fire), you are like the rain" - five bricks for rain, in reverse order. "For water to you" - eight bricks for the sun. "For your radiance, for your brightness" - five ghee bricks, in reverse order.
17.5.10	"You are the one who is many times, five times."
17.5.11	"You are the one seated on the waters, five forms of Agni."
17.5.12	"I place you in the wealth of the earth," five sources of wealth.
17.5.13	"Protect my life," six for longevity.
17.5.14	"O Agni, your supreme heart is called," the heart of Agni.
17.5.15	"As many as there are, as many as there are," seven for the seasons.
17.5.16	The Goddess who is the bestower of life, the bestower of peace, may she bestow peace on me, as a wife on her husband. The Goddess who is bestower of life in the east, bestower of life-breath, bestower of out-breath, bestows of through-breath, bestowers of sight, bestower of hearing, bestower of speech, bestower of self, bestower of earth, bestower of space, bestower of heaven, bestower of the sky, bestower of maidenhood, bestower of prosperity, bestower of first peace, bestower of youth, bestower of peace - may she bestow peace upon me, as a woman on her husband. Thus the sixteen Goddesses who bestow peace.
17.6.1	And Abhiṣā, Abhiṣavī, Abhivyā, Urddhva-vya, Bṛh-d-vya, Savya, Sahvāṃ, Sahmāṃ, Sahsvāṃ, Sahīyāṃ—these are the ten names of Indra.
17.6.2	Agni, Viśvāsāḍ, and Iti are the twenty-two forms of Indra.
17.6.3	Prajāpati, Manasa, Āndha, and Acchheta are the thirty-three forms of the sacrifice.
17.6.4	"Thou art Jyotishmati (the luminous one), I place thee." Thus twelve Jyotishmati bricks.
17.6.5	"The full one behind," having placed the full-moon brick in front, "the constellation Krittika," the constellation bricks in front, not touching each other.
17.6.6	Having placed the eastern one, the western one, the westernmost one, the two Vishakha (bricks).
17.6.7	He places the southern brick on the self-spread line.
17.6.8	The gods have placed for you what they have placed for you. After the new moon, the remaining ones are placed in the reverse order, starting from the Apābharaṇī constellation.
17.6.9	He places the bricks in the northern direction, following the self-spread line.
17.6.10	The full moon is the last one.
17.6.11	He places all the bricks of the constellations, saying, "For you, O Richi, for you, O Ruci."
17.7.1	The golden embryo emerged first. These are the eight rivers.
17.7.2	Vishvakarman, the lord of the directions, is the five golden bricks in each direction, one in the middle.
17.7.3	For your breath, for your sight, for your hearing, for your mind, for your speech, for your touch, for your smell, for your body, for your mind - these are the four self-sprouting bricks in each direction.
17.7.4	O Agni, come for our welfare. We choose Agni as our messenger. Agni is kindled by Agni. Agni has destroyed the foes. O Agni, we desire thy praise, today, reaching the sky, of the divine wealth. These are the forms of the five-day sacrifice.
17.7.5	Then he lays down the vow.
17.7.6	"I place thee in the eastern direction." Five bricks are placed in each direction, one in the middle.
17.7.7	"He thinks of his enemy in his mind, saying, 'He who is and he who is wise.' These five bricks are dedicated to all gods.
17.7.8	By what wondrous boon has the ever-increasing friend been united with us? By what most excellent boon? Which of thy true boons, the most excellent, is it that hath united thee with the most excellent of our assemblies? Even the firm-set wealth hath been united with us. Hear the songs of our friends, the protectors of our worshippers. May he be a hundredfold through his boons. This is the hymn to Vamadeva.
17.8.1	In the south, in the self.
17.8.2	Indra, with the bones of Dadhīci, destroyed the enemies, the invincible. He was fierce, the destroyer. Thus is the beginning of the Atharva Veda. The ten verses are connected.
17.8.3	In the first half, there is the description of the head. In the second half, there is no description.
17.8.4	We invoke thee, O hero, like milked cows, as the lord of this world, as the lord who sees, as the lord, O Indra, of the standing, as the lord... No other, divine or human, born or to be born, is thy equal. O Indra, the steed-riding, the horse-winning, the strong, we invoke thee. Thus is the Rathantara on the right wing, the Apvarga internally.
17.8.5	Having placed the first, then the second, and then the third.
17.8.6	Half in oneself, half in the side.
17.8.7	We invoke thee, O Indra, for the sake of wealth, for the sake, O Indra, of the strong steed. Thou art the true lord of men in battles, thou art the true lord in battles. Thou art the best of the strong, thou art the best of those who are strong. Thou art the most excellent of the strong, Thou art the most excelleṇt of those who are strong. Thou art the strongest of the strong, O Indra. Thou art the greatest of the strong, O Indra. Thou art greater than the greatest, O Indra. O Indra, thou art the greatest of all. Thou art the highest of the high, O Indra. The highest of the high is Indra. Thou art Indra, the highest of the highest. Thou art the supreme of the supreme, O Indra. Thou art the supreme of all, O Indra.Thou art the supreme, O supreme, O Indra.
17.8.8	Its Kalpa is like that of the Rathantara.
17.9.1	To Agni, the knower of all, to Agni, the giver of all, we sing again and again. We praise the dear friend, the immortal, the giver of wealth, the giver of food, the giver of life, the giver of strength, the giver of light, the giver of happiness, the giver of heaven, the giver of the world, the giver of cattle, the giver of offspring, the giver of heroes, the giver of fame, the giver of truth, the giver of peace, the giver of prosperity, the giver of good fortune, the giver of everything. We praise the friend who is dear, the friend who is near, the friend who gives everything, the friend who bestows everything, the friend of the world, Agni, the friend who brings everything, the friend, the friend who grants everything, the friend. We praise the giver of everything, the giver of every kind, the giver of many kinds, the giver of various kinds, the giver, the giver of gifts, the giver of great gifts, the giver, Agni, the giver, he who gives everything, he who gives all, he who gives the world, he who gives heaven, he who gives cattle, he who gives offspring, he who gives heroes, he who gives fame, he who gives truth, he who gives peace, he who gives prosperity, he who gives good fortune, he who gives happiness, he who gives light, he who gives strength, he who gives food, he who gives wealth, he who gives life, he who gives protection, he who gives safety, he who gives freedom from fear, he who gives shelter, he who gives refuge, he who gives help, he who gives assistance, he who gives support, he who gives aid, he who gives relief, he who gives salvation, he who gives deliverance, he who gives release, he who gives liberation, he who gives Agni, he who gives, he
17.9.2	His Kalpa is like that of the Rathantara.
17.9.3	"Placing the verse, "O Agni, thou art the bull," he says, "The image of the year," the Prajapati.
17.9.4	" "To him who has a hundred weapons and a hundred powers," the five Ajyanis in each direction, one in the middle.
17.9.5	" "Placing the four Vajrinis in each direction on the stone, with the verse, "."Thou art Indra's thunderbolt," he says,
17.9.6	You are Indra's thunderbolt, the slayer of Vrtra, the protector of our bodies, the repeller of our enemies. Whoever from above sends harm, may he meet this stone. Some recite the fifth one in the middle.
17.9.7	For the earth, for the atmosphere, for the heaven, these are the three world-bricks.
17.9.8	For Agni thee, for Agni the Purifier, for Agni the Cleanser, for Agni the Pure. These are the three Pavamana verses.
17.10.1	I settle you with the Rk, with the Chhandas, with the Vasatkara, with the Hingkara, with the Pratihara, with the Udgitha, with the Nidhana. These are the seven Chhandas.
17.10.2	And the four Rṣṭra-bṛt-s, namely, Yaśasvin, etc., having placed them in front, he places the golden bricks on all sides.
17.10.3	It is said that the Gāyatrī is placed in front.
17.10.4	Then he lays down the Gāyatrī in front, the Tristubh on the right, the Jagatī behind, the Anushtubh on the left, and the Paṅkti in the middle. Thus he lays down all of them with all faces.
17.10.5	The Gāyatrī etc. are the Paṅkti-ending verses.
17.10.6	Agni is the head of the world of men, the protector. O Agni, today we offer thee the horse of variegated fame. These are mentioned.
17.10.7	With these (verses) he lays down the altar with all its faces.
17.10.8	Some (performers) do it with the Lokampranas.
17.10.9	Here one should lay down the Vikarni and the Svayamatrna.
17.10.10	The Lokampṛṇā is the last one.
17.10.11	Having touched the fire kindled with the two verses, "O Agni, do thou yoke thy steeds, do thou yoke the divine invocations," he sprinkles the fire kindled with these verses, "Vasus protect thee from the east with Rudras," sprinkling the fire kindled according to the prescribed procedure with clarified butter, facing east, in the middle and at the end.
17.11.1	"He stands with a thousand (coins) in his hand, and with a hundred golden plates, and sprinkles Agni in each direction, with two by two, with two hundred, with the middle and the last, facing east.
17.11.2	"May these bricks of mine be cows for you, O Agni," thus the sacrificer makes the bricks cows.
17.11.3	The Adhvaryu, having touched the fire with the Aitika recitation, offers the Satarudriya oblation. It is offered with barley grains of Jartila or Gavadhuka, or with barley grains of Gavadhuka mixed with Jartila, or with Kusayasa, or with clarified butter, or with the milk of a doe, or with the leaves of Arka, standing towards the north, on the northern and southern edge of the Vikarna stone, which is self-perforated, and which is used for circumambulation.
17.11.4	Having divided the Anuvākas into three parts, beginning with "Salutations to you, O Rudra, the angry one," he offers the first part at the knee-length, reciting "Salutations to the carpenters." He offers the second part at the navel-length, reciting, "Salutations to your weapons." Having offered the third part at the mouth-length, he offers the thousand oblations. Having offered the ten oblations, he offers the Anvarohas.
17.11.5	"Salutations to the Rudras who are on the earth." (He recites this) while holding the knee-region. "Salutations to those who are in the sky." (He recitates this) while holding at the navel-region. "Salutaions to those who are above." (He recitates this) while holding near the mouth. Having recited these, he recites the same verses in the reverse order. Having offered the oblations, he moves around. He places the Arka leaf for the animals.
17.11.6	If one hates someone, one should move towards him, reciting the Rudras. If Rudra is angry with someone's offspring or cattle, one should move away from him and recite the Rudras. This is a ritual not associated with sacrifice.
17.12.1	"The Rudra who is in the fire," one offers a cake of barley mixed with ghee.
17.12.2	With this mantra, one offers the Rudras to the brick on which the Rudras are established.
17.12.3	Having given the bow with three strings to the Brahman-priest, the sacrificer worships Rudra with the verses beginning with "O Rudra, the bow in front of thee."
17.12.4	Taking the pot of water, the Adhvaryu sprinkles the fire three times while moving around it clockwise, reciting the verse, "O Agni, the strength in the stone."
17.12.5	Having placed the pot on a stone, he should sprinkle it three times, saying, "May hunger and thirst befall him whom we hate." He should then return, carrying the pot.
17.12.6	If one is performing a curse, one should place the pot on the southern or northern bank, saying, "I am taking away the life of so-and-so, the son of so-and so."
17.12.7	Having bound the frog to a long bamboo stick, he draws the fire seven or eight times, saying, "I draw thee for the ocean."
17.12.8	Having drawn it, he releases the frog's life and throws it away.
17.12.9	One who hates should sprinkle him with this.
17.12.10	He approaches the rear with the Gāyatrī verse, the sides with the Bṛhat and Rathantara (verses), the tail with the Rtuṣṭhāyajñāyajña (verses), the southern hip with the Vāravanti, the northern with the Vāmadevya.
17.12.11	He sings the Sama of Prajapati on the right side.
17.12.12	The Hotr recites the Anusamsas with the Samcita Ukthya verse, "Father, O Matarisvan."
17.13.2	The Maruts, seeing the right path, enjoyed this sacrifice of the man who gave them an excess. The rain of the gods, the nectar, the knower of heaven, Turning in the middle of the world, creating diverse beings, the Parameshthin, the one of firm vow, may he protect our sacrifice from the front. May he give us offspring. May the one who gives, the one who is satisfied, give us many, of many forms, of one vow, may they all enter me. Having offered five ascending oblations, taking another five-fold offering, he releases the black shoes. One or two.
17.13.3	"If you are not pleased, then the southern one."
17.13.4	Thus the sacrificer.
17.13.5	"He ascends Agni with two verses, "This is the path of the waters, salutations to your rays," and "I have stepped on the earth." The sacrificer does so with these."
17.13.6	Having sprinkled the fire with a handful of darbha grass mixed with honey and curds, having made the tortoise-shaped mound, having descended with the formula, "The breath-givers, the out-breath-givers," having offered one oblation to Agni with the two formulas, "Agni with sharp," "Agni with bright,"
17.14.1	Having filled the ladle with sixteen spoonfuls, he offers to Vaiśvakarman.
17.14.2	"He who offers these worlds, the father of sight, with mind and wisdom." With two oblations, one from each of the two different verses.
17.14.3	If one desires that he may be freed from sin for a long time, then one should say, "For each of him."
17.14.4	If he is afraid of water, he should offer a handful of water, saying, "To the ocean, to the wind," in the water. This is a ritual connected with the sacrifice.
17.14.5	"Lead him to the north," having placed three kindling woods of Ficus glomerata smeared with ghee, and having placed three fires in the manner of animal sacrifice, he leads the fire.
17.14.6	The Adhvaryu, having taken up the fire with the verse, "The All-gods have raised thee," carries it in five directions with five verses.
17.14.7	The Brahman priest follows from the south with the verse, "The swift one is shining," the Maitrāvaruṇa or the Pratiprasthātṛ follows.
17.14.8	If one desires, "May there be a kingdom," one should bind him with this (mantra) and attack him in battle. The Homa should be performed when the battle is engaged. The fire-altar is made of clay and wood. This is a rite connected with non-sacrifice.
17.14.9	Placing a stone in the Agnidhra chamber with two verses, "This is the middle of heaven, not measured," and going to the tail with four verses, "Indra has increased all (worlds),
17.15.1	Having ascended Agni with five verses beginning with "Agni, the eastern direction," and having offered the full pot of curds on the naturally perforated stone with two verses beginning with "O Agni, with a thousand eyes," he offers milk to the black cow with a white calf.
17.15.2	He offers milk to the cow with the verse "O Agni, the black one with a white calf."
17.15.3	Some offer milk with the verse "Agni, with a thousand rays."
17.15.4	Having placed the sacrificial requisites for the Hotr, beginning with the "Oornavant" verse, on the ground, having established the fire in the naturally perforated stone with the three verses beginning with "You are the Suparna, the Garutman", he places the Udumbara twig with the verse, "O Agni, being kindled, shine forth in front of us."
17.15.5-7	We invoke thy supreme birth, O Agni, with the Vaikankati verse. The variegated (verse) of Savitar, the desirable, with the Sami tree verse. I offer the mind to Agni, and today the horse, having offered two oblations, filling the ladle with twelve portions, he offers a full oblation with the seven-verse (verse). Seven are thy kindling woods, O Agni, seven thy tongues.
17.15.8	He meditates on the fire in the directions with the thought, "May he offer that here."
17.16.1	Having performed the sprinkling of the altar, he commences the ritual of Agni Vaiśvānara.
17.16.2	Having made the altar and spread the fire, he undertakes the rites such as washing the hands.
17.16.3	The arrangement of the vessels is according to the meaning.
17.16.4	At the time of offering, having offered the twelve-vessel oblation to Vaisvānara, he offers seven oblations to Maruts in seven vessels.
17.16.5	They are served silently.
17.16.6	At the time of sending forth, he sends forth except the wife.
17.16.7	At the taking of clarified butter, he takes it from the Dhruva vessel itself.
17.16.8	He performs the rites beginning with the sprinkling of the Prokṣaṇī water.
17.16.9	At the time of spreading, having spread the sacrificial grass and the Dhruva ladle towards the fire, he places them.
17.16.10	He recites the mantra "They have been placed."
17.16.11	Having placed the Veda, he proceeds to the Sāmidhenī verses.
17.16.12	He does not instruct, does not sweep, and does not offer the Prayāja offerings.
17.16.13	Having performed the Ājyabhāga offerings, having placed the Juhu, having taken up the entire Vaiśvānara, having poured over twice, he makes the Vaiśvānaran offering loudly.
17.16.14	He offers the Maruts silently, having offered everything.
17.16.15	Sitting with seven groups, namely, this one and that one, he offers the Maruts, having followed each group with the group of hands.
17.16.16-19	In the middle of the forest, one should offer with the Anuvākyā verse and the Gaṇa verse, say some. With the Maruts, one should encircle Vaiśvānara from all sides, say some. Svatavaṃśa, Praghāsa, Sāntapana, Gṛhamedhi, Kīḍī, Sākī, Urjīṣī - this is mentioned as the sixth. Mitāsas and Samitāsas - one should not follow everywhere.
17.17.1	If one desires, "May the Kṣatriya caste be more powerful," then having recited three or four verses of the Anuvākyā in the village, and having recited the Anuvākyat in the forest, one should offer the remainder of the Anuvākya in the village.
17.17.2	Thus having offered with the first three groups, one should offer in the forest with the Anuvācya.
17.17.3	As in the case of the former three groups, so in the case of these three groups.
17.17.4	If one desires that the strength of the Kshatriya should be greater than that of the Brahmana, one should offer oblations to the six intervening spaces of the verses with the three groups as mentioned at the beginning, and then offer oblations to six groups placed in the forest with the Anuvakya.
17.17.5	As in the case of three groups before, so in the cases of these three groups.
17.17.6	He does not give instructions, does not sweep, and does not offer the Anuyājas.
17.17.7	If one wishes, "May his kingdom be destroyed by the kingdom," then one should make the Agniṣṭha or the Rathāvāhana of the forest disappear with the Anuvākyā. This is a rite connected with non-sacrifice.
17.17.8	Having offered the four spoonfuls with the verse, "O Agni-Vishnu, you are in unison with the gods," he fills the ladle made of Udumbara wood, measuring a cubit, smeared with clay, with ghee, and offers a continuous stream of ghee with the verse, “May strength and offspring be mine,” until the completion of the mantra.
17.17.9	If one wishes to deprive someone of his life and food, one should say, "Let him be separated." This is what has been said.
17.17.10	If there is leftover ghee, one should cook Brahma rice in it and feed four Brahmins. Having cooked rice in four pots, one should feed it with sauce.
17.17.11	One should give four cows to those who have eaten.
17.17.12	From the ocean, a wave. Three.
17.18.1	The gods found the ghee, hidden in three ways by the Panis. Indra generated one, Surya generated one, and Vena generated one, they generated one through their own power. They flow from the heart, from the ocean, from the hundred herds, they are not seen by the enemy. I see the streams of ghee flowing. The golden palm tree is in the middle of them. The rivers flow correctly, the goddesses, purified by the heart and mind. They flow, the waves of ghee, like deer moving in the forest. They flow like the rushing waters of a river, blown by the wind, the swift ones. The red horse, breaking the banks, swelling with waves, flows like a woman in love. The glowing ones, smiling, approach Agni. The streams of ghee flow like kindling. The one who enjoys them, the one who knows, carries them like maidens. I see the well-smeared ones flowing. Where Soma is pressed, where sacrifice is performed, the streams of ghee flow there. Flow forth, O streams of ghee, the good, the flowing, the cattle, bestow upon us the good riches. Lead this sacrifice to the gods. The streams of ghee flow sweetly. Your abode is established over the entire universe. Within the ocean, within the heart, within life, within the assembly of waters, the one brought forth, we have drunk that sweet wave. The sacrificer praises the one being offered.
17.19.1	He offers with the Vājaprasavīya verse.
17.19.2	There are seven kinds of plants growing in villages and seven kinds of plants in forests.
17.19.3	Having melted the separate kinds of plants, he offers with the Udumbara ladle with the verse, "This is the offering of the Vāja, the offering of the Suṣuva." Having offered the plants growing in villages, he offers those growing in forests.
17.19.4	After offering, he pours the remnants into a vessel.
17.19.5	Having placed the udumbara stool on the right side with its back towards the south, having spread the skin of a black antelope on it with its neck towards the east and its hair towards the north, having seated the sacrificer on it, he sprinkles him with the drops of Agni.
17.19.6	On the skin of a tiger, a king; on the skin of a goat, a vaiśya; on the skin on a black antelope, one desiring brahmic lustre.
17.19.7	Some say, "For the one desiring prosperity, O Bāstaja."
17.19.8	Having recited "For the god thee," one says, "I consecrate thee with the royal power of Agni." For a brahmin, one says, "For Indra." For a kshatriya, one says, "For Brihaspati." For a vaishya, one says, "For Varuna."
17.19.9	Some prescribe the reverse of the mantras for kshatriyas and vaishyas.
17.19.10	Having seated himself facing the east, he stands facing the west and sprinkles from the head to the mouth.
17.19.11	They say, "One should offer it. For one who is offering does not descend on anyone."
17.19.12	Having offered with the milk of a black cow with a white calf, he offers twelve times with six turns, offering to the twelve upholders of the kingdom.
17.20.1	Having recited the alternate verses, "O Rtasad, O Rtasadame," he offers the first oblation with "To him svāhā." He offers the subsequent oblations with "To them svāhā."
17.20.2	Thus he divides the other verses.
17.20.3	"O lord of the world" is the thirteenth oblation of the alternate verses.
17.20.4	This has been explained.
17.20.5	"The lord of the world" - thus he offers five oblations at the mouth of the chariot, or ten.
17.20.6	Some say that the head of the chariot is held above the Āhavanīya and offered.
17.20.7	Having offered it, the Adhvaryu takes it and carries it to the resting place.
17.20.8	They lead the three or four horses in a friendly manner.
17.20.9	He gives the chariot with the horses to the Adhvaryus.
17.20.10	Some call it Vāḍabā, others Vāḍabē.
17.20.11	One offers three times with the name of Vāta, saying "You are the ocean, the shining one."
17.20.12	It is known that there is no offering for this.
17.20.13	Some offer Vāta with a black antelope skin.
17.20.14	Having offered five oblations of ghee with the verse, "O Agni, O Ocean, that arrow is called young," and having offered six oblations of honey mixed with curd with the verse, “The eastern direction is called Samīcī,” one should offer the oblations of the serpents in succession.
17.20.15	"The names are Hetayas," one should offer six great oblations as in the case of the serpent oblations.
17.20.16	"O Suvarṇa, O Gharma, svāhā," one should offer five oblations to the Sun.
17.20.17	The three lights of thee, O Agni, in the sun, are the three lights.
17.20.18	He undertakes the Soma rite from the spreading of the Veda.
17.20.19	Having done that before the placing of the Dhishnyas.
17.21.1	He lays down the Dhishnyās with bricks by reciting the Anuvāka, "May my radiance be in disputes."
17.21.2	He places the ninth brick in the Agnidhra chamber.
17.21.3	The number of bricks in the Hotrīya mound is twelve, sixteen, twenty-one or twenty-four. In the Brāhmaṇācchaṃsīya mound eleven, in the Mārgālīya mound six.
17.21.4	It is known that eight bricks are placed in each of the other mounds.
17.21.5	The mounds are square or round.
17.21.6	The number of sand-grains around them is equal to the number of bricks.
17.21.7	For your welfare, the mountain has given up its herd of cows. What Angiras has given up, O Indra, together with Indra, enveloped in darkness, O Brihaspati, you have emerged from the water, from the ocean. O Brihaspati! When the noble one has gone beyond the noble one, Brihaspati has conquered the wealth, the great herds of cattle. This is the god who has conquered the waters, the unapproachable gold. Brihaspati destroys the enemy with his rays. These are the three places of Brahma.
17.21.8	Yama held the earth, Yama this entire world. Everything stood for Yama, as long as the wind, the inexhaustible, breathed. As five, as six, as fifteen sages, he who knows Yama, he may say, as one sage knows. He falls with the three-crested ones, six earths, one great. The Gāyatrī and the Tristubh, all the metres, are deposited in Yama. Three Marjālīya.
17.22.1	O Rudra, be gentle to us, make us thy friends. We desire thy good will by offering to the gods. We desire the good will of the powerful, the bountiful Rudra. We desire thy favour, O Vash, O Vash. We offer thee the sacrifice, O Vash; we call thee, O Vash! We call thee, O Rudra, the bestower of sacrifice, the wise, the bountiful, O Vash (to our aid). May he remove from us our sin. We choose his good will. Three times in the Chaitvala.
17.22.2	Offer the oblation, make the oblation, cook the oblation, melt the oblation, you are the oblation, for the oblation, to the oblations, you sit down in the oblations. These are the eight Shamitras.
17.22.3	Your head is down, the highest is up, I come to you. These are the three Avabhrthas.
17.22.4	They perform in them.
17.22.5	The black pieces, the marks, and the heap are thrown out.
17.22.6	And the remaining ones, having pierced, he makes it equal to the sacrificial post. Having made it equal to one sacrificial post, he makes eleven sacrificial posts.
17.22.7	Of them, the one nearest to the fire is on the previous day, and the others on the next day.
17.22.8	In the case of one sacrificial post, one makes eleven.
17.22.9	He offers the Pasupurodāsa of Agni-Soma and eight Havis for the gods.
17.22.10	The Svishtakrit is the same.
17.23.1	"He yokes Agni with three verses, beginning with, "I yoke Agni in front of the morning recitation."
17.23.2	If the enemy is in front, one should place eight Gāyatrī verses before the Bahispavamāna, eleven Tristubh verses before the Madhyandina, and twelve Jagatī verses before the Ārbhava.
17.23.3	If the enemy is behind, one should place them in reverse order after the Pavamānas.
17.23.4	At the time of the animals, he prepares the animal for the Agni-sava.
17.23.5	At the time of the Dakshina, he gives a golden vessel filled with honey, made of a hundred measures, and variegated, saying, "To the gods," and having made the horse smell it, he gives it to the Brahman.
17.23.6	To the Adhvaryu, he gives the Kalpani as Dakshina.
17.23.7	If he offers Agni with this (verse), then the praise of the Yajñāyajñiya becomes unoffered.
17.23.8	Having touched Agni with two verses, "May there be salutations to you, do not injure me," he offers eleven Samits.
17.23.9	Having offered nine Adhvarika offerings, he offers the tenth and eleventh with "The sacrifice is accomplished by the Bhrigus."
17.23.10	When the Anūbandhyā oblation has been offered, having filled the Udumbara ladle with ghee, he offers the Agnivimokam with the verse, "This is the nourishing stream of milk, the stream of milk which is the most nourishing."
17.23.11	Having offered the oblation of barley, having offered ten oblations from the Akūta, having descended again, the mind returned, life returned, breath returned, intention returned. May Vaishvanara, having grown with rays, stand within the guardian of immortality. Thus he stands up.
17.23.12	The Agni-s who are of the ashes, thus the sacrificer, going to perform the Agnihotra, worships the Agni with the Apti-verses.
17.24.1	With the three verses, "I approach thee, O Agni, day by day," having seen the other Agni-s, one should perform the Sautrāmaṇī sacrifice with the Maitrāvaruṇa and the Chamasa.
17.24.2	For a year he should not go back to any (woman), nor should he approach Rāma, nor eat birds.
17.24.3	For as long as he lives, he should not eat brains, nor run when it rains.
17.24.4	If he runs, he should turn back.
17.24.5	Having chosen another woman, he should not approach her again. Having chosen a third woman, he should never abandon his wife.
17.24.6	If one who has performed the Agnihotra in this year should fail, he should perform the Ekacittika sacrifice while bringing the Kratu.
17.24.7	One should place eight different mantras on the northern altar, as per the meaning of the Lokamprana, and then the soil.
17.24.8	If one does not succeed, he should perform only the Ekacittikasacrifice while bringing the Kratus.
17.24.9	And the five Mantras of Sanayci, Praceta, etc., are to be placed on the northern altar, in accordance with the meaning of the text, and then the earth.
17.24.10	Some people have stated that the two desires are contrary to each other.
17.24.11	The Puna-chiti is heard in three senses, viz., in the sense of hearing, in the sense of prosperity, and in the sense of continuity.
17.24.12	We shall explain the sense of hearing.
17.24.13	If one wishes to sacrifice with the Iṣṭi, with the animal sacrifice, or with Soma, one should sacrifice after having taken possession of the fire that was his earlier.
17.24.14	Or one should place eight different mantras on the northern altar, according to the meaning, the Lokampṛṇā, and then the soil.
17.25.1	If the fire is placed on the northern altar, he should touch the northern altar with the formula, "May Prajapati place thee; may it be firm like Angiras with that divinity."
17.25.2	Or three self-spreaders.
17.25.3	The procedure of spreading them is as follows:
17.25.4	The first one is spread with the formula, the second one without the formula, and the third one with the formula.
17.25.5	Or, three Svayamatrṇṇas and three Viśvajit.
17.25.6	The method of performing the Upadhanas is as follows:
17.25.7	The Svayamatrṇa is the first, then the Viśvajit, then the Sāmapuriṣa. The second is performed in this way. In the third, the Viśva-jit is the first, the Svayamatrņa is the second, and the Sāmapu-riṣa is the third.
17.25.8	Or eight Lokampranas, or eleven Lokampranas or twelve Lokampranas.
17.25.9	One who has kindled the fire and offers Soma sacrifice should offer these thirty-one Lokampranas on the northern altar.
17.25.10-12	In the second layer, while performing the second layer for prosperity, one should place eight different mantras and eight Lokampṛṇā bricks on the northern altar. Then the earth. On the next day, one should place these same different mantras and eleven Lokampṛṇās. Then the earth.
17.25.13	But one who is performing the third kind of sacrifice for the sake of progeny, should place eight different mantras on the northern altar in the third kind of sacrificial rite, as per the meaning of the verse "By whom the sages", and then the ashes.
17.26.1	But some say that one should not think. It has been said that Agni is indeed Rudra.
17.26.2	The Chhandas-citam (mantras) are mentioned in the Sulba (sutras) for those who desire (certain results).
17.26.3	The Tapasci-fire is kindled for a year, and the Upasads are performed for a year.
17.26.4	Before the Upasads, he offers the Agniya cake on eight potsherds, and then for four months he offers with each Upasad-formula.
17.26.5	He erects the fire without Upasads.
17.26.6	Two months are one layer, and four are the last layer.
17.26.7	Three months each of the four-breasted, three-breasted, two-breasted, and one-breasted (cows).
17.26.8	The sages stay for a year with the Agniya (bricks) in the Upadana (layer).
17.26.9	It is known that the Agniya of the sages is the Yagnasenani (bricks).
17.26.10	One should place the bricks with the ten verses which are Agniya in the Dhatayi (layer).
17.26.11	The bricks are of the size of the Sūkta, the Mantras are of various kinds, the earth is of true nature, and the excrement is of true nature.
17.26.12	One should perform the Abhijit or Viśvajit sacrifice in the third year.
17.26.13	One gives away all one's knowledge.
17.26.14	Having taken a resolution, he takes out the cow with a calf, having ears and tail, with or without hoofs, having covered with the outer hair, having wound the head clockwise with a turban, he takes the Udumbara vessel, the Udumbara, the Aksha, the Vaina, the Kalmasha, of the same size as before.
17.26.15-17	When the husband and wife live for three nights in the forest on wild fruits and roots, or when they live by digging, or when they take from each other the root placed in a vessel after digging it out, then the wife and the husband are the sacrificers. When they drink from a vessel made of clay, then they are not the sacrificers. When the husband and the wife desire to eat the food, then they are the sacrificers, when they eat it with a group of people or with a digger, or when they eat it by looking at each other or by cutting it with a knife, then they are only the wife and the sacrificer.
17.26.18	One who has stayed with a Niṣāda for three nights, with a Vaiśya for three nights, and with a Kṣatriya for three nights should stay with a Brāhmaṇa for three nights.
17.26.19	One should not beg for a year, nor should one refuse what is being given.
17.26.20	If not for a year, then for twelve days, or twelve days.
18.1.1	In autumn, a Brāhmaṇā or Kṣatriya who desires prosperity should perform the Vājapeya sacrifice.
18.1.2	Some recite it as it is always recited.
18.1.3	He attains Prajapati.
18.1.4	Its rite is sixteenfold.
18.1.5	All (rites) are seventeenfold.
18.1.6	There are seventeen consecrations, three Upasads, and twenty-one Prasuta.
18.1.7	Or there are thirteen consecrations, three upasads, and seventeen Prasuta.
18.1.8	The sacrificial post is made of Butea frondosa, or Khadira, or of Tūpara, seventeen cubits in height, with four corners, and a cup made of wheat flour, or a cup made of barley flour.
18.1.9	When it is made before the Upasads, the Pratiprasthātṛ prepares Sura in the manner of Sura.
18.1.10	There is a dripping vessel.
18.1.11	At the time of the Khara-saman, he places the second Khara to the south of the Havirdhāna shed, behind the axle, for the purpose of keeping the Sura-graha.
18.1.12	At the time of the Rasana-saman, the sacrificial post is bound with seventeen garments.
18.1.13	At the moment of placing the vessels, having used the Indra-grahya vessel, he places five Indra-grahya vessels near it.
18.1.14	The rite of the sixteen Soma-cups has been explained.
18.1.15	Having employed the sixteen Soma-cup, he employs near it seventeen Prajapati-cups for holding Soma-graha.
18.1.16	The rite of them is like that of the sixteen Soma cups.
18.1.17	On the other platform, the Pratiprasthātṛ employs seventeen earthen cups for holding Sura-graha. 
18.2.1	Taking the Indra-graha, he takes the Atigrahya-graha, saying, "Thou art taken with a desire; thou art taken for men." He takes five Atigrahya-draughts for Indra.
18.2.2	Their procedure is as before.
18.2.3	Taking the Sodashin-graha, (he says), "Thou art taken for the birth of the offspring, for the production of the offspring." He takes seventeen Prajapati-grahas.
18.2.4	Their procedure also is as before.
18.2.5	In the other Khara, the Pratiprasthātṛ takes up the Soma-grahas with seventeen Upāṁsus.
18.2.6	Some recite the two Grahas in the reverse order.
18.2.7	The Pratiprasthātr takes up the Sura-grahas in between the Soma-graha.
18.2.8	The Adhvaryu takes up first, the Prati-prasthātṛ last.
18.2.9	He places the Soma-cups in front of the dice, and the Sura-cups behind the dice.
18.2.10	He offers at the beginning of the Savana-s, saying, "O god Savitar, do thou shine forth." He offers at the beginning or at the end of a rite.
18.2.11	The priests wearing golden garlands perform the rites on the Suti day.
18.2.12	Having set apart three animals for the sacrifice at the time of the sacrifice, he sets apart a female goat for Maruts, a female sheep for Sarasvati and a cow for Apandati.
18.2.13	Having set apart a male sheep for Sarasvati, he sets apart seventeen animals for Prajapati, all black sheep of one kind.
18.2.14	They offer the animals beginning with Sarasvati and ending with Apandati, which have been encircled by fire.
18.2.15	They carry the northern ones, beginning with the Sarasvatī.
18.2.16	It is said, "For each animal, two sacrificial grass-blades."
18.2.17	Having placed the midday oblations to the east of the Maheśvara oblation, having offered the oblations to the Sarasvatī animal, he offers the oblation to the Brhaspati barley cake, and the oblation to Sarasvatī, and the oblations to Indra and Agni, and the oblational portion to the Maruts, and the obolation to the Viśve Devas, and the obilation to the Sarasvatīs, and the obational portion to the Sarasvatis, and the obalition to the Sarasvatas, and the obation to the Sarasvatās, and the obaltion to the Sarasvatā, and the obiation to the Sarasvat, and the obialtion to the Sarasva, and the obition to the Sarasv, and the obtion to the Saras, and the ob to the Saras, all of them are offered with the mantra "O Sarasvatī, O Sarasvatī, may you be pleased with this oblation." The other oblations are offered silently.
18.2.18	He cooks it in milk.
18.2.19	Having offered the two oblations to the south,
18.3.1	Having brought the chariot to the water with the formula, "Thou art the thunderbolt of Indra," they bathe the horses in water with the formula "In the water."
18.3.2	He cleanses the wheels with the formula, “Thou art the foot of the waters."
18.3.3	He yokes the chariot of the Prishthivāhin with the formulas, "May Vayu or Manu yoke thee." He yokes the other sixteen chariots silently.
18.3.4	At the time of the Dakṣiṇā, he gives seventeen chariots, seventeen spears, seventeen horses, seventeen elephants, seventeen gold coins, seventeen female slaves, seventeen sons, seventeen cows, seventeen garments, and seventeen hundred cows.
18.3.5	Then he gives seventeen hundred cows, seventeen yokes of oxen, seventeen horses, seventeen elephants, seventeen gold coins, seventeen female slaves, seventeen drums.
18.3.6	This is the acquired Vājapeya.
18.3.7	Now the Kuru Vājapeya:
18.3.8	He gives seventeen gifts of each age.
18.3.9	The animals are of one year and more, up to five years.
18.3.10	When the Dakṣiṇās have been duly distributed, he gives to the Adhvaryu the sacrificial fee along with the Yajus.
18.3.11	The rest is common.
18.3.12	To the north of the Āhavanīya, or to the east, they place the chariots.
18.3.13	Of them the southern one is equipped with the Yajuş.
18.3.14	The prince, standing in front of the Agnidhra, shoots an arrow at seventeen targets.
18.3.15	Where the arrow falls, he marks a piece of wood with the sign of a fig tree.
18.4.1	Having placed the Maheendra post towards the east, he brings clarified butter from the Naivasaiyaka and places it in the Catvala.
18.4.2	The prince protects it.
18.4.3	Having placed a piece of wood shaped like the axle of a chariot in the Catvāla, he releases the chariot wheel of Udumbara wood with seventeen spokes.
18.4.4	On the northern edge of the altar, they attach seventeen drums.
18.4.5	The sacrificer approaches the chariot, saying, "You are the step of Vishnu."
18.4.6	He touches the chariot wheel, saying, "The flanks and the flanks."
18.4.7	"He speaks to Indra." Thus they make the Dundubhi drums resound.
18.4.8	"He mounts the chariot wheel of Udumbara wood, saying, 'In the impulse of the divine Savitar, I conquer the prize with Brihaspati, the conqueror of prizes.'
18.4.9	He is told, 'Sing the Sama of the horses.'
18.4.10	He makes the wheel turn three times to the right.
18.4.11	When the wheel is turning, the Brahman sings.
18.4.12	"I ascend the highest heaven, won by Bṛhaspati, at the impulse of the god Savitr." Thus the sacrificer ascends, reciting the Yajus.
18.4.13	The other chariots are driven by the wind.
18.4.14	"The horses, having won the race, are going to win the race, smell the share of Brihaspati." He makes the two horses smell the cake. All (the horses) are (thus) honoured.
18.4.15	"Be pleased with the share of Briha-spati." He smears the cakes on the ground at the Prāprotha (ceremony).
18.4.16	Having taken the horse-halter, the Adhvaryu, having mounted the chariot yoked with the Yajus-formula, and having said, "Thou art the horse-halter," he makes the horses move forward with it.
18.4.17	The other chariots follow without touching.
18.4.18	He makes the horses run with the four verses, "The horses run the race, the horses run the race."
18.4.19	Agni is the one-syllabled one. Thus the Udgātṛs recite to the Yajamāna while running.
18.4.20	Having reached the characteristic (place), they turn around and move clockwise.
18.4.21	With the four verses beginning with "Mitadrava" he recites while running back.
18.5.1	Having offered to the gods who have returned, he makes the Nīvara cake smell. He also smears the dough.
18.5.2	He offers the Dūndubhi-releasing oblation, saying, "This is your true agreement."
18.5.3	He touches the water.
18.5.4	He gives a black-coloured cow to the Vājasṛts.
18.5.5-9	Having taken them back, he gives them to Brahman. The golden pot for honey is made of a hundred measures. Here he performs the praise of Indra. The sacrificer puts on the Tarpya garment, saying, "You are the womb of the Kshatriya." The wife puts on the Darbha-made garment, saying, "You are the womb (yoni) of the Kshatriyas." The sacrificer invites his wife, saying, "Come, O wife."
18.5.10	The other one replies, "Let us ascend."
18.5.11	He invites three times and replies three times.
18.5.12	The sacrificer says at the end, "I shall ascend for both of us."
18.5.13	Having offered twelve oblations to Vāg and Prajā, he ascends the sacrificial post with ten rites, together with the Sarasvatī rite, for the sake of longevity.
18.5.14	Having reached the top, he recites, "May I go to the gods."
18.5.15	Looking at the houses, he says, "May I be united with offspring, may my offspring be united with me."
18.5.16	The Brahmins, having tied it to long-stemmed bamboo poles, or to bamboo poles with leaves, or to both, or to the poles of the houses, or to the houses themselves, or to the trees, or to the posts, or to the corners, or to the doors, or to the door-posts, or to the walls, or to the pillars, or to the roofs, or to the windows, or to the stairs, or to the steps, or to the ground, or to the sky, or to the water, or to the fire, or to the wind, or to the earth, or to the heaven, or to the directions, or to the quarters, or to the intermediate directions, or to all directions, or to everything, or to the gods, or to the ancestors, or to the men, or to the animals, or to the ghosts, or to the plants, or to the demons, or to the serpents, or to the Gandharvas, or to the Yakshas, or to the Raksasas, or to the Pisachas, or to all beings, or to the Brahmins, or to the Kshatriyas, or to the Vaishyas, or to all castes, or to the Vedas, or to the Vedangas, or to
18.5.17	"For food thee," says the Adhvaryu in front; "for food to be eaten," says the Brahman on the right; "for strength," says the Hotṛ behind; "for victory in strength," says the Udgātṛ on the left.
18.5.18	They strike at the mouth.
18.5.19	The striker turns around the striker.
18.5.20	This is your gift to Mitra, to Yantra, to Dhartr, to agriculture, to welfare, to wealth, to nourishment. He descends (from the cart).
18.5.21	Placing a woolen cloth with its neck towards the east and with its fur upwards in front of the sacrificial post,
18.6.1	and placing a hundred-man gold on it, the sacrificer places his right foot on the gold, saying, "This is nectar."
18.6.2	"Thou art nourishment, thou art generation." On the left side of the skin of the cow.
18.6.3	From that he ascends the couch.
18.6.4	"He ascends the couch of heaven, having ascended it he sees the one-eyed men." So he recites while ascending.
18.6.5	He offers seven times seven oblations of food before.
18.6.6	He is sprinkled with the Stotra of Indra as in the case of the kindling of the fire.
18.6.7	In the Madhyamdina Savana, in the Uthyaparyaya, when the Brahma-saman has been assigned, they offer the animals beginning with Sarasvata.
18.6.8	He proceeds with the Vapa oblations of these animals without pouring clarified butter over them.
18.6.9	Having proceeded with the Vapa of Sarasvata, he proceeds with the other Vapa oblations.
18.6.10	Having proceeded by the Pasupurodasa of Sarasvata, one proceeds with the Naivara.
18.6.11	The Svishtakrit is the same.
18.6.12	The priests eat the remnants of the oblations.
18.6.13	They eat the remnants of oblations at the Agnidhra.
18.6.14	Here, the gods of the Saravasvati end, and one proceeds with the gods of the Svishtakrit at the time of the Svishtavit.
18.6.15	Having performed with the Sodashin, having taken up the Hotr's goblet and the other goblets, he commences the Brihat stotra.
18.6.16	At the time of the commencement of the offering, the Adhvaryu takes up the Hotr's goblet, the Camasādhvaryus take up the goblets, and the other priests take up the Soma-goblets.
18.6.17	The Pratiprasthātṛ takes up the principal Sura-goblet, and the Vājasṛt takes up the other Sura-goblets.
18.7.1	"O Soma, do thou unite me with the good." Thus the Adhvaryu proceeds towards the east with the Soma-grahas. "O Sura, do thou separate me from evil." Thus the Pratiprasthātṛ proceeds towards the west with the Sura-grahas.
18.7.2	At the end of the Ahavaniya fire, they stand with the Soma- grahas. At the end of the Marjālīya fire, they proceed with the Sura- grahas.
18.7.3	The Adhvaryu goes ahead with the Soma-grāhas.
18.7.4	The Vasat and Anuvāsat mantras are recited while shaking the Soma and Sura cups.
18.7.5	The Soma offering has been explained.
18.7.6	The Viraj metre is mentioned in the Soma offering mantra.
18.7.7	The Marutya and Avadaniya Soma cups are offered to the priests, while the Sura cups are offered to those who know the Vedas.
18.7.8	Having crushed them in the southern part of the altar, they consume them.
18.7.9	Kakud, the son of a king, or Dhruvagop or Naivaragop should eat, or all Kakud should be eaten above all Soma sacrifices.
18.7.10	Here the gods beginning with Sarasvati are worshipped.
18.7.11	It is known that they move in the sacrificial forest.
18.7.12	Now when the Anuyājas are offered without the Sruva being filled up, then they should proceed with these (Anuyājas). But one should not do so. For the sacrifice is defective if one does so.
18.7.13	Therefore, where they proceed with the Vapas of the former (sacrifices), there they should proceed with the Havis of the latter (sacrifices). Where they proceed with the Haviṣ, there they should proceed.
18.7.14	The Vājapeya comes to an end.
18.7.15	Having performed the Sautrāmaṇī, one should offer the Maitrāvaruṇa and Vāmaikṣa sacrifices.
18.7.16	One should not descend to any (lower) world as long as one lives.
18.7.17	One should offer the sacrifice of Brhaspati or the sacrifice of descent.
18.7.18	It is known that one becomes a white parasol bearer.
18.8.1	One who desires heaven should offer the Rājasūya sacrifice.
18.8.2	The Dakṣiṇā is one hundred thousand.
18.8.3	The Agniṣṭoma with five Apāvarya (sacrifices) is the first day.
18.8.4	He gives five thousand for the Pavitra, thirty for the consecration, thirty for the Dashapeya, ten for the Keshavapani, twenty for the Vyushti-Dvi-atra, five for the Kshatra-Dhrti.
18.8.5	Or four for the consecration.
18.8.6	The other days are of a thousand each.
18.8.7	The Bahvṛca Brahmana says, "He gives sixty-three hundred thousand."
18.8.8	Thus one should give Dakshina so that the days become their own time.
18.8.9	The remaining is directed.
18.8.10	The next day, he performs the sacrifice with the eight Anumata and others.
18.8.11	While grinding, he spreads the Anumata grass towards the south and north.
18.8.12	Those who are drawn to the dice, that is the one-pot offering to the Nirrti.
18.8.13	If they are in the north, then having gone to the north, having dug out the anthill, he should offer with the formula, "I have dug out the field of so and so, son of so and so." Having offered with the anthill, having dug out, he should offer the anthill with the same formula, "I am offering the field of so-and-so, son of so-and so."
18.8.14	Some say that one should offer with the Valmīka-grass and cover with the Valmika-grass.
18.8.15	Having obtained permission, one proceeds with the Nairṛta.
18.8.16	Having offered at the Garhapatya with "Vīhi svāhā", one carries a single torch to the Dakṣiṇāgni.
18.8.17	Having gone to the southern and western intermediate directions, having settled down in the hollow of his own hand, he offers the entire oblation to Nirriti with the formula, "This is thy share, O Nirriti."
18.8.18	The fee is a black garment and a black pot.
18.8.19	Some say that the garment should be black and torn.
18.8.20	It is known that they come without being expected, to the Niṣṭhyā (oblation) of Nirṛti.
18.9.1	"Having returned, he offers on the Garhapatya with the permission of the Anumati, saying, "Svāhā! Salutations! He who did this."
18.9.2	A cow is the Dakṣiṇā.
18.9.3	Having offered daily with these (verses), one undertakes the Cāturmāsya sacrifices.
18.9.4	One performs the sacrifices for a year.
18.9.5	He does not perform the Shunasirya rite.
18.9.6	Then he performs the sacrifice with four oblations and four Indras.
18.9.7	The Agniya oblation with eight potfuls of cooked rice.
18.9.8	A milch cow is the Dakshina.
18.9.9	One should perform this for one who has an enemy or for one who is dear.
18.9.10	On the same night, he performs the sacrifice of the five oblations.
18.9.11	Having removed the four sacrificial fires to the four directions and having made the fifth one in the middle, having placed the separate fires, having taken five spoonfuls in the ladle, he offers with the formulas beginning with "Ye Devas purasadā" in accordance with the respective texts. In the middle, he offers with five spoonfuls.
18.9.12	Having placed the middle kindling woods together, having put them together in one place, and having taken another five handfuls, he offers five oblations to Agni Rakṣogni with the formula, "To Agni Rakṣognī Svāhā."
18.9.13	The chariot with a mule or with five horses is the Dakṣiṇā.
18.9.14	One who is afraid of Rakṣas or Pisācas should offer this sacrifice.
18.9.15	When the sun has set, they perform the Apamarga Homa after the Agnihotra.
18.9.16	Having brought Apamarga plants after the water has been taken away, they make them into flour and offer them as incense to the southern fire.
18.9.17	Having gone to the northern or southern direction, having settled down in the self-made pit, having recited the Devatve formula, he offers the oblation for the killing of Rakshas with a leaf-vessel, saying, "I offer for the killing of the Rakshas."
18.9.18	Having struck the vessel with the formula "Rakshas is killed," he stands up with the formula "We have restrained the Rakshas."
18.9.19	The garment worn is the Dakshina, or a boon.
18.9.20	It is known that the Rakshasas come without being expected.
18.10.1	Having offered the Agnihotra, one offers the oblations to the goddesses.
18.10.2	The oblations are: a cake on twelve potsherds to Dhatri, and five others.
18.10.3	The Dakshina is a pair of cows.
18.10.4	Here, the animal is also offered as a fee to Dhatri or not.
18.10.5	The oblatioins are: a cake to Agni-Vishnu on eleven potsherds, and three others.
18.10.6	Among them, one who desires a village should offer the first, one who desires brahmic glory should offer the second, and one who desires cattle should offer the third.
18.10.7	Some say, "It is the birth of heroes."
18.10.8	One should offer a cake on twelve potsherds to Vaisvānara.
18.10.9	Gold is the dakṣiṇā.
18.10.10	A cake made of barley, the size of a palm, all around.
18.10.11	A horse with an unbroken gait is the dakṣinā.
18.10.12	The oblations of the Ratnis are twelve in number, including the cake to Brhaspati.
18.10.13	The Dakshina is the offering of the Iṣṭi and the gifts.
18.10.14	The cake to Bhaga is the fourth, in the house of the Vāta-s.
18.10.15	The Dakshinā is a variegated calf.
18.10.16	Some say that the cake to the Nairṛta is the size of a thumb joint.
18.10.17-22	The Vaisnava sacrifice with three pot-shaped oblations is performed in the house of a carpenter or a chariot-maker. The fee is all iron. Some say that it is for the carpenter or the chariot-maker. The Rudra sacrifice with Gavinduka oblations is performed at the house of a gambler or a cow-dealer. The fee consists of a whip, a sword, and a woolen blanket. It is known as Trivatsa.
18.10.23	The bow is covered with leather, bound with leather thongs, with a leather case, with a leather strap, with a leather arrow-case, or with a leather calf-skin.
18.10.24	Some say: The horse is red-eared.
18.10.25	He offers in the house of the Palākalas with the formula, "To the path, svāhā."
18.10.26	They speak the messenger of untruth.
18.10.27	Three arrows made of leather, or a bow wrapped with cane, are the Dakṣiṇā.
18.10.28	The sacrificer offers a cake on eleven potshards to Indra Sutāma, and a cake on eleven potshards to Indra Ahomuca.
18.10.29	A bull is the sacrificial fee.
18.10.30	Some say that a gold coin is the armour.
18.11.1	The Adhvaryu murmurs before the Svishtakrit, "May this king, having become a king, slay Vritra."
18.11.2	For the Aśvattha branch which is self-sown, he makes a vessel of four corners.
18.11.3	They milk a white cow with a white calf in the autumn season.
18.11.4	They carry it in a self-sown vessel.
18.11.5	They expose it to the sun in a self-pounded vessel.
18.11.6	It becomes ghee by self-dissolution.
18.11.7	On the next day, he performs the consecration of the Ukthya sacrifice.
18.11.8	The consecration is performed by Mitra and Brhaspati.
18.11.9	The altar is made by oneself, the sacrificial grass is cut by oneself, and the wood is collected by oneself.
18.11.10	Now some make half of the altar, half of their own making; half of the grass is given, half of their self-made; half of the wood is cut, half of theirself-cut.
18.11.11	Some say that the grass should be spread and the wood should be placed.
18.11.12	At the time of preparing the vessels, he places the Barhaspatya rice-cake and the Maitra vessel in place of the potsherds.
18.11.13	He divides the rice into three parts with the Vibhaga mantra, separating the grains with ears from those without ears.
18.11.14	Some say that the grains with ears are the most tender and the grains without ears are the most mature.
18.11.15	Those with ears are Barhaspatya in the milk.
18.11.16	When it is cooked, he puts it into a vessel with the Maitra-cup.
18.11.17	He brings it in, melted by itself.
18.11.18	He pours the clarified butter into the Pavitra-vessel.
18.11.19	He makes the two ears (of the vessel) upper and lower.
18.11.20	Thus they become cooked together.
18.11.21	Having reached the Brhaspati-cup, he reaches the Maitra-vessel.
18.11.22	Thus he proceeds.
18.11.23	The horse of the Barhaspatya sacrifice is to be black-backed, that of the Maitra sacrifice is to be white and its calf also is to be white.
18.12.1	Thus the consecration of the Ukthya sacrifice is increased so that when ten days of the year remain, there will be the Dashapeya sacrifice.
18.12.2	He buys Soma for the consecration and the Dashapeyasacrifice together. He carries them together.
18.12.3	Half of it he puts aside in the house of the king's priest for the ten-fold drinking.
18.12.4	He offers eight oblations of the Soma-Agni animal sacrifice, the Savaniya oblations, one after another.
18.12.5	But the Svishtakrit and the Idam are common.
18.12.6	The Brahman takes the sacrificer's hand, saying, "Savitar may lead thee to prosperity."
18.12.7	Then he announces him to the Ratnis (the people of the Ratni country), saying, "This is your king, O Bharatas." "This is your Kurus king," "This is your Panchalas king," "This your Kurupanchala king," "This king of yours is the people." Thus he announces him to other kings.
18.12.8	The Brahmanas recite, "Soma is our king."
18.12.9	The sacrificer, having placed the name of the kingdom, goes forth with the Varuni verses, having cleansed his mouth.
18.12.10	"He says, "Thou art the step of Vishnu." He steps three steps of Vishnu towards the east."
18.12.11	Having placed the Mahavira towards the east, having offered the midday oblations, he offers the Ekavimsa-kapala oblation to Maruts and the Vaisvadevam-amisha oblation.
18.12.12-15	In the forest, he places the skull-cups with the third Anuvāka. With the two verses, "One is this, another is that" etc., in the middle of the forest, with the Anuvāka.
18.12.16	The number of Grahas is the same.
18.13.1	Having offered in the waters of Sarasvati, he takes them with this very Mantra.
18.13.2	In the same way, he takes with the remaining ones, with which he offers.
18.13.3	The lord of waters, the waters of the ocean, or the Sindhu waters, or any other male river.
18.13.4	The wave of the man and the animal goes against the stream, the other wave goes with the stream.
18.13.5	"He who goes against the stream says, "I am a bull," he who goes with the stream says, "I am a bull with a bull-like army."
18.13.6	" "He who is in the village says, "I stand on the village-land."
18.13.7	Those who go against the stream say, "We stand on the strength of the Maruts," or those who are in the Hraduni river.
18.13.8	Those which, having flowed out, are re-absorbed in the same place, are called Prahāvari.
18.13.9	Those which flow around, are called Parivāhiṇī.
18.13.10	Those which shine like the sun, are called Sūryavarcasas.
18.13.11	Those which have forms visible, are called Sūrvatvacas.
18.13.12	Those that are immovable, are called Mandā.
18.13.13	Those that flow, are called Vāśā.
18.13.14	Those which are the membranes of a cow, are called Śakvarī.
18.13.15	The one who supports the world is of milk.
18.13.16	The one who supports the people is of curd.
18.13.17	The one of Agni's brilliance is of ghee.
18.13.18	The one is the juice of water and plants is of honey.
18.13.19	The goddesses of water, full of honey, are taken up. This is recited at all offerings and consecrations.
18.13.20	"O you who give the kingdom, give the kingdom! Svāhā!" along with the Homa. "O you who bestow the kingdom, give this kingdom to him!" along with the Grahaṇa.
18.13.21	The goddesses are the waters, so says the Vaitasa. Having placed the Grahas in the middle of the Hotr's and the Brahmaṇācchaṃsin's Dhishniyas, having placed the gold in the Niyukt, having purified it with the verse, "You are purified," having purified it with "May the bright ones purify you with brightness," having placed it in four vessels, namely, Palāsha, Udumbara, Ashvattha, and Nyagrodha.
18.13.22	The Agni-dhrīya-offering is made with the verse, "O Rudra, having gone to the north, the highest place of yours, I offer to you the highest name."
18.14.1	The sacrificer puts on the Tarpa (a garment) with the verse, “Thou art the womb of the nobility.” The second is the white turban with the verse, ”Thou art the source of the nobility.”
18.14.2	White and yellow are called Pandara.
18.14.3	Some have three kinds of turbans, white, yellow and Pandara.
18.14.4	On the head, the turban.
18.14.5	Then he consecrates him with one hundred darbha grass blades, and anoints him with one hundred.
18.14.6	Fifty to the right eye, one hundred and fifty to the left.
18.14.7	Then he places curds and jujube fruits in his mouth.
18.14.8	Some people mention these rites in the order in which they are performed, viz. anointing, bathing, eating, putting on of garments.
18.14.9	These rites are performed by the Agnidhra.
18.14.10	Having sprinkled (the arrow) with water, he makes the sacrificer recite the verse, "Agni has come to us." Having taken it outside, he says, "I am offering this to you, O king." He gives the bow to the sacrificer, saying, "You are Indra's thunderbolt."
18.14.11	"You are the destroyers of enemies," he says to the three arrow-bearing ones.
18.14.12	He recites the verse, "May it fall back on me," when they are being given.
18.14.13	The Adhvaryu, while giving (the Soma), mutters, "May it fall on the east, may it fall on the west, may it fall in the north."
18.14.14	The sacrificer raises the right arm with the words, "Thou art Mitra," and the left arm with the words "Thou art Varuna."
18.14.15	This is the reverse.
18.14.16	He addresses the raised arms with the words, "Thou art of golden colour."
18.14.17	Then he assigns the directions to him with five (verses).
18.15.1	"He stands with the sacrificial grass, and mentally follows it."
18.15.2	Here one should offer to Maruts.
18.15.3	Having made it seated on the sacrificial grass, they invoke the lion, roaring around the tiger, for great good fortune. They rub the ocean, the great one, the dwelling place, the island in the waters. With a wooden sword, one who is practising sorcery strikes the sacrificial cake.
18.15.4	Whatever is held by the Sphyi and whatever is scattered, that he offers to Vishnu Sipivista.
18.15.5	Having placed the Khādirī, the Udumbara, and the Vāsaṇḍī in front of the presiding priest, he says, "You are the lustre of Soma." On that (seat), having spread the tiger skin with the neck towards the east and the hair upwards, he says, "You are nectar." Having placed a golden piece weighing one hundred mānas in it, he says, "Protect me from lightning." He places it on the head of the sacrificer with a golden piece weighing a hundred mānas, a hundred syllables, or a hundred Kṛṣṇalas.
18.15.6	The sacrificer, ascending it, places the head of the black antelope on the right foot with the verse, "The serpents are bound." With the verse, "We have removed the head of Namuci" he places the head of a red-coloured sheep on the left foot.
18.15.7	They throw them outside the altar.
18.15.8	He offers six Partha oblations in front of the consecration with the formula, "To Agni svāhā."
18.15.9	"Om! To the Earth, svāhā!" Thus, the six consecrations of the elements.
18.15.10	He stands with arms raised and consecrates the praise of Indra.
18.15.11	Having recited "Soma is the king," he consecrates, saying, "I consecrate you with Soma's radiance."
18.16.1	The Adhvaryu consecrates with a Palāśa (tree) in front.
18.16.2	The others do likewise.
18.16.3	With the Udumbara (tree) on the right side, the Brahman or the Rajanya.
18.16.4	With the Ashvattha (tree) on west, the Vaishya.
18.16.5	With the Nyagrodha (tree) on north, the Janamitra.
18.16.6	He recites the formula, "You are the lord of the Kshatriyas" while anointing him.
18.16.7	The anointing substances that flow down from the one being anointed,
18.16.8	he wipes them with vessels.
18.16.9	"Thou art the womb of Indra, the womb of generation." With the black-horned one he throws out the garments, one by one, two by two, or all together.
18.16.10	He throws them on the heap, saying, "Protect me from above."
18.16.11	He offers six times to Indra with "Svāhā" above the sprinkling.
18.16.12	Six times to the waters with "Svāha" for the enclosing of the beings.
18.16.13	Here one should offer the Praraka oblation.
18.16.14	If one wishes for a wife, one should offer two oblations to Prajapati, after having prepared the oblation in the manner of the Upavasatha rite, from the dough that has been spread out in the vessels, saying, "Prajapati, these are not yours."
18.16.15	He mixes the names, saying, "This is the son of so-and-so, and that is the son of such-and-such."
18.16.16	Some say, "Names."
18.17.1	"Thou art Indra's thunderbolt." Having brought the chariot to the front, he yokes the chariot with the reins of Mitra-Varuna, the rulers.
18.17.2	"Thou art Vishnu's step." The sacrificer approaches the chariot.
18.17.3	The noble who is appointed follows.
18.17.4	"O Purandara, do thou conquer!" thus he approaches the Brahman from the right side.
18.17.5	"I conquer in the impulse of the Maruts" thus he proceeds.
18.17.6	The king with his bow stands in front, to the north.
18.17.7	He shoots these arrows at him, saying, "May my mind be firm."
18.17.8	Having won each one by one, he turns to the right, saying, "I have won by strength and energy."
18.17.9	He stands where he goes.
18.17.10	"You are Indra's bow," he says, and then he takes the bow and the wife of the horse-owner.
18.17.11	"This is the thunderbolt, the strength-giving. By it may our son win strength," he says, giving the bow to his wife.
18.17.12	"The Varāhi (a kind of antelope) says, 'You are the anger of the animals.' Having released the shoes, he descends to the earth, reciting, 'Salutation to the mother.' Having descended, he releases the gems, saying, 'You are this much,' for the silver one, 'You are energy,' for the Udumbara one, and 'You are a yoke,' for the golden one.
18.17.13	Some prescribe the golden one in the middle."
18.17.14	Having offered the oblations to be offered at the release of the chariot with the formula, "Svāhā to Agni, the lord of the house," he makes the chariot ascend the road with the formula, “The swan, the pure one..." along with the Saṃgrahītṛ.
18.17.15	When the chariot is placed, the Saṃgrahitṛ descends.
18.18.1	The sacrificer takes up the right arm with the formula, "You are Mitra," and the left arm with the formula "You are Varuna."
18.18.2	This is the opposite.
18.18.3	"I am with all the gods" - thus one takes up the hands in the offering of milk to all the gods.
18.18.4	"You are true, may I be true" - thus some recite the offering of milk for Mitra and Varuna.
18.18.5	They make a square enclosure four cubits away from the Agnidhra, with a raised front and a sloping back.
18.18.6	"Thou art the seat, thou art the good seat." Having placed the seat of Khadira wood on it, he says, "Thou art the navel of the Kshatriya." Having sat on it, he covers himself with the skin of the Krittikas, saying, "May I be covered."
18.18.7	Having approached it, the sacrificer sits down, saying, "Thou art seated on the good seat."
18.18.8-11	He sits down, saying, "He who is firm in his vows." The officiating priests and the jewel-wearers sit down all around him, the Adhvaryu in front, the Brahman on the right, the Hotṛ behind, and the Udgātṛ on the left. When they have sat down, the Brahman addresses the Adhvaryus, saying, "You are the king, O Brahman." The other replies, "You are."
18.18.12	Thus to Brahma, the Hotar, and the Udgatar.
18.18.13	The others reply with the next verse.
18.18.14	"The king gives the Sphy to Brahma, the Purorhita to the Pratihita, the Ratnis to the Ratni."
18.18.15	They give it to the lowest one, at the end of the dice-game.
18.18.16	Then, having taken up the dice from the place of gambling, one should throw them down.
18.19.1	They should be made of gold, either in hundreds or thousands.
18.19.2	Brahmins, kings, merchants, and shudras, these four groups, play dice and announce the rice.
18.19.3	These are the two Agni-bearers as Dakshina for this rite.
18.19.4	These two are to be given to Brahma.
18.19.5	The king's share is the victory. Having won the directions by playing with four hundred golden dice, the king becomes victorious. He gives five dice to the king.
18.19.6	The king calls out the names of the auspicious ones, the compiler named Sumanghala, the milk-giver named Sumanghalas, and the steward named Satyaraja.
18.19.7	Having summoned them, he gives the four-cornered field to Brahma.
18.19.8	They become the observers.
18.19.9	Here one should offer two oblations with the names of the deities.
18.19.10	He recites the verses mixed with hymns, a hundred or a thousand.
18.19.11	The Hotṛ recites while seated at the sacrifice of Hiranyakaśipu.
18.19.12	The Adhvaryu recites while standing at the sacrifice of Hiranvakatsu.
18.19.13	"The Pratihara recites the verses with "Om". The hymns are recited with "Yes."
18.19.14	When the Hotr priest, Shunaahshepa, has finished his duties, he gives two golden ladles to the Adhvaryu priest, who is about to be consecrated, and two golden ladles.
18.19.15	Here, the Maruts and the Visve Devas are invoked.
18.19.16	The Svishtakrit is the same as the Idam.
18.19.17	When the Idam is invoked, the Adhvaryus give the gems to the Brahmana priest.
18.20.1	He performs the rites of Maheśvara.
18.20.2	It is similar to the Avabhrtha rite.
18.20.3	Having performed the Avabhrthā rite, he offers oblations in water with the formula, "Svāhā to the waters, to the son of waters."
18.20.4	Having offered to Agni, the lord of the house, with the formula, "To Agni, the lord, svāhā," having returned, he offers to Agni, the domestic fire, and then offers the Anūbandhyā animal dedicated to Indra and Sūta-vāsā.
18.20.5	He offers the Pasupuroḍāśa and Nīvaraṇa cakes on the four-legged wooden post.
18.20.6	It is understood that the method of offering is as follows.
18.20.7	On the next day he should offer the Sauma sacrifice with ten or seven oblations. The first oblation is to Agni in eight potsherds.
18.20.8	He should choose the earlier and earlier sacrifices.
18.20.9	The Ahavaniya fire is to the east and the Garhapatya fire to the north.
18.20.10	The Ahavanīya fire is in the easternmost part of the house, and the Garha patya fire outside.
18.20.11	Then, in the afternoon, he begins the ritual of the Dashapayin.
18.20.12	They initiate immediately.
18.20.13	They buy Soma immediately.
18.20.14	He releases a garland of twelve lotuses in place of the initiation.
18.20.15	He buys Soma with ten young bulls.
18.20.16	He does not bargain or carry it away.
18.20.17	He only rejects the purchase.
18.20.18	One consecration, three Upasads.
18.20.19	He offers a Soma cake to Soma in front of the Upasads, a cake on eight potsherds to Tvashtri in between, and a cake on three potsherds to Vishnu above.
18.20.20	The same kindling wood and enclosing sticks as in the case of the Upasad oblations.
18.20.21	The Hotri priest is from the Bharadvaja gotra.
18.20.22	The Brahma-saman is in the Sraiyantiya mode.
18.20.23	The Agnistoma-saman is Vāravantinīya.
18.20.24	He takes the waters of Sarasvati.
18.21.1	The next day, at the time of placing the vessels, he prepares ten additional cups.
18.21.2	At the time of raising them, he raises them.
18.21.3	At the mealtime, ten Brahmanas who have drunk Soma drink Soma in each cup, from the tenth person onwards, without interruption.
18.21.4	From the tenth person onwards, he becomes the performer of the sacrifice.
18.21.5	One hundred Soma-drinking Brahmanas enter the assembly.
18.21.6	At the time of Dakshina, he gives a golden garland to the Adhvaryu, a golden garland to Udgata, and gold to Hotra, as mentioned in the texts.
18.21.7	Then he gives the bull to the leader of the Ekisha group, the ram to the Gravastuta, the goat to the Subrahmanya, the bull to the Neshtri, the bull to be given to the Agnidhra, the sheep to the Sthuri, the barley-fed sheep to the Acchavasaka.
18.21.8	Having circumambulated the directions, he sits down.
18.21.9	The five are the Agniya with eight potsherds, the Vaisnava with eleven potsherds,
18.21.10	If a brahmin, a kshatriya or a vaishya desires radiance, he should perform this sacrifice.
18.21.11	If a brahmin performs this sacrifice, he should offer oblations to the deity of Jupiter in the middle, and then pour libations. If a kshatriya, to the deity of Indra. If a vaishya, to the deity related to all gods.
18.21.12	In the afternoon, one should perform the animal sacrifice with two animals.
18.21.13	He offers the pregnant Aditi, the Malha, the Prsni, the Pashouhi to Maruts.
18.21.14	He calls out loudly to Aditi, and performs silently for Maruts.
18.21.15	The call and the response are silent.
18.21.16	On the next day he performs the Satyadutas' Iṣṭi with three oblations: a cake on twelve potsherds to the Asvins, and to Pūshan.
18.21.17	The sacrificial post, the dry shield, and the worn-out shoes are the Dakṣiṇās.
18.22.1	Some say that the staff, the boar-skin, and the shoes are the Dakshina.
18.22.2	The staff or the dry shield, or the worn-out sandals.
18.22.3	Having bathed them, he sends them to the rival kings.
18.22.4	He informs them, "I have been anointed, I have become a king."
18.22.5	In the afternoon, he offers six oblations with the verses beginning with "Agneya asthakapala".
18.22.6	The southernmost chariot-bearing procession is the Dakshina.
18.22.7	The next day, he offers six northern oblations.
18.22.8	The northernmost chariot-bearing procesion is the Dakshna.
18.22.9	Having offered Agnihotra for a year, one performs the Atiratra sacrifice with the Keshavapaniya (verses).
18.22.10	The mantras of the Vapa-pravada are those which say, "Those who are the first to perform the sacrifice of Kesin."
18.22.11	He performs the Vapa-pradava first with the initial Pravadai and then with the final Pravadai.
18.22.12	After that, he performs the Vyuṣṭi-Dvi-ratra.
18.22.13	The Agniṣṭoma is the first day and the Atiratra is the second day.
18.22.14	The first day is on the full moon day and the second day is on the Vyusṭaka day.
18.22.15	Or the day before the new moon, if it is seen later.
18.22.16	Or the days of the waxing moon which are auspicious.
18.22.17	They offer five days before the Ekadashi, and six after.
18.22.18	For the Kshatriyas, Dhriti, Trishtum, Agnistoma, and Pancavarga.
18.22.19	One should perform the sacrifice at the end.
18.22.20	The Rajasuya is concluded.
18.22.21	Having performed the Sautrāmaṇī sacrifice, one should perform the Maitrāvaruṇa and Vāmadevya sacrifices.
18.22.22	The days of the various ablutions are different except for the first day of the two-day (rite).
19.1.1	Before the three-day (rite), having bought six sheep from a eunuch, having put on a woolen garment, having deposited the materials, one commences the procedure of the Sautrāmani sacrifice.
19.1.2	Its procedure is like that of the Nirūḍhapaśubandha.
19.1.3	Having placed the fires, having performed the Veda, having strewn the fires, he proceeds with the rites of washing the hands etc.
19.1.4	He arranges the vessels according to their purpose, placing the pot in the place of the potsherds.
19.1.5	At the time of offering, he offers plenty of rice grains to the Ashvins, Sarasvati, Indra and Sutradhara.
19.1.6	The procedure of cooked rice has been explained.
19.1.7	Having cooked (the oblations) in front of the Garhapatya, he digs a pit and mixes Sura in it according to the Sura method.
19.1.8	It flows out.
19.1.9	He mixes Sura with fresh grass, saying, "Thou art sweet, with the sweet."
19.1.10	She stays mixed for three nights.
19.1.11	He cuts down the single sacrificial post.
19.1.12	He does not make an altar.
19.1.13	He performs the rites with the one already prepared.
19.1.14	It is known that the Sāumika sacrifice is performed on the third day of the Veda.
19.1.15	When the northern altar is being made, the Pratiprasthātṛ, having brought the soil from the Catvāla, makes a mound towards the south of the northern altar, and in front of the Anvāhāryapacana, he makes a second mound for the Suragraha.
19.1.16	When the fire is being carried, the Pratiprasthātṛ, having brought the fire from the southern fire, places it on the southern part of the northern altar and adds it.
19.1.17	At the time of placing the vessels, he places three vessels - the Satam, the Valasrava, the Syenapatra and the vessels for cooking - to the Asvins, Sarasvati and Indra Sutrasamana.
19.1.18	Having first taken out the Soma, having cut it off, having placed it on the head of the Brahman or on the back of a donkey, he purifies it with the words, "Purify the flowing Soma with the woolen filter."
19.1.19	"Soma has flowed too much towards the east," for the Soma-drinkers. "Soma has flowed too far towards the west," for the Soma over-purifiers.
19.1.20	Having placed the purified (animal) in its proper place, he dedicates the animals to the one-yoked (Agni).
19.2.1	The black goat to Indra, the ram to Sarasvati, the bull or the he-goat to Brhaspati.
19.2.2	The fourth to Soma-vamina or to Soma-atipavit.
19.2.3	Having offered the oblations, he gives a golden bull, a heifer and a mare.
19.2.4	They say that the Prāyascitti is to be performed when the Āhavaniya fire is lost and restored.
19.2.5	The cow to be given as Dakṣiṇā is to be a heifer.
19.2.6	Some say that the gold and silver should be of the size of a hundred māṇas.
19.2.7	Having purified themselves in the Cātvāla, they take the Suragrahas on another cart.
19.2.8	For all of them, there is one Puroruk, one Puronuvākya, one Prāyaṣcitti, and one Yajya.
19.2.9	The Adhvaryu takes up the Asvin cup with the formula, "Thou art taken with a support; I take thee who art faultless with the faultless one, dear to the Asvins." The Pratiprasthātṛ takes up the Sarasvatī cup with the same formula. The Agnidh or the Brahman takes up the Indra cup with the formula "For Indra thee." The sacrificer or the Brahman takes it.
19.2.10	With barley-cakes and lion-hair, he offers to Asvin; with jujube-cakes and tiger-hair, to Sarasvat; with sugarcane-cakes and wolf-hair, to Indra.
19.2.11	In their absence, the Adhvaryu should mentally contemplate lions, the Pratiprasthātā tigers, and the sacrificer wolves.
19.2.12	Having wiped them all with the hawk-feather, he places them in their respective places, saying, "This is your birthplace."
19.2.13	Or if there are obstacles to the performance of the sacrifice.
19.2.14	Having taken the sacrificial animals and the Soma, they should take up the Grahas.
19.2.15	Then he offers the Puronuvakya oblations, having offered the Pasupurodasa oblation to Brihaspati, the Ekadashakapa oblation to Indra.
19.2.16	Having approached those three, they move with the Grahas.
19.2.17	When they seize them, the Adhvaryu instructs.
19.2.18	"Recite for the Asvins, Sarasvati, Indra, the distributor of wealth, the Soma-drinks, the Sura-drinks." "Send forth the Soma-drinks for the Asvins..." The two instructions are: "Send forth the Somas, the Sura-liquids, which have been started."
19.2.19	You two, O Asvins, drank soma with Namuci in the Asura-world, you two, O givers of good fortune, came to Indra in his deeds. Like a son to his parents, the two Asvins came to Indra in deeds, with their faces shining. When you drank soma with Shachi, Sarasvati has blessed you, O Maghavan. In the oblations to all the gods, the yajya and anu-yajya verses are recited.
19.3.1	"O Agni, do thou take Soma."
19.3.2	O Agni, the oblation is in your mouth. Like a ladle, like a vessel, Soma, the giver of strength, bestow on us wealth with many heroes, glorious, great, in which are horses, bulls, rams, ewes, goats, released, invited, the pressing stone, for Soma, the creator, the charming mind, the heart, the mind, the heart. The sacrificer recites the oblation being offered.
19.3.3	One should buy a brahmin who is a consumer of leftovers.
19.3.4	"The two of you, O gods, have a separate place of honour. Do not mix together in the highest heaven. You are the goddess, I am the Soma. Do not injure me. I enter my own place. Whatever of the juice of the pressed Soma is left here, which Indra drank with his wives, I now consume that Soma, the king, with a friendly mind." Or he may drink it himself.
19.3.5	Two Vedas I have heard, of the Pitrs and of the gods and of men. By them this whole world has come together, the former and the latter sign. Or one may offer on the anthill.
19.3.6	On the southern fire he places a pot with a hundred holes attached to it.
19.3.7	Then he spreads out the sacred thread of the pit in the northern direction, saying, "Whatever my mind has gone to." Having placed a hundred pieces of gold in it, he says, "The fathers who are like Soma are satisfied." He brings the remaining Soma there and says, "The Soma-like fathers are satisfied. May we enjoy the divine life that is to be drunk. The Soma drunk by Indra is discerning. May we enjoy..."
19.3.8	They stand with the three Soma-streams, the three Pitṛ-streams, the successive ones.
19.3.9	These are mentioned as 'You, O Soma, are the knower'.
19.3.10	The Adhvaryu is in front, the Brahman is on the right, the Hotṛ is behind.
19.3.11	If a Brahman performs the sacrifice, he establishes the hundred-fold (sacrificial) gifts in the southern fire with the formula, "O Agni, O bearer of the Kavya (gifts), O bearer of the gifts."
19.4.1	If a Kshatriya or a Vaishya does not honour the southern fire,
19.4.2	he should himself perform the remaining part of the Soma sacrifice.
19.4.3-6	Having performed the animal-sacrifice of Barhaspatya, he performs with animals and cakes. The Sviṣṭakṛt offering is common. "Having brought the sacrificial grass, he says, "O Agni, do thou bring the sacrificial grass." Having brought the sacrificial grass and the sacrificial grass-blades, he says, "O Agni, do you bring the sacrificial grass- blades." Having brought the sacrificial posts, he says, "O Agni, bring the sacrificial posts." Having brought them, he says, “O Agni, bring them." Having brought wood, he says,"O Agni, bring wood." Having brought it, he says," "O Agni bring it." Having brought fire-wood, he says, ”O Agni, bring fire-wood." Having brought, he says, " "O Agn, bring it." He brings the fire-wood, the sacrificial grass, the sacrificial grass-blade, the sacrificial posts, the sacrificial grass and wood. " "Having brought the fire-wood and the sacrificial grass, they perform the Avabhrtha rite with the heart-spoons and the vessels of the Masara."
19.4.7	The month of Māsa is described as the month of Rīṣīṣa.
19.4.8	The month of Māsa, they say, is the month of Bulka.
19.4.9	"He inserts the Āśvina vessel into the Avabhṛtha with the formula, "The Gayatra metre is thy noose, O Varuna, I free thee from that with this (formula). Svāhā." "With the same formula, "the Tristubh metre." "The Jagatī metre." "the Anushtubh metre." "The Satamvala, the Syena-leaf and the Paṅkti metre." "The Śūla."
19.4.10	The return is silent.
19.4.11	He should perform the Soma-sacrifice for one who is being deprived of the Soma-drink, or for one who is deprived of it, or for one being consecrated, or for one consecrated.
19.4.12	One who is being cursed should perform the sacrifice, or one who is cursing, or one desiring food, or one desiring offspring, or one desiring cattle.
19.4.13	All consecrations are mentioned.
19.4.14	A Brāhmaṇa, a Kṣatriya, or a Vaiśya desiring brilliance should perform this sacrifice.
19.5.1	Now we shall explain the Kukiya.
19.5.2	Its rite is as before.
19.5.3	At the time of sowing, one should offer a sacrifice to Indra.
19.5.4	A bull is the Dakshina.
19.5.5	A cake to Aditya.
19.5.6	A calf.
19.5.7	Having bought barley, wheat and rice from the eastern market, having put them in a linen cloth, they make the barley and wheat slightly heated.
19.5.8	Having mixed the powder with curd or whey, he puts it around with darbha grass.
19.5.9	It is for one month.
19.5.10	The same, but in the form of coarse powder, smeared with the exudation of the trees, is the Nāgnahus.
19.5.11	Having made the barley-meal, at the time of mixing the Sura, he mixes it with the Sura with the Tockma, the Masara, and the Nighuna. Having sprinkled the barley-meal with the third (part), he sprinkles it with the Sura mixed with the milk of one cow. Having sprinkled it with the third (portion) of the milk of another cow, he sprinkles it with Sura mixed with the third (portions) of the milk from two cows. Having sprinkled it for three nights with the milk of three cows, it remains mixed.
19.6.1	Some people say that the Karotarā is to be placed in the place of the pit.
19.6.2	The Baiḍala is bound with leather.
19.6.3	He places the Baiḍala with its mouth facing the mouth.
19.6.4	Its hole is bound with leather,
19.6.5	and what flows out of it is called the parisru.
19.6.6	At the time of preparing the vessels, he places three vessels for the Asvins, Sarasvati, Indra and Sutrasamana.
19.6.7	Three kinds of grains - barley, wheat and rice - are placed in a vessel made of the feathers of a hawk or in a pot.
19.6.8	The filter of the Adhvaryu is made of goat hair, and that of the Pratiprasthatri is made of cow and horse hair.
19.6.9-13	Having poured out clarified butter, the Adhvaryu pours out a large quantity of milk in the Drona vessel. "Aśmarathya says, "With mantras." Ālekhana says, "Silently." Having melted the clarified butter, he pours out the milk with the ladle. "If Soma is flowing towards the east, then (the Adhvaryu) says, "Soma is flowing towards the west." If Soma is flowing towards Soma Atipavit, then (the Pratiprasthātṛ) says, "The Brahman and the Kshatra are flowing towards Soma Atidrava."
19.6.14	Having taken up the sacrificial portions of clarified butter, the Adhvaryu takes up the Paya-grahas.
19.6.15	"For all (grahas) there is one Puroruk, one Puronuvakya, one Prāṣa, and one Yājyā, namely, "Kuvid-aṅga..."
19.7.1	Having taken it with the formula, "Thou art taken with a support; I take thee agreeable to the Asvins", having besmeared it with barley-flour, having wiped it with the strainer, having placed it with the formula "This is thy place; for brilliance thee", having taken it with the verse, "Thou art grasped with a support; I take thee agreeable to Sarasvati", having besmeathered it with wheat-flour, having rubbed it with the strainer and having placed it with "This is thy abode; for strength thee", having taken with the verse, "Thou art grasped with support; I take Thee agreeable to Indra-Sutradamana", having besmeered it with the flour of wild barley, having rubbed it by the strainer and having besmeared with the formula, "This is thy abode, for strength thee", he places it. He then stands with the remaining formulas as prescribed.
19.7.2	When the Soma is being brought in, the Pratiprasthātṛ takes up the Soma-grahas.
19.7.3	"The two (verses) are different, for the two of you have made the place of the gods. The Puroruk, the Puronuvākyā, the Prāṣa and the Yājyā are common to all."
19.7.4	The formula for taking up is, "Thou art taken with a formula; I take thee agreeable to the Asvins, the lustre of the Asvins." Having taken it, he cleanses it with the strainer and places it with the formula, "This is thy birth-place; for thy delight."
19.7.5	"You are taken with the Upamantras. The power of Sarasvati, I take you for Sarasvati, agreeable." Having taken it, he cleanses it with the strainer and places it, saying, "This is your birthplace, for your delight."
19.7.6	The formula for taking up the Soma is, "Thou art taken with a formula; for Indra, for Sutrāman, I take thee agreeable." Having taken it, he cleanses it with the strainer and places it with the formula, "This is thy place; for thee for greatness."
19.7.7	The Soma-pressing stones are like Soma.
19.7.8	The Adhvaryu and the sacrificer stand together with the remaining portion of the Anuvāka, with the northern Anuvāka.
19.8.1	As before, he offers the animals.
19.8.2	Similar to the Barhaspatya, except that the animals are not offered into the fire.
19.8.3	At the middle stage, he places a part of the fire-brand on the ground and offers it.
19.8.4	Having offered the animals into the fire, he places this (fire-brand) for the purpose of burning the animals.
19.8.5	When the oblations have been offered, he gives away forty cows as Dakṣiṇā, along with a calf and a she-buffalo.
19.8.6	Here they should take up the Grahas.
19.8.7	The instructions have been stated.
19.8.8	All should be offered in the Āhavanīya fire, says Āśmarathya; the Soma-Grahas in the Dakṣiṇīya fire, say Ālekhyas.
19.8.9	He offers the Suravant-grahas with the verse, "The juice of yours which is collected."
19.8.10	Having offered silently at the Anuvshada-call, the Adhvaryu consumes the Asvin-graha with the verse, "Whom the Asvins have released from Namuchi."
19.8.11	The Pratiprasthata and the Agnidhra consume the Sarasvata-graha with "What is here poured out."
19.8.12	The Brahman and the sacrificer consume the Indra-graha with, "This oblation."
19.8.13	The offering to the Pitrs has been explained.
19.8.14	He offers the remaining milk to the south of the Ahavaniya with the formula, "To the Pitrs, to the grandfathers, to the great grandfathers, to all the Pitrs, svadha, obeisance."
19.8.15	He prays with the verse, "May the Pitrs, the Soma-drinkers, protect us."
19.9.1	The Adhvaryu and the Pratiprasthātṛ offer the oblations with the verses, "Those who are equal" and "Those who are of the same caste."
19.9.2	At the time of Manota, he places the meat-broths of the animals separately in vessels.
19.9.3	He offers oblations with the horns and hooves before the Svishtakrit.
19.9.4	There are eight oblations for each animal, with the hooves and horns.
19.9.5	Having filled the Kuṣṭhikā and the Śapha with the broth of the Aśvinī constellation, he offers the Kuṣṭikā and the Śapha twice with each mantra, using the eight-verse formula and the lead ladle.
19.9.6	He places the Kuṣṭika and the Śapha on the upper horn.
19.9.7	Having offered the Kuṣṭhika and the Śapha, he cuts them into pieces in the Avāniya and Ahavanīya fires, using the lead ladle.
19.9.8	Thus with the northern eight-versed hymn for Sarasvati.
19.9.9	With the entire Anuvaka for Indra.
19.9.10	The stool of Udumbara wood, a span in height, with a hole at the navel, with a foot, with a string,
19.9.11	"He places it on the seat of the sacrificer, saying, "You are Mitra, you are Varuna."
19.9.12	The placing, seating, and reciting of the hymns are as in the Rajasuya.
19.9.13	Sitting facing east, he sprinkles him facing west with the Aśvin-Sampaata mantras, saying, "In the impulse of the divine Savitar, with the arms of the Ashvins, with the hands of Pusan, with the healing of the Ashvins I sprinkle you for brilliance and brahminical lustre."
19.9.14	In the same way, with the northern mantra, for Sarasvata.
19.9.15	With the supreme mantra, for Indra.
19.10.1	Who are you? What are you? The Adhvaryu offers the Vyahrtis, touching the hands.
19.10.2	Here, as in the Rajasuya, he calls out the names of the auspicious ones, touches his limbs in the proper order, saying, "May Sri be on my head," and descends from the chariot by the thighs and feet. Having recited, "I stand in the Kshatra, in the kingdom," and having offered oblations with the words, "The three gods," he touches his limbs in proper order, saying "My hair is the effort."
19.10.3	The rest is similar to the Svishtakrit.
19.10.4	"As for the offering of five oblations at the Avabhrtha, Ashmarathya says that they should be offered in the Ahavaniya."
19.10.5	Having recited the formula, "O Avabhrtha, O Nichaṅkana," the sacrificer recites the formula, "The friendly waters have flowed from the Drupada. Having bathed, he stands near the sun reciting the formula, "I am freed from the two kinds of darkness." He then stands near the water reciting the formula, "The noose of Varuna is released."
19.10.6	The offering of the kindling woods is like that of the animal sacrifice.
19.10.7	Having made the offering with the formula, "May it be accomplished," and having offered the oblation with the formula, “Svāhā,” the Pitryajña is performed as before.
19.10.8	One offers a bull to Indra, the bestower of strength.
19.10.9	A bull is the Dakṣiṇā.
19.10.10	A cake to Āditya.
19.10.11	A cow.
19.10.12	It is known that one gives the calf to the east and the mother to the north.
19.10.13	The Kaukīlī sacrifice is concluded.
19.10.14	One who desires heaven should perform this sacrifice.
19.11.1	One desiring heaven should perform the Savitrī rite.
19.11.2	It is performed at the animal sacrifice.
19.11.3	When about to perform, one prepares eighty-five hundred gold bricks, as many sand grains smeared with ghee, four self-matted bricks, and an unlimited number of Lokampṛṇā bricks.
19.11.4	He undertakes the ritual beginning with the six Hotr priests.
19.11.5	It is known that the Veda is the third (and the most important) of the three.
19.11.6	Having first drawn a line from the north to the south, having fixed a peg in the middle of the northern altar-space, having drawn a circular line all around, having the size of a chariot-wheel, having brought a green Darbha-stalk with its roots, having fixed it in the middle of fire, having taken five spoonfuls of clarified butter, having offered five oblations on the Darbha-stalk, having taken it up and sprinkled it, having drawn the northern altar-line ending with sprinkling, having drawn nine circular lines inside the line, having strewn sand, having covered it with Darbha-grass, having filled the outer line with curd mixed with honey and sugar, one dwells.
19.11.7	Having offered the morning Agnihotra, may Prajapati settle thee. With that deity, may it be firm like Angiras. Having touched the northern altar with this verse, he takes Agni in himself with the two verses, "I take Agni first in myself. Agni is our father." Having taken Agni in himself, he touches the self-kindled fire with the verse, "O Agni, those are thy kindling woods." He scatters sand with the verse, "O Agni, thy ashes are here." The ashes are a sign."
19.11.8	When he scatters them, he thinks mentally, "Whatever is black in the moon, may that be here."
19.11.9	"May your bodies be united with the ones you love." Having mixed the sand and gravel, he surrounds them with an unlimited number of pebbles, thinking, "May you grow and be united." He arranges the pebbles.
19.11.10	The lines do not attract.
19.11.11	In the interior he places the half of the thigh, the water-pot, with the formula, "The ocean has placed thee, the bestower of offspring, the bestower or wealth, for me, for strength."
19.12.1	In the ninth line, on the exterior, he places fifteen days of the bright fortnight, with the formulas, "Recognition, recognition."
19.12.2-4	In the intervals of these days, he lays down fifteen Muhurtas, with the verse, "Citra is the banner." Then in the interval, he lays down the fifteen nights of the bright fortnight, with the verse "Darsha is seen." In the intervals of these nights, he lays down five Muhurtas, with the verse, "The giver, the bestower."
19.12.5	Then he lays down the fifteen days of the later half of the fortnight in the middle, with the verses, "The praised and the unpraised."
19.12.6	In the intervals of these days he lays down fifteen Muhurtas, with the verses "Savitar, the creator..."
19.12.7	Then he lays down the nights of the later half, with the verses,"The sung and the sung-over."
19.12.8	In the intervals of these nights, he places fifteen Muhurtas, saying, "The overseer and the approving one."
19.12.9	Then in the middle, he places twelve nights of the bright fortnight, saying, "Purifying the purifier."
19.12.10	Then in between, he places twelve dark fortnight nights, saying, "Powerful, more powerful."
19.12.11	Then he lays down the fifteen names of months in the middle, beginning with 'Aruna, Arunaraja'.
19.12.12	Then he lays down the sand, beginning with 'Ejatka, Jovanka'.
19.12.13	Then he places the fifteen Muhurtas in the middle, starting with 'Idanina, Tadanina'.
19.12.14	Then in the middle, he places the six names of the sacrificial rites and the three names of the four seasons: Agniṣṭoma, Ukthya, Agni, and Rtu.
19.12.15	Then in the navel, he places the four names of the year: Prajapati, Samvatsara, Mahān, and Ka.
19.12.16	He places the four bricks of his own accord in the directions, saying, "Earth, Agni and Earth and me."
19.12.17	He places the Lokamprana bricks saying, "May I fill the world."
19.12.18	Having brought the soil from the sacrificial pit, he arranges it on the altar with the verse addressed to Vaisvānara, "The earth is the back."
19.12.19	That becomes the altar.
19.12.20	He recites the ascending verse, he recites the descending verse.
19.12.21	He worships with the Upasthāna (rite), "You worship yourself, you know yourself, you are what you are."
19.12.22	He makes it a thousandfold.
19.12.23	Having made the cow, the sacrificer worships with the rites of Samhāra and Viharā, "You are the year, you are the year."
19.12.24	On the northernmost brick, he offers cow's milk with an Arka leaf.
19.12.25	You are Agni, O Rudra. This is the form of the Satarudriya. The Arkaparna is placed on the anthill.
19.12.26	Sitting behind the fire facing east, the Hotṛ recites the Anusamsas with the Anuvāka beginning with "Bhūr Bhuvaḥ Svar".
19.13.1	The rites beginning with Agniprāṇayana and ending with Pāśuka are common to all except the Ati-Mukti.
19.13.2	Having offered the Ati-mukti oblations, he offers four spoonfuls.
19.13.3	"O Agni, you are Rudra" is the form of the Satarudriya, the second four spoonfuls. "
19.13.4	"O Agni and Vishnu" is the form from the stream of Soma, the second four-spoonfuls.
19.13.5	"Lord of food" is the food offering, the second four spoonful.
19.13.6	"Seven are your Agni, seven tongues" is the Vishvapri.
19.13.7	The other four are taken up with the formula, "I offer thee to the Vasus with the Veda, to the Rudras with the Veda, the Adityas with splendour, to all the gods with the sacrifice, to the Maruts with the Veda. Svāhā."
19.13.8	At the pouring of the oblations, the sacrificer is anointed with the formula, “The queen, the Virajini.”
19.13.9	Then he offers twenty-one oblations with the formula, "To Asvin, svāhā! To Vasu, svāhā!" in accordance with the text.
19.13.10	He performs the animal sacrifice beginning with the collection of grass, which is common up to the offering of the oblation.
19.13.11	After the oblation has been offered, he gives the sacrificial animal and the cow as Dakṣiṇā.
19.13.12	If he is unable to give so much, he should give as much as he can afford. He should feed Brahmins with porridge or rice.
19.13.13	By this, his desire is fulfilled.
19.13.14	He should give a cow with a calf, gold and a garment.
19.13.15	He takes the Soma-cup for Mṛtyu in the Uduṃbara vessel, having performed the rites before the Manota rite.
19.13.16	The two Grahas, called Vipashchin and Pavamana, are taken up.
19.13.17	The Graha called Marutvat is taken up.
19.13.18	There is a Svishtakrit offering after it.
19.13.19	One should touch water with the formula, "Thou art lightning, thou art lightning, thou removest my sin."
19.13.20	Then one offers with the formula, "Thou art death, thou art hunger."
19.13.21	Then having offered, he should touch (the fire) with the formula, "Thou art the rain, thou hast sprinkled my sin."
19.13.22	The eating of the cake follows that.
19.13.23	He eats with the formula, "This is the eating, the eating of immortality."
19.13.24	Having eaten, he establishes the life-taking breaths in himself with the formula, "The subduing of the slow ones." The remaining part of the Anuvaka is to be recited.
19.13.25	From here onwards the ritual is common.
19.13.26	The Savitrī rite is concluded.
19.14.1	This (rite) explains the Naciketā.
19.14.2	There are no lines here.
19.14.3	Twenty-one golden bricks or sugar lumps anointed with ghee are placed on the navel at the time of placing (the bricks). "One says, 'You are the world, you are heaven' according to the Anuvāka, for each mantra."
19.14.4	Now some people perform this sacrifice at the animal-sacrifice itself, on the northern altar. The variations are explained in the Brāhmaṇa.
19.14.5	We shall now discuss them.
19.14.6	At the animal-sacrifice, at the Soma-sacrifice, at a Sattra, at a thousand-fold sacrifice, or at any sacrifice where the most oblations are offered, one should perform this sacrifice.
19.14.7	One who desires to establish himself in the sacrifice, fame, progeny, cattle, heaven, and prosperity, should perform the sacrifice according to the available space and as prescribed.
19.14.8	In all cases, the beginning is in the east, the circumambulation is clockwise, and the conclusion is in the north.
19.14.9	One who desires cattle should perform the sacrifice in the form of a five-fold altar, with five in each direction and one in the center.
19.14.10	One who desires to be the eldest, or fame, or progeny, should make the altar with three rows in front, three rows on the right, seven rows behind, three rows on left, and one row in the middle.
19.14.11	One who desires to be eldest should proceed from the middle and reach the upward direction.
19.14.12	One who wishes for heaven should proceed from the rear and reach the eastern direction.
19.14.13	If he desires, "May I be brilliant, glorious, and lustrous," he should offer to the east of the Hotr's seat, to the east of those who are to the south. The one that is to the east is glorious. May it cover me with brilliance, glory, and lustre.
19.14.14	Now if he wishes, 'May they have more faith in me, may they give more Dakṣiṇā', then when the Dakṣiṇās are being given, he should say, 'Come east, come east.'
19.14.15	Having offered with the ladle with the formula, 'May the eastern one accept the ghee, svāhā', one should offer in the Āhavanīya.
19.14.16	From 'self-spread' onwards, the subsequent procedure is similar.
19.14.17	The Nāciketa rite is concluded.
19.14.18	By this the Catuhotr is explained.
19.14.19	As far as the word 'padas' (is concerned), the bricks are made of gold or sugar, smeared with ghee.
19.14.20	At the time of placing, he places the Dashotr in front of the Darbha stalk, facing east, with each mantra, towards the north, the heart, the Graha, four places for the offerings, two for the wives.
19.14.21	Similarly, on the right side, the Catuhota facing east,
19.14.22	Then the five-hotar towards the west.
19.14.23	Towards the north the six-hotar towards east.
19.14.24	Above the seven-hotar towards north.
19.14.25	Here there are five places for the materials and the remaining ones for the wives.
19.14.26	The subsequent procedure is similar to that of the Svayamātr̥ṇṇa.
19.14.27	The Cāturhotra comes to an end.
19.15.1	By this the Viśvasṛj is explained.
19.15.2	As long as the mantra is recited, the golden bricks or sugar-coated bricks are placed.
19.15.3	At the time of placing the bricks, one encloses the fire with the three verses beginning with "Whatever is immortal and whatever is mortal" from the east to the north.
19.15.4	There are three layers of bricks, enclosed with three verses.
19.15.5	The same as before, with the exception of the self-sprinkling.
19.15.6	The eastern direction is called the great direction of the verses. This is what is praised by this chapter.
19.15.7	In the three Sārasvata sacrifices, in the three great sacrifices, in the six-day sacrifice of the Visve Devas, in the six months of Prajapati, in the thousand years of Prajapati and in the six months, the fire of the Visve Devās is controlled.
19.15.8	If they were to go forth, he should touch the place of the Uttaravedi with these mantras.
19.15.9	He who is dear to him, like a well-known one, should be given the Vaishvasrj in the third turn.
19.15.10	One who is combining the Savitar, Nachiketa, Catuhotr, Vaishvasrj, and Arunaketa should also perform the Soma sacrifice.
19.15.11	Savitar is the first layer, Lokamprana the second, Nachiketa the third, Lokamprana again the fourth, Catuhotr the fifth, Vaishvasrj the sixth, Arunaketaka the seventh.
19.15.12	Yushna, belonging to Savitar, takes up the Soma-cup for Death.
19.15.13	He who builds these fires separately or collectively and gives both kinds of fees, the fees for the sacrifice and the fees for Agni, as prescribed.
19.15.14	Here they do not join together without using separately.
19.15.15	Having built the fire, one should offer the Sautrāmaṇī sacrifice, the Maitrāvaruṇa sacrifice, and the Vāmaikṣa sacrifice.
19.15.16	The Āruṇaketu is explained in the Brāhmaṇa.
19.15.17	One desiring heaven should offer every day to the heavenly hawks and to the feet-less ones.
19.15.18	They are explained in the Brahmanas.
19.16.1	One should offer animals desired for the new moon or full moon.
19.16.2	Their rites are like those of the established animal sacrifice.
19.16.3	The white one belonging to Vayu, etc. They are explained in the Brāhmaṇas.
19.16.4	In the places of the oblations, he places two verses each, for the omentum and the cake as oblations, thus: "The gods who are the givers of food, the givers of wealth, the givers who increase, the givers, the givers."
19.16.5	"The givers of food," "the givers of wealth," "the givera who increase," "the giversa," "the giveras" - these are mentioned in the order of their occurrence and according to their respective forms.
19.16.6	All the priests of the Abhichara rites wear red turbans and red garments, and are girt with girdles. They are called Malhas.
19.16.7	The meaning is that they are adorned with gems.
19.16.8	If one were to offer a sacrifice to Visam, it would be an uneven sacrifice, or one could offer a sacrifice to a beast that is uneven.
19.16.9	There is an inquiry about the ten-bulls deity.
19.16.10	The Adityas are the deities of the Ekadashina sacrifice.
19.16.11	"The verse "Paryariṇi" is a farewell verse.
19.16.12	"Sphyoyūpa" means a wooden post shaped like a spear.
19.16.13	"Tvashtras Vadama" means a man who ascends.
19.16.14	The union of water and plants is in the rainy season or at the beginning of autumn.
19.16.15	The Visakha post is that which is above the yoke, and the two branches below it are the Visakha. It should have eight corners and a vessel.
19.16.16	The bull, the heifer, the cow, the calf, the bull, the goat, the sheep, the deer, the antelope, the wild cow, the buffalo, the camel, the donkey, the horse, the mule, the ass, the elephant, the rhinoceros, the boar, the deer, and the wild cow are the animals.
19.16.17	One should offer the bull to Anna, the heifer to speech, the cow to faith, and the bull to Brahman.
19.16.18	"The offerings are made with the words, "The cows have come."
19.16.19	The bull is offered to Death.
19.16.20	There he should offer oblations to his master.
19.16.21	The two Yama deities, white and black, are offered to the sun and moon at a single sacrificial post.
19.16.22	From the waters, the Vehatam.
19.16.23	There one should offer oblations of water.
19.16.24	To Bhaga, the desire.
19.16.25	Those animals above the Ashvina month, their rites are in the order of the hymns.
19.17.1	When the bull among the cows is old, the young one should be made to bellow. The bull is yellow in color. With these two verses, "May we have good fortune."
19.17.2	Then he releases it among the cows with the verse, "This young one."
19.17.3	Then he slaughters the old one, either dedicated to Prajapati, Indra, or Tvashtra.
19.17.4	At the time of slaughtering, he recites the verse, "Salutation to greatness."
19.17.5	With the third (verse) he offers the oblation, with the fourth the oblation, and with the fifth the Sauviṣṭakṛt.
19.17.6	Having offered an eight-vessel oblation to Agni, one should offer a black-antelope to Indra.
19.17.7	One should offer to Vayu if one desires prosperity. The deities have been mentioned.
19.17.8	One offers to Vayu with the verse, "O Vayu, be adorned, O drinker of pure Soma."
19.17.9	When the fire is being carried around, he offers with, "For inspiration thee, for desire thee."
19.17.10	When being led towards the north, he recites, "Thou art the fourth, the most powerful, the most obedient."
19.17.11	When being struck down, he recites "Thou art the most prosperous of goats."
19.17.12	When spreading the thread, he offers with "Spreading the thread."
19.17.13	When the oblation, he recites: "May we be without decay, may we be without decay."
19.17.14	"The mind is the oblation" - thus they eat the remnants of the oblation.
19.17.15	It has been said that this (oblation) is indeed confined to three (deities).
19.17.16	Of that, the only divine worship is when there is a cloud on the day of the new moon.
19.17.17	If there is a cloud when the new moon is attained, one should immerse it in water, or the sacrificer should eat it every day.
19.17.18	The rites of Jātavedas and Abhyatāna are explained in the Brāhmaṇa.
19.17.19	In the rites of Abhyatāna, one recites the verse, "In this Brahman."
19.17.20	It is understood that one succeeds in the rite for which one desires.
19.18.1	One should perform the rites of desire on the new moon or full moon.
19.18.2	They are explained in the Brahmana.
19.18.3	Between the two Dhāyyas, Samidhyamānāvatī and Samiddhāvatī, he places the two Ajyabhāgas as prescribed.
19.18.4	If the Kāmeṣṭi were to be the Pravāda, it would be so because of its meaning, because of its indication, or because of its deity.
19.18.5	In the absence of a specific instruction, the natural state should be followed.
19.18.6	The two Anushtubh verses are the Samyājyas.
19.18.7	You, O Agni, the most famous, the gods, the mortal ones, praise you, the knower of beings. I think of you, the knowers of beings. You will bring the offerings in due order. These are mentioned.
19.18.8	O both of you, Indra and Agni, you are invoked. These are mentioned in the proper order. The Yajya and Anuvakya are regulated by the signs.
19.18.9	The deity of the first half of the verse is in front, the Puronuvakya is in front, and the Yajya is above.
19.18.10	This is the opposite.
19.18.11	The remaining ones are optional.
19.18.12	The Upamantras are doubtful there.
19.18.13	We will discuss them in order.
19.18.14	He should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni, the destroyer of demons, at night on the new-moon day. By the power of its excellence,
19.18.15	the new-moon day would be extended.
19.18.16	One should recite the Raksogha hymns in the reverse order, beginning with "Krnuṣva pāja."
19.18.17	The Yajya and Anuvakya verses are "Vi jyotisa" and "Vi jyotir agne".
19.19.1	One who is about to go to war should offer a cake to Aditya.
19.19.2	One who has gone to the place of battle should offer a cake on twelve potsherds to Vaisvānara.
19.19.3	One should tie the best cow with the rope with which one would tie the cow of one's enemy, and place it in the cowpen.
19.19.4	One should fasten the Balbaja (a kind of grass) to the sacrificial post.
19.19.5	He should sprinkle them with the ladle.
19.19.6	"Sarasvatī is the offering of ghee." The offering is of ghee.
19.19.7	"The sprinkling is of ghee, they cleanse with ghee." All sprinkling and cleansing is done with ghee.
19.19.8	"One should recite the two verses "Mānavī" and "Dhāyyā" in the manner of "Mānava" and "Mānuṣī." "
19.19.9	One should offer this oblation when going to one's abode.
19.19.10	Having gone to the field of his enemy, he should perform this Isti.
19.19.11	There, having raised the southern half of the sacrificial grass, he should spread it with the other half of the sacrificial straw, and place the other half of wood.
19.19.12	One desiring a village should offer an Indra-offering of eleven potsherds and a Marut-offering of seven potsherds.
19.19.13	He places the Indra-offering on the Ahavaniya fire and the Marut-offering on the Garhapatya fire.
19.19.14	At the time when the Sāmidhenī verses are being recited, he recites the Kalā and the Indra verses.
19.19.15	Then at the time when the Puronuvākyā is recited as "Recite to Indra", the Yajyä is recited as "Maruts are to be worshipped". At the time when it is recited as "To Maruts", the Puronuväkyä is recited as "Maruts are to worshipped". The Yajyä at the time when it recited as "To Indra" is recited as "Indra is to be worshipped".
19.19.16	One desiring a village should offer a cake on eleven potshards to Indra and a cake on twelve potshers to the All-gods.
19.19.17	Having taken the first portion of the Indra cake, one should take both portions of the All-gods cake. Then the remaining portion of the Indra cakc should be placed above.
19.19.18	One instructs, "Recite to Indra and the All-gods; offer to Indra and the Vishvas."
19.19.19	The Yajus and Anuvakya are recited as "Indra in the Bhara."
19.20.1	The fee is a garment with a border.
19.20.2	The meaning is "with a variegated border."
19.20.3	Having separately arranged the sacrificial posts, having covered them all around, and having followed all the deities, he instructs:
19.20.4	The Yajus and Anu-vakya are recited as, "Agni first with the Vasus."
19.20.5	If he is obstructed, or is being obstructed, he should sit down and wait until he is not obstructed.
19.20.6	If he is being obstructed, the one who is obstructing him should say, "You may go," and then he should go.
19.20.7	If someone on the other side of the village speaks, he should take grain from his house.
19.20.8	He should search for white and black (grains).
19.20.9	If they are white, he should offer a cake to Aditya.
19.20.10	If they are black, he should place them under a black antelope skin, and having released speech with the Havishkrit formula, he approaches the sacrificer with the verse, "O Maruts, accepters of good gifts."
19.20.11	He places a piece of the sacrificer's upper garment at the edge of the foot with the verse, “May there be truth in the blessing.”
19.20.12	He places the remaining part on the chest with the verse, "Here is the mind."
19.20.13	The Iṣṭi comes to an end with success.
19.20.14	If one does not know, one should take the name of the person who is the receiver of the share of the Adityas from such and such a village, saying, "I am offering this share of the Aditvas to the receiver from such and such village."
19.20.15	If he does not see them, he should offer oblations to the seven rays of the Asvattha tree in the middle of the month, saying, "I bind these rays of the sun for the one who is to be released from this world." Three towards the east and four towards the north.
19.20.16	If he still does not see them,
19.21.3	He pours them into the Pavitravati vessel.
19.21.4	The scraping is the only rite.
19.21.5	At the time of serving, he offers eight oblations to the deity, four to Svishtakrit, two to Prashitra and eight to Ida.
19.21.6	At the stage of dividing into four parts, he offers all the Prashitra oblations together to Brahma in one part.
19.21.7	Brahma eats them.
19.21.8	Remove the remnants for the others.
19.21.9	Having taken up the Sūrya rice-pap along with the two golden (pieces), he places it.
19.21.10	At each Prajāpati offering he offers a Kṛṣṇala.
19.21.11	Having offered the two golden (objects) along with the rice-pap, he proceeds.
19.21.12	These two golden (objects alone) are the Dakṣiṇā.
19.21.13	For Agni Datra, a cake on eight potsherds, for Agni Datrya, a cake on eleven potsherds, and for Agni Datri, a cake on twelve potsherds. These are three.
19.21.14	Among them, the third one is the one having the offerings of Prajāpati mixed together.
19.21.15	Curd, honey, ghee, water, cooked rice, and rice grains are mentioned by some. Ghee is a modification of butter.
19.21.16	When honey and water are mixed together, the principal one is the one that is mentioned first.
19.21.17	The Yajus and Anuvakya verses are "Ghee is not pure, both are pure, and the moon."
19.21.18	One should mix the offerings of Agni and Soma together. The meaning is that one should place the offerings of Agni, Soma, and Indra together.
19.21.19	Or he should apply it to the paste.
19.21.20	"One should destroy the Brahmana-class, thus it becomes all Brahmana-related."
19.21.21	One should perform the Yajya and Anuvakya mantras related to Marut.
19.21.22	Then he places this three-element on eleven skulls that are stretched out.
19.22.1	Having placed the first cake and having performed the Paritapana rite, he places the next one which is superior to it and performs the rite upto that. He places the next one, which is superior to the previous one, and performs the rite up to that.
19.22.2	At the time of Pracaraṇa, one should offer the first deity from the southern half, the second from the middle and the third from the northern half.
19.22.3	It has been said that he recites all the verses, going from one to the other.
19.22.4	In the eastern direction, one should recite three verses in reverse order, beginning with "Indra, you are in the east."
19.22.5	Having recited the first verse, one should offer with the middle verse; having recited the middle verse, one should make an offering with the last verse; having recited last verse, one should perform the offering with the first verse.
19.22.6	Thus all the verses become the offering verses and the introductory verses.
19.22.7	One should offer the entire oblation.
19.22.8	He places the twelve potsherds in the prescribed manner, reciting the verse, "To Indra, the destroyer of forts."
19.22.9	At the time of offering, he offers the first deity from the eastern half.
19.22.10	In this way, he offers the other deities in a clockwise direction, ending with the northern direction.
19.22.11	It has been stated that one should offer in a clockwise direction.
19.22.12	He recites the six verses in reverse order, beginning with "O Indra, the hero, I praise you."
19.22.13	One should not make the Vasat-call with the Brihatī (metre).
19.22.14	One should make the Yañyā (verse) consist of four syllables after the Anuvākyā (verse).
19.22.15	They (the metres) are also made to consist of the Anushtubh and the Paṅkti. We think that they are.
19.22.16	We invoke thee, O hero, like milked cows, as the lord of this world, as the lord and seer of wealth. Having recited "Oṃ," one should invoke thee, O Indra, the standing one, thus: "We invoke thee indeed."
19.23.1	You indeed we invoke, O Indra, for the sake of good gifts, you, O Indra, the true lord of men in battles, you, O most excellent one, thus they say, "May the most excellent one praise you."
19.23.2	"Never have you been weak," thus he places the fourth.
19.23.3	"To Agni, the shining one, a cake on eight potsherds," it is said.
19.23.4	At the time of making four portions, having taken out three portions for the Sun, he gives the portions to the sacrificer with the verse, "O Jātavedas, the seven tawny horses have brought thee. The variegated army of the gods has risen."
19.23.5	The sacrificer eats them.
19.23.6	One desiring a village should offer the Vaiśvadevī and Saṅgrahaṇī.
19.23.7	He cooks in fresh butter.
19.23.8	"He places the enclosing sticks with the respective mantras, beginning with 'You are Dhruva.'
19.23.9	The Upāṁshu-libation is offered with the verse, 'You are the bestower of peace.'
19.23.10	If one is afflicted with a chronic disease or if one desires to live the full span of life, one should perform this Iṣṭi. The five oblations are to Agni and others.
19.23.11	At the time of preparing the vessel, he uses a vessel made of Khadira wood with four corners and a golden vessel made of one hundred measures.
19.23.12	Then, as much as he thinks he will need for the number of days.
19.23.13	When it became new, it became ghee. At the time of taking up the ghee, having taken four spoonfuls of Khadira wood, he places the Khadira wood to the north of the Dhruva ladle. He places the Pravarta ladle in it.
19.24.1	At the time of the Upāṃśu-offerings, he offers four Upāṃśus with the mantras beginning with "Prāṇaḥ asi" for each of the two Aśvins.
19.24.2	Having offered, he pours down the melted butter on the Pravarta (the wooden ladle) with the mantras, "You are the king, you are the Viraj, you are the Samrāṭ, you are the Svarāṭ."
19.24.3	The Khadira wood and the butter are taken around the Ahavaniya fire and placed on the southern edge of the altar.
19.24.4	The sacrificer looks at the stream of ghee, the path of immortality.
19.24.5	Then the Brahman takes the sacrificer's right hand.
19.24.6	The other priests, starting from the Brahman, address the sacrificer, saying, "With the Pavamāna Stotra."
19.24.7	Then the sacrificer drinks ghee from a golden vessel.
19.24.8	"This Agni, for your life and lustre, may he make you." He recites this formula to the one who is taking the Agni.
19.24.9	Having taken out the gold and washed it, he gives it to the sacrificer, saying, "May it give you life on all sides."
19.24.10	The sacrificer, having sipped water, takes it and ties it to the right ear, saying, "You are life, you are all life, you are the whole life, you are my whole life, may I have the whole life, may the whole life be mine."
19.24.11	The Adhvaryu takes the right hand of the sacrificer with the remaining portion of the Anuvaka, saying, "Agni is the life-giver."
19.24.12	The Iṣṭi comes to an end with the Siddha (oblation).
19.25.1	Having offered a cake on eight potsherds to Indra-Varuṇa, one should offer a Payasyā to Indra-Varuna.
19.25.2	Having taken it down and adorned it, one places the cake on the Payasyā.
19.25.3	One spreads it with this (cake).
19.25.4	Then one arranges the Payasyā in the four directions from this.
19.25.5	The body of you, O Indra and Varuna, is to be released. With these (verses) he again unites (the Soma).
19.25.6	The verses ending with 'Unreleased' are recited.
19.25.7	He offers the cake on eight potsherds to Agni, the binder, together with the Payasya cake.
19.25.8	The verses beginning with 'The one who is angry with you, O Indra-Varuna, in the fire' are the offerings.
19.25.9	It is said that the cake on eight potsherds to Agni, Binder, is offered.
19.25.10	"O Agni, do thou yoke the invoked gods." Thus he recites fifteen Sāmidhenī verses.
19.25.11	He concludes with the Nitya verse.
19.25.12	"O Agni, do you come to us with the cows." Thus he recits the Yajya and Anuvākyā verses.
19.25.13	"We know him who has enjoyed the bright and full moon." Thus he recitess the Samyājyā verse.
19.25.14	One should perform the Citrā Iṣṭi for the bright and full-moon days. The seven offerings beginning with Agni are offered.
19.25.15	"O Agn, do you come with the cows." These are the Upāṃśu offerings.
19.25.16	If one desires rain, one should offer sacrifice to the Maruts in the Pushkala asterism.
19.25.17	Having kindled the fires, having gone around along the southern side of the Ahavaniya fire, having sat down, the sacrificer puts on a black garment with black fringe, saying, "Thou art Marut, the strength of the Maruts."
19.25.18	He then turns towards the wind, saying, "May the Maruts delight the hawk-like one."
19.25.19	He generates the wind in front, saying, "Come, wind!"
19.25.20	A black horse stands facing east.
19.25.21	He covers it with this cloth, saying, "Cry out!"
19.25.22	If it cries out, he should shake it. If it defecates or urinates, one should know that it will rain.
19.26.1	Having offered eight oblations named after the winds, he spreads a black antelope skin on the inner side of the altar, with the neck towards the east and the hair towards the north. Having mixed three balls of dough with black honey, having wrapped them with lotus leaves, having lifted them up, he fastens the ends of the black antelope skin with a black rope, saying, "You are the offering of the black antelope and horse."
19.26.2	The Praagishas are placed on the heap, the Trigadhas on the east.
19.26.3	The meaning is "the Chashins."
19.26.4	One should place the black antelope skin on the eastern Gadha, saying, "The Vasus, the gods."
19.26.5	It becomes attached to the day and night.
19.26.6	If it rains, one should offer oblations to the mounds.
19.26.7	If it does not rain, one should place it on the middle Gadha, saying,
19.26.8-12	It is effective for a day and night. If it rains, one should offer oblations of balls of dough. If it does not rain, one should tie it to the lower part of the body, saying, "The gods have drunk." It is effective for a period of a day and night.
19.26.13	If it does not rain, he offers three oblations of black rice, namely, the Dhāmacchādinī and others.
19.26.14	Having placed them, he places the black antelope skin on the heap.
19.26.15	The priests proceed wearing black turbans, black garments, and girdles.
19.26.16	The Yajya and Anuvakya verses are "You are indeed the unchanging one."
19.26.17	At the time of the oblation, she binds the balls with these mantras, making darkness during the day.
19.26.18	Some say, "She offers."
19.26.19	Then she recites the following mantra over the smoke:
19.27.1	"The dark-colored, tawny, golden-winged ones."
19.27.2	On a heap of earth, she fills a black pot with raw and cooked rice with water, reciting, "Let there be rain."
19.27.3	If it breaks, one should know that it will rain.
19.27.4	If it is bound with black thread, it is for support or doubt.
19.27.5	One sprinkles it with the formula, "You are the lotus."
19.27.6	One gains knowledge about it like a horse.
19.27.7	Having established the rain-summoning tree on a mound, one offers to the rain-summoner with the formula, "Raise the earth."
19.27.8	Some offer with a ladle filled with water.
19.27.9	Then he strikes him on the Āhavanīya fire.
19.27.10	Then he recites the verse for the smoke: "The golden-haired one, the spreading of dust."
19.27.11	"Those gods who have a share in heaven," he shakes the black antelope skin above the Āhavanīyī fire, with its neck turned upwards, outside the cutting.
19.27.12	Black is the garment, black is the horse, black is the fee.
19.27.13	Then the Savakāris (offer) the Agniya cake on eight potsherds, without any oblation.
19.27.14	The oblations are the names of the winds, with which he binds the balls and offers them, and with which he recites the fumigation.
19.27.15	He places the three kinds of wood as before, but in the middle is one made of barley.
19.27.16	The offering is Indra-Vishnu.
19.27.17	"Agni, the giver," (thus) he places the Uṣṇihā and Kakubha.
19.27.18	"O Agni, three are thy powers, three thy places," (thus) one places the Trivṛt.
19.27.19	"Ye both have won together by your deeds," (thus) the Yajya and Anuvākyā.
19.27.20	The Uttara-Samyājyā.
19.27.21	Gold, a cow, and a heifer, are the Dakṣiṇās.
19.27.22	He should offer cooked rice dedicated to Indra and Brhaspati when a king is born.
19.27.23	A golden belt should be given as Dakṣiṇā.
20.1.1	A king who is not a universal monarch should perform the horse sacrifice.
20.1.2	The constellation Citrā is auspicious.
20.1.3	He should choose a place for the sacrifice where water is pleasant, easy to enter, and not salty.
20.1.4	On the full-moon day of Caitra, he performs the Saṅgrahaṇī Iṣṭi. The next new-moon day is the one for Saṅgrahaṇa.
20.1.5	On the full-moon of Vaiśākha, he offers a bull to Prajāpati, which is the last, of all forms, for all desires.
20.1.6	The next new-moon is the one for Apadātin. The priests are brought in for Apadāti.
20.1.7	Every day they carry the others to the Subrahmaṇyā.
20.1.8	Having performed the New-moon sacrifice, one approaches the Devayajana.
20.1.9	One shaves the hair and beard.
20.1.10	One cuts the nails.
20.1.11	One cleans the teeth.
20.1.12	One bathes.
20.1.13	One puts on a new garment.
20.1.14	One observes silence.
20.1.15	Those who are awake keep awake.
20.1.16	Those who are restrained in speech offer the Agnihotra at night.
20.1.17	To the seer, salutations. To the sub-seer, salutations. To the super-seer, salutlations. To the hearer, salutations.To the sub-hearer, salutations.
20.2.1	"Salutations to Agni, the lord of the earth." With these mantras, as appropriate.
20.2.2	"Those are your paths, O Savitar." Having entered the eastern door with this verse, having placed the Vaitas wood on the sacrificial fire, he offers eleven full oblations: "The golden embryo arose first." Eight oblations with this verse, and three with "May the gods advance among the gods."
20.2.3	The four kinds of water are brought from the directions.
20.2.4	In them, he cooks the Brahma-rice.
20.2.5	Placing a silver vessel on a golden vessel, and taking out the Brahma-rice from it, pouring plenty of ghee over it, and placing a golden vessel on top, he offers it to the four learned Brahmins, without cutting off.
20.2.6	He gives four thousand gold coins to those who have eaten, four chariots with horses and mares, and two golden ornaments.
20.2.7	The rope is made of darbha grass or muñja grass, twelve or thirteen cubits long.
20.2.8	He anoints it with the remaining rice cooked for the Brahmins.
20.2.9	The forms of the horse are described as black, white, tawny, variegated, or reddish-tawny.
20.2.10	One should offer a horse whose black colour is small, which is maternal, paternal, and on the back, which is well-trained, which belongs to Soma, and which is the son of Soma.
20.2.11	It is known that he who drinks Soma when he is a child before he eats grass, is the Soma-drinker. They say, 'Those two are the Soma-drinkers who drink Soma when they are children before they eat grass.'
20.2.12	He gives the Adhvaryu the kingdom.
20.3.1	The Brahmanas and the kings are your Adhvaryus. Whatever is my honour, that is yours. Whatever he does, that is done by you.
20.3.2	The Adhvaryu is the king as long as the sacrifice lasts.
20.3.3-4	Taking up the rope with the formula, "By the impulse of the divine Savitr," and then taking hold of it with the formula, “I have taken hold of the rope of truth," he addresses the Brahman with the formula, " shall bind the horse for the gods, for the sacrifice, for Prajapati. May I be successful through it." The Brahman replies, "Bind him for the gods, the sacrifice, and Prajapati. Be successful through him."
20.3.5	"He places the horse, saying, 'Thou art the horse.'
20.3.6	They bring the dog, bound with a four-cornered noose,
20.3.7	The son of the father's younger sister leads in front, the son of the mother's younger sister behind.
20.3.8	A stone pestle.
20.3.9	The son of a Pāñcālayan woman, having bound his knee with a piece of cloth, follows behind.
20.3.10	They make the horse and the dog enter the water.
20.3.11	Where the dog does not stand, the Adhvaryu pushes it away with the words, "Go away."
20.3.12	The Pauchchala-s strike the dog with a stone-pestle with the verse, "He who is the horse."
20.3.13	Having placed it below the horse, he says, "The man is far, the dog is far."
20.3.14	"You are the one who has flooded the south, and I am the one who has killed Vṛtra." The Brahman priest takes the hand of the sacrificer.
20.3.15	The Adhvaryu priest makes the sacrificer recite, "O Indra, you have come to the sacrifice, to the earth and the ground."
20.3.16	They bring a birch-bark vessel bound with three cords.
20.3.17	On it is attached a branch of the wet Vetasa tree.
20.3.18	Two hundred (men) hold it on the right side, two on the left.
20.3.19	With this they lead the horse forward, facing west.
20.4.1	The Adhvaryu, standing in front facing west with a hundred princes, sprinkles (the horse) with the formula, "May this king slay Vritra with this pure horse for the sake of sacrifice."
20.4.2	Standing to the south and facing north, he sprinkles with a hundred sharp royal formulas, saying, "May this king be invincible through this sacrifice with the pure horse."
20.4.3	With a hundred Sūta-leaders, the Hotṛ, standing towards the east, sprinkles (the Soma) with the formula, "May this king, the lord of this assembly, be the lord of many horses, many goats, many sheep, many barley and corn, many beans and sesamum, many gold, many elephants, many male slaves, of prosperity, of nourishment, of wealth and growth. May he be a king."
20.4.4	The Udgātṛ priest, standing to the north of the hundred Ksattṛ priests, sprinkles (the Soma) with the formula, "May this king, having performed the sacrifice with this pure horse, live for the whole life."
20.4.5	Here, having crossed over the water with this horse, having made it enter the water, having made it cross the intervening space, having made it step on the place, having made it go to the place, having offered three oblations to Vishnu, he recites the Stokas of the horse, Agni svāhā, Soma svāhā.
20.4.6	He recites this Anuvāka a hundred times, each time with ten oblations, or an unlimited number of times.
20.5.1	Then he sprinkles it in each direction,
20.5.2	standing towards the east, he says, "I sprinkle you for Prajapati."
20.5.3	Towards the south, facing north, he says, “For Indra and Agni.”
20.5.4	Towards the west, facing east, he says “For Vayu.”
20.5.5	Towards the north, facing south, he says, "For all the gods."
20.5.6	"To the gods thee" below.
20.5.7	"To all the gods thee" above.
20.5.8	"To the earth thee, to the atmosphere thee, to the heaven thee" for the rest.
20.5.9	"The horse is released with the words, "You are Bhūr, you are Bhuva, you are Bhava, you are Bhaviṣya." The horse is given to the relatives with the words, "The gods are the protectors of the horse."
20.5.10	One hundred armored ones protect.
20.5.11	They follow the horse, not letting it go back.
20.5.12	Some say that there are four hundred.
20.5.13	There are a hundred princes of the Tālpiyas, armed with their charioteers, a hundred Ugras, not kings, armed with their chariots, a hundred Vaishyas, not on the road, and a hundred Shudras, on the road.
20.5.14	They are the protectors of the horse.
20.5.15	If they should approach any group of Brahmins, they should ask them, “How much do you know about the Aśvamedha?”
20.5.16	If they do not know, having defeated them, they should offer food and drink from their homes.
20.5.17	The food of those who are not Brahmins is their food.
20.5.18	They live in the family of a chariot-maker.
20.5.19	Here, he offers four oblations to the four feet of the horse, saying, "To Dhriti, svāhā!" in the evening.
20.6.1	In the morning, he offers a cake on eight potsherds to Savitr.
20.6.2	Before that, he offers the Uddrava oblations, saying, "Svāhā to the going forth! Svāhā to the departure!"
20.6.3	"To the Iṃkāra, svāhā! To the accomplished, svāhā!” are the horse-related oblations.
20.6.4	"He should offer eight oblations, saying, 'To the black one, svāhā!' 'To the white one, svāha!' There are forty-eight horse forms, with one extra.
20.6.5	Here the Brāhmaṇa sings with the vīṇā. He says, 'I gave,' 'I sacrificed,' 'I cooked,' these three.
20.6.6	To Savitr, the creator, on the middle day, an oblation of eleven potfuls. To Savitr, the nourisher, on the afternoon, an oblation with twelve potfuls.
20.6.7	The Hotṛ sits to the right of the Havaniya fire, on the golden seat of Hiranyakaśipu, and explains the Pariplāva and Bhavanīya hymns.
20.6.8	Brahmā and the sacrificer sit to the right of Hiranyaka-śipu.
20.6.9	The Adhvaryu sits in front on a golden seat.
20.6.10	The Vīṇā and Gandharvas sit to the right.
20.6.11	When the priests have sat down, the Hotṛ addresses the Adhvaryu with the formula, "O Adhvaryu, do thou sit down."
20.6.12	The Adhvaryu responds with "O Hotṛ, do thou sit." Or he may respond with "O Hotri."
20.6.13	When the two have sat down, he instructs the Vīṇā and Gaṇaka players, "Sing this sacrificer along with the good kings of the past."
20.6.14	When the oblations are being offered in the evening, the Kṣatriya sings the Vena-song. Thus there are three (songs).
20.7.1	In the evening and morning, the Brahmanas sing the Vena-songs.
20.7.2	Thus these rites of Savitri and others are performed for a year.
20.7.3	One offers the horse-rites only once.
20.7.4	This is the year of thirty months.
20.7.5	When the Iṣṭis are concluded, he gives a hundred and a horse to the Vīṇāgāthins.
20.7.6	Some say, "A hundred and a horse."
20.7.7	From the eleventh month onwards, they tie the horse to the Aśvattha tree in the village.
20.7.8	They bring fodder for the horse that is tied.
20.7.9	If one were to steal a horse, one should offer an oblation of eight potfuls to Agni, a rice-ball to Soma, and eight potfuls to Savitr.
20.7.10	If a donkey, a rice-oblation to Pusan.
20.7.11	If one were to think of a great deity, a rice- oblation to Rudra.
20.7.12	If a deer were to enter the house, one should offer a cake on twelve potfuls to Vaisvānara.
20.7.13	If he is studying for Agni, the oblation to Agni, the remover of distress, should be offered on eight potsherds, milk to Surya, and ghee to Vayu.
20.7.14	If he is studying for a cow, an oblation to Prajapati should be offered on twelve potsherds.
20.7.15	If he loses it, an oblation should be offered to Vayu. If he wins a cow from an enemy, an oblation of milk should be offered to Indra.
20.7.16	If he wins a cow in battle, an oblation on eleven potsherds should be offered to the victorious Indra.
20.7.17	If they were to take it away by force, he should offer a cake on eleven potsherds to Indra, the forceful.
20.7.18	If he were blind, he should offer rice-gruel to Surya on one potsherd.
20.7.19	If he should throw it into a pit, he should offer an oblation to Vishnu.
20.7.20	If he dies from an unknown disease, he should offer oblation to Prajapati on twelve potsherds.
20.8.1	If his enemies were to obtain his horse, his sacrifice would be destroyed.
20.8.2	Then, having brought another (fire-stick), they sprinkle it.
20.8.3	On the full-moon day of this year, he collects the fire-wood.
20.8.4	The consecration is done with three kinds of wood.
20.8.5	He offers four oblations to Agni, the instigator, with the formula, "To Agni, the instigating, Svāhā."
20.8.6	He offers three oblations to the All-gods with the formula, "To the instigator, Svāhā."
20.8.7	This is the time of the consecration-oblation, which has been expanded.
20.8.8	For seven days he proceeds with the Udgṛhṇānas and the Vaisvadevas.
20.8.9	On the sixth day he offers six Udgṛhņānas, and the final oblation with the formula, "To all Svāhā."
20.8.10	For six days he proceeds with Agni-Viṣṇu.
20.8.11-13	On the seventh day, the Agni-offering is performed three times. This is according to the Vājasaneya school. "He recites the mantra, "For the work of the gods of the earth," while the student is ascending the skin of a black antelope during the initiation for the seasons." "He recitess the mantra, ". . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . .," while standing near the fire that has been lit."
20.8.14	When the sacrificer has been permitted to speak, he instructs the Vīṇā-players and the Gandharvas, saying, "Sing this sacrificer."
20.8.15	Thus it is on the day of fasting.
20.8.16	Prajapati has prescribed Avabhrtha, Udayanīya, and Udasanīya rites in connection with the Soma sacrifices.
20.8.17	The gods have prescribed it at the end.
20.9.1	At the time of the Veda, the altar is twice the size, the fire is three times the size, or twenty-one times the size.
20.9.2	He offers the oblation of ten kinds of food to Agni Vaiśvānara, reciting the Gāyatrī verse.
20.9.3	The Yajya and Anuvākyā verses are recited according to the prescribed order.
20.9.4	He yokes the Paridhīs with the verse, "Who yokes you? May he yoke you."
20.9.5	He follows it everywhere with the verse, "For the prosperity of this sacrifice, for my prosperity, may the gods grant me the prosperity of the sacrifice."
20.9.6	He places the sacrificial post of the Ratha-vahana, the Havir-dhana, the Rajju-dala, twenty-one cubits high, at the Agni-sthana.
20.9.7	The Pautidravas are on both sides, three of the Bilva tree on the south, three on the north, three of the Khadira tree on the south and three on the north and three of the Palasa tree on the south.
20.9.8	Some say that the Khadira and Palasa trees are at the end.
20.9.9	The Kalabhavi Brahmana says, "They are binding the eleven eleven-fold eastern ones."
20.9.10	The fourfold waters are brought together from the directions.
20.9.11	He takes the Vasatavari from them.
20.9.12	On the next day, the Rathaantara-saman is performed before the Gotama Catustoma.
20.9.13	He prepares the animal for the Agni-savaneya sacrifice, either from the Ekadasin or from the animals.
20.9.14	At the time of giving gifts, if there is wealth for non-Brahmins in the directions, he should divide it equally among the three and give it daily.
20.10.1	He gives the eastern direction to the Adhvaryu, the southern direction to the Brahman, the western direction to the Hotri, and the northern direction to the Udgâtri. Whatever is left of the earth, he gives to men. Or he may give the eastern direction to Hotri, the western directionto Adhvaryu.
20.10.2	It is known that he gives his chief queen to the Brahman, the Vāvatā to the Hotṛ, the Parivṛktī to the Udgātṛ, and the Pālākalī to the Adhvaryu.
20.10.3	The day comes to an end with the Patnīsaṃyājas.
20.10.4	When the day has come to an end, they spread thirty-six ashvattha leaves around the Āhavanīya.
20.10.5	When the sun has set, thirty-six Adhvaryus ascend the beds and offer oblations of food throughout the night with Khadira ladles, offering ghee, honey, rice, cakes, barley grains, Karambha, cooked barley, barley flour, Masura beans, Prayanguta rice.
20.10.6	Some prescribe four: one offers with ghee, with fried grains, with cooked rice, with barley flour.
20.10.7	"One offers to the one, svāhā." These are the verses of the Anuvākas. The odd ones are offered with ghee, the even ones with food. The last one is offered with ghee.
20.10.8	Some prescribe the use of mantras that are being used and will be used here.
20.11.1	Vibhu to the mother, Prabhu to the father, these are the names of the horses.
20.11.2	To Ayana svāhā, to Prayana svāhā - these are the Uddravas.
20.11.3	To Agni svāhā, Soma svāhā - this is the first offering.
20.11.4	To Earth svāhā, Space svāhā - having offered this, to Agni svāhā Soma svāhā, these are the first consecrations.
20.11.5	"Obeisance to Earth, obeisance to the Sky, obeisance to Heaven" - this is the consecration of the twenty-one.
20.11.6	"Obeisance to the Gods of the Bhuvar world" - this is consecration of the seasons.
20.11.7	"O earth, obeisance to Agni, obeisance to Vayu" - this is to be offered. "May the sacrifice enter the four directions" - this is for the Aptis.
20.11.8	"The past, the present, and the future" - this is Parapti.
20.11.9	"May my house be yours" - this is Abhi.
20.11.10	Agni became the heat. Thus, it is called Anubhu.
20.11.11	"Oṃ svāhā to the Adhimatīrtha, Oṃ svāhā." All the Vaiśvadev offerings.
20.11.12	"OṂ svāhā to those who give, Oṃ svāhà to the nostrils." Anga Homa offerings.
20.11.13	"Om svāhā to Anjita, Oṃ svähā to Krishna, Oṃ svähä to Śveta." Horse-shaped offerings.
20.11.14	"OM svāhā to herbs, Oṃ svăhā to roots." Herb Homa offerings.
20.11.15	"Obeisance to the trees" - thus the oblations to the trees.
20.11.16	"May the sheep cook you" - thus the offerings to the Apas.
20.11.17	"Obeisance to those in the well, obeisance to the waters" - thus the offering to the waters.
20.11.18	"O obeisance to the water, obeisance to space, obeisance to greatness" - thus the water, space and greatness.
20.12.1	"O homage to the king, homage to Varuna" - thus the barley grains.
20.12.2	May I be the earth, may I be the wind, may I be Vāta, may I be Uṣas, may I be Gavya.
20.12.3	To Prāṇa svāhā, to Vyāna svāhā, these are the oblations for continuity.
20.12.4	To Sīta svāhā, Sīta svāhà, these are the releases.
20.12.5	To Pṛthivī svāhā, Antarikṣa svāhā, having offered this, to Dāntaka svāhā, Adantaka svāhā, oblations for the body.
20.12.6	He who gives life, he who gives the self, these are the glories.
20.12.7	"May the Brahman become Brahmanic in lustre." All the Brahmanic lusters are included in this.
20.12.8	Having offered this, he bowed to Agni and bowed to the earth. These are the offerings of bowing.
20.12.9	"Svāhā to the existent, svāhā to the future." These are the offerings to the existent and the future.
20.12.10	Having offered the Anushtup verses, he offers the Ekashma Svāhā. Having offered the remaining part of the night, he offers the Usha Svāhā. At the time of dawn, he offers the Vyushta Svāhā. When the sun has risen, he offers the Udita Svāhā. He offers the Udita to the rising sun, and the Uditā to the risen sun. Having offered to the heaven, he places the remaining food for the wise.
20.13.1	The Ekavimsa stoma is the Ukthya, the Mahanama is the Sama.
20.13.2	Between the Agranayana and Ukthya, having poured out the Soma according to the prescribed rule, he takes up the two verses, "He who gives life, he who gives the self" with the golden cup first and the silver cup later.
20.13.3	He places the golden cup first with the verse, "The sun is your glory" and the silver cup with the verse, “The moon is your glory”.
20.13.4	The life of the sacrifice flows forth, sweet, dear, the father of the gods, the generator, the illuminator. He places the gem, the eternal, in the right places. The most sweet, the most jealous, the most powerful, the most tasty. This is the golden necklace that is attached to the neck of the horse. "Agni, O horse, is yoked. I follow you. Having followed the horse in the Valadha race, they move towards the Bahispavamana. "Agni on the head."
20.13.5	Having obstructed the Udgātṛ, he chooses the horse for the Udgītha.
20.13.6	They obstruct the mare for him.
20.13.7	When he makes a sound, that is the Udgīthi. When they make a sound in reply, that is the Upāṁgiṭha.
20.13.8	The horse is let loose with the words, "The horse is let loose, the sacrificial horse." Having instructed the Udgātṛ with a hundred, a hundred and a half, and a gold coin, he sends him to sing the Devata in accordance with the Udgātā.
20.13.9	With that gold, he offers the Stotra.
20.13.10	It is performed at the place of the sacrificial grass.
20.13.11	"He offers the horse, the ass, and the goat with the Vetasa branch, saying, 'Salutations to the king, salutations to Varuna.' He offers them in the Agni-sthana, to those whose country is not mentioned.
20.13.12	The other animals are bound with the branches of the Plaksha tree. The black-necked one dedicated to Agni is placed in front, on the forehead. The one dedicated to Pūṣan is placed behind, on the neck. The one dedicated Indra-Pūṣan is above, on the neck, the two black-necked ones dedicated to Agni are on the arms. The two hairy-legged ones dedicated to Tvaṣṭr are on the thighs. The two with sharp backs are on the back. The two dedicated to Brhaspati are on the back, the white and black ones are on the sides. The one dedicated Dhātar is below, with the navel. The one dedicated Surya is on the tail.
20.13.13	Elsewhere, the Agniṣṭhas are eighteen.
20.14.1	Some people count the Navanavas as Indra-Agni-Dasamān.
20.14.2	The same is the case with the Āraṇyas.
20.14.3	They are placed between the sacrificial posts.
20.14.4	Eleven animals are offered to Indra the King, namely, the boar.
20.14.5	He offers the Kapiñjala birds to Vasanta, the Kalaviṅka birds to Grīṣma, the Tittiri birds to Varsā, the Vartikā birds to Śara, the Kakara birds to Hemanta, and the Vikara birds to Śiśira.
20.14.6	The black ones are of the earth, the smoky ones of the atmosphere, the big ones of the gods, the tawny ones of lightning, the shining ones of the stars. These are the fifteen kinds of birds.
20.14.7	The black-necked ones are dedicated to Agni, the tawny ones to Soma, the ones with white tips to Savitr, the ones with black tips to Sarasvati, the ones with calves to Pusha, the dark ones to Priyashni, the ones with variegated spots to Maruts, the ones with many forms to the All-gods, the ones with long tails to the sky and earth.
20.14.8	The black-necked ones have been mentioned.
20.14.9	These are the ones with variegated horns dedicated to Indra and Agni, the dark ones dedicated to Varuna, the ones with tufts to the sky and the earth.
20.14.10	To Agni Anīkavān he offers the first-born, to the Maruts Sāntapanas the Savatya ones, to the Marut Grhamedhis the Vaska ones, to the sporting Maruts the Saṃsṛṣṭa ones, to the self-luminous Maruts the Anusṛṣṭa.
20.14.11	It is said that they have black necks.
20.14.12	These are the Indra-Agni-offerings. The horns are pointed upwards. The Indra-offerings are of many forms. The offerings to Visvakarman.
20.14.13	To the Fathers who drink Soma, the brown ones, the smoky ones, the reddish ones. To the Fathers who sit on the sacrificial grass, the smoky ones. To the brown ones, to the reddish ones. The Fathers who belong to Agni, to the smoky ones, to the red ones, to the Triyambaka ones.
20.14.14	Some say that they are black and spotted.
20.15.1	The white ones are dedicated to Aditi.
20.15.2	It has been said that they have black necks.
20.15.3	These are dedicated to Indra-Agni, the many-formed ones to Visve Dev, the ones with horns pointing downwards to Sunasiriya, the white ones to Vayu, and the white ones to Surya. These are the animals for the Caturmasya sacrifice.
20.15.4	They offer two sets of animals in the Ekadasin sacrifice, the ordinary ones and the ones related to the horse sacrifice.
20.15.5-7	To Agni, the leader of the army, etc. To Soma, the self-sovereign, etc. He offers to the one who has been taken up with "To the one who has taken up, svāhā." To the one who has performed the rite, with "To the accomplished, svāhā"; to the one who is being offered, with "To what is being offered, svāhā". The wives adorn the horse with "The wife adorns the horse, the queen, the wind-blown."
20.15.8	One hundred times one hundred of each of these, the ministers, the wives of the princes, and the wives of the foremost men, are in the village of the Sūtas.
20.15.9	One thousand times one thousand of the gems, gold, silver, and sea-shells.
20.15.10	They fasten the gems on the ends of the Valas, saying, "Bhuvah" (to the golden ones) from the eastern side of the bull, "Bhuvar" (to the silver ones) from the western side of the bull. "Suvar" (to those of the sea) from the eastern part of the bull, and "Parivriti" (to those) from the western part of the bull.
20.15.11	The maidens fasten the conch-gems on the ends of Valas for non-slipping.
20.15.12	Then they anoint him with ghee from his own country, saying, "May the Vasus anoint thee with the Gayatri metre." With the Gugulva (tree), the Mahisî with the Rudras, with the Kasâmba (tree), the Vâvâtî with the Adityas, with the Moustakrita (tree), the Parivrktî.
20.15.13	By the Gaugulva, Surabhi, the horse, has been brought to the sacrifice. The horse, going to the gods, may be the giver of splendour, the conqueror of the world. By the Kasambava, Surabhi... By the Moustakrita, Surabhi ... By these verses, each with a different mantra.
20.16.1	"They yoke the chariot," (thus) on the right side the charioteer yokes the horse.
20.16.2	"They yoke his desire," (thus) the charioteer.
20.16.3	"Making a banner, without a banner," (thus) he places the flag on the chariot.
20.16.4	"Like a cloud," (thus) one puts on the armour.
20.16.5	"With the bow," (thus) takes up the bow.
20.16.6	"Like the voice," (thus) touches the string.
20.16.7	"They are driving," he says, touching the yoke of the chariot.
20.16.8	"He is the father of many, he has many sons," he says, binding the arrow-case to the back.
20.16.9	"Standing in the chariot, he leads the horses," he says, addressing the charioteer.
20.16.10	"The bull-handed ones make fierce sounds," he says, to the horses.
20.16.11	"The Fathers, the sweet-voiced, the life-giving, with these three verses he worships the Fathers.
20.16.12	" "Having touched himself with the verse, 'O Riji, protect me,' and having taken the horse-hair, he recites, 'Like a serpent with its coils,' and then the Hastagha (verse).
20.16.13	" "With five verses, 'O Lord of the forest, be the protector, the strong one,' he worships the chariot."
20.16.14	"O Agni, turn back these (cows) with your mouth. With the sound of the kettledrums, they make the announcement, 'The banner is here.'
20.16.15	The horse, having crossed the river, crosses it again with his steps. Having gone to the other bank, the Adhvaryu makes the sacrificer recite, 'Those are the paths of Savitr.'
20.16.16	"The horse himself smells the water." Having made the horse smell the water, he makes it turn to the right, saying, "The wind has gone to the water."
20.16.17	He stands where it goes.
20.16.18	"I release thee from this," thus he releases the horse, the vehicle of the chariot. "The name of this oblation is," thus having placed the chariot on the vehicle of the charioteer, he anoints the back of the horse, saying, "The sky is thy back."
20.16.19	"May my wealth, my fame, my prosperity be like that of the horse," thus the wives of the sacrificer scatter the grains of barley over the horse, which is left over after the oblation.
20.16.20	To him whose food is scattered over the horse, his progeny and kingdom become prosperous.
20.17.1	Having recited the formula, "The horse has crossed over the ground by his steps; the horse is your back," and having directed the horse as it is placed, he sprinkles it and makes it drink.
20.17.2	If the horse does not drink while being made to drink, he should make it drink with the formula, "Agni was a beast."
20.17.3	"The kindled one is shining, the receptacle of thoughts," the horse becomes dear.
20.17.4	When the fire is being carried around, he offers oblations to the Apāyas.
20.17.5	They release the wild animals that have been carried around in the fire.
20.17.6	A Vāḍava and a human being.
20.17.7	A goat is led in front of a horse.
20.17.8	On the branch of a Vetasa tree, having placed the sacrificial grass, and having spread out the skin of a black antelope, and having placed gold on it, and having placed a horse on it, they kill the horse, the ass, and the goat. On the branches of the Plakṣa tree, they kill other animals.
20.17.9	They bind the horse with a black antelope skin or with a piece of silk. They bind other animals with ropes.
20.17.10	When the animal is being consecrated with the formulas, "To Prāṇa svāhā, to Vyāna svāhā," he offers oblations. When the animal is consecrated.
20.17.11	The Prastotṛ recites the Sāman with the formula, "Yaṃ."
20.17.12	The Pratiprasthātṛ makes the wives recite with the formula, “O Amba, O Ambāli, O Ambikā."
20.17.13	Having tied up the right locks of hair and loosened the left ones, they strike the right thighs with their palms and shake them thrice, going around the horse clockwise, saying, "You are the Avantin."
20.17.14	Having tied up the left locks of hair and loosening the right ones, they strike their left thighs with their palms, not shaking them, and go around the horse counterclockwise thrice.
20.18.2	"They both (the Adhvaryu and the Pratiprasthātṛ) move forward with the four steps, saying, "We move forward with the steps." They move forward with the step.
20.18.3	"The Adhvaryu, covering the cow and the horse with a garment of wool, saying, "O fortunate one, dwelling in the Kambuka (forest), the bull is yours."
20.18.4	"Place the stool on the thighs," (thus) they say, thinking of procreation by procreation. The cow-wife reproaches the cow.
20.18.5	"May the wives raise her up." Thus they praise her.
20.18.6	The cow-wife reproves three times, the wives praise three times, with each succeeding verse.
20.18.7	Having recited the entire verse "I have performed for Dadhikravan" and having purified with the Apishthya verses, he makes the cow's path with golden needles, from the front of the womb. With the two verses "Gayatri, Tristubh" he makes the horse's path with silver needles, from the back of the womb. From the front of the navel with the two verses "Agni, the lord of the house" he makes the path with copper needles, from the rear of the womb. The remaining is made with lead needles.
20.18.8-14	The goat and the deer are silent, they make the path of the sword. "Who cuts you? Who rules you?" He cuts the skin of the horse. The fat named "moon" is taken out. There is no fat of the horse. It is taken out from the others. Having cut the ear, he binds it to the three parts. There is not the anus of the horse.
20.18.15	The omentum of the horse, the goat and the deer are placed on the Vetasa-branch above the fire, after the omenta have been cooked.
20.19.1	On the south, on the branches of the Plaksa, are placed the omenta of other animals.
20.19.2	Having offered the two omenta of the horse and the goat, he mixes the omenta of the goat, the horse and the deer and gives the order.
20.19.3-4	"Recite the offering-prayer for the omentum of the horse, the goat and the cow, for the fat of the omentum." "Recite the prayer for the omentums of the horse, goat and cow, for the fats of the omentums." "Recite for the omentus of the moon, for the fats." "Recite to the omentum and fats of the moon." "Recite thus for the omentuses of the others." "The omentum is offered together."
20.19.5	"For the All-gods, for the Usra, for the sheep, for the goats, for the fat of the vaps, recite." "For the All gods, for the Usras, for the sheep and goats, for the vaps and fat, recite." These are the two invitations.
20.19.6	Having offered the two Uttaraviparyya-offerings, having sprinkled themselves at the Catvāla, they sit down on either side of the Agni-sthala, the Brahman to the right and the Hotṛ to the left.
20.19.7	What was the former intention? This is the question of this Anuvāka. The Hotṛ has promised, the Brahman has promised.
20.19.8	The Brahman announces the victory to the north.
20.19.9	They cut the bone and hair of the horse, the goat and the deer at right angles, saying, "We are cutting the skin of the pig." They act as if they were giving instructions.
20.19.10	He places the blood of the horse for the purpose of Sviṣṭakṛt.
20.19.11	He sprinkles the tail of the goat and the neck of the deer with the Mahendra hymn.
20.19.12	The six oblations to Prajapati are offered before the consecration, beginning with "Hiranyagarbha, the golden embryo, was born first." The six oblations for the vital breaths are offered before the rite, beginning with "This is the front, this is the earth."
20.19.13	The consecration is performed on a tiger skin or a lion skin.
20.20.1	The bull skin is held above the one being consecrated.
20.20.2	The thousand-headed man is the man Narayana. With the golden measure of a hundred, with the hundred-syllabled, with the hundred black-gram-seeds, the sacrificer places the head.
20.20.3	"With the impulse of Prajapati, with the earth, with the space, with the arms, with the heaven, with the hands, with the supreme lord of Prajapati I consecrate you with the consecration of sovereignty." He consecrates with the sprinkling of the two Mahis.
20.20.4	Some say, "He consecrates with the Vayu offerings."
20.20.5	He offers with the names of the months, Madhu and Madhava.
20.20.6	He offers to the seasons with the names of six seasons, Vasanta, Grishma.
20.20.7	O Indra, do thou destroy the foes, do thou bring down the Dasyus, do thou send him who assails us to the nethermost darkness. Do thou drive away the Rakshas, do thou break the head of Vritra, do thou destroy, O Indra, the anger of the foe. The sacrificer, with the two verses addressed to Indra, has removed the mouth.
20.20.8	His kindling-sticks are above him. He takes hold of his hand while he is being anointed with the Apāmpāyaka oblations belonging to Prajapati.
20.20.9	Prajapati moves in the womb, Prajapati is the first of the gods worthy of sacrifice. Offer sacrifice to him first. May he grant us wealth, good valour, prosperity, and may he spread out his navel for us. These worlds, the directions, the distant and the near, the upper and the lower, Prajapati, the creator, the giver of life, this oblation of ours, O god, do thou accept. He offers six oblations to Prajapati above the consecration.
20.20.10	The six directions are the east.
20.20.11	Here the sacrificer steps on the Viṣṇukrama steps in the waking state.
20.21.1	On the northern side above the fire, on a skin of black antelope, he places the horse facing east, according to its limbs.
20.21.2	Similarly in front, facing west, and above, facing east, the cow and the deer.
20.21.3-6	He places the other animals on the branches of the fig tree on the right side. The rite of sowing. "At the end, he bows down, saying, "O Vapa, O Vapa, O sacrifice." "O Vaja, O Vaja, O sacrifice." " "O Vaji, O Vaji, O sacrifice." " "O sacrifice, O sacrifice, O sacrifice." Having offered all the animals to the Luvardi and Balivardi gods, he offers the horse, saying, "] "O Vaja has crossed the sky with his steps. The sky is your back." " "] "Having offered the horse, he offers the goat, saying, "]"
20.21.7	Here he strikes the pot.
20.21.8	It is understood that all those who smell the smoke of the horse sacrifice become people of merit.
20.21.9	Having performed with the oblation, having offered the oblation, he offers the body-sacrifices with each mantra with these fourteen Anuvākas: "Having seized the frogs with his fangs and teeth,"
20.21.10	The fifteenth is the Divakīrtiya, the sixteenth is the Aranya-anuvaaka, the seventeenth is the one beginning with "The sky is your back."
20.21.11	With these three anuvaakas, he offers sixty-three times with the Avasthomiyas.
20.21.12	"He passed over with steps" - this is the sixty-third.
20.21.13	Some say that one should offer eighteen oblations.
20.21.14	"These worlds, which one, do they support?" (RV 10.129.1) are the two-footed verses."
20.21.15	At the end, he offers the Svishtakrit oblation with the cooked blood of the horse.
20.22.1	He offers the first oblation with the throat of a cow, the second with the tail of a horse, and the third with an iron pot.
20.22.2	The day concludes with the Patnisaṃyāja.
20.22.3	On the next day there is the Sarvas toma Atiratra with the Brihat-sastra.
20.22.4	At the time of cattle, they offer the Gavya animals of eleven kinds, either dedicated to Prajapati or to Visvedevas. The bull dedicated to Prajapata is the last one, having all forms, for all desires. The twelfth one is to be offered.
20.22.5	It is similar to the Avabhritha.
20.22.6	Having performed the Avabhrtha rite, he offers to Sipivista, Khalati, Viklidha, Shukla, Pingaksha, Tilavalam Avabhrtha, and offers on his head, "To Death svāhā, to abortion svāhā, and to Jumbaka svāhā." These three.
20.22.7	He gives him a hundred and an ox.
20.22.8	Some say, "To a hundred and an oxt."
20.22.9	Those who have performed good and bad deeds, with their hands raised, are approaching the village. It is known that all of them become beings in the world of the virtuous.
20.22.10	There are nine white cows, a calf, and a cow to be followed.
20.22.11	Then there are some cows that are reddish-brown, belonging to Indra, tawny, white, with a sharp back, and belonging to Brihaspati.
20.22.12	Here, those who are in pairs are offered.
20.22.13	Chāgala, Kalmāṣa, Kīkīdīvi, and Vidīgaya are the three Tvaṣṭra-sacrifices.
20.22.14	The Pātnīvata, Āgneya, Āyurveda, and Āyurveda-Agni are the three Agni-sacrifices. The Āyurveda is the Agni-sacrifice. The Āyus is the Agni-Agni. The Āyura is the Agni-Ayus. The Āyuras is the Agni-Āyura. The Āyure is the Agni-āyure. The Āyures is the Agni- Āyures. The Āyuru is the Agni- āyuru. The Āyurus is the Agni-ayurus. The Āyuro is the Agni- ayuro. The Āyurs is the Agni- Ayurs. The Āyū is
20.23.1	Then of the three kinds of animals, he offers the first-born Kalakābhru to the Asvins in the middle, the Vishālayūpa to Urja in the south, and the best-born to Pṛthivī in the north.
20.23.2	He offers the animal oblations to Agni, the remover of distress, on eight potsherds. He performs the Mṛgāra-Iṣṭi with ten oblations.
20.23.3	The Svishtakrit is the same.
20.23.4	The Yajya and Anuvakya verses are in accordance with the respective texts, beginning with "I think of Agni, the first, the discerning one."
20.23.5	One performs the Tridahatviya sacrifice.
20.23.6	One gives a thousand (cows) at that sacrifice.
20.23.7	Some prescribe the Vishalayupa sacrifice after the Udavasaya sacrifice.
20.23.8	They say, "One should offer twelve Brahmoḍana oblations when the sacrifice is concluded, and perform the sacrifice with twelve enclosing fires."
20.23.9	One should not do it like that. One should offer twelve Brahmodana oblations when a sacrifice is concluded, giving twelve hundred oblations on each of them.
20.23.10	"The three spring ones are tawny," one performs the sacrifice for a year with the seasonal animals.
20.23.11	Now, the Agniya ones are in spring, the Indra ones in summer, the Maruta ones in the rainy season, the Parjanya ones in autumn, the Indra-Varuna ones in autumn, and the Indra-Brhaspati ones in winter, and the IndraVaisnava ones in the cold season.
20.23.12	He performs the animal sacrifice for two months each, saying, "For the year, for the completion."
20.23.13	The horse sacrifice is concluded.
20.24.1	The Pañcāha is a Purushamedha.
20.24.2	A Brāhmaṇa or a king should perform it.
20.24.3	He attains strength and valour and conquers all enemies.
20.24.4	There are eleven sacrificial posts and eleven Agniṣṭoma sacrifices.
20.24.5	The five autumnal days are like the Agniṣṭoma, and the Upoddhṛta is the last.
20.24.6	Having offered three Savitri-oblations, the sacrificer dedicates animals on the middle day.
20.24.7	Having dedicated two sets of eleven animals, he dedicates men.
20.24.8	The Brāhmaṇa is dedicated to Brahman. This is as mentioned in the text.
20.24.9	They are placed between the sacrificial posts.
20.24.10	Having placed the articles to be offered to the east, he stands to the south and recites the Purusha Sukta beginning with "Brahma, the thousand-headed man" and the Anushans verse beginning with "Para".
20.24.11	Having taken the articles to be burnt to the north and thrown them away, having offered oblations to the respective deities with ghee, he establishes them with the Ekadashin verses in pairs.
20.24.12-15	At the time of giving Dakshina, he gives wealth to non-Brahmanas in the directions along with the land, as in the horse sacrifice. The Brahmanical sacrificer is the knower of all Vedas. On this very day, the consecration is like the horse sacrifice. The eleven Anubandhya rites are performed, the Sauri, Vaishvadevi, and Prajapati rites.
20.24.16	Having deposited the fires in separate fire-places, having worshipped the sun in the form of Uttara Narayana, one should stand in the forest.
20.24.17	Or having entered the village, one should perform the sacrifice with the Tri-dhatavīya rite.
20.25.1	With the Sautrāmaṇī, Maitrāvaruṇa, Chamasya, Saṃprasthāyin, Pañcabila, and Pañcaśāradīya oblations.
20.25.2	The Agniya oblation is known to be offered in the eastern pit, the Indraya in the southern, the Mitra-Varuna in the western, the Maitravarunya in the northern, the Brhaspatya in the central pit.
20.25.3	The Sarvamedha is a ten-day sacrifice.
20.25.4	A king who desires to be all this should offer it.
20.25.5	The Agni is of a hundred kinds.
20.25.6	The Agniṣṭoma is the first day, everything is Agni-related.
20.25.7	The Ukthya is the second day, everything is Indra-related.
20.25.8	Ukthya is the third day, everything is Surya-related.
20.25.9	Vaisvadev Ukthya is fourth day, everything is Vaisvadev.
20.25.10	The fifth day is the Asvamedhika, the middle one; on that day he dedicates the horse to be sacrificed.
20.25.11	The sixth day is the Paurushedika, the middle one, on that day he (dedicates) men.
20.25.12	The seventh day is the Aptoryama, on that day all the animals to be sacrificed are dedicated.
20.25.13	He offers the Vapa to those who offer the Vapa, having taken out the skin of the Vapa.
20.25.14	Having cut the dry and moist plants and trees, they scatter them on the sacrificial fire.
20.25.15	At the morning pressing, when the Nārāśaṃsa verses have been recited, he offers food after food.
20.25.16	It is known that this is for the attainment of everything and the securing of everything.
20.25.17	In the same way at the midday and third pressings.
20.25.18	The eighth is thirty-nine.
20.25.19	The ninth is thirty-three.
20.25.20	The Vishvajit, the Sarvaprstha and the Atiratra are the tenth day.
20.25.21	At the time of giving gifts, he gives to Brahmanas the wealth in the directions, along with the land and the people, as in the horse sacrifice.
21.1.1	By performing the twelve-day sacrifice, one attains heaven and victory in this world.
21.1.2	It is performed with the fire kindled.
21.1.3	The sacrifice and the Ahirbudhnya are not to be interrupted.
21.1.4	Those who have been initiated should not perform the sacrifice for those who have not been initiated. The priests and the sacrificer in the sacrifice are the same.
21.1.5	Therefore, it is known that one should not perform the twelve-day sacrifice for one who has been excluded due to sin.
21.1.6	One who performs the twelve-day ritual prospers.
21.1.7	Some say that one who accepts it prospers.
21.1.8	The text speaks of the officiating priests and the sacrificer.
21.1.9	It is understood that the sacrificer who is emaciated performs the sacrifice.
21.1.10	It is known that if one is not ascetic, one's sacrifice would be disconnected. One should be ascetic. One should connect the sacrifice.
21.1.11	One should perform the sacrifice for one month, three for six months, and three for twelve or thirteen months.
21.1.12	At the Upavasatha of these, they initiate for the thirteenth (day).
21.1.13	Therefore some say, "At the twelve-day sacrifice, one should not be a Brahman for the thirteenth (month)."
21.1.14	Fifteen for the half-year, seventeen for the progeny-seeker or the cattle-seeker, twenty-one for the prosperity-seeker or the lustre-seeker, thirty for the half-month, thirty-three for the strength-seeker or the valour-seeker, forty for the sacrifice-seeker, forty-four for the power-seeker, forty eight for the cattle-seeker.
21.1.15	The author says this as the last statement, that there are unlimited initiations.
21.1.16	Those other than the seventeen are the ones who are present in the sacrifice.
21.1.17	Of the seventeen, one can choose as one wishes.
21.1.18	All those who are officiating priests are present in the rite.
21.1.19	All of them should perform the officiating rites, whatever does not obstruct the officiating rites.
21.1.20	One who obstructs the officiating rites is stronger.
21.2.1-4	All the sacrifices beginning with the Iṣṭi are performed by the householder himself. The Yūpāñjana and Rtuyāja are performed for the sake of others by the householder himself.
21.2.5	The other clans have the Ajyuhotṛ.
21.2.6	The second Prayāja is the Nārāśaṃsa for the Vasīṣṭhas and Śunakas.
21.2.7	The other clans have the Tanūnapāt.
21.2.8	They initiate in the winter and rise in the spring.
21.2.9	The winter is the departure and the spring the rising of him who knows thus.
21.2.10	He prospers who, knowing thus, initiates in the winter and rises in the spring.
21.2.11-14	Those who are to be initiated in the bright half of Caitra should perform the rites of Savitri. Those who are to perform the rites of Nirmathya should perform the rites. Those who wish to perform the rites with five animals should perform the rites and then perform the rites. Those who are to perform rites should perform the rites.
21.2.15	These fires are set up for them at the end of the Oḍavasa sacrifice.
21.2.16	Having initiated the householder, the Adhvaryu initiates the Brahman, then the Udgātṛ, then the Hotṛ.
21.2.17	Then the Pratiprasthātṛ, having initiated him, initiates the half-portion.
21.2.18	Then the Neṣṭṛ, having initiated the Pratiprasthatṛ, initiates the third portion.
21.2.19	Then the Uṇnetrā initiates him and initiates the Pādin.
21.2.20	Then the Pratiprasthātṛ initiates him.
21.3.1	Or another Brāhmaṇa.
21.3.2	Initiated, he abandons one by one from the state of being a Tantri.
21.3.3	Thus the rites of the sacrificers are in order, and those which are not possible.
21.3.4	The view of some is that the sons of different Gotras can be admitted to the same Gotra by the practice of intermarriage. The view of others is that the sons are not admitted to the same gotra by the practice.
21.3.5	Some say that the initiation should be done immediately, while others say that it should be done every day.
21.3.6	Some say it should be done in two days, some in three days. Thus they go on for twelve days.
21.3.7	When one is being initiated, all the things to be initiated are turned around, says Āśmarathya.
21.3.8	Having brought the fires near, one should proceed with the self-purification. The rites should be performed with oblations, says Ālekhana.
21.3.9	The wives are initiated in the place of the wives.
21.3.10	The sequence of rites for the wives has been explained by the priests.
21.3.11	The Initiates begin with the Adhvaryu, the wives with the Initiates.
21.3.12	When they have begun, he offers on the Garhapatya with the verse, "May death depart, may immortality come. May Vaivasvata make us free from fear. May wealth come to us like the leaves of the forest-tree. May Sachi's lord be with us. Svāhā."
21.3.13	Except for the wives.
21.4.1	Go beyond the supreme death, go beyond the path that is yours, other than the path of the gods. To those who see and hear, I say this: Do not harm our offspring or our heroes. In the southern fire.
21.4.2	This is indeed the best place to come to, where there is wealth from cattle, wealth from horses, wealth from plants. May wealth come to us like the leaves of a tree. May Sachi-pati be with us. Svāhā in the Āhavanīya.
21.4.3	They are initiated for twelve days.
21.4.4	They do not send away the clouds during the Sattra.
21.4.5	Having performed the Pravargya rite, having bought the king, having bound it, he places it for the twelve-day rite.
21.4.6	The Soma-purchasing rite is like the sixteen-day rite. The Soma-purchasing is like the sixteen day rite.
21.4.7	At the twelve-day Upasads, he recites the Sambharya verses.
21.4.8	Some say that the sacrificer should recite.
21.4.9	Twelve Upasads.
21.4.10	For each Upasad, he offers with each Upasad verse.
21.4.11	He builds the fire-altar in the Anupa-sada.
21.4.12	The building of the altar is done in two days, one layer at a time.
21.4.13	The last day is of four days.
21.4.14	The vows are observed for three days, one layer each day, four layers, three layers, two layers, and one layer.
21.4.15	One who wishes to complete the vow should offer a ladleful of curds.
21.4.16	The shed has twenty-one layers.
21.4.17	The two fruits of the Adhiṣavaṇa are placed on the ground.
21.4.18	The Upavasatha is straight.
21.5.1	The Jyotiṣṭoma begins on the next day.
21.5.2	The Prāyaṇīya Atiratra is dedicated to Vaisvānara.
21.5.3	It is the same as the one at the Rājanīya.
21.5.4	One should think that the one which is obtained in one day is sufficient.
21.5.5	He puts on the other one which is to be worn on the next day, and puts on the other.
21.5.6	Thus the daily ritual of Agni, the union and release,
21.5.7	He unites on the first day and releases on the last day.
21.5.8	Some prescribe the union and release daily.
21.5.9	At the time of the Dakṣiṇā, he gives twelve hundred each day without fail.
21.5.10	At the Sattra, having offered the Dakṣiṇā-homa, the sacrificers, shaking their black antelope skins, proceed towards the southern path, saying, "I am leading this Dakṣiṇās to Kīrtyā, to Svarga, to the world."
21.5.11	Thus every day.
21.5.12	On the last day, they release their friends.
21.5.13	They are pierced with black-horned spears.
21.5.14	On the same day on which he takes up the Vasatīvarī waters, he takes up the Yajñāyajñiya (cup).
21.5.15	On the same day on whch he takes up the Payas waters, he takes them up.
21.5.16	At that place, the Maitrāvaruṇa recites, "Tomorrow, I shall recite Soma to Indra-Agni, to all the gods, to the Brahmanas, to the Soma-drinkers, to the Soma drinkers." "O Subrahmanya, I invite you to the Subrahmanya ceremony."
21.6.1	Having entered the Agni-house, the Agnidhra announces, "Tomorrow I shall offer Soma to Indra-Agni, to all the gods, to the Brahmanas, to the Soma-drinkers. I am announcing Soma. I invoke Subrahmanya in the Subrahmanya-rite."
21.6.2	Now, as for the statement, "He should say, 'Tomorrow we shall perform the Soma sacrifice,'": Āśmarathya says, "He should make the statement, 'Today we shall perform the soma sacrifice."
21.6.3	After that, he should say, "Tomorrow we shall perform."
21.6.4	The day concludes with the Patnîsaṃyājas.
21.6.5	When the day is concluded, the Brahman releases speech.
21.6.6	They remove water from the wives.
21.6.7	They go to the well-kindled fires.
21.6.8	Having come, they place it in the Ahavaniya fire.
21.6.9	Thus every day.
21.6.10	At that time itself they perform the Trivrit Agniṣṭoma with Rathantara Sāman.
21.6.11	By the word 'ratha' he performs the Mahendra Stotra.
21.6.12	The word becomes a place of mantra.
21.6.13	On the next day, they perform the Bṛhat-sāman with fifteen Stomas.
21.6.14	He performs the Mahendra-stotra with the sound of a drum.
21.6.15	If there is thunder, it should be the same sound, but in the place of the mantra.
21.6.16	On the next day, the perform the Virāṭ-sāman, with seventeen Stomas.
21.6.17	The Udgātṛ recites the Mahendra Sāman at the place of the Barhis.
21.6.18	The Sama is recited in the Prāstāra mode.
21.6.19	Then the Udgātṛ chants the Sama.
21.7.1	On the next day, they perform the Ekavimsa and Ṣoḍaśin Sāmans of the Vairāja Sama.
21.7.2	This is the Nyuṅkhya day.
21.7.3	At the place of the sacrificial grass, he performs the Mahendra hymn with the two kindling woods.
21.7.4	The Sama is performed as an Upakrama.
21.7.5	Then, covering the right thigh of the Udgātṛ with the Avakā, he churns fire on it.
21.7.6	The Udgātṛ, having churned it, gives it to the Prastôtṛ, who gives it to the Adhvaryu.
21.7.7	The Adhvaryu, having taken it around the north of the Dhishnyas, having placed it in the Ahavaniya, offers with the verse, "O Agni, being kindled, do thou shine forth." He offers the Viraj verse.
21.7.8	On the next day they perform the Ukthya sacrifice with the Sakvara Saman consisting of twenty-nine verses.
21.7.9	At the place of the sacrificial grass, he prepares the Mahendra Stotra with water and Avaka grass.
21.7.10	The Sama is performed without the recitation of the Udgātṛ.
21.7.11	Then three cows with their calves go ahead, towards the north, along the southern path, towards the Agnidhriya fire.
21.7.12	On the next day they perform the Triṃśa Stotra with the Raivata Sāman.
21.7.13	This is the Niyunkha day.
21.7.14	The Adhvaryu himself offers the Rtu-oblations. The householder himself.
21.7.15	"The Adhvaryu and the householder offer, saying, "The Adhvaryus offer, the householder offers." Having entered the Havirdhana hall, the Adhvaryu offers with the verse following the instruction, or with the verse following an instruction."
21.7.16	"O Asvins, drink the pressed (Soma), O shining ones, with pure vows, with the season, with the carrier of the sacrifice, with the season drink Soma. Vasat!" If it is not spread out.
21.7.17	If the Soma-pressing is prolonged, then one should say, "Do you yoke the chariot of the Nṛvāhana (god) going towards the west. Here is your release. Pour the oblations with honey. Go to the Soma. Drink Soma, O ye possessors of strength. Drink Soma in due season. With Vasat." Its performance is done by the Marutvatīyas.
21.8.1	The Mahendra (cup) is not taken.
21.8.2	Then the Pratiprasthātṛ, having stretched out the northern rope towards the north of the Āgnīdhra, ties the calves to it.
21.8.3	The mothers are placed near the Marjālīya (shed) on the southern side.
21.8.4	At the place of the sacrificial grass, he performs the Mahendra Stotra with water and Dūrvā grass.
21.8.5	The Sama is performed as an Upakrama.
21.8.6	Then they unite the calves with their mothers and make them stay together.
21.8.7	They lead them towards the north, towards the south, towards the fire-chamber, towards the north, and towards the south.
21.8.8	The six-day session of the Prsthya comes to an end.
21.8.9	When it is over, they drink ghee or honey.
21.8.10	Just as one would wipe a chariot, so is it known.
21.8.11	Then they perform the three Uthyas (sacrifices) in accordance with the metres, namely the twenty-four, forty-four, and eighty-four.
21.8.12	The first one has Rathantara as the Sama, the second one has Brihat and Rathantara, and the third one has Brihat.
21.9.1	Then they perform the tenth day without speech, the twenty-fourth Agniṣṭoma with Rathantara Sāman.
21.9.2	Here no one is harmed by anyone.
21.9.3	Those who are outside should speak.
21.9.4	If they do not find it there, it should be spoken from inside the assembly.
21.9.5	If they do not find it there, the householder should tell them.
21.9.6	He tells them that it is there.
21.9.7	It is known that the Anushtubh is the marriage.
21.9.8	Having spoken the Anushtubha, he should then say that.
21.9.9	If it is defective, he makes it complete with the Anushtubhas.
21.9.10	On this day, they bring two kinds of kindling sticks - the regular ones and the Udumbara ones.
21.9.11	They place them in the prescribed manner.
21.9.12	They place the Udumbara twigs north of the Ahavaniya.
21.9.13	When the oblations have been brought together, he offers on the Garhapatya with two verses, "Those who are above the sun, by whom the sun shines, may they impel our sacrifice. May there be delight here, may there be enjoyment here, may there he joy here, may you enjoy here, svāhā."
21.9.14	Having gone to the Ahavaniya fire, they stand with the Atichandas verses.
21.9.15	"The thousand-fold man, the vision of the poets, the light, the law, the order of the universe, the dawn has united the faultless, the all-embracing, the conscious, the seed-bearing, the self-seed, the angry, the knowing, the unaging."
21.10.1	Then they flow to Prajapati, the mind-receiver.
21.10.2	When they have flowed, he takes them with the Upāṁshu-vessel, with the formula, "With this vessel of the earth, I take thee, the ocean of taste, agreeable to Prajapati."
21.10.3	One should take from the sky. This is one. One should offer the Soma of the third pressing as much as one thinks is sufficient for a group of cups with the Grahas. This is another.
21.10.4	The chanting of the Stotra, the Prastara, the Udgitha, and the Pratihara are done mentally.
21.10.5	The Hotr recites the three names of the Serpent-kings six times, if he recites in half-verses, nine times, if in full verses.
21.10.6	The Hotr announces the four Hotras.
21.10.7	"Om" is the reply of the Dashahotri, "So be it" is the reply to the Catuhotri, "Om" is the Dashahotra's reply, "So be" is the reply for the Panchahotri, "Aradsma Hotr" is the reply from the Saptahotri.
21.10.8	The recitation of the Yajya and Vasat and Anuvakata mantras are done mentally.
21.10.9	Having mentally offered the oblation, one takes the portion of the oblation.
21.10.10	When they look at each other, that is the Samuhavya (offering).
21.10.11	They consume the oblation mentally.
21.10.12	It is known that they recite the Brahmavadi (Brahmavadi) mantra.
21.10.13	The story is that the priests, having sat down, should ask a householder.
21.10.14	The Adhvaryu asks him:
21.11.1	"When the Dashahotaras performed a Sattra, by what did they succeed as householders? By what did they generate offspring?"
21.11.2	Prajapati himself asked them, "By whom did you succeed in becoming householders? By whom did you create progeny?" This was the reply.
21.11.3	Brahma asked, "When the four Hotras performed a sacrifice, by whom did you succeed as householders? By what did you create herbs?"
21.11.4	"By Soma did we succeed as householders, by that did we create herbs," was the reply.
21.11.5	The Hotṛ asks, "When the five Hotṛs were performing a Sattra, by what did they succeed in becoming the lords of their own homes? By what did they drive away the Asuras from these worlds? By what did the Asuras win back their cattle?"
21.11.6	Agni indeed, O householder, helped them. By him they drove away the Asuras from these worlds and by him they won their cattle. This is the reply.
21.11.7	The Hotrakas ask: When the six Hotrakas performed the Sattra, by whom did the householder help them? By whom did they arrange the Rtus?
21.11.8	The questioner replies, "It was by the creator that you, the householders, failed. Therefore, he created the seasons."
21.11.9	The Udgātṛ asks, "When the seven Hotṛs were performing a Sattra, by whom did you, the householdrs, fail? By whom did you attain heaven? By whom did they create these worlds?"
21.11.10	Aryaman, the householder, helped you. By that you attained heaven and by that you spread these worlds." This is the reply.
21.11.11	Or, whatever this silent mental (speech) is, this is its speech.
21.11.12	Or, when the Hotṛ describes the four Hotr-s,
21.11.13	it is known that he describes Prajapati.
21.12.1	Or, this Prajapati is wicked, who created mosquitoes and gnats, who are thieves. This is a slander against Prajapati.
21.12.2	Or, he studies the mantras that slander Prajapati.
21.12.3	They are to be known as the ones who created the forests, Prajapati, the mountains, and the performers. That is not good. Whatever is good, may it be for me. Whatever darkness was united with the dawn, the sun shone upon it, the most radiant. The water and the intense heat were like that when Prajapati was heated. Whatever thieves, wolves, biting insects, and harmful ones there are, that is your deceit. This is your vow, but it is not my opinion. Prajapati is the tenth day. May you follow the counsel of the poets, the leader of the people. He, having the ability to bestow good praise and good wealth, being purified, free from sin, leaves the world. Thus it is said.
21.12.4	Then he asks for a boon, saying, "May there be this for us." Whatever he desires, a Brahman may have many desires.
21.12.5	"May I be well-born with offspring, well-heroic with heroes, well-shining with radiance, well-nourished with nourishment." This he determines.
21.12.6	Having explained the four Hotṛ-priests, having closed the doors, having arranged the wives as in the Adhishṇiya rite, he makes the speech as in the Ābharaṇa rite.
21.12.7	Holding the Udumbara branch, touching the belly, and standing with restrained speech, they stand thus: "Here is Dhriti, here is Svadhriti, here is Ranti, here is Ramati."
21.12.8	They move towards the sun over the tree, moving towards the east.
21.12.9	You two, O Indra and Pārvatī, are the leaders in the front. He who would injure us, him you have struck far away with the thunderbolt. He who has struck us, him you strike far away. He who has hidden himself in the dense (forest), him you strike far. He who has gone far away, him you strike. He who has concealed himself in the dense forest, him you strike near. He who has been struck by us, him you smite far away. He has been struck by the gods. He has been smitten by the gods. The gods have smitten him. The gods have struck him. The gods strike him. The gods smite him. The gods will strike him. The god will smite him. The god strikes him. The god has struck him. The god smites him. The god smote him. The god struck him. The God will strike him. He has been stricken by the gods. They go forward with their faces towards the east, taking up the ladle and the strainer, and recite five verses: "May speech come, may speech approach, may speech unite, may speech be united. May speech be the earth, the atmosphere, the heaven."
21.12.10	Having meditated on the day and night, having released speech at the tree and the sun, he offers the Udumbara kindling woods.
21.12.11	The tenth day is concluded.
21.13.1	The Udayaniya (rite) is performed like the Prayanīya.
21.13.2	Here there are no Aheenasantati (rites).
21.13.3	What is done in the later day after the earlier day, those are the Aheenasantati rites.
21.13.4	If they shave their heads at the time of the Sattra, they should shave with the hair.
21.13.5	Having performed the Udavasaniyesti, they appoint other priests and perform the Prsthashmananiya sacrifice with the Jyotishtoma and Agnistoma, with a thousand Dakshina.
21.13.6	Now the arrangement of the Grahas.
21.13.7	At the Prāyaniya and Udayaniya sacrifices, he takes up the Pṛṣnigrāha cups on the tenth day, in accordance with the Soma-cups.
21.13.8	Having recited the original Yajus-mantra, he measures ten Soma-cups with the ten mantras of the Pṛṣṇigrāha cups, saying, "You are Vayu, named Prāṇa."
21.13.9	Having recited the northern Yajus-formula, he measures out ten measures with the ten Mantras of the Pranagrahas, beginning with "This is the front, this is the back."
21.13.10	Thus he places the northern measures.
21.13.11	The ten Mantras have nine and nine parts.
21.13.12	Or he may measure out with nine and nine.
21.13.13	The remaining ones are for optional purposes.
21.13.14	Or having recited the Yajus-formulas, he may offer the Pranas with the nine and nine. 
21.13.15	If one were to offer the Prāṇa in the Pṛṣṇi,
21.13.16	if one were to offer Pṛṣṇī in the Prāṇa,
21.13.17	the two subsequent rites would be performed thus.
21.13.18	The first is the fourth, the second is the fifth.
21.13.19	He takes nine new Anśus.
21.13.20	On the three subsequent Prsthya days, he takes three Atigrahya oblations.
21.13.20	The Agniya is in the twenty-first, the Indra in the twenty-ninth, and the Surya in the thirty-third.
21.13.21	In the first three days, the Vājasaneyins perform the Samāman.
21.13.22	Where there is the Gaurīvita Sāman, he takes many Atigrahyas.
21.14.1	We shall explain the Trianika.
21.14.2	The Indra-Vayu are the first, the Prayaniya and Udayaniya are the tenth day.
21.14.3	Now the other nine days, beginning with the Indra-Vayu day, then the Sukra day, then the Agrayan day.
21.14.4	Thus arranged, the three groups of three days are rotated, if not already arranged.
21.14.5	The first day of the ten days is the one beginning with Indra-Vayu, then the one beginning with Sukra, then two days beginning with Aggrayan, then the one begining with Indra-Vau, then two days begining with Sukra, and then the one beginning Aggrayan, and then two days beginning Indra-Vayu.
21.14.6	Now the arrangement of the days.
21.14.7	They offer the Agniya animal on the Prāyaniya day and the Sarasvati sheep on the next day.
21.14.8	They offer animals of the Ekadasin type every day in this manner.
21.14.9	The animal for the Udayaniya day is Agniya or Indra-Agni.
21.14.10	One desiring Brahmic glory offers the animal to Surya.
21.14.11	If the Yupa is of the Ekadasini type, one should erect the Yupa every day, one by one, and all of them on the Upavasatha day.
21.14.12	Every day the sacrifice is performed with a lesser number of animals.
21.14.13	On the Udayaniya day, the animal is offered to Agni.
21.14.14	There are twelve Agniṣṭoma sacrifices with Rathantara Sāman.
21.14.15	It is the Bharata-dvādaśāha (twelve-day rite).
21.15.1	By performing the Gavāmayana rite, they attain progeny, prosperity, and greatness, and conquer heaven. They establish themselves in these worlds.
21.15.2	The Kalpa is explained in the twelve-day Sattra.
21.15.3	Seventeen are said to be the consecrations.
21.15.4	It is said that those who are going to consecrate for a year should consecrate on the Ekastaka day.
21.15.5	They should consecrate four days before the full moon.
21.15.6	In the month of Magha, says Ashmarathi. In the month of Acitira, says Aalekhana.
21.15.7	It is the same as the Prayaniya.
21.15.8	Having performed the Prāyaniya Atiratra, they perform the Upavasatha connected with the Catuśvimsa stoma.
21.15.9	These two days are called Śaya.
21.15.10	Then they perform the six-day Abhiplīvana sacrifice, with the Jyotiṣṭoma Agniṣṭoma having Rathantara Sāman, the Gāyatra Ukthya having Bṛhat Sāman, Āyuṣmat Ukthya having Rathantara Sāmā, Gāyatra ukthya having Bृhat Sāman Āyuṣmat ukthya having Rathantara Sāman, Jyotiṣṭomam agniṣṭomam bṛhat sāmānam.
21.15.11	Thus they perform the four Abhiplīvana sacrifices, the Pañcadaśa, the Sākamāsa, the Pañcahasti, and the Pañcavimśa. They perform the six-day Pañcadaśin sacrifice.
21.15.12	Thus they perform the five months.
21.15.13	Then they perform the Samvarga.
21.15.14	Three Abhiplīvana, the six-day Pratiṣṭhī, the Abhijit Agniṣṭoma, three Upavasatha Upavasatha, the Agniṣṭoma with Upavasatha or two Upavasatha days.
21.15.15	Thus the six months.
21.15.16	Then they perform the Visuvatam, the Ekavimsam Agniṣṭoma with the Divākirti Sāman.
21.15.17	At sunrise he performs the Prātaranuvāka.
21.15.18	This is the Divākirtin day.
21.15.19	The groups of days have been turned around in the northern half of the year, except for the twelve-day and ten-day rites.
21.15.20	Then they perform the three Upavasatha rites before the Agnistoma.
21.15.21	The Visvajit is an Agnistoma. The Visvajit is a Soma rite.
21.15.22	These are the four nights of rest.
21.15.23	Having performed the six-day Prsthya rite, they perform the four Abhiplvana rites in succession.
21.15.24	They perform the five months with such rites.
21.16.1	Then they perform the Sambarya rite.
21.16.2	Two Abhiplvas, the Goāyuṣī, twelve days of the Dvādaśāha, four days of rest, the Mahāvrata and the Atiratra.
21.16.3	Thus twelve months.
21.16.4	This is the Śāṭyāyanaka.
21.16.5	Now the Tāṇḍaka.
21.16.6	After the northern half of the month, having gone to the six-day Prsthya Abhijit, having gone to three Abhiplvas, having gone to two Abhiplvas, one Abhijit, having come to the six-days of the Prsthya, having gone to one Abhijit, one Abhijit.
21.16.7	Those (days) along with the previous ones are twenty-eight days of rest.
21.16.8	Having approached the six-day Prsthya, the four Abhiplvas are completed in a summary.
21.16.9	They perform the four months thus arranged.
21.16.10	Then the two Samvaras.
21.16.11	Three Abhiplvas, Ayus, Gau, and twelve days of the twelve-day rite.
21.16.12	The twenty-eight days of the dark fortnight are the Mahavrata and the Atiratra.
21.16.13	Thus the twelve months.
21.16.14	Thus the Tandaka.
21.16.15	Now the Bhallatika.
21.16.16	The Agnishtoma Abhijit is before the last Pratipada of the eastern fortnight.
21.16.17	The Agnistoma Vishvajit is above the first Pratipada of western fortnight.
21.16.18	The other details are as in the Satyayana-sutra.
21.16.19	Or, having completed the year, they should perform the twelve-day rite in the best month, on the tenth day, with the Ekadashini rite.
21.16.20	In that case, the Abhiplvas should be performed in place of the Prishthas.
21.16.21	After the twelve-day Ekadashini, there is the Mahavrata.
21.17.1	Then they perform the Mahavrata, the twenty-five-day Agnishtoma.
21.17.2	He praises with a verse.
21.17.3	The Adhvaryu chants with the nine Indra-verses, the invincible ones, or not.
21.17.4	The wives sing the auspicious Sama.
21.17.5	His performance is with the Marutvatiya verses.
21.17.6	The Mahendra is not taken up.
21.17.7	Then the Pratiprasthātṛ recites the Mahāvratika rites.
21.17.8	The staff of the vīṇā is made of the wood of the udumbara tree and is cut into ten pieces.
21.17.9	For each piece, ten strings of muñja grass are attached.
21.17.10	The vīṇā has a hundred strings.
21.17.11	Then the Adhvaryu spreads out thirty-three threads for the earth, the Hotr thirty-three for the heaven, the Udgātṛ thirty-three for prosperity, and the householder the last.
21.17.12	The Udgâtri puts the Udumbara stool with a fringe of Muñja grass in the Hotri's seat.
21.17.13	The Hotri ties the Udumbara sling with a Muñja rope.
21.17.14	The Adhvaryu puts the Udumbaraslab in the Adhvaryu's seat, or the stool.
21.17.15	The Hotrakas, the Udgâtri, the wives sit on the stools.
21.17.16	The wives of the sacrificer play the lute, the tāmbala-lute, and the piścūla-lute.
21.17.17	The lute-players play the lute, conch, and the flute.
21.17.18	The celibate and the prostitute are about to enter through the southern door-post of the sacrificial hall.
21.17.19	On the northern side of the altar, they arrange a seat for the prostitute and the Magadha.
21.18.1	In the directions they beat the drums, or on the Sraktis of the Mahāvedas.
21.18.2	To the west of the Agni-dhrā, they dig a hole for the drum to be placed in the ground. Half of it is within the altar, half outside.
21.18.3	Having spread it with a wet skin with the hair upwards, and having bound it with pegs, he places here the tail-end for striking.
21.18.4	The two, the leather-worker and the Śūdra, are seen to be stretching the leather in front of the Āgnīdhra.
21.18.5	In front of the Āgīdhra, they spread out a wet leather for piercing in the bundle of the Katas and the bundle of the Tejas.
21.18.6	In front the Āhavanīya, the armourers are seen to be putting on the armour on the chariots.
21.18.7	At the end of the Marjalyana (Sutra), eight slave-girls sprinkle water with pitchers.
21.18.8	One should recite three times: "Speech is auspicious, mind is auspicious, pride is auspicious, may that be auspicious for us."
21.18.9	Having struck the arrow with a bamboo, reed, or bamboo stalk, one performs the praise of Indra with it.
21.18.10	It is known that the Udgata plays.
21.18.11	The Udgātṛ priest hands it over to the Prastôtṛ priest, who hands it over to Adhvaryu. The Adhvaryu hands it over to another (priest).
21.18.12	He stands at the southern door of the assembly hall, playing it facing towards the front.
21.19.1	When the Stotra for Indra is taken up, all the voices speak.
21.19.2	The sacrificers cry out.
21.19.3	The wives play the apaghāṭalika, tamba, vīṇā, and piccholla.
21.19.4	The vīṇā players play the conch shells, nāvi, and tūṇa.
21.19.5	The celibate and the prostitute embrace the right doorpost.
21.19.6	The prostitute and the Magadha embrace.
21.19.7	They run in a race.
21.19.8	The Dundubhi drums are beaten with the tail-end.
21.19.9	The Sudra and the Brahmin, the leather-worker, work on the wet, white, round (drum) inside the altar, the Brahmin outside the altar, the Sudra.
21.19.10	The Sudras shout, the Brahmins praise.
21.19.11	"These are the good ones, these have done good." This is said by a Brāhmaṇa. "These are the bad ones, these have not done good." This said by a Śūdra.
21.19.12	The Brāhmaṇa places the skin on the fire-altar after binding it.
21.19.13	"This skin is turned upside down, the armourers."
21.19.14	He instructs each of them, saying, "Do not transgress, do not exceed."
21.19.15	They shoot it without letting it fall too far.
21.19.16	Some say that princes shoot it.
21.19.17	They go a long distance and then return and shoot it.
21.19.18	Here the slave girls place water pots and dance around the Mārgaliya three times, stepping on the right foot, singing this song:
21.19.19	This is the essence of honey, this is Soma, the pressed. Drink here, O son, and be satisfied. This is honey, this is honey. Thus should they sing, says Ashmarathi.
21.19.20	Now about writing.
21.20.1	Two songs should be sung: Hillaka, two songs of Hillaka, Himbini, two songs of Himbini, Hasta-vara, two songs of Hasta-vara, and two songs of Samvatsara.
21.20.2	The tongue sings the hymn of the Vedehimbini, to the tune of the vital breath. May the songs sung by the Sema people come here and bless the sacrificers. The tongue sings the hymns of the Hastavara, to the tune...
21.20.3	Then the verses of the year, the cows are indeed fragrant, the cows are fragrant like frankincense, the cows are the mothers of Dhṛti, may they be abundant here. Indeed, the cows drank the water of the Ganges at Maṅkīra, they drank the Sarasvatī river and bathed in the eastern waters. We are now floating like a boat crossing a stream. Having scattered for you in the middle, like a horse when broken, O Aśvin, speak the truth-leafed one, you who have killed. The fault of what is revealed and what is not done, when the two Rākṣas speak, the village-dweller and the Maṅkīradāśaka, when the village is safe and the bull is suffering, carrying it. This was drunk by Kalmāṣa, this was drunk by Soma, this was drunk with golden pegs, rubbing the thighs.
21.20.4	This is the time for all the verses ending with "haimaha, idam madhu, hillilluv".
21.20.5	Here, the slave girls bring water pots and go according to their purpose.
21.20.6	The praises of the Maheśvara are followed by the sounds of the cows.
21.20.7	The sun, the pure, the purifier of the dust, purifies all the worlds of the gods. The sky and earth, united by milk, yield ghee, the immortal, the pure, purifier of the dust. The sun purifies all worlds of the gods, the pure, purifying of the dust. We have attained the great light, the glory, the depth and the support. The Adhvaryu takes up the sacrificial grass on the grass-blades or on the wooden supports, saying, "The grass is the sacrificial grass."
21.20.8	The Mahāvrata rite is concluded.
21.21.1	The Udayanīya and Prsthyaśamanīya rites have been explained.
21.21.2	Now the arrangement of the Grahas.
21.21.3	In the three Parāsaṃs rites, one takes three Atigrahya Grahas.
21.21.4	The first day he takes it with the formula, "Thou art taken with a formula for the waters, for the plants." The second day with the formula, “For the plants, for thee, for the offspring." The third day with the formula "For the offspring, for thee, to Prajapati."
21.21.5	These are the same, but in the reverse order, in the Sāmans going towards the east.
21.21.6	These are the ones going towards the north, in the reverse order at the Viṣuva.
21.21.7	In the middle of them, he takes up the Sūrya (cup) with the verse, "The well-knowing one, the son of Aditi, has risen in the middle."
21.21.8	On this very day, he takes up Vaishvakarman, the eighth (cup) of the Atigrahya cups, with the verse, “O Vachaspati, O Vishvakarman, you are the protector."
21.21.9	The next day, he takes it up with the verse, "The sun, the great mother, the earth, is the protector."
21.21.10	He takes them up in this way, alternating, until the Mahāvrata (rite).
21.21.11	Together with the great vow, the Prajapati and the five-vessel (offering).
21.21.12	This is the thirty-third day, he takes the Atigrahya (offerings).
21.21.13	Ten Agniya, ten Indra, ten Surya, ten Vaishvkarman, Aditya, and the five-vessels - these are the thirty-three.
21.21.14	And in the place of the Atigrahya there are four Atigrahya vessels placed in the four directions, and a fifth in the middle.
21.21.15	He takes it in the eastern half.
21.21.16	Having recited the verse "Indra, indeed, is the poet," and having taken it with "Thou art taken with a desire to offer," he takes it with "I take thee agreeable to Indra, the possessor of Arkas," and having taken, he places it with "This is thy place, to Indra, the possess or of Arkas."
21.22.2	"You, indeed, we invoke." This is in the latter half.
21.22.3	"This is the most excellent among the worlds, from where the fierce one, the strong one, was born. The newborn one destroys the enemies. Whom all the Uma-s follow." This is in between.
21.22.4	Having brought them into another vessel, he takes them all in the middle one. "They also offer you a sacrifice. All (offer) you a sacrifice."
21.22.5	Now, if one were to offer the oblations separately, one would sever one's own limbs. If one were to offer oblations after collecting them together, the sacrificers would be obstructed. The oblations should be offered after bringing them back to oneself. One gives back one's own parts, not the oblations. It is known that one does not obstruct the sacrifice.
21.22.6	He eats it, saying, "I eat your greatness, I eat your splendour, I eat your arm, I eat your food."
21.22.7	We shall explain the three-fold arrangement of the days.
21.22.8	The first day begins with Indra-Vayu, then with Sukra, then with Agrayan.
21.22.9	Thus arranged, the three-fold days proceed from here onwards, up to the equinox.
21.22.10	Above the equinoctial points, in the ascending and descending nodes.
21.22.11	The head of Venus is the equinoctium.
21.22.12	Now the arrangement of the animals.
21.22.13	They offer the Agniya animal on the day before the Pravargya, and the Sarasvati sheep on the next day.
21.22.14	They offer animals of the same kind every day.
21.23.1	The Surya animal is offered at the equinoctiam.
21.23.2	When they perform in this way, the twelve-day sacrifice, the ten-night sacrifice, the seventeen Ukthyas, and the thirty-two Ekadasin sacrifices are excluded.
21.23.3	Nine days are left over.
21.23.4	In them they offer animals other than cows. In the Ekavimsa (stoma) they offer a Vaisnava calf, in the Trinava an Indra-Agni calf, in the Trayastrimsa a Visvedeva calf, in the first Chandomas a cow belonging to the sky and earth, in the middle one a calf belonging to Vayu, in the last one a she-goat belonging to the Adityas, in the Avakya a she-goat of Mitra-Varuna, in the Mahavrata a bull belonging to Prajapati, in the Uduttarayana an Agni calf.
21.23.5	Thus the Pāṭhīnaka-s.
21.23.6	Now the Kāṭhaka-s.
21.23.7	They perform the Prāyaniya and Udayaniya sacrifices either separately or together.
21.23.8	The Agniya sacrifice is performed in the Rathantara Sāman, the Indraya sacrifice is performed with the Brihat Sāman.
21.23.9	Or the Agniya sacrifice is with the Rathantara Sāmā, the Indraya with the Brihat.
21.23.10	In those very nine, the Gavya.
21.23.11	There is modification.
21.23.12	The Barhaspatya, the Sitaprstha, the Trayastrimsa, the Prisni, the Uttama, the Vaishvakarman, the Rishabha, the Tupara, the Mahāvrat, the Dvirupa, the Ubhayatatya.
21.23.13	The animals for the sacrifice should be offered every day in the manner of Samābhūcaya if the animals are available. Or they may be offered after the Ekādaśina sacrifice. This is the view of the Vājasaneyins.
21.23.14	The Indra-Agni sacrifice should be performed everywhere.
21.24.1	The Gavāmayana is a modification of the Utsargīyana.
21.24.2	It has been said whether to offer or not to offer.
21.24.3	If they were to omit the days, having established the first Prājyā, having taken away the Vasatīvarī waters from the next day, having placed a lump of clay in the Vasatīvari waters, they should offer the Indra-Sāṁnāyya and observe fast.
21.24.4	On the next day, after omitting the days, they should offer a Prajāpati animal.
21.24.5	At the proper time, he offers to Agni Vasumān a cake on eight potsherds and curd dedicated to Indra.
21.24.6	They have a common Svishtakrit offering.
21.24.7	When the Ida has been invoked, they consume the Samnayya after invoking it.
21.24.8	At midday, having performed with the Pasupurodāsa, he should offer a cake on eleven potsherds to Indra-Maruts and a cooked oblation to Indra.
21.24.9	Having established the oblations beginning with the Ahuti, at the third pressing, having performed with Pasu, he should offer the cake on twelve potsherds to Visvedevas and a cooked oblations to Visvedevas.
21.24.10	He should establish the oblations as before.
21.24.11	Or else, in place of these offerings, one may offer the Savanīya oblations.
21.24.12	"One should undertake the rites of the Agnihotra, starting with the words "O Agni, bring the sacrificial twigs"."
21.25.1	Thus, having completed the six months, they abandon the seventh month and perform this rite.
21.25.2	The five lights are let loose before the equinoctial day.
21.25.3	The thirty-three are let loose above, and one light is let loose below.
21.25.4	Some say that only the first and seventh should not be let loose.
21.25.5	But according to some, those days which are due for letting loose should be the one-triad-stotra.
21.25.6	They should omit one of the Stotriya verses. The Utkhas are (omitted).
21.25.7	On the last day of the year, they should omit only one Stotriya verse. Thus what is omitted and what is not omitted becomes equal.
21.25.8	Now, on which day they would omit, on that very day they would come the next day.
21.25.9	He should not do it like that. That is the expansion of the year.
21.25.10	They should go to those (sacrifices) after the Avabhṛtha.
21.25.11	If they were to be released on the twelfth day of the new moon, if they were to be on both sides, then twenty-four.
21.25.12	This is the sacrifice of the grandsons, the sacrifice of cattle, the sacrifice of life, the sacrifice of heaven.
21.25.13	The sacrifice of the release is concluded. The sacrifice of the release.
22.1.1	If the days are not lost, he gives the natural Dakṣiṇās as prescribed.
22.1.2	The Agniṣṭoma is the natural rite for all sacrifices. The first one is the natural rite of the group.
22.1.3	The Jyotiṣṭoma, Gauṣṭoma and Ayusṭoma are the three-fold sacrifices.
22.1.4	The first one is the Agniṣṭoma or the Ukthya. All are prescribed.
22.1.5	The Brhat-pṛṣṭha sacrifice is performed by one who desires to give a thousand cows.
22.1.6	The Agniṣṭoma sacrifice is performed by a person who desires to conquer his enemies. The Viśvajit Agniṣṭoma is performed by one desiring to conquer his enemies and attain the highest position.
22.1.7	The Dakṣiṇā is a thousand cows or as many as are required for the Stotriya verses of the Kratu.
22.1.8	Having given away the eldest son to all the Vedas, he should exchange his knowledge with the teacher.
22.1.9	At the time of giving Dakshina, one should give away all one's possessions, and whatever else is on the land and from the men.
22.1.10	Having taken the best Dakshina, and having decided to go, sitting facing east with the Udumbara branch on the right side, one should say, "Whatever debt I have, whatever I owe, I give it all."
22.1.11	Having decided upon the Rohini constellation, the Vatsacchasi is the same.
22.1.12	Indra's Abhijit Agniṣṭoma is for the sake of victory over the non-Abhijit.
22.1.13	Both the Brhat and Rathantara are performed, with the Parokṣapṛṣṭha.
22.1.14	The Brhat is the Hotr's, and the animals are eleven at the Ekayūpa.
22.1.15	The Dakṣiṇās are a thousand, or twelve hundred, or a hundred.
22.1.16	By the Sarvajit Agniṣṭoma, one obtains everything and conquers everything.
22.2.1	And becomes a food-giver.
22.2.2	His Mahāvrata is recommended as a Prsthya and Arkya.
22.2.3	The Dakṣiṇā is a thousand or twenty-eight.
22.2.4	Four thousand.
22.2.5	The Agniṣṭoma sacrifice with the Jyotiṣṭoma hymn and the Rathantara Sāman is the first one. It is established in the vital airs and food. The Ukthya sacrifice with the Gauh hymn and the Bṛhat Sāman is second. It is established among cattle. The Agniṣṭomas with all the hymns and both the Sāmans is third. One obtains everything and conquers everything. The Agniṣtoma sacrifice with the Bṛhat hymn and the Trirātra (rite) is fourth. One obtains the fruits of the Trirātra.
22.2.6	There are four Sadyaskra sacrifices.
22.2.7	Their special features are as follows:
22.2.8	The first one has Rathantara as the Sama, Brihat as the Sama, or both as the Sama.
22.2.9	In it, desires, rivalry, overcoming the enemy, heaven, or cattle are the objectives.
22.2.10	On the previous day, the Agniya, Saumya, and Barhaspatya are the objectives. Cattle.
22.2.11	Their forms are in the Ekadashina sacrifice.
22.2.12	If one does not obtain them, then one should offer oblations to the eight deities on eight potsherds and also offer cooked rice.
22.2.13	One should hold the Ahavanīya fire.
22.2.14	One should pour clarified butter on the Uttaravedi.
22.2.15	One should eat food mixed with clarified butter.
22.2.16	Placing gold in the mouth, one should sleep between the thighs of one's beloved wife, saying, "Tomorrow I will perform a sacrifice with animals."
22.2.17	The priests are equally yoked.
22.2.18	Having placed them in the proper places, the horses with their milk-fed mares, carrying Soma, run in all directions.
22.2.19	From them whatever ghee comes out, one should pour it into the clarified butter.
22.2.20	In the eastern direction, one should go four yojanas with four-yoked horses, three yojanas to the north with three-yoked horses. In the west, two yojanas with two-yoked horses; in the south, one yojana with one-yoked horse.
22.2.21	One horse-drawn chariot.
22.2.22	The offering is made to the east.
22.2.23	The distance is measured in krośas.
22.2.24	The offering is made to Dakṣiṇā.
22.2.25	A bull with three calves, a bull for buying Soma,
22.3.1	When the sun has risen, the Avabhṛtha rite is performed before sunset.
22.3.2	One should sleep three times during the Upasads. One should proceed after sleeping or not at all. The Upasads are not performed in the afternoon.
22.3.3	The altar is made of barley.
22.3.4	The northern altar is made of the barley-stalks.
22.3.5	The Havirdhana is to be ascended.
22.3.6	The Sadas is measured.
22.3.7	The sacrificial post is made of wood, or with a wooden top, or with a wood-cutter's axe, or with a plough-share.
22.3.8	The ladle is made of wood.
22.3.9	One who is going to perform the Agniṣṭoma sacrifice should take the Vasatīvarī water from the house of the sacrificer.
22.3.10	At the Savaniya (Sāmnīya) time, he offers the animals along with the Savaniya (Soma). The Savaniya is dedicated to Agni-Soma, and the Anubandhya is dedicated to Agni.
22.3.11	In place of the Agni-Soma, there is the Agni-Soma with eleven potsherds. In place of the Anubandhyā, there is the Maitrāvaruṇyā cake.
22.3.12	At the time of giving Dakṣiṇās, a white horse is given as Dakṣiṇā.
22.3.13	One should give it to a brother or a relative.
22.3.14	Having taken a brahmin who is an object of hatred, he should give a horse with a golden bridle.
22.3.15	If that is not available, a white cow.
22.3.16	For a year, he should avoid washing the feet, meat, women, lying, sleeping on a higher bed, and anointing and massaging.
22.3.17	That is the consecration.
22.3.18	If one is unable to do it for a year, one should do it for twelve days.
22.4.1	By this the northern ones are explained.
22.4.2	One who desires food, offspring, or cattle should perform the Agnistoma-sāman with fifteen verses for one who is free from disease.
22.4.3	The one who is inferior to the one who is inferior is the one who is below.
22.4.4	His two Pavamāna verses are the eighteenth.
22.4.5	The horse-riding Soma-drinking one, the one who holds curd, and the one who is three Krośas away, have said at the end.
22.4.6	The cow for the Soma-purchasing is a female.
22.4.7	The sacrificial post is cut at the top.
22.4.8	The altar is made of barley.
22.4.9	The barley-heap is the Uttaravedi.
22.4.10	Bharadvaja is the Hotṛ.
22.4.11	Viśvavajja is the Śilpa, the fourth, with all the Stotras, all the Stomas, and all the Dakṣiṇās.
22.4.12	He goes to the origin of all food.
22.4.13	One who is practising sorcery should offer a sacrifice.
22.4.14	The two chariots are the Havirdhāna carts.
22.4.15	The sacrificial post is made of teak or of bamboo, with a tip of stone.
22.4.16	The two Savanabhya and Adhiṣavaṇaphalaka are the two Savanabhyas and Adhiṣaṇaphalaka.
22.4.17	The animal to Agni Rudravat is red.
22.4.18	The two Upaṃśu and Antaryama are the two Upaṃsu and Antaryama.
22.4.19	The sacrificial grass is made of reeds.
22.4.20	The Prastara is made of Udumbara wood.
22.4.21	The kindling wood is made of Vibhitaka wood.
22.4.22	The enclosing sticks are made of arrows.
22.4.23	The priests wear red turbans and red garments, and are girt with girdles.
22.4.24	The sacrificial fees are nine-nine, with ears, with horns, with holes, with lumps.
22.4.25	At the time of the sacrificial fees they should be beaten with thorns.
22.4.26	If one wishes to kill them, one should make the Rathantara the Pavamana, and the Brihat the Prishtha. If one wishes to conquer them, one should do the opposite.
22.4.27	He should go to the farthest end and not return, as before. He should perform the Brahma-sāman on the floating (sāman).
22.4.28	The Agniṣṭoma of Prajapati is performed in one place, and one goes to the farthest end, indicating all sins.
22.4.29	He gives twenty-four cows as Dakṣiṇā.
22.5.1	There are three Stotras of speech.
22.5.2	The two Agniṣṭoma sacrifices are performed at the beginning, with the Rathantara Sāman. The Atiratra is performed at the end, with all Stotras.
22.5.3	In it, all the verses, all the Sāmans and all the Yajus are employed.
22.5.4	In the course of the wandering of the Vrātyas, the Vrātyastomas are performed with the Ukthas and the Rathantara Sāmānas. The second Agniṣṭoma is performed.
22.5.5	The turban, the whip, the bow-string, the chariot, the road, the cart, the horse, the mule, the pair of horses, the black garment, the black blanket, the sheep, the goat, the skin, the gold coin, the silver coin.
22.5.6	These belong to the householder.
22.5.7	The woolen garments, the leather garments, and the other garments.
22.5.8	Two pairs of garments, two pairs of shoes.
22.5.9	The garments of the enemies are worn.
22.5.10	Thirty-three times thirty-three (the Brāhmaṇas) approach the householder.
22.5.11	These are the gifts.
22.5.12	Or they may give sixty-six cows.
22.5.13	But some say that whatever is their wealth, they should give that, for that is the wealth of the Vratyas.
22.5.14	The sixteen-fold sacrifice is for the condemned, the twice-sixteen-fold for the inferior, the upward-increasing for the superior, and the four-sixteen-folds for all.
22.5.15	The Utkhya sacrifice of the Adityas is the first of those who dwell in heaven.
22.5.16	They go away from their evil enemies.
22.5.17	The Agniṣṭoma is the first, the other is the second, the Sādhyas' is the third, the Maruts' is the fourth, the thirty-third is the fifth.
22.5.18	One who desires heaven conquers his enemy with the Abhibhuva, one who desires to conquer his enemy conquers him with the Vinut.
22.6.1	The Citti Stoma is for one who desires offspring.
22.6.2	A Brahman who desires Brahmic lustre should perform the Agniṣṭoma sacrifice with the Gayatri metre and the Rathantara Sāman.
22.6.3	The Agniṣṭoma sacrifices are the first sacrifices.
22.6.4	By the first one, a Brahman attains Brahmic lustre and by the second one, a Kshatriya attains a fierce and invincible kingdom, but not like one with many cattle.
22.6.5	One who is not purified by the Trivṛt Agniṣṭoma Agniṣṭoma should offer.
22.6.6	The Purorucas are dedicated to Agni, the Subrahmaṇyā is dedicated to Agni.
22.6.7	One recites in praise of Agni, the Dakṣiṇā is a goat and gold.
22.6.8	Having performed this Catuṣṭoma, one who is afflicted by hearing, afflicted by dice, afflicted by desire, or afflicted by walking should offer.
22.6.9	The horse is black. That should be given to the Brahman.
22.6.10-11	One who desires to be free from disease, who desires food, who desires offspring, or who desires cattle, should be made to perform the Agniṣṭoma Sāman in the Vāyavyā Sūktas. One who desires brahmic glory should be made to offer the Vāravantīya Agniṣṭoma in the Revatī Sūktas. One who desires a village should be made to make the Catuṣṭoma. Some say that the Apravṛjya Sūktas are not to be performed.
22.6.12	One who desires food should offer the Trivṛt sacrifice.
22.6.13	One who desires strength should offer the Pañcadaśa sacrifice.
22.6.14	One should offer the Agniṣṭoma sacrifice with the Saptādaśa (Stoma) if one has deviated from the Yajna or if one has deviates from any particular rite.
22.6.15	The Trivṛt is for one who speaks without food.
22.6.16	The Pañcadaśā is for one who has been defeated and is well-known.
22.6.17	The Saptādaśā is for eating food without any disease.
22.6.18	The Ekavimsa is for one who desires offspring, the Gāndhārīka, the Kalīṅga, the Magadhas, the Pāraskaras, or the Sauvīras.
22.6.19	The Trinava is for one who seeks strength.
22.6.20	The Trayastrimsa is for one who wishes for heaven, or it is the Jyotistoma itself.
22.6.21	At the Agniṣṭoma, one should desire all desires.
22.7.1	The four Trivṛt Agniṣṭomas have the Rathantara Sāman.
22.7.2	For those who desire a village, one should perform the first sacrifice.
22.7.3	Some say that the morning pressing is the prescribed one.
22.7.4	The white horse is the sacrificial fee, which should be given to the Brahman.
22.7.5	The second sacrifice is dedicated to Brihaspati.
22.7.6	A Brahman who desires Vedic splendor or who desires to be a Purohita, or for whom they should consecrate as the chief priest, should perform this sacrifice.
22.7.7	The Hotṛ priest is Parisañjī, Arun, Mimira, Triśukra.
22.7.8	"He takes up the Barhaspatya draught for grasping excess, saying, "O Brihaspati, do thou accept this."
22.7.9	The Barhaspatya animal is for censure.
22.7.10	At the morning pressing, when the Nārāśaṃsa verses have been recited, he directs eleven Dakṣiṇās.
22.7.11	At the Madhyamdina Savana, while seated on the skin of a black antelope, he anoints him with clarified butter, with the verse, "O Brihaspati, you and Indra are the lords of the divine and the earthly. Grant wealth to the one who praises. May you protect us always with your blessings."
22.7.12	At the Madhyamdine Savana, there are twelve horses, and eleven at the third Savana.
22.7.13	He thus removes both of them.
22.7.14	Or eight at the morning pressing, eleven at the midday pressing, twelve at the third pressing, or all at the midday pressing.
22.7.15	They lead the horse to the third pressing.
22.7.16	Or one should meditate on the other two pressings, or not at all.
22.7.17	Having performed the praise of the third pressing, one should sacrifice against an enemy.
22.7.18	The rest is common with the hawk.
22.7.19	The horse is the Dakṣiṇā. It should be given to the Brahman.
22.7.20	The fourth is the Stoma of Sunaskarna, with all one's wealth.
22.7.21	One who desires death should offer this sacrifice, one who desires to go to heaven without illness.
22.7.22	The animal to be sacrificed is a sheep, green in color, to be blamed.
22.7.23	Cooked food is the Dakṣinā.
22.7.24	When the Ārbhava is being praised, he lies down with his head towards the south, covered with a piece of cloth made of cotton, and says, "O Brahmanas, please complete my sacrifice."
22.7.25	It concludes at that very moment.
22.7.26	One who desires prosperity should offer a sacrifice with the Bhuukthya hymn and the Rathantara Sama.
22.7.27	The Dakshina is a cow.
22.8.1	The merit of one who performs the Cāturmāsya sacrifice is inexhaustible.
22.8.2	The Trivṛt Agniṣṭoma is the Viśvadevya (sacrifice).
22.8.3	The animal sacrifice is Viśvadevīya and the Anūbandhya is dedicated to Brhaspati.
22.8.4	One offers the Viśvadeviya oblations at the morning pressing.
22.8.5	The Sviṣṭakṛt and the Idā are common.
22.8.6	They do not erect the sacrificial post, nor do they place the Uttaravedi.
22.8.7	They employ the animal in the enclosing sticks or in the sacrificial grass.
22.8.8	They erect the sacrificial posts towards the north and sow the northern altar.
22.8.9	Then, in the fourth month, there is the Agniṣṭoma-Ukthya or the Ukthya-Agniṣṭoma in the Varuṇa-grahas.
22.8.10	The Marut-s are the animals, the Varuna-s are the second. The Maitravaruni is the Anubandhya.
22.8.11	The oblations for the Varuna-prastha-s are like those for the Visvedevas.
22.8.12	They perform with the Marjalis and the Karambha-vessels.
22.8.13	Then in the fourth month, the Agniṣṭoma Ukthya Atirātra is performed for the Sākamedhas.
22.8.14	The animal sacrifice to Agni is on the first day, to Indra-Agni on the second, to the eleven Rudras on the third, to Prajapati on the fourth, and to Surya on the fifth.
22.8.15	The morning Soma-pressing is performed with the Anīkavata hymn on the first day; the midday pressing with the Sāntapana hymn.
22.8.16	When the garments are removed, they perform with the Grhamedhiya hymn.
22.8.17	When they have performed the morning Prastara and the Pūrṇadārvī at the northern pressing, they perform with it.
22.8.18	The Kraidins perform the Prātahsavana rites, the Svātavas the Madhyāndinasavana rites, and the Mahāhavis the Tṛtīyasavana rites.
22.8.19	When the Nārāśaṃsa oblations have been placed, and the Marjālīya oblations have been sprinkled, they perform the rites of the Pitryajña.
22.8.20	Having performed the rites with the Traiyambaka hymns, they return and perform the rites with the Aditya hymns.
22.9.1	Then in the four months, the Jyotiragniṣṭoma is performed for Śunāsīrīya in the world.
22.9.2	The Vāyavya animal is offered at the end of the Āṣāḍha month.
22.9.3	The offerings to Śunāsīriya are like those to Viśve Devā.
22.9.4	The intermediate rites are like those of the Cāturmāsya.
22.9.5	Everywhere, one rises from the Avabhṛtha wearing the same garment.
22.9.6	Every day he gives fifty-five cows as Dakṣiṇā, and twelve hundred as the last.
22.9.7	The calves of the cows according to the season and according to their own (season) in the four months, at the third pressing together with their mothers.
22.9.8	One who desires a village should offer an Upāhvya Agniṣṭoma with an Anirukta (Sūkta).
22.9.9	Some say that the Prātḥasavana is Nirukta.
22.9.10	The white horse is the Dakṣiṇā, to be given to the Brahman.
22.9.11	One desiring heaven should perform the Agniṣṭoma sacrifice with the Bṛhat Sāman and the Rtapeyya (Sāman).
22.9.12	There are six consecratory rites and nine Upasads.
22.9.13	One observes the Ghṛtavrata.
22.9.14	The Vrata is observed until the first Angulikaṇḍa (part of the Soma) is bought.
22.9.15	One observes Vrata with each subsequent part of the Soma.
22.9.16	At night, he sleeps facing the Āhavanīya fire, facing the sun during the day.
22.9.17	Having uttered the truth, they proceed; speaking the truth, they consume.
22.9.18	The Soma-filled Udumbara vessel with four corners should be given to a dear Brahmin of the same Gotra.
22.9.19	By performing the Agniṣṭoma sacrifice with much gold, one attains the world of cattle and conquers the worlds of light.
22.9.20	He gives twelve Māṇas of gold at the Diksaniyā (rite), twice as much at the Prāyaniyā.
22.9.21	Thus, henceforth, in the Atithya (rite), in the Upavasatha rites, in the Vapa of the Agniṣomīya (rite), and in the Vapa rite of the Savanīya (rite) at the Savanīyīya rite, at the morning Savana.
22.9.22	When the Nārāśaṃsa hymns are recited, he gives a bull as a gift.
22.10.1	At the Udayanīya, Anūbandhya, and Udasanīya sacrifices, he gives a golden garland to the Udgātṛ priest, and a six-plowed or twelve-plowed field at the Stotra of the Yajñāyajñiya sacrifice.
22.10.2-5	A Brahmana desiring Brahmic glory should perform the Agniṣṭoma sacrifice with the Trivṛt stoma, the Rathantara Sāman. A Rajanya desiring valour should perform the Indra-stoma sacrifice with the Pañcadaśa stoma, the Ukthya Sāman, and the Bṛhat Sāman. The Viśa desiring cattle should perform the Agnișṭoma sacrifice with seventeen stomas, the Kānva-Rathantara Sāman, the Agniṣṭuta Sāman. This is the order of the stomas. The Prātaḥsavana is said to be Pratiṣṭha.
22.10.6	One who desires food, offspring, cattle, or who has been overtaken by prosperity, should be sacrificed to with the hymns of the Rathantara and Brihat, and with the hymns of both, by one who desires food, one who desires offspring, one who desires cattle.
22.10.7	They milk a hundred times.
22.10.8	These are the Dakshina.
22.10.9	The gifts are for the Vaishya.
22.10.10	Or with the hymns of Nitama Ishra at the third pressing.
22.10.11	They pour out the Soma for the pressing.
22.10.12	The priests smell (the Soma) but do not consume it.
22.10.13	They consume it at the Stotra of the Acchāvāka.
22.10.14	The Hotrakas desire to be invited in the Brahman.
22.10.15	Both Adhvaryus and all the Camasādhvaryus chant for the Acchāvaaka.
22.10.16	The Ekādaśinī is performed facing east.
22.10.17	As long as the sacrificial post and the altar are being raised.
22.10.18	A white she-goat with young is the sacrificial fee.
22.10.19	By means of the Marut-stotra, the king and the royal priest attain union.
22.10.20	Now this is the Rajat (rite) for one who desires to attain kingship but does not succeed.
22.10.21	One who desires prosperity and food, one who desires his own kingdom, one who desires stability,
22.11.1-5	One who has received much and thinks like a crow should perform this sacrifice. Some say that one who has performed a sacrifice for one who is not eligible should perform this sacrifice.
22.11.6	Let the Gandharvas and Apsarasas be pleased, at the morning pressing.
22.11.7	When the Naraśamsa oblations have been placed, the Pūtabhṛt priest offers the Anusamya oblation.
22.11.8	Let the Gandharvas, the gods, be pleased, at midday; let the Gandharvas the fathers be pleased, at third pressing.
22.11.9	One who has an enemy should offer the Anusamyu oblation.
22.11.10	The Stotra-stotra is the Stotriya.
22.11.11	It is known that the one who is being destroyed by this is destroyed by his enemy.
22.11.12	One who desires to be all-sided should say, "May everything be mine."
22.11.13	In the middle is the Garhapatya fire, and on each side are the Soma-fires. The Trivrit (three-fold) is in the east, the Pañcadaśa (fifteen-fold) in the south, the Saptadaśa (seventeen-fold) is on the west, and the Ekavimśa (twenty-one-fold) is north.
22.11.14	The Rāśi and Arayu (rites) and the Catuṣṭoma (rite) for one desiring food.
22.11.15	He gives the heap of grain in the east and the Arayu of grain in the north.
22.11.16	One desiring cattle performs the Gotama Catuṣṭomas.
22.11.17	The Utkhya is the one with sixteen verses. The one following it is the one with eight verses.
22.11.18	They are like animals of neuter gender.
22.11.19	One desiring cattle should offer the Udhi and Valabhid.
22.11.20	Having offered the Udhi, one should offer the Valabhid in the next year.
22.11.21	One attains the interval with the Agniyeya with eight potsherds.
22.11.22	At both places, one gives complete Dakshina with the Gayatri verses.
22.12.1	Eight each.
22.12.2	One who desires to be honoured should honour with two (cows).
22.12.3	Both of them are equal.
22.12.4	The Dakṣiṇā for them is a chariot with four horses.
22.12.5	All the horses are of Śatakri.
22.12.6	He is Rukmi, Pravī, and Anśumān, adorned with all ornaments.
22.12.7	His retinue is Vaiyagha, Dvaip, Dhanvadhi, Ārks, and Kavaca.
22.12.8	He is armed, with his chariot harnessed, and surrounded by his followers.
22.12.9	It is known that he is adorned with garlands and is honoured.
22.12.10	If one desires to go to the heavenly worlds through the two wings with fire-kindling, then one should perform the Agniṣṭoma sacrifice.
22.12.11-16	If the king is engaged in a battle, one should perform the Agniṣṭoma sacrifice with the Ṛṣabha Sāman and the Rathantara Sāman. The Dakṣiṇā should be twelve hundred. One who desires heaven should offer with the Vyoman Sāman. Both the Bṛhat and Rathantara Sāmans are used. The entire (sacrifice) becomes seventeenfold. The Agniṣṭoma Sāman is twenty-onefold.
22.12.17	One who desires sovereignty should perform the Goṣava sacrifice with thirty-six Ukthyas, with the Rathantara Sāman, with the Brihat Sāman, or with both.
22.12.18	The Kanva Rathantara is the Pavamāna Sāman.
22.12.19	The Dakṣiṇā is ten thousand.
22.12.20	Having been anointed with the Brihat hymn, he is anointed with the Pratiṣṭha hymn. He is born as Reva, suddenly grown, the most powerful among the warriors, the protector of the age, the great one, the one who has attained greatness, the one who is established in the kingdom and the country. I anoint you with the sovereignty of Prajapati, the supreme lord.
22.13.1	Having worshipped thus for a year, one becomes a cow-herder.
22.13.2	One should drink water and cut grass, approach one's mother, sister, or a woman of the same clan.
22.13.3	Wherever one finds oneself, one should stay there.
22.13.4	One conquers infinite glory with the Stoma of the Maruts.
22.13.5	One should perform this for two or three persons.
22.13.6	For Agni, the one desiring food.
22.13.7	For Indra and Agni, the one desirous of heaven.
22.13.8	Indra and Agni, with the Stoma of Indra, with the Ukthya, with the Brihat Sāman, the royal priest, desirous of power.
22.13.9	The bull is the Dakṣiṇā.
22.13.10	One should offer to Indra and Agni with the Stoma, the royal priest and the Purohita, both of them having one prosperity.
22.13.11	The king enters the class of the Brahmanas, the lustre and the Brahmic glory.
22.13.12	By means of the group, he conquers his evil enemy, and by that all the enemies are conquered.
22.13.13	By means, of the thunderbolt, of sixteen, one who is practising sorcery, by means of the clamp, one who is practicing sorcery.
22.13.14	The rite is explained by means of the hawk in regard to these two.
22.13.15	Thirteen Atiratras.
22.13.16	One who desires the Jyotishtoma and the Rddhi.
22.13.17	One who desires to prosper should perform the Sarvas toma.
22.13.18	Animals are of eleven kinds.
22.13.19	If animals were to fall from their proper state, one would attain everything and conquer everything by performing the Aptoryama.
22.13.20	One who desires offspring should perform the Navasaptasahasra.
22.13.21	One who is a son of Jyesthina should perform the Visuvata to attain lordship.
22.13.22	One who wishes to prosper should perform a Gos toma.
22.13.23	One who seeks heaven should perform the Ayusha.
22.13.24	One who desires cattle should offer the Abhijita sacrifice.
22.13.25	One who has an enemy should offer the Vishvajit sacrifice.
22.13.26	One desiring food should offer the Trivrit sacrifice.
22.13.27	One desirous of strength should offer the Pañchadashin sacrifice.
22.13.28	One wanting progeny should offer the Saptadashin sacrifice. 
22.13.29	One desiring prosperity should offer the Ekavimshin sacrifice.
22.14.1	The Atiratras beginning with the two-day sacrifice are performed without deficiency up to the eleven-day sacrifice.
22.14.2	The Kalpa is explained with the twelve-day sacrifice performed without deficiency.
22.14.3	The first day of the two-day sacrifice is presided over by Indra and Vayu, and the second day by Shukra.
22.14.4	The first day of the three-day sacrifice is also the first day of the Agranyan sacrifice.
22.14.5	The first and second days of the four-day sacrifice are also the first and second days respectively of the Indra and Vayu sacrifice.
22.14.6	The second and third days of the five-day sacrifice are presided over by Shukra. The first day is presided over by Shukratman.
22.14.7	In the six-day sacrifice, the days are repeated twice.
22.14.8	The first two days of the seven-day sacrifice are the first and second respectively of the Indra-Vayu sacrifice.
22.14.9	This is the beginning of the eighth night.
22.14.10	In the ninth night, it turns three times.
22.14.11	This is the beginning of tenth night. This is the beginning for Indra and Vayu.
22.14.12	This is for the eleventh night. This is for Shukra.
22.14.13	In the twelfth night, it turns four times.
22.14.14	The Grahaṇa of the Sodashin is in the second day after the first day.
22.14.15	The Grahya is to be performed on the fourth day of the three-day sacrifice, and on the fourth day in the case of the four-day and other sacrifices.
22.14.16	Four are the two-day sacrifices.
22.14.17	The first one is the Vyushti-two-day sacrifice, which has been explained.
22.14.18	If the Angirasa sacrifice is to be performed, it should be performed as if it were a Hina sacrifice.
22.14.19	The Jyotistoma Agnistoma is the first, and the Atiratra is the second, both being performed with all Stotras.
22.14.20	He who desires cattle should offer the sacrifice to Agni in the forest of monkeys. He obtains whatever he desires and becomes free from disease.
22.14.21	The Jyotiṣṭoma or Agnistoma is performed first, followed by the Atiratra.
22.14.22	One who desires food should offer the sacrifice in the month of Caitra. He becomes established in food and life.
22.14.23	The Agnistoma is offered first, followed by Atiratra.
22.15.1	By the Gārgya three-night (rite) one attains progeny, one attains the earth, one conquers the heavenly world, one stands firm in these worlds, one ascends the Vasus, the Rudras and the Adityas.
22.15.2	The consecration is done with the three-night (rites).
22.15.3	The Soma-purchasing cow is either a reddish-brown or a tawny-coloured one, either one-year-old or two-year-old.
22.15.4	The Agniṣṭoma, Ukthya and Atiratra are the three-night rites.
22.15.5	The Rathantara, Vamadevya and Brihat are the Prsthas.
22.15.6	The Dakshina is a thousand.
22.15.7	In the first day, he gives three hundred and thirty. So also in the second and third days.
22.15.8	The excess is a thousand. The Rohini is destroyed. It is of two forms, on both sides or on one side.
22.15.9	The same is said as the best and auspicious.
22.15.10	The Udbhrishti is the principal (animal) on the first day.
22.15.11	He recites over it, "O Agni, thou hast pierced a thousand of the strong one's skin. May it bring us a thousand, with offspring and cattle. May wealth again enter me."
22.15.12	The Vehad is the second.
22.15.13	She is invoked with the verse, "Thou art the essence of water and plants. Thou hast become the essence. May I be blessed with a thousandfold progeny and cattle. May prosperity again enter me."
22.15.14	The third verse is for the dwarf.
22.15.15	He recites over it, "Thou art the foundation of a thousand, thou art the Vaisnava dwarf. Thou bestow on us a thousand, together with progeny and cattle. May prosperity again enter me."
22.15.16	It is said that it should be placed north of the Agnihotra fire.
22.16.1	Having taken the Veda to the south, having taken the sacrificial post and the Āhavanīya fire to the north of the Veda, he should make the sacrificer smell the Dronakalaśa, saying, "Smell the pot." At the Āgnidhra or Havirdhāna.
22.16.2	Having taken it towards the north, he places the Tarpaṇa on its back.
22.16.3	In that (Tarpaṇa) the form of the Dhishnyas is woven.
22.16.4	Then, if she stands facing the west, one should offer with the verse, "You both strive for victory."
22.16.5	One offers the forms that are present in her.
22.16.6	Some prescribe the Aśvamedhika (rites).
22.16.7	Having brought the western corner of the assembly hall, one should recite the verse, "O Ida, you are singing," standing near it.
22.16.8	Having abandoned knowledge, one attains it.
22.16.9	If it goes east without a man, one should know that this sacrificer has won the auspicious world. If it goes south, he will soon depart from this world. If it is west, he will have plenty of grain. If it is north, he will be better off in this world.
22.16.10	The sacrificer recites over it, "May it lead me to the heavenly world."
22.16.11	Having brought together the three sets of thirty, he should give it to the Brahman, the Hotṛ, the Udgātṛ, the Unnetṛ, or the Adhvaryu.
22.16.12	Having made two Unnetṛs, he should give to the one who does not announce.
22.16.13	Or a double share to the Brahman, a third to the Agnīdh.
22.16.14	Or to all the members of the assembly.
22.16.15	Or, having excluded her, she may be made to submit. It has been said that he who does not know this and accepts her,
22.16.16	Having bought her with gold weighing a hundred māṇas, he releases her in the cowpen of the sacrificer.
22.17.1	Ten cows are milked on the first day, twenty on the second, and thirty on the third.
22.17.2	Food cooked should be given on the first day, gold, cow, cloth on the second day, and on the third day, a chariot, horse, elephant, man.
22.17.3	One should not give anything more than a thousand.
22.17.4	Some say one should give.
22.17.5	If one gives, when the Anūbandhyāvpayā has been offered, one should give the Dakṣiṇās, not less than ten.
22.17.6	If one were to give one cow to ten, one should give ten cows to them.
22.17.7	If two to five, if five to two.
22.17.8	In this way up to a hundred or a thousand.
22.17.9	Having taken the highest gift, one should go away at dawn or with a cow.
22.17.10	You are the ocean, the universal expanse, Brahma, the firstborn of the gods, the truth. You are food, you are bright, you are light, you are immortality. We know you, O Shabali, shining forth. That earth is your foot, the sky is your foot, heaven is your foot, ocean is your foot. This is you, O Shabeli, we know you. Do you milk the grass and strength, the stream of wealth, O Shabeli. The most powerful among creatures, following the herd, svāhā. He offers the Shabeli oblation.
22.18.1-6	The Agniṣṭoma, Ukthya and Atiratra are the three sacrifices of the horse-sacrifice. The Rāthantara, Mahānāmni and Bṛhat are the three Sāmans. One who desires to be the lord of all should offer the sacrifice. One who is desirous of sovereignty should offer the three-day sacrifice. Three Atiratras with three Vṛtras and sixteen Sāmans. The Rāthantara and Vāmadevya are the two Sāmans. 
22.18.7	The three days of Gargī are explained as the three days of the northern ones.
22.18.8	One desiring cattle should perform the Chandomā Pavamāna.
22.18.9	One obtains cattle by the Antarvasu.
22.18.10	One desiring heaven should perform the Parāka.
22.18.11	There are four four-day rites.
22.18.12	The first four-day rite belongs to Atri.
22.18.13	It is said that four heroes are born in his family.
22.18.14	The Agniṣṭoma, the Ukthya, the Atiratra and the four Caturṣṭomas of Atri.
22.18.15	It has been said that Atri is the deity of faith.
22.18.16	For prosperity, Jamadagni performed this sacrifice.
22.18.17	The Upavasatha days are with Pūrṇāhomas.
22.18.18	The Agniya is one-pot, the Asvinya two-pot, the Vaishnavya three-pot, the Saumya four-pot, the Savitrya five-pot, the Dhartrya six-pot, the Marutya seven-pot, the Barhspatya eight-pot, the Maitra nine-pot, the Varunya ten-pot, the Indra eleven-pot, and the Vaishvadeva twelve-pot.
22.18.19	The Darvihoma offerings are made.
22.19.1	Agni, the Hotar, the Adhvara, the father, the all-shining, for the sake of Indra, the gods, may they enjoy the oblation. Svāhā. The two divine Asvins, the drinkers of sweet mead, have mixed together in this sacrifice for the sacrificer. O divine Viṣṇu, today, for the sake this sacrifice, may you follow the sacrificer. Today, O divine Soma, the bearer of seed, may you be present in this sacrifice for this sacrificer. O god Savitr, the well-bestowing, today, in this sacrifice, may it be well for the sacrificer, O god Dhātā, the well-giver, today, in the sacrifice, may you be for the sacrificer! O divine pressing stones, today, in sacrifice, may you speak the sweet-sounding word for the sacrificer today. O divine Aditi, today, for this sacrifice, may the sacrificer be in your presence. O divine Anumati, today, for sacrifice, may the sacrifice be in your presence, O divine Aditi. The heavenly waters, bowing to the path, today, in his sacrifice, may the one who is seated in the assembly, the one who is blessed with offspring, the one who delights in the strength of the gods, be for the sacrificers. Today, in this sacrifice for him, may the sacrificers be for him. O divine Tvashtri, the bearer of good seed, today, in that sacrifice, may he be for the sacrificier.
22.19.2	"Indra to the gods, may they enjoy the oblation, svāhā." Thus one recites at every place.
22.20.1	Vasīshtha's serpent: If one is weak, one should do this.
22.20.2	Vishvamitra's victory: One who has an enemy should sacrifice.
22.20.3	Five five-day rites.
22.20.4	It has been said that the year was once this.
22.20.5	The second is the union.
22.20.6	He obtains whatever desire he may desire.
22.20.7	Agniṣṭoma, three Ukthyas, and Atiratra.
22.20.8	Two Savanas are Trivrit, one is Pañcadaśa, two are Pañcadaśas, one is Saptadaśa, two Saptadas, one is Ekavimśa, two Ekavimśas, one Trinava, two Trinavas, one Trayastrimsa.
22.20.9	By the five-month-long sacrifice, one becomes greater than many.
22.20.10	One performs the animal sacrifice for a year.
22.20.11	They bring seventeen cows with calves, five years old, seventeen cows with calves with three calves, not yet milked.
22.20.12	They release the cows that have been sprinkled and placed around the fire, and they offer the cows with calves.
22.20.13	We shall describe the colours.
22.20.14	They perform the consecration after having offered the oblations of the Rajivā, Navanīta, Prisni, Aruna, Pisangī and Sarangī cows.
22.20.15	The Trivṛt Agniṣṭoma, Pañcadaśa Ukthya, Saptadaśa Ukthhya, Pañcadaša Ukthya and Saptadaśa Atiratra are the Savanīya sacrifices.
22.20.16	These are the Savanēya sacrifices.
22.20.17	They offer three oblations each day, five on the last day.
22.20.18	The Uksanas are dedicated to Indra-Maruts, the Vatsaryas to the Maruts.
22.20.19	If the Uksanas are suspected of being Rudras,
22.21.1	One should offer a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Rudravat.
22.21.2	If one falls into water, one should offer a cake to Apamnapta.
22.21.3	If one becomes unconscious, one should offer rice to Nirriti.
22.21.4	If he is dead or destroyed, a rice-cake on one potsherd to the Earth.
22.21.5	If he is a bull or a ram, a rice- cake on one potshered to Brhaspati.
22.21.6	If he perishes, a rice-kake on one potshere to Vayu.
22.21.7	If he wins by means of the army, an eleven-potshered rice-cake to Indra the Victorious.
22.21.8	If they lead him away by force, an eleven- potshered rice-kake to Indra the Victor.
22.21.9-13	If he dies of blindness, then the Sūrya-oblation. If he dies of falling into a pit, then the Viṣṇu-oblation. If he dies of an unknown disease, then the Prajāpati-oblation. The oblation is made with twelve potfuls of rice. The fourth is the internal Mahāvrata. One should perform the sacrifice if one has an enemy.
22.21.14	The Trivṛt Agniṣṭoma, the Pañcadaśa Ukthya, the Mahāvrata, the Saptadaśa Ukthhya, the Ekavimśa Atiratra.
22.21.15	The Puruṣamedha is the fifth.
22.21.16	The days are like the five of the autumnal season.
22.21.17	On the first day he gives ten thousand, on the second a hundred thousand, on the third an arbud and a nyarbud. As in the first two, so in the last two.
22.22.1	Four are the six-day (sacrifices).
22.22.2	The first is for the Sadhyas.
22.22.3	It has been said that the Sadhyas, desiring heaven,
22.22.4	The second is for the seasons, for one desiring offspring.
22.22.5	The six-day sacrifice is the Prsthya.
22.22.6	With the third, above, with the Trikakru, one obtains whatever desire one may desire.
22.22.7	The Trivṛt Agniṣṭoma, the Pañcadaśa Ukthya, the Saptadaśa Ukthhya, the Jyotiṣṭoma, Gauḥ, Āyuḥ, and the Atiratra.
22.22.8	By the fourth one, one is born with progeny and cattle.
22.22.9	The Abhiasaṅgya Pañcaha, the Viśvajit, and the Atiraтра.
22.22.10	Eight Saptarātras.
22.22.11	One desiring cattle should perform the Kauśurubinda.
22.22.12	It has been explained.
22.22.13	One who desires heaven should perform the second one of the seven Rsis.
22.22.14	The Mahavrata-Atriatra with the six-day Prsthya.
22.22.15	One who desires offspring should perform the Prajapati.
22.22.16	The Maha-vrata-Atlra with the six-days Prsthya and the Prajapati
22.22.17	One who desires cattle should perform the Chandoma-Pavamana.
22.22.18	The Maha vrata-Atltra with the six-dats Prsthya, the Chandoma Pavamana and the
22.22.19	One desiring food should perform it with the Prsthya Stoma.
22.22.20	The Mahavrata sacrifice with six days and an Atiratra.
22.23.1	One desiring food should perform the Sattra Samiti.
22.23.2	The days are like the Kausirubindas.
22.23.3	One desiring strength should perform the Indra sacrifice.
22.23.4	The Jyotirs, Gaur, Ayus, Abhijit, Visvajit, Sarvajit, Sarvas toma and Atiratra.
22.23.5	By the seven-night rite of Janaka, one attains progeny, prosperity, and heaven. One gains victory in these worlds and stands firm in them.
22.23.6	The four Trivṛt days with Agniṣṭoma as the first, Viśvajit, Mahāvrata, Jyotiṣṭoma, Vaisvānara, and Atiratra.
22.23.7	By the eight-night rite, one desires brahmic glory. It has been explained.
22.23.8	There are three nine-night rites.
22.23.9-13	One desiring longevity should perform the first one. The six-day Prsthya sacrifice, the Jyotistoma, the Gauri, the Ayus and the Atiratra are the second one. One desiring Brahmic glory should perform the second one. The Trivrit Agniṣṭoma, the Pañcadaśa Ukthya, the Saptadaśa Ukthhya, the Abhiasaṅgya, the five-day Visvajit and the Atiratras are the third one. One desirous of food should perform the Śalali-Piśaṅga.
22.23.14	Jyotiragaurayura, Jyotiragaurayauryura, Urayagaurajyotiratiratra.
22.23.15	Four ten-night rituals.
22.23.16	One who is about to initiate the ten-night ritual should mentally follow the Dashotr and offer oblations with grahas in the Ahavaniya fire.
22.23.17	The first one is Trikakut, which becomes Trikakut for all beings and equals.
22.23.18	The Trivṛt Agniṣṭoma, the Pañcadaśa Ukthya, the Trivṛt Agnistoma, the Saptadaśa Agnistoma, and the Ekavimśa Ukthhya, the Saptadaša Agnistoma, Triṇava Agnistoma, Trayastrimsa Ukthya, Triṇava Agniṣṭoma and Viśvajit, all-back Atiratra.
22.24.1	being honoured by the gods.
22.24.2	The Triṣṭoma Agniṣṭoma, the Jyotiṣṭoma Uktha, the Triṣṭoma Agnistoma, the Abhijit Agnistoma, and the Gaura Uktha Abhijit Agnistomah, the Viśvajit Agnistoma and the Āyus Uktha Viśvajit Agniṣṭoma and the Sarvas toma Atiratra.
22.24.3-6	One who performs the sacrifice with the Chandomas attains the person, cattle, energy and strength. The Abhirasangya sacrifice consists of six days, three Chandomas and an Atiratra. Some perform the Abhirasangya with five days, four Chandomas and Atiratra. Translation: One who performs the Chandomas sacrifice attains the person, animals, energy and strength." The Abhirasanga sacrifice consists of six nights, three Chandomasas and an Atiratras. Some perform Abhirasanga with five nights, four Chandomasas and Atiratras. One becomes greater than many by Kauśurubinda.
22.24.7	Three Agniṣṭomas with three stomas, three Ukthas with five stomas, three with seven stomas, and an Ekavimśa Atiratra.
22.24.8	The Pauṇḍarīka is an eleven-day sacrifice with a thousand cows as Dakṣiṇā.
22.24.9	Every day he gives a thousand cows, and at the end a thousand horses or a hundred horses.
22.24.10	By that he attains all prosperity, goes to the highest heaven, conquers, and stands firm in these worlds.
22.24.11	The Abhiasaṅgya sacrifice is a six-day ritual with four Stoma-s, an Agniṣṭoma, three Chāndogya-s, and an Atiratra.
22.24.12	Then the five-day Ekāha, the four Chāndogya, the Mahāvrata, the Viśvajit, the Sarvapṛṣṭha and the Atiratra.
22.25.1	Now the Savanas have been explained. The Savana of Brhaspati.
22.25.2	A Vaishya desiring prosperity.
22.25.3	He offers seven oblations beginning with Agni.
22.25.4	A spotted heifer is offered to Maruts.
22.25.5	In front of her, having spread the skin of a bull with its neck towards the east and its hair towards the north, he anoints the sacrificer seated on it with curds.
22.25.6	A brahmin desiring brahminical splendour.
22.25.7	He offers eight oblations beginning with Agni.
22.25.8	Having purified ghee with gold in front of the Svishtakrit, he consecrates the one seated on the black antelope skin with that.
22.25.9	Then the Soma-drinking (rite).
22.25.10	Whatever is done in the Rajasuya except Soma, all that is done.
22.25.11	Having established the Maitravaruna and the Brhaspati, he offers the Soma-drinking Soma-cow.
22.25.12	In front of her, he consecrates with the Soma-cups, reciting, "May I be victorious in battles, O Agni, O Indra, O Soma, O Varuna, O Rudra, O Bhaga, O Vishnu, O Yama, O Aryaman, O Mitra, O Vayu, O Savitar, O Sarasvati, O Pusan, O Dhruva, O Indra, and O Agni."
22.25.13	Having established the remaining (sacrifices), he performs the Saṃsṛpa offerings, the offerings to the directions, the animal-sacrifice with two animals, and the offerings to the Satyadūtas.
22.25.14	One desiring cattle should perform the Pṛthivāsvāmi sacrifice.
22.25.15	Whatever is the Rajasuya, the unsurpassed, all that becomes.
22.25.16	Before Maitravaruni and Svishtakrit, he consecrates with the Narashansa hymns, "Those who are my fifty."
22.25.17	The subsequent part is the same as the previous one, except for the animal sacrifice.
22.25.18	The Go Sava has been explained.
22.25.19	One desiring food should perform the Odanasava.
22.25.20	One who is sacrificing on Rohini should cook the oblation at dawn.
22.25.21	The offering is made with Darvi.
22.25.22	Having offered four oblations to the Sun, the Lion, and the Tiger, one should offer oblations to the Rice with the mantras "You are the king, you are the Viraja."
22.26.1	They prepare the churning sticks - the Brahmana churns clarified butter, the Rajanya churns milk, the Vaishya churns curd, and the Shudra churns water.
22.26.2	"For Indra, thee, the shining one, I offer the shining one." Having offered the oblation of flour and ghee, having recited the formula, "Thou art shining," he gives it to the sacrificer, saying, "I give this to you."
22.26.3	Having received it, he eats it, saying, "May my face be shining."
22.26.4	Thus, the taking of the others is in accordance with their respective characteristics.
22.26.5	Having consumed all the offerings, the sacrificer gives gold to the Brahman, a bow-length to the Rajanya, eight to the Vaishya, and a maasaka-mandalu to the Shudra.
22.26.6	The sacrificer consumes the remaining rice.
22.26.7	"This Agni, for life and lustre, do thou bestow." So he recites while the sacrificer is drinking.
22.26.8	He binds the gold to the sacrificer.
22.26.9	"Thou art life, thou art all-life." So he mutters while the gold is being bound.
22.26.10	They take up the Grahas of water, those who prepare the churning sticks, "The juice that moves in water," with these mantras one by one.
22.26.11	With them, mixed together, he sprinkles him, saying, "May the wind be swift as thought."
22.26.12	Having recited this formula, he consecrates him with three handfuls of darbha grass, saying, "You are like the ocean, O friend."
22.26.13	It is known that the Avabhrtha rite is performed.
22.26.14	A chariot is stationed in front of the sacrificial post.
22.26.15	The sacrificer approaches him with the verse, "Do thou approach."
22.26.16	He recites over the one ascending, "Stand up, O Mitra-enhancer."
22.26.17	He touches the wheels of the chariot with the verse, "Angka and Nyanka."
22.26.18	With the five verses, "Stand up O Vritra-slayer," he recites over the ascended one.
22.26.19	It is known that one who performs this sacrifice becomes one who is seen with pleasure and is worthy of being seen.
22.27.1	The Odanasava is concluded.
22.27.2	The Pañcaśāradīya has been explained.
22.27.3	So also the Agniṣṭoma.
22.27.4	Its Purorucas are:
22.27.5	"O Agni, the immortal, the life-giving, the immortal, O Agni, the life-giver," the second of the Indra-Vayu, the third of the Maitrāvaruṇa, the fourth of the Aśvin, the fifth of the Sukra and Manthin, the sixth of the Āgrayana.
22.27.6	He consecrates the other (cup) for Agni.
22.27.7	The Dhruva is always (consecrated).
22.27.8	He consecrates the cups for Indra-Agni and for the Visve Dev.
22.27.9	"The three (cups) for the Maruts are called "Agni-Sri," the last one for Indra is called "Shruti-Shrutakrni," the three (cups) of the Adityagraha are called "Visva, Aditi," the last (cup) of the Savitra is called "Savitri."
22.27.10	He consecrates (the cup) for the Visvedevas.
22.27.11	The Pātnīvata is eternal.
22.27.12	The Hāriyojana is connected.
22.27.13	One who desires Indra, one who desires Indra, should offer a sacrifice with the Indra-stotra and Ukthya, one who desires power or strength.
22.27.14	Indra is the leader of the Indra-stotras.
22.27.15	"Stand, O Hari, for whose bull?" The third is of Indra-Vayu, the fourth of Mitra-Varuna, the fifth of Asvins, the sixth of Shukra and Manthin, the seventh of Aggrayan.
22.27.16	Of the Nitya Ukthy.
22.27.17	It is yoked to the Dhruva, Indra-Agni and Visvedevas.
22.27.18	The Marutvatis are always yoked to the Maheendras.
22.27.19	The three verses beginning with "Come to us with all your blessings" are the last of the Adityagraha and Savitra.
22.27.20	The Niyunkti is performed for the Vaishvadev and Patnivat offerings.
22.27.21	The Hariyajana is always performed.
22.27.22	The Aptoryama has been explained.
22.28.1	When the people of the country have assembled for the consecration of the king, having prepared a mound and having kindled the fire on it, and having spread it around, he dwells there.
22.28.2	Having offered two oblations to the Brahmana at the rising of the sun, he establishes the Udumbara stool for the sacrificer, saying, "You are the king, you are the Viraj."
22.28.3	The king ascends it.
22.28.4	He recites the verse, "Ascending the highest," while ascending.
22.28.5	Here he gives a boon.
22.28.6	While seated on it, he shaves his hair with the verse, "May Savitr shave your hair with the razor."
22.28.7	He recites, "May your hair not fall out," while the hair is being scattered.
22.28.8	Having collected them, he places them on a bundle of darbha grass with the verse, "This is your place of deposit."
22.28.9	Then he anoints him with milk mixed with ghee, with the verse, "May thy arms be strong." On the head, with the verse "The line of thy head."
22.28.10	Having offered seven oblations with the verse, "This is a tiger in the fire," he spreads on the skin of a tiger, with its neck towards the east and with the hair upwards, on the place for the sacrificer, with the verses, "Thou art heaven, thou art earth."
22.28.11	The king sits on it.
22.28.12	"The tiger is the tiger," he recites while seated.
22.28.13	Then he anoints him with the Dūrvā grass, with the words, "The divine waters," following the sequence of the verses.
22.28.14	Having recited, "The reddish-brown wolf," he extends his arms with the words, "For the strong one." He says, "For the strength you have created for Indra."
22.28.15	The chariot is stationed in front of the fire.
22.28.16	The king approaches it with the words, "Go forward."
22.28.17	He recites the verse, "Stand, O slayer of Vritra," while ascending.
22.28.18	He touches the chariot wheels with the words, "Angka and Nyanka," referring to the wings.
22.28.19	He recites to the priest, "Salutations to you, O Rishi."
22.28.20	To the charioteer, he says, "Stand, chariot!"
22.28.21	"He takes the rays (of the sun) with the formula, 'To the rays.'
22.28.22	With the six formulas, 'Stand up, O slayer of Vritra,' he mounts (the chariot).
22.28.23	Having recited the two formulas, 'Protect me with thy army,' and 'Protect me with thine army,' he gazes at the rising sun with the three subsequent formulas, 'May it come up.'
22.28.24	He gazes at the people with the formula, "May they be endowed with food."
22.28.25	The consecration of the king is concluded.
22.28.26	The Vighna sacrifice has been explained.
22.28.27	The Savas are concluded.
23.1.1	They perform the Sattra with twenty-four Paramas.
23.1.2	The Kalpa of them is explained by the Sattra of twelve days, which were before the year, by the Gavam Ayana and the others.
23.1.3	There are Atiratras on both sides.
23.1.4	Having performed the third fifteen-night sacrifice, they perform the sacrifice of the Kundapāyin.
23.1.5	By the eleven-night sacrifice of the seasons, they create offspring, they obtain offspring, they obtain progeny, they become endowed with progeny.
23.1.6	The Jyotiṣṭoma, the Atiratra, the six-day Pañcadaśa, the three Chāndogya and the Atiratra.
23.1.7	Two thirteen-night sacrifices.
23.1.8	They obtain whatever desire they may desire.
23.1.9	The Atiratra is the sixth day of the Pañcadaśa sacrifice, the Atiratra is a six-day sacrifice with all Stotras, the Atiratras are four Chandomas.
23.1.10	Those who desire Brahmic glory should perform this.
23.1.11	The Atira-tra is the first and last day of the twelve-day sacrifice, the Mahavrata is the tenth day, the Atirat-ra is the last day.
23.1.12	Three fourteen-day sacrifices.
23.1.13-17	Whatever desire they may desire, they attain it. The Atiratra is the first, then the Prastara, then the Atiratra, then the Prastarin, then the Atira, then the Atistra, then the Atitra, then the Atiatra, then the Atiastra, then the Atiara, then the Prastra, then the Prastrin, then the Prasta, then the Prastri, then the Prastre, then the Praster, then the Prasty, then the Prastry, then the Prastro, then the Prastru, then the Prasto, then the Prastu, then the Prastor, then the Prastur, then the Prastran, then the Prastram, then the Prastan, then the Prastras, then the Prastrat, then the Prastat, then the Prastas, then the Prastata, then the Prastare, then the Prastrar, then the Prastrato, then the Prastrata, then the Prastrate, then the Prastray, then the Prastay, then the Prastag, then the Prastad, then the Prastva, then the Prastav, then the Prastava, then the Prastab, then the Prastam, then the Prastap, then the Prastamo, then the Prastato, then the Prastā, then the Praṣṭā, then the Prașta, then the Praśṭā, then Praṣṭāṃ, then the Praṭā, then Prāṭā, then Pratā, then Prātā, then Prata, then Prataṃ, then Prataḥ, then Pratañca, then Prataṅga, then Prataṇḍa, then Prataṇa, then Pratama, then Pratamam, then Pratamayam, then Pratamaya, then Pratamayo, then
23.1.18	The Atiratra is the Goayushi. The twelve-day sacrifice has ten days and an Atiratra.
23.2.1	Four fifteen-day sacrifices.
23.2.2	One goes to heaven.
23.2.3	The Prāyaniya on the new moon day, the Mahāvrata on the eighth day, and the Udayaniya on the full moon day. This is the reverse.
23.2.4	The Atiratra is a six-day sacrifice with the Prsthya, the Mahā-vrata is a six- day sacrifice with the Avṛtta, and the Atiratra is another six-day sacrifice.
23.2.5	Those who desire Brahmic glory should perform the second one.
23.2.6	The Atiratra, the Trivṛt, the Agniṣṭoma, the Jyotiṣṭoma, and the Ayus, the three-day Prsthya, the six-day Ayus, the Jyotiştoma, and the Atiratra.
23.2.7	In the third one, both desires are fulfilled, the one who performs the Sattra and the one who performs it without a Sattra.
23.2.8	The Trivṛt Agniṣṭoma, the Jyotiṣṭoma, and the Ayus are the three days of the twelve-day sacrifice. The Dasahā is followed by an Atiratra.
23.2.9	They are born with offspring and cattle through the fourth (day).
23.2.10	The Atiratra, the Jyotiştoma, and the Ayuş are the three days. The Dasahä is followed by an Atirātra.
23.2.11	Those who desire strength should perform the sixteen-day sacrifice dedicated to Indra.
23.2.12	These are the great sacrifices.
23.2.13	Those who desire food should perform the seventeen-night sacrifice.
23.2.14	The Atiratra, Jyotiṣṭoma, Gauri, Ayus, Gauri, and Ayus, the five-day, the twelve-day, the ten-day, and the Atiratra.
23.2.15	Those who want cattle should perform the eighteen-night sacrifice. The Atiratra, Abhijit, the six-day, the eleven-day, the three-day, the nine-day, the six-night, the three-night, the nine-night, the six-month, the three-month, the nine-month, the six-year, the three-year, and the nine-year.
23.2.16	The Atiraтра, Abhijit, and the six-day.
23.2.17	By the Ekānnāviṃśa-tīra-tra (rite) one is born with progeny and cattle.
23.2.18	These are the same as the Samāhavrata rites.
23.2.19	By the Viṃśa-ti-rātra (rite) they become Brahmavārcasins and eaters of food.
23.2.20	The Atiratra, Abhiplava, Ṣaḍaha, Abhijit, Viśvajit, the twelve days of the Dvādaśāha, and the Atiratra at the end - these are the Ekānnatiṃśa-trā.
23.3.1	There are two Ekānnati-ṃśa-tra rites.
23.3.2	They obtain whatever desire they may desire.
23.3.3	The Atiratra, the Abhiplava, the six-day Abhiplava, and the Atiratra are the two Abhiplavas and the Atiratras.
23.3.4	Those who desire brahminical splendour should perform the second one.
23.3.5	Soma-Pusan is the animal to be offered for atonement.
23.3.6	The verses of Manu are the Sāmidhenī verses.
23.3.7	They perform the Nidāgha.
23.3.8	They destroy darkness.
23.3.9	The Atiratra is the concluding one. The six-day Prajapatya sacrifice has three Svarasama days, the Divakīrtiya day, three Svarasama, the returning Prajapatya six-day sacrifice and the Atiratra.
23.3.10	By means of the twenty-two-day sacrifice, they obtain food from these worlds and from the sun.
23.3.11	The Atiratra, Jyotiṣṭoma, Gauriṣṭoma, Ayustisṭoma, the three-day Abhijit, the six-day Abhijit and the twelve-day Abhijit are the ten days of the Mahavrata and the Atiratra.
23.3.12	Those who desire cattle should perform the twenty-three-day sacrifice.
23.3.13	The Atiratra, the Jyotiṣṭoṃa, the Gauriṣṭoṃna, the Ayustisṭoṃa and the five-day Abhijit; the six-day and twelve-day Abhijits are the ten days and the Atiratras.
23.3.14	Two (sacrifices) of twenty-four days.
23.3.15	They obtain whatever desire they desire.
23.3.16	The Atiratra, two Abhijit, the twelve days of the twelve-day sacrifice, and the Atiratra.
23.4.1	Those who perform the Caturvimśati-day sacrifice with the Atiratra attain heaven.
23.4.2	The Atiratra is the twenty-fourth, the Ukthya is the beginning, the Trivṛt is the Stoma of the Prstha, the six-day (rite), the thirty-three days, the thirty-three unspecified, the thirty-nine specified, two Ekavimsa, the thirty-nin, the thirty-third day, the specified thirty-three, the unspecified, the Stoma of Prstha, six days, the Trivrt day, the unspecified, Jyotistoma, Vaivasvata, Atiratra.
23.4.3	Those who desire cattle should perform the twenty-five-day sacrifice.
23.4.4	The Atiratra, two Abhijit, twelve days of the twelve-day sacrifice, the Mahāvrata and the Atiratra.
23.4.5	Those who desire heaven should perform the twenty six-day sacrifice. 
23.4.6	The Atiratras, the Goāyusī, two Abhijitas, twelve days of twelve-day sacrifice and the Atiratras.
23.4.7-11	Those who desire food should perform the twenty-seven-day sacrifice. The Atiratra, Jyotiṣṭoma, Gauri, Ayus, three-day, two Abhijit, twelve days of the twelve-day sacrifice, and Atiratra - this is the twenty-eight-day sacrifice. Those who desire cattle should perform the twenty eight-day sacrifice. These are the same as the Mahavrata sacrifices. By performing the thirty-one-day sacrifice, one attains unlimited prosperity.
23.4.12	The Atiratra, Jyotiṣṭoma, Gauriṣṭoma, Ayus, Ayus, Pañcaha, two Abhijit, the ten days of the twelve-day sacrifice and the Atiratra.
23.4.13	Those who desire food should perform the thirty-night sacrifice.
23.4.14	The Atiratra, three Abhijitas, the ten days, and the Atirattra.
23.5.1	Those who seek food should perform the Ekātrimśa sacrifice.
23.5.2-6	These are the great sacrifices. Those who desire prosperity should perform the thirty-two-night sacrifice. The Atiratra, Goayushi, three Abhijit, twelve nights of the twelve-night sacrifice, and the Atiratra - these are the thirty-three-night sacrifices. They attain whatever desire they may have.
23.5.7	The Atiratra (sacrifice) is performed for three days, the Visvajit for five days, the Atiratra for one day, the Dasahina for twelve days, and the Atiratra (again).
23.5.8	Those who desire Brahmic glory should perform this sacrifice.
23.5.9	The Atiratra, the Abhijit, the six-day Abhijit, the Atiratra, and the six-day Atiratra, are the twelve days of the twelve-day Soma sacrifice. The Mahavrata and the Atiratra are the thirteenth and fourteenth days.
23.5.10	Those who desire prosperity should perform the third one.
23.5.11	The Atiratra, three five-day periods, the Atiratras, and the Atiratras.
23.5.12	Those who desire the senses should perform the Caturvimśatirātra.
23.5.13	The Atiratra, Jyotiṣṭoma, Gauri, Ayus, three days, three Abhijit, twelve days, Dasahā, Mahāvrata, and Atiratra - this is the Pañcatriṃśatirātrā.
23.6.1	Those who desire cattle should perform the Pañcatrimśatirātram.
23.6.2	The Atiratra, Jyotiṣṭoma, Gauriṣṭoma, Ayusṭoma, Pañcaha, three Abhijit, twelve days of the Dvādaśāha, and Atiratra at the end.
23.6.3	Those who desire heaven should perform the Satatrimśa-rite.
23.6.4	Atiratra, four Abhijit, twelve Dvādaśāhās, and Atirattra at the end. This is the Saptavimśa-rite
23.6.5	Those who desire food should perform the Saptavimsa-rite.
23.6.6	These are the great sacrifices.
23.6.7	Those who desire cattle should perform the thirty-eight nights.
23.6.8	The Atirātra, Goāyusī, four Abhijit, twelve days of the twelve-day sacrifice, and the Atirātra.
23.6.9	By the forty-one nights, they conquer infinite prosperity.
23.6.10	The Atiratra, Jyotiṣṭoma, Gauriṣṭoma, Ayustisṭoma, three days, four Abhijit sacrifices, twelve days, and the Atiratra at the end.
23.6.11	They attain the highest Viraj with a forty-day sacrifice.
23.6.12	These are the Mahavrata sacrifices.
23.7.1	There are fifty-seven days of Viddha rites.
23.7.2	By the first one, they turn away from evil and their enemies.
23.7.3	The three Atiratras, the three Trivṛt Agniṣṭomas, the Atiratra, the ten Ukthyas of fifteen stomas, the tenth day with sixteen stomas, the Atiratras, twelve Ukthyas of seventeen stomas, the Ukthyas of twenty-one stomas, the Ekavimsa Uktha, the Atirattra, the twelve Ukthyas, the Atirattras, the Ekavimsas, the Atirastra, the twelve Ukthya of twenty-one, the Atiratta, the twelve Ukthas of twenty-one.
23.7.4	The second is the Yama Atiratra.
23.7.5	The prosperity of these gods, Mitra, Varuna, Dhātar, Aryaman, Amsha, Bhaga, Indra, and Vivasvan, they attain.
23.7.6	Two Atiratra (sacrifices), two Abhijit (sacrifices), the Goayushi (sacrifices), and two Abhijit (sacri- fices), the Abhijit and the Vishvajit (sacrifices) are the Atiratras, one Abhijit (sacrifice), the Sarvas- toma (sacrifice), the Navasaptasomas (sacrifices) and the Atiratras are the twelve days, the Mahavrata (sacrifice) and the Atira- tra (sacrifice).
23.7.7	The third is the anointing and unguent.
23.7.8	When they do not know, when they know, and when they know and know again, they place in themselves that which is auspicious.
23.7.9	At the morning pressing with Guggula, at the midday pressing with Saugandhika, and at the third pressing with Pāṭūdrava.
23.7.10	The Atiratra, four Abhijit-days, the Atiratra with all Stoma, two Abhijit-days and the Atiratra at the end of the twelve-day Soma-sacrifice.
23.7.11	The fourth is equal to a year.
23.7.12	They attain the prosperity of the year.
23.7.13	The Atiratra is the twenty-fourth, the Ukthya is the beginning, the Trivrt, the three Abhijit, the three Svarasama, the Divakirtti day, the three Svarasa, the Visvajit, the single Abhijit, the return, the Ayus, the Gaur, the twelve days, the Mahavrata and the Atiratra.
23.8.1	The fifth is Savitar's Kakubha.
23.8.2	They lead to the production of all food.
23.8.3	The Atiratra is nine days, with three-fold oblations, with the Agniṣṭoma at the beginning, six days, then three Agniṣṭomas with the Ukthya in between, then nine with fifteen oblations, then nine with seventeen oblations, then again nine with twenty-one oblations, then twelve days, the Mahāvrata and the Atiratra.
23.8.4	Those who desire prosperity should perform the sixth one.
23.8.5	The Atirātra, four Abhijit, the Mahāvrata, two Abhijit, the twelve-day sacrifice, ten days, and the Atirātra.
23.8.6	With the seventh one, the offspring become superior and most vigorous.
23.8.7	The Atratra, six Abhijit, the ten days of the twelve-day sacrfice, the Mahāvra, and the Atratra.
23.8.8	Those who desire prosperity should offer for sixty-one nights.
23.8.9	"He offers with the resolve, 'May the god Varuna grant me the divine sacrifice.'"
23.8.10	The Atiratra is the twenty-fourth. The Ukthya is the beginning. The Trivrt is the three-day Prastara. The three Abhijit days, the three Svarasama days, the Divakirtti day, the three Svarasama days, the Visvajit, the reversed Prastara, the six-day, the reversed Abhijit, the Ayus, the Gau, the twelve-day, the ten days, the Mahavrata, and the Atiratra.
23.8.11	The gods, by means of a hundred nights, attain to the full span of life and become more powerful.
23.8.12	The Atiratra, Jyotiṣṭoma, Gauri, Ayus, three days, fourteen Abhiplvas, twelve days, Mahāvrata, and Atiratra.
23.8.13	They proceed together, or they perform together.
23.9.1	By the course of the Adityas, they go to the world of heaven, to the world of the progeny, to the world, and conquer the world of heaven. They stand in these worlds.
23.9.2	The course of the cows has been explained.
23.9.3	All are floating.
23.9.4	The months are three-fold, fifteen-fold, and middle-back.
23.9.5	In the place of Abhijit, the Trivrit; in the place of Vishvajit, the Pañchadash Indrastoma Ukthya.
23.9.6	After that, having gone to the Prsthya and Abhiplava, the Agniṣṭomas of the twelve-day Dasātra are extended, the Trivṛt.
23.9.7	The month is filled with the Udbhid and Valabhid, being two less.
23.9.8	Having approached the Ayus and the Go, the Chandomas are completed in thirty-nine days, forty-four days, forty days, thirty-six days, thirty-two days, thirty days, two twenty-eight days, twenty-five days, twenty-four days.
23.9.9	The month is completed with two less by the Mahavrata and Udayaniyas.
23.9.10	By this the Angirasa-sutra is explained.
23.9.11	Those who desire heaven should perform.
23.9.12	The three-fold ones are the Abhiplvas.
23.9.13	The months are performed in front of the Prishthya (satra). Before the vernal equinox, the Prishthyas are performed above the equinox. The fifteen-fold ones are performed above the vernal equinox.
23.9.14-15	The Chandomas, the Urdhvastomas, the Catu-vimsa, the Pañca-vimsa, two Aṣṭāvimsa, the Trimsa, the Dva-trimśa, the Ṣaṭ-trimśa the Catvāriṃśa, the Catuścatvāriṃśat, the Aṣṭa-catvāriṃsa, the Maha-vrata and the Udayaniya are the two months less by two.
23.9.16	Now some (performers) perform the Prāgvargīya and the Ākṣyanta rites of the Adityas, and some perform the Abhiplāva and the Ākhyan rites of the Aṅgiras. They say that what is left over from the Prāg-vargīya-Abhiplāva rites is performed in the rites of the Aṣṭaukas.
23.10.1	By means of the rites of the Dṛti and Vātavat, they obtain whatever desire they may desire.
23.10.2	Two Atiratras are performed on both sides.
23.10.3	The months are of three, fifteen, seventeen, twenty-one, twenty-nine, and thirty-three days.
23.10.4	Then comes the equinox and the great vow.
23.10.5	These are the northern months, beginning with thirty-three and ending with three.
23.10.6	In the Kundapayin solstice, they are initiated for a month.
23.10.7	Having performed the Pravargya rite, having bought the king, having bound him, they deposit him.
23.10.8	Having performed the twelve Upasads, they perform the Havyayajnas.
23.10.9	They offer Agnihotra for a month, they perform the Darsa-Pūrṇamāsa sacrifices for a month, the Vaisvadeva sacrifice for a month, Varuna-prastha sacrifices for a month; the Sāka-medha sacrifices for a month and the Śunāsīrīya sacrifice for a month. They perform the Trivṛt sacrifice for a month; for the Pañcadaśa sacrifice for a month and for the Saptadaśa sacrifice for another month; for the Ekavimśa sacrifice for one month and for the Trinava sacrifice for another month. They perform for the Aṣṭādaśa sacrifice for three months and for the Trayastriṃśa sacrifice for twelve days. The Mahāvrata and the Atiratra are the twelfth month.
23.10.10	All of them become successful in all their undertakings.
23.10.11	They eat with Atasaruka bowls.
23.10.12	The Hotṛ is the Adhvaryu, the Potr, the Udgātṛ, the Nestr, the Acchavaka, the Maitrāvaruṇa, the Brahman, the Pratihartṛ, the Prastôtṛ, the Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin, the Gravastut, the Pratiprasthātṛ, the Agnīdhra, the Unnetr, the householder, the householder, Subrahmaṇya, Subrahmaṇaṇya.
23.11.1	Those who desire heaven perform austerities and approach (the fire).
23.11.2	The consecration lasts for a year, and the Upasads last for a year.
23.11.3	He offers for four months each with each Upasad mantra.
23.11.4	One builds the fire without Upasads.
23.11.5	Two months each, and one each for the Citis, the last four.
23.11.6	Three months each for the four-teated, three-teated, two-teated and one-teated cows.
23.11.7	Those who have given birth to a calf observe the vow for a year.
23.11.8	They attain the prosperity of Prajapati by the twelve-year vow of Prajapati.
23.11.9	Three years are of three months, three years are of fifteen months, three years of seventeen months, and three years of twenty-one months.
23.11.10	Those who desire heaven should follow this very (rite).
23.11.11	The Navatritas, the Navapankadas, the Navasaptadas, the Navavimsas, the Shaktyas, the thirty-six years, the Tarasa Purorasha, the Adhvaryu Kapya, the householder Agastya - these are the rites.
23.11.12	When the day is over, the householder goes hunting.
23.11.13	The oblations of those animals which he kills are made of flour.
23.11.14	By this very (rite) Shaktya Gouriviti obtained the oblation of flour and prosperity in the world of gods and the human world.
23.11.15	The twenty-five years are of three kinds, the twenty-five years of fifteen kinds, the twenty five years of seventeen kinds, the twentyfive years of nineteen kinds.
23.12.1	In the hundred years of the Sadhyas, the cows and men go to heaven.
23.12.2	In the thousand years of Agni, they go to the origin of all food.
23.12.3	The Atiratra (sacrifice) is followed by a thousand (cows) and the Trivrt (series of sacrifices). The Atiratra is the last (sacrifice).
23.12.4	The three Saravasvatasatra-s are the first of Mitra-Varuna, the second of Indra-Agni and the third of Aryaman.
23.12.5	They are initiated at the bathing of Sarasvati.
23.12.6	Having performed the Prayaniya (sacrifice), having bought the king, having put on the robe, they deposit it.
23.12.7	Having performed the twelve Upasads, they approach the Pravargya Atiratra. On that day they take away the calves.
23.12.8	When the Pravargya is over, they perform the Sannayya sacrifice.
23.12.9	When it is over, the Adhvaryu throws a chip towards the east.
23.12.10	Where it falls, there is the Garhapatya.
23.12.11	Therefore he proceeds with thirty-six steps towards the east.
23.12.12	That is the Ahavaniya.
23.12.13	The Sadas and the Havirdhana sheds and the Agnidhra shed are circular.
23.12.14	The Havirdhana shed is made of ashvattha wood and the Agnidhrā shed is also made of ashvatthā wood.
23.12.15	The sacrificial post is made of the Ulūkhala tree and is erected after being soaked.
23.12.16	They do not dig up the ground.
23.12.17	They go to the full moon with the offering of the New Moon.
23.12.18	At the full moon they perform the Goshtoma with the Brihat-saman.
23.12.19	When that is completed, they perform the sacrifice with the full moon.
23.12.20	They go to the dark fortnight with the offering of full moon.
23.12.21	At the new moon they perform the Ayus-stoma with the Rathantara-saman.
23.12.22	When he is settled, they perform the sacrifice with the Samnayya (oblation).
23.12.23	They proceed in this way, alternating, on the southern bank of the Sarasvati.
23.13.1	They go forward, crying out.
23.13.2	Having offered a cake on twelve potsherds to Apamnaptrya at the confluence of the Drishadvati, they proceed.
23.13.3	They release a bull among ten cows.
23.13.4	When they make ten hundreds, then they perform the Udyat sacrifice. When they make a hundred thousand, or when a householder dies, or when all his wealth is lost, or when they reach the confluence of the Plakṣa and the Sarasvatī.
23.13.5	Having reached the confluence of the Sarasvatī and the Plakṣā, they perform an Isti sacrifice to Agni Kama.
23.13.6	Having given a horse, a woman, and a cow to the Dhenuka, they enter the Yamuna for the Avabhrtha.
23.13.7	In the second, the Trivrit, the Brihaspati-sava, the Goayushi, and the Indrakukshi.
23.13.8	Other creatures become more powerful.
23.13.9	In the third, the Jyoti, the Gau, the Ayana, the Vishvajit, the Abhijit, and the Indra-kukshi.
23.13.10	They ascend the path of Aryaman and go to the world of the gods.
23.13.11	One should protect the cow of a brahmin for a year for the one from Darshva.
23.13.12	For a year, one should not kindle the fire in the ashes.
23.13.13	Having kindled the fire, having performed the Parinama rite, having gone to the southern bank of the Drishadvati, having offered the Agniyeष्टाकपाल oblation, one should go to the other side of the Shamya.
23.13.14	He goes to the Yamuna for the Tri-Plaksha bath.
23.13.15	Then he becomes invisible to humans.
23.14.1	By the Turāyana (rite) one attains all prosperity.
23.14.2	One who is not initiated releases the black antelope skin and attains human prosperity.
23.14.3	By the penance one attains divine prosperity.
23.14.4	One observes the vow of eating the remnants of oblations.
23.14.5	He offers the Iṣṭi-s of the Sāmnāyya-s for a year, the Agniya with eight potsherds, the Indra with eleven potsherds, and the Vaiśvadeva with twelve potsherds.
23.14.6	Some say that it is a cake.
23.14.7	At the morning pressing, all (the Iṣṭi) are offered.
23.14.8	By the sacrifice of the serpents, one destroys old age. Their light is like that of the Ādityas.
23.14.9	The entire year is of ten months, the twelfth month is the Viṣuva.
23.14.10	The Gavāmayana of the Ādityas and the Aṅgiras is for three years.
23.14.11	They go to the Prajāti and Bhūmānas, conquering heaven, they stand firm in these worlds.
23.14.12	They attain the prosperity of Prajapati with the thousand-year-long rite of Prajapati.
23.14.13	The Atiratra is a thousand, the Trivṛt year, the Atiratra.
23.14.14	The five hundred and fifty are the Trivṛt; the five hundred and fifty the Pañcadaśa; the five hundred fifty the Saptadaśa; the twenty-five the Ekavimśa; the thousand years of the Viśvasṛj.
23.14.15	By this the Viśvasrjs created this world. Because they created the world, therefore they are Viśvasṛjs. The world follows them.
23.14.16	The creators of the world, the first to perform the sacrifice, went on for a thousand years, proceeding with the offspring. Then was born the guardian of the world, golden, the bird, named Brahma.
23.14.17	Those who attain this, those who attain this, go to the union with Brahma, to the world of Brahma.
24.1.1	We shall explain the sacrifice.
24.1.2	He is prescribed for the three castes, namely, the Brāhmaṇa, the Kṣatriya and the Vaiśya.
24.1.3	He is prescribed by the three Vedas.
24.1.4	By the Ṛgveda, the Yajurveda and the Sāmaveda.
24.1.5	The Darśa-Pūrṇamāsa sacrifices are performed by the Ṛg and Yajur Vedas.
24.1.6	The Agnihotra sacrifice is performed by the Yajur Veda.
24.1.7	The Agniṣṭoma sacrifice is performed by all (the three Vedas).
24.1.8	The Ṛg and Sāma Vedas are performed loudly.
24.1.9	With the Yajurveda in a low voice.
24.1.10	Except when there is a question, a reply, a challenge, or an order.
24.1.11	The Anūcya is recited between the Sāmidhenī verses.
24.1.12	The Mandre is recited before the two Ajyabhāga offerings at the morning pressing.
24.1.13	The Madhyame is recited before the Sviṣṭakṛt offering at the midday pressing.
24.1.14	The Krushta is recited after the remaining offerings at the third pressing.
24.1.15	The Vaksandrava is also like that.
24.1.16	The Hotṛ performs with the Ṛgveda.
24.1.17	The Udgātṛ with the Sāmaveda.
24.1.18	The Adhvaryu with the Yajurveda.
24.1.19	All (the priests) with the Atharvaveda.
24.1.20	One should perform according to the injunction or in the absence of it, according to the prohibition.
24.1.21	The priestly duties of the Brāhmaṇas.
24.1.22	The fires of all sacrifices are kindled only once.
24.1.23	When the offering is being made, one should offer clarified butter and honey.
24.1.24	The Adhvaryu is the performer.
24.1.25	The Juhu is the vessel.
24.1.26	When the Sruva is busy, (the Juhu) is used.
24.1.27	The offering is made in the Ahavaniya.
24.1.28	The vessels are to be held from the time of installation till the end of life.
24.1.29	Their purification is according to each Veda.
24.1.30	The extent of the sacrifice is mentioned in the Mantras and Brahmanas.
24.1.31	The Vedas are named after the Mantras and the Brahmanas.
24.1.32	The injunctions of rites are the Brāhmaṇas.
24.1.33	The Brāhmaṇāśeṣa, Arthavāda, Nidāna, Praśaṃsā, Parakṛti, and Purākalpa are the other parts of the Veda.
24.1.34	Other than these, the Mantras are the other parts.
24.1.35	Those not mentioned are the Mantras, such as the Grahas with the names of Pravara and Rohita.
24.1.36	The words "ratha" and "dūndubhi" are also included.
24.1.37	In the case of the Veda, there is no prohibition, because the mantras are not meant for any action.
24.1.38	The rites are performed with one mantra.
24.1.39	They are performed with the rites being distinct from each other even when they are accompanied by numbers.
24.1.40	In scratching, sleeping, crossing a river, avoiding rain, and in the case of the unmentionable, they are performed in the same way, even when the time is not fixed.
24.1.41	In the case of going, when the purpose is accomplished.
24.1.42	In the rites that do not require assembly, they are performed similarly.
24.1.43	The Havishkrit, the Adhrigi, and the Anuvakya are to be recited in succession, when the rites are performed at different times.
24.1.44	By the statement of one rite, many mantras are to be used.
24.2.1	The mantras ending with the rite are to be recited together.
24.2.2	The initial conjunction is to be made in the Aghaara and Dharaa rites.
24.2.3	The mantros prescribed at the beginning are to be used in the rites.
24.2.4	The end of the previous rite is to be known by the beginning of the next.
24.2.5	In the Hotr and Ajya rites, there is a combination.
24.2.6	Option is in the case of the Yajya and Anuvakya.
24.2.7	And so in the case of numbers.
24.2.8	In the case of buying and selling, there is a collection of substances.
24.2.9	Having performed the cutting, piercing, crushing, and touching of the self of Raudra, Rakshasa, Nairrita, and Pitri, one should sprinkle oneself.
24.2.10	The northern ritual is a pastime.
24.2.11	One should not turn away from the fire.
24.2.12	One should also not turn away from a pastime.
24.2.13	The internal parts of the sacrifice are the organs, the external performers.
24.2.14	One should not injure oneself with a sacrificial organ that has mantras.
24.2.15	One who wears the sacrificial thread performs the divine rites clockwise, either in the direction of the sun or against it.
24.2.16	One who does not wear the sacrificial thread performs rites for the ancestors counterclockwise, in the direction of darkness.
24.2.17	The ones that are joined together should be tied together and then joined in a clockwise direction.
24.2.18	The ones that are not joined together should be joined in a clockwise manner.
24.2.19	One should offer the Amavasya sacrifice on the new moon day.
24.2.20	One should perform the Full Moon sacrifice on the full moon day.
24.2.21	If the moon is full before the day of the full moon, one should observe the fast for that full moon day. "
24.2.22	Or one should say, "Tomorrow it will be full."
24.2.23	The Vājasaneyins mention the third Khārvīra.
24.2.24	The day on which the moon is not seen is the day of new moon.
24.2.25	Or, the day on which it will not be seen.
24.2.26	In one section, the principal things being raised, the injunctions are similar.
24.2.27	Injunctions are bound by the section.
24.2.28	Because of non-mention, they are common.
24.2.29	Because of mention, they cease.
24.2.30	The principal offerings at the Full-moon sacrifice are the Agniya offering on eight potsherds, the Agnisomiya offering on eleven potsherds, and the Upāṁśuyāja.
24.2.31	The other offerings are its appendages.
24.2.32	The Agniya offering on eleven potshers, the Indra-Agniya offering on twelve potsherds, or the Agniya offering are the principal offerings at the New-moon sacrifice for those who do not offer Soma.
24.2.33	The Sannāyya is the second offering for those who offer Soma.
24.2.34	For the Brāhmaṇa who does not sacrifice with Soma, there is no Agnisomiya cake.
24.2.35	The Indra-Agni sacrifice is not performed by one who mixes the castes.
24.2.36	The Pitryajna (Father's sacrifice) would be incomplete due to the injunction of its own time.
24.2.37	And because of the enumeration as equal.
24.2.38	And because it is seen in the prohibition.
24.2.39	The principal is with its parts.
24.3.1	When a place and time are indicated by the word 'karta' (performer),
24.3.2-10	The Darvihoma is not prescribed before. It is prescribed by the injunction of Homa. It is offered with the utterance of "Svaha". Taking it once, Taking it for each offering in the group of offerings, One should not mix it. The absence of kindling wood, except in the case of Agnihotra, One offers the Darvihoma sitting with the right knee touching the ground, or without touching it, to the right of the fire.
24.3.11	Having gone round the Ahavaniya fire, keeping it to his right, and having turned towards the north, he offers all the oblations.
24.3.12	In the absence of the injunction, otherwise.
24.3.13	The Yajya and Anuvakya mantras, the Avadanas, the Upastharanas and Abhigharanas, the taking of four spoonfuls, the Vasat-call and the Adarvishoma offerings are not heard.
24.3.14	When the Vasat-cry is uttered, one should offer the oblations with the Vasat-utterance.
24.3.15	In the case of the Grahas, with the Upayāma.
24.3.16	In the case of the bricks, with the deity.
24.3.17	"One should cut off each one, saying, 'May you turn away according to your share from the group of Purorasa offerings."
24.3.18	"May you turn away from the group of offerings according to your share."
24.3.19	He instructs the two deities.
24.3.20	In the group of Caru-Purorasa offerings, he divides the Caru-Puroras before the pouring down.
24.3.21	It indicates the deity according to the deity.
24.3.22	The word "this" would be the treatise.
24.3.23	Even in the case of mixed (offerings),
24.3.24	At the time of placing the skull, he places the rice-ball with the first skull mantra.
24.3.25	He recites the mantra "You are firm."
24.3.26	At the time when the husks are being winnowed, he winnows the rice.
24.3.27	At the time of spreading, he spreads the rice with the spreading mantra.
24.3.28	Without taking out the cooked rice, he places it.
24.3.29	There are fifteen Sāmidhenī verses in the Darsha-Pūrṇamāsa sacrifices.
24.3.30	Seventeen are mentioned in the Iṣṭi-Pashu-Bandha sacrifices.
24.3.31	The Iṣṭis are performed silently as per desire. The principal part is performed silently.
24.3.32	Darsha-Paurnamasa are the original forms of the Iṣṭis.
24.3.33	And of the animal sacrifice to Agni-Soma.
24.3.34	And of Savaniya.
24.3.35	Savaniya is of the Ekadasina sacrifices.
24.3.36	Ekadasina is of the groups of animal sacrifices.
24.3.37	Vaishvadev is of the Varunapraghasa, Saakamedha and Shunasiriya sacrifices.
24.3.38	Vaishnava is of the Ekakapala sacrifices.
24.3.39	Vaishanava is of the Amikṣa and Mikṣa sacrifices.
24.3.40	There, the general (rule) would be inferred from the particular.
24.3.41	The offerings to Agni are of one deity.
24.3.42	The offerings of Agni-Soma are of two deities.
24.3.43	And those of many deities.
24.3.44	Or those of Indra and Agni.
24.3.45	Excepting the offerings to the natural deities, as Indra is the cake and Soma is the cooked rice.
24.3.46	In the case of similarity of the deities of the offerings, the offering is more important.
24.3.47	In a conflict between substance and modification, the substance is stronger.
24.3.48	In a conflict between meaning and substance, meaning is stronger.
24.3.49	There is no inference in the original text.
24.3.50	In the modified text, there is inference as per meaning, except for the Arthavada.
24.3.51	Arthavada is heard from the words of others.
24.3.52	In the absence of the qualified, there is substitution by the general.
24.3.53	It should have the characteristics of that.
24.3.54	In the case of a deviation from the prescribed quantity, one should complete it with the remaining.
24.4.1	Since the word "lord" and the prohibition of the act indicate the absence of a substitute, the natural course is stopped.
24.4.2	The natural course is determined by three causes: by repetition, by prohibition, and by the omission of the meaning.
24.4.3	The Agniṣṭoma is the natural course for the one-day sacrifices.
24.4.4	The Dvādaśāha is the natural course of the Ahargamas.
24.4.5	The Gavāmayana is the natural course among the annual sacrifices.
24.4.6	The first belongs to the Nikāyas.
24.4.7	The Agniṣṭoma is the Uttaravedi.
24.4.8	The Agni is in the northern rites.
24.4.9	Except for the Sadyaskra, Vājapeya, Ṣoḍaśin, and Sārasvata Sattra.
24.4.10	One should desire the one who desires a rite at the beginning of a rite.
24.4.11	One should be desired by the one who desires the parts of a rite at the start of the parts of a ritual.
24.4.12	The mantras are fewer and the rites are more. There, having divided them equally, one should perform the earlier ones with the earlier ones and the later ones with the later ones.
24.4.13	The rites are fewer and the mantras are more. There one should perform according to each mantra. The remaining ones are optional. For example, the materials for the sacrificial post.
24.4.14	There is omission or increase from the end.
24.4.15	Since the Prakriti has been mentioned before, the Apūrva would be at the end.
24.4.16	Since there is the lordship of the pot, the stake, the noose, and the ladle, it would be a Tantra.
24.4.17	But in the case of a difference in the species, there would be a difference due to the difference in cooking.
24.4.18	In the case of the Vanaspati in the Svishtakrit Vikara, the deities would be mentioned due to the connection with the Prakriti.
24.4.19	The Anvarambhaṇīya would not be applicable to the Vikṛta, because it is in the middle of the time of the Prākṛti. It is done for that purpose.
24.4.20	Or, because time is the entire cause.
24.4.21	And because of the division of the beginning.
24.4.22	When the worldly rite is completed, one offers the Agni for the purpose of the rite, as when it is ascended.
24.5.1	We shall explain the Pravaras.
24.5.2	The meaning is that one takes up the Arsha vow for the sake of the continuity of the vow.
24.5.3	It is understood that one takes up Arsha vow not for the sake of gods or men but for the sake of sages.
24.5.4	It is known that one describes the Arsha vow because the gods know the man through the sage.
24.5.5	Or if one who is one (i.e. a Brāhmaṇa) chooses another (i.e., a non-Brāhmaṇa) by the verse of a sage, then it is known that that sage has taken away his desired and accomplished (wealth).
24.5.6	One chooses three (verses), one chooses those composed by sages, as it is known that those composed by sages are chosen.
24.5.7	Now it is known that one chooses one, two, three, but not four, not five.
24.5.8	It is known that the Adhvaryu chooses from above and the Hotṛ from below.
24.5.9	It is said that the king chooses with the best of the Purohita.
24.5.10	We shall first explain the Brāhmaṇas.
24.5.11	The sons of Jamadagni.
24.5.12	Of these, the best is the one belonging to the five sages, namely Bhārgava, Cyavana, Apnavāna, Urva and Jamadagni. They are called Jamadagni, Urva, Apnavāna and Cyavana, Bhārgava.
24.5.13	Some say that the three sages are Bhārgava Urva and Jamadāgnya. They are called Urva, Jamadagni and Bhārgava.
24.5.14	This is the unaltered (text) of Savarni, Jivan, Jabala, Ishashyana, Vaisharadya, Vatamandhu, Prachin-Yogya.
24.5.15	Now the five sages of Arshtisena: Bhargava, Chavana, Apnavan, Arshtisena, Anupa. Anupa, Anupa, Apnavan and Chavana, Bhrigu.
24.5.16	The Triarsheya is the same as the Bharadvāja, the Rishti Sena, and the Anupa. It is like the Anupa, the Rishtisena, and the Bharadvaja.
24.6.1	Then there are the Vetahvyas, the Yaska, the Vaadhuli, and the Mauka.
24.6.2	Their Triarsheya consists of the Bharadvāja and the Vetahvy. It is like that which has the Veda, the Vetahvy, and the Bharadvaja.
24.6.3	Then there is the Gartsamda, the Shuna.
24.6.4	Among them, the one belonging to Gartsamad is the Hotri; the one belonging to Gritsamad is the Adhvaryu.
24.6.5	Then the Vadhryashvas, the friends of Mitra.
24.6.6	Among them, the one of Vadhryashva is the Hotri, the one of the Vadhryasvas is the Adhvaryu.
24.6.7	Then the Vinayas, the Parthas.
24.6.8	They are of three sages, namely Bhārgava, Vainya and Pārtha. They are like Pṛthu, Vena and Bhṛgu.
24.6.9	These Bhṛgus have been explained.
24.6.10	Now, the Aśyāgautamas of the Angirasas.
24.6.11	They are of three sages: Aṅgīrasa, Aśya and Gautama.
24.6.12	Now, there are the Ucathya Gautamas.
24.6.13-16	They are the three sages, Angiras, Uśija, and Gautama. The Uśija-Gautamas are the followers of Uśija. They are the three sages: Angiras, Uṣija, and Gautamas. The Vāmadevagautamas are the followers of Vāmadevya. They are the three: Angiras, Vāmadevī, and Gautama.
24.6.17-19	Of these, the three are Angiras, Vamadeva, and Barhadgathya. Thus, it is like Barhadgathas, like Vamadevas, and like Angiras. Then of the Bharadvajas, the three are like Angiras, like Brihaspati, and like Bharadvajas. Thus, it resembles Bharadvajas like Brihaspati and like Angiras.
24.7.1	The Kukas, the Agnis, the Veshins, the Jayanas, and all those who are called Stambas.
24.7.2	Now the families of the Dvyamushyayanas, like the Shungas and the Shirishayas.
24.7.3	The Bharadvajas, the Shungas, the Katas, and the Shirishayas.
24.7.4	Of these, the five are the Angiras, the Barhaspatya, the Bharadvāja, the Kātyāyanīla, and the Atkila. Atkilavat, Katavat, Bharadvājavat, Bṛhaspatyavat, and Angiravat.
24.7.5	Some say that the three are the Angiras and the Kātyāyanila. Atkilavāt, Katavat, and Angirāvat.
24.7.6	Then the five sages of the constellations: Angiras, Brihaspati, Bharadvaja, Vandan, and Matavacasa. One who is like Matavacasa, like Vandan, like Bharadvaja and like Brihaspati, like Angiras.
24.7.7	Some say that there are three sages: Angiras, Vandan, Matavacasa; one who is like Matvacasa, like Vadan, like Angiras.
24.7.8	Then the Tri-rsheya of the monkeys: "The Angiras, the Urukshaya, the Amahīyava." The Urukshaya, Amahīyaya, and Angirasa.
24.7.9	Then the Tri-rsheyas of the Garga: "The Angira, the Garga, the Shini." The Shini, Garga, and Angiras.
24.7.10	Some of the Angirases are called Bharadvāja, Garga, and Śainya. They are called Śainya because they are like Śini, Garga because they are like Garga, and Bharadvāja because they are like Bharadvāja.
24.7.11	The three sages of the Haritas are called Aṅgirasa, Ambarīṣa, and Yauvanāśva. They are called Yauvanāṣva because they are like Yauvanāshva, Ambarīșa because they are like Ambarīṣā, and Aṅgirasa because they are like Aṅgirasa.
24.7.12	The Angirases, indeed, are the same as Mandhatri, Mandhatri, Ambarisa, and Yauvanaswa. (The Angirases) are the same as Yauvanasva, Ambarisa and Mandhatri.
24.8.1	Then the Kutsa-s, the Triarsheya, the Angiras, and the Mandhatri are the same as the Kutsa- Angiras, Mandhatri and Kutsa. (The Angiras) are the same Kutsa, Mandhatri or Angiras.
24.8.2	Then the Kanvas, the Ajameldas.
24.8.3	They are the three sages: Angiras, Ajmiḍa, and Kanva. Kanva, Ajmiḍā, and Angiras.
24.8.4	Then the Virūpas, the Ratiras.
24.8.5	Their three sages are Angiras, Virūpa, and Pṛṣadāśva. Pṛṣadāsva, Virūpa and Angiras.
24.8.6	The Angirasas of Ashtradaṃṣṭra, the Vairūpas of Parshdasva, the Maudgalyas of Bhrimasva, the Angirasas of Triarsheya, the Bhrimasvas of Maudgalyas.
24.8.7	The Angirasas of Bhrimarasva, the Angirasi of Bhrimarasvas, the Angirasis of Bhrimarasas, the Angiras of Bhrimarasava, the Angirasa of Bhrimarasavas, the Angirasi of Bhrimarasavati, the Angiras Vas of Bhrimarasavat, the Angiras Va of Bhrimarasvat, the Angiras Vati of Bhrimarasvavat, the Angira Vas of Bhrimarasa, the Angiras Vat of Bhrimarasat, the Angiras Vi of Bhrimarasavi, the Angiras Vis of Bhrimarasati, the Angira Vis of Bhrimarasi, the Angiras Vs of Bhrimarasivati, the Angi Vas of Bhrimasas, the Angi Vat of Bhrimasat, the Angi Vi of Bhrimasavi, the Angi Vis of Bhrimasati, the Angis of Bhrimasavati, the Bhrimarasas of Bhrimarasava, the Bhrimarasa of Bhrimarasavis, the Bhrimaris of Bhrimarasatis, the Bhrimatis of Bhrimarasvati, the Bhrimatis of Bhrimarati, the Bhrimati of Bhrimaratis, the Bhrimari of Bhrimaravati, the Bhrumaras of Bh
24.8.8	The Angirasas, the Triskus, the Tarksya, the Bharmya-ashva, and the Maudgalyas are called after the names of their respective teachers.
24.8.9	The Visnu-Vridhas, the Triarsheya, the Angiras, the Purukutsas, and the Trasadasyus are named after their respective teachers.
24.8.10	These are the same as the uncorrupted ones, except for the names Śaṭha, Marṣaṇa, Bhadraṇa, Madraṇa, Bādarāyaṇa, Upaminya, Upagava, Sātyaka, Sātyamkā, Kamyāraṇi, and Nitunda.
24.8.11	Here are the three sages of the Ātreya lineage: Ātreya, Arcānanasa, and Śyāvāśva. Śyāvāśvas are like Śyāvāśavas, Arcānanasas are like Arcānanasas, and Ātreyas are like Ātreyas.
24.8.12	Then the Tri-rsheya of the Gavishthira-s: "Gavishthira, Arcana, Nas, Gavishthira" - Gavishthira, like Arcana, like Nas, like Atri.
24.8.13	Then the Tri-rsheyas of the Atithis: "Atithi, Arcana, Atithi" - Atithi, like Arcana.
24.8.14	This is the same, unaltered, for the Vamarathiyas, Sumangalas, and Vaipinas.
24.9.1	Then the descendants of Viśvāmitra, Devātrī, Chikītanu, Tantva, Ulāka, Vāluki, Yajñavalkya, Ulūka, Bṛhadagni, Babhru, Gālava, Viśāla, Avāta, Śālanāyana, Kāla, and Bāva.
24.9.2	Among them, the three sages were Viśvāmitras, Devātrīs, and Audalas. The Audalas were like Devātrīs and Viśvāmitrās.
24.9.3-5	Then the three-versed ones of the Sromata, Kamata, and Kayana are Devatarasa, Devashrava, and Vishvamitra. Devatarasa, like Devashrava, like Vishvamitra. Then the three-versed one of the Ajya is Madhuchanda, Ajya. Like Madhuchanda. Like Vishvamitra. Then the Dhananjaya of Madhuchanda alone.
24.9.6	Of these, the Tri-arsheya is called Vaishvamitra, Madhuchhandas, and Dhananjaya. It is like Dhananjaya, like Madhuchhandasa, and like Vaishvamitra.
24.9.7	Now the Ashtaka Lohitas.
24.9.8	Of these, the Dvyarsheya is named Vaishvamitra-Ashtaka. It is like Ashtaka and like Vaishva-mitra.
24.9.9	Now the Puranas, the Varidhapayanas.
24.9.10	Of these, the Dvyarsheya is called Vaishvamitra Pauraṇe, like Pūraṇa and like Vishvamitra.
24.9.11	Then the Katanas, the Tryarsheya is named Vaishvamitra Katyatkele, like Katyatke, like Katan and like Vishvamatra.
24.9.12	Now the Kushika of the Aghamarshana.
24.9.13	Of these, the three are the sons of Kaśyapa, Aghamarṣaṇa, Vaishvamitra, and Kausika.
24.9.14	Then of the Kasyapa, the three are Kasyapa, Avatsara, and Nidhruva. Nidhruva is like Nidhruva, Avatsara is like Avatsara, Kasyapa is like Kasyapa.
24.9.15	Then of the Rebhus, the Triarsheya (is called) Avatsara of the Kasyapa-Rebhus. It is like the Rebhus and Avatsaras and Kasyapa.
24.10.1	Then of the Sandilas, the Dvyarsheya (called) Daivalasita. It is like Asita and Devala.
24.10.2	Some say that the Triarsheyas are Kasyapa, Daivalasita, (called) Asita and Devalakasyapa.
24.10.3	The Vasīstins are of two kinds, according to the above rule.
24.10.4	The Vasiṣṭhas are of one kind, except the Parāśaras. The Hotr is Vasiṣṭha, the Adhvaryu is Vasiṣthavatsa.
24.10.5	Some say that the Vasīstins, Indra-Pramada, and Bharadvāja are of three kinds. The Bharadvāja is Bharadvatsa, the Indra-Pramada is Indra-Pramadavatsa, and the Vasīṣṭha is Vasiṣṣṭhavat.
24.10.6	Then the three sages of the Parasaras are Vasishtha, Shakta, and Parashara. Parasara is like Parasara, Shakta is like Shakta, and Vasishtha is like Vasishtha.
24.10.7	Then the three sages of Kundina are Vasishtha Maitravaruna, and Kundina. Kundina is like Kundina, Maitravaruna is like Maitravaruna and Vasishtha like Vasishtha.
24.10.8	Then the Sāṃkṛtya of the Saṃkṛti, Puti and Māṣa grains is performed in the manner of the Triāṛṣeya. The Sāṃkīrtyas are performed in the manner prescribed for the Saṃkīrtya, the Saṃkiti and the Gaurīvīti.
24.10.9	Then the Āgastyas are performed in accordance with the Ekāṛṣeya rule. The Hotṛ performs the Āgastyā in the manner prescribed. The Adhvaryu performs the Āgastya in the manner prescribed.
24.10.10	The three sages are Agastya, Dardchyuta, and Idhmavāha. The three sages are Idhmavādha, Dardchyūta, and Agastya.
24.10.11	Now for the Kshatriyas:
24.10.12	If they choose the Sarṣṭi, then their Pravara is only one, namely, Manavida and Purūravas. Purūravas is like Manu.
24.10.13	Now those among whom there are no priests with a Purohita, they should choose (the Purohita).
24.10.14	Those among whom there are not Purohita-priests, they should choose.
24.10.15	Those among whom are Purohita-priesthoods, they should choose according to this rule.
24.10.16	The Hotr says, "The Vatsapras," the Adhvaryu says, "The Vatspras."
24.10.17	Then the teacher of the Asamprajnatas should recite the teacher of the Pravaras.
24.10.18	Then the Tandins say, "We know the one-verse, the universal, the human." The Hotri says, "Like Manu." The Adhvaryu says, "Like the human." The Brahmana says, "The human is the offspring."
24.11.1	The Hotṛ, holding the heart-region above the fore-arm, recites the Sāmidhenī verses in front of the Samidhenī verses, with the words, "I take Agni first, who is our Agni, the father."
24.11.2	Going towards the Uttaravedi and the sacrificial grass, he murmurs: "Whom shall I seek refuge in? I seek refuge in that. O Prajapati, I seek refuge in the refuge of the Vedas. I shall do as much as I know of you, O Vishnu. Salutations to Agni, the observer. Salutations to Vayu, the listener. Salutations to Aditya, the announcer. Today I have uttered words pleasing to the gods, flowing with our own rites, attentive to the ancestors, and beneficial to humans. I seek refuge in Prajapati, the lord of creation. May I be safe from the dangers of creation. I shall recite the Prajapati hymns. May speech perform the priestly duties. May mind perform the priestly duties." He seeks refuge in speech. "May there be truth."
24.11.3	He stands, saying, "I stand in Vishnu's place."
24.11.4	The right foot is within the altar, the left foot outside.
24.11.5	Then, standing upright, he addresses the Brahman, saying, "O Brahman, I shall recite the Sāmidhenī verses," and having explained the Dashotr and recited the Vyāhṛtis, he recites the half-verse with the last Hiṅkāra after reciting three times.
24.11.6-9	He recites the first three times and the last three times. If one desires that he may live the full span of life, then he should recite the first and the last three verses. Some say that one should recite the first verse alone, repeating it three times. One should recite the third verse three times, repeating it continuously. Since there is no distinction among the Sāmidhenī verses, one should recite them continuously.
24.11.10-11	And the Sāmidhenī verses are composed by one sage after another. If they were not connected, they would separate the sacrificer from his progeny and cattle. He connects the two half-verses. He connects them. We think that he should connect the eastern and the western, the western and the eastern.
24.11.12	The Sāman-verses are recited continuously. The recitation of the Sāman-verse is known by the breathing.
24.11.13	If one recites in between the two Arcis, one should place the Prāṇa in the Apāna. Having omitted the first half of the Arci, one recites in the second half of the Arcis.
24.11.14	There is a continuity of the Arcis through the recitation three times. Because of being one Rși.
24.11.15	"You are Varuna" (is recited) for the Vasishtha Rajanyas. "One should offer the Paridhananiya oblations" (is recited for) the other lineages.
24.11.16	The second Prayaja is Narashansa for the Vasishthas and Shunakas. Tanunapata is for the other lineages. The other lineages.
24.11.17	Having recited the Samidheni verses, having recited the Pravara, one should recite the Nivida.
24.11.18	Having recited seven steps of them, one should say "Apana".
24.12.1	Then four, then four.
24.12.2	Those deities are invoked by the one who is about to perform the sacrifice.
24.12.3	One should not invoke the Vājinī deities, the Devīkā deities, and the Devasuvo deities, because we think that they are of that kind.
24.12.4	There would be a prohibition against those who are under the control of others and those who are under various controls, due to the indicative nature of the word.
24.12.5	For those who have one deity and those who have various deities, the invocation is a means, due to their capability.
24.12.6	Then, with knees raised, having placed the earth with the span, he recites this: "With the three-fold Stoma, with the Rathantara Sama, with the Vashatkara, with the thunderbolt, I strike him who hates us and whom we hate, from this abode, from this earth, from this foundation. Whatever crooked eye fell down today in the Hotrvarga, Agni, the knower of beings, the one with many powers, brings it back. May we be in the Ratha of the Vasus, in the waves of the Rudras, in the Aditi of the Adityas, in the Aditis without distress. The pleasant speech that I have uttered today to the gods, the pleasant to the Brahmins, the pleasant to men, the pleasant to Narasamsa, approved by the fathers, your hundred, O Varuna, your thousand, the binding cords that are spread out in many ways, may Indra, Savitar, and Vishnu, all the gods, the Maruts, release us.
24.12.7	Then when he says to him, "He is a human being," he rises up and, with his right hand, clasps the right shoulder of the Adhvaryu, reciting (the verse), "Sixty and ninety nooses have been spread out between the Hotar and Agni. They approach the cooking, the wise one follows the path of truth. We follow Agni, the Hotar, the excellent Hotar, the priest, by whom the gods, the Angiras, have gone to the highest heaven."
24.12.8	"I am the Prāṇāpāna (vital airs)," touching the region of the heart, withdrawing the hands.
24.12.9	"You fill, you fill completely, fill me with offspring and cattle," shaking the kindling woods towards the mouth.
24.12.10	Then having touched water, he goes to the Hotṛ's seat reciting these two verses: "O Agni, lead us on the good path, come here, O Agni, sit here as the Hotṛ, be our protector, the remover of evil. May the heaven and earth, extending everywhere, protect us. We worship the gods for happiness."
24.12.11	Having sat down facing the east with his buttocks towards the Hotr's seat, he touches the Hotr' seat with the formula, "O Dādhīci, the son of Dadhivāna."
24.12.12	Then he removes the grass from it.
24.13.1	He removes the dry grass or the grass with cut ends with the formula, “The dust has been removed. May the dust go along with sin."
24.13.2	Then he sits down at the Hotṛ's seat, saying, "May the heaven and earth be my support." Having made the right side the eastern and the left side the northern.
24.13.3	Then he mutters: "Sit down, O Hotar! The Hotar has sat down. Please the gods, O most generous one!" This is the verse: "You are the Hotar and the Potr of the people. You are the giver of wealth, the truthful one. Svāhā! We shall perform the offerings. The god Agni, the worthy one, offers to the gods. You, O Agni, are the guardian of the vow. Whatever we may have transgressed, whatever we have done with the mind, for all the rites, the bright banner, the creator has generated you. You should offer to the desirable, the nourishing, the universal ones. Which you were generated by heaven and earth, which you were generated by water, which you were born by Tvashtri, the well-born one, knowing the path to the fathers, O Agni, the bright one, the kindled one, shine forth." This is the entire hymn: "All the gods are instructing me. As the Hotar is chosen here, having sat down, please tell me my share, by which path I may bring your oblation. Which one I desire in my mind, he has come. Knowing the sacrifice, the skillful one, he should attend to us, the most worthy one. He has sat down in the middle, before this. Having sat down, this is the first speech of today. By which we have approached the Asuras, the energetic ones, the five classes, accept my Hotar. Salutations to the great ones, salutations to the young ones, salutations the youthful ones, salutations those who are old. We offer to the gods if we are able. Do not obstruct the greater ones."
24.13.4	Having recited this, he makes the oblations flow into the ladle.
24.13.5	After reciting "ye yajamāham" before every offering, he recites the Vyāhṛtis.
24.13.6	He does not recite "ye yajāmāham" in the Anūyājās.
24.13.7	He offers the Anūyajās without reciting "ye yajāmah" or "amatsate" or "vāpān".
24.13.8	The Puronuvākyā is recited before the Lakṣaṇa, and the Yājyā is recited after the Lakṣaṇā. This is the opposite.
24.13.9	Some say that the Puronuvākyā and the Yājyā are recited from both sides.
24.13.10	One should recite the Puronuvākya while standing and the Yāgyā while seated; both may be recited while standing or seated.
24.13.11	The Puronuvākyat is indeed successful when one recites the deity first. The Yājyā is indeed successful when the deity is offered the Vasat-call.
24.13.12	The Praṇava is placed in the Rk, except in the Yajya.
24.13.13	One recites the Rks with "Om".
24.14.1	Some say that the last syllable is modified.
24.14.2	Others say that it should be more.
24.14.3	And when one recites the Rk and then pronounces the Vasat, and then recites another Rk and then again pronounces the Vasāt, then it is proper to say that one pronounces the Vasät continuously with the Rk. And in the same way one pronounces the Vasaț after the Yajya.
24.14.4	The pronouncement of the Vasat after reciting the Rk is a loud utterance of the sound.
24.14.5	If one desires, "May he be a deceiver," one should offer the Vasat-call loudly, as if digging up. If one desires, “May he be a sinner,” one should offer the Yasya-call lower than that. If one desires that he may be more prosperous, one should offer the Yasyā-call higher than that. If he desires that he may not be more prosperous nor less prosperous, one should make the Vasat-offerings equal to the Yasyā. One should offer the Vasāt-call loudly, like a crow, for one who desires heaven. This is known.
24.14.6	The stronger one makes the Vasat-offering.
24.14.7	It is known that one should meditate on the deity one is going to worship mentally before the Vasat-oblation, if one desires heaven.
24.14.8	One should inhale and exhale after making the Vasat-offerings.
24.14.9	It is understood that one should hold the breath with exhalation and close the eyes.
24.14.10	He who hates him should say "Oṣad" (to him). It is known as "Oṣad".
24.14.11	Some call it "Vāṣad", some call it "Vauṣad", some "Vauṣāḍ", some "Vāksad", some "Vausad", some "Vasāḍ".
24.14.12	"O Vasat-sound, do not injure me, nor my speech. I invoke you with the great mind. Do not injure me, do not injure my speech. I am carrying the offering to the gods. Strength, power, strength, power. Speech is the Vasat-sound. May there be salutations to you. Do not injure us." Thus one mutters at the Vasat-offering. "Speech is the Vasat sound. May there be salutation to you. Do no injury to us."
24.14.13	Having released the fingers, he draws up the mouth region, saying, "To Prāṇa" and downward, saying, "to Apāna".
24.14.14	Holding the Avantara-Ida with the fingers, he does not make a fist.
24.14.15	He makes a gesture as if to the mouth.
24.14.16	If one desires that he should be without cattle, one should say, "To him who is beyond."
24.14.17	The prohibition of the repetition of words is found in the Veda.
24.14.18	And it is known that the call to Ced is made to the east, and the call to Upadhva is made to the west.
24.14.19	The other rites mentioned in the Veda are performed by the Adhvaryu, because they are mentioned in the Veda. The other rites are mentioned in the other Vedas.
