1.1.1	Now we shall explain the application of the rules of this Veda.
1.1.2	The rites beginning with the installation of fire are prescribed in the Veda.
1.1.3	But we shall first explain the Darsha-Pūrnamāsa sacrifices, because they are mentioned in the Tantras.
1.1.4	At the Darśa-Pūrṇamāsa sacrifices, when the oblations are near, the Hotṛ priest, having been requested, stands facing east, away from the Āhavanīya fire, facing east, with the sacred thread on the right shoulder, performs Ācamana, and proceeds to the Vihāra, turning to the right, with the heap of grass on the east and the Prāṇītā on the west.
1.1.5	The kindling wood is on the west of the Prāṇitā.
1.1.6	The Chaitvāla is like the Chaitvāla.
1.1.7	This is called the Tīrtha.
1.1.8	His actions are always directed towards the east.
1.1.9	And he wears the sacred thread.
1.1.10	And he is pure.
1.1.11	And he does not turn away from his dwelling place, if there is an act there.
1.1.12	If there is a statement of one part, one should understand the right.
1.1.13	If there are no instructions,
1.1.14	In the injunction of an act, the Hotr.
1.1.15	The one who gives is the Yajamana.
1.1.16	In the expiation of Hoti and Japi, the Brahman.
1.1.17	The Rk is to be taken in the case of a foot.
1.1.18	The Sūkta is to be taken at the beginning of the Sūkta, if there is a deficiency in the foot.
1.1.19	If there is an excess, the Trivṛt is to be taken everywhere.
1.1.20	Recitation, invocation, nourishment, and attendance are to be done in a low voice.
1.1.21	Mantras are to be used in performing rites.
1.1.22	By implication, the exception is stronger.
1.1.23	Having placed the heel of the foot which is raised higher, on the upper part of the altar, having placed the foot evenly on the ground, having stepped on the sacrificial grass with the other foot, holding the hands together, looking at the junction of heaven and earth, with fingers pointing upwards, measuring the size of the heart or the size of the elbow.
1.1.24	This is the place of the Hotṛ.
1.1.25	Or, everywhere, one should sit in this way.
1.1.26	Other than what is said.
1.1.27	One who is sent recites.
1.2.1	Obeisance to the speaker, obeisance to the observer, obeisance to him who proclaims. Who will proclaim this? He will proclaim this. May the six seasons, the three worlds, the sky and the earth, the day and the night, the water and the plants, and speech protect me. The sacrifice is established in the right places. I take refuge in the good metres. "He should say, "I am myself, he is himself." His own name should be mentioned. "May he be in the future, may he be born, may he be about to be born." "I carry the unpurified speech." Having drawn back the tips of the fingers, he should say, "May the fire god delight the animals in me." "May the sky and the Earth be my armour, may Agni be my armour, and may the Sun be my armour. May the animals be my armour. This is the first speech of mine today."
1.2.2	Having completed the Sāmidhenī verses, he recites.
1.2.3	He recites "Bhūr Bhuvah Svaḥ Om" after uttering "Him".
1.2.4	This is the Abhihiṃkāra.
1.2.5	Having recited "Bhūr Bhuvaḥ Svaḥ" alone, Kautsah recites "Him".
1.2.6	He does not recite the earlier recitation.
1.2.7	Then the Sāmidhenī verses: "O ye Vājas, come to us, O Agni, come to our sacrifice, O Agni, the singer, worthy of praise, the worshipper, we choose thee as our messenger, Agni, as thou art kindled at the sacrifice, Agni, the kindled, the offered." These two verses are to be recited together.
1.2.8	One should recite them together.
1.2.9	The highest proximity is the similarity of sound of the Udātta, Anudātta and Svarita.
1.2.10	Having made the Oṃkāra ending with the vowels and beginning with the Rg, ending with the M-sound, and having three measures, one should place it in the northern half of the verse, continuously.
1.2.11	This is the end.
1.2.12	The northern recitation is without confusion.
1.2.13	At the end, the end is made with the Pranava.
1.2.14	The end has four measures.
1.2.15	The attainment of its end.
1.2.16	Among the touches, the supreme of one's own class.
1.2.17	The nasal sounds are to be used in the middle of the words.
1.2.18	The anusvara is to be used in conjunction with the Re and Uṣma sounds.
1.2.19	The first and last syllables are to be repeated three times, with the middle syllable being omitted.
1.2.20	After reciting the middle syllable, one should omit it.
1.2.21	The first syllable is to be repeated twice, followed by the last syllable, then the middle syllable.
1.2.22	These are the fifteen repetitions.
1.2.23	With this mantra, the offerings, the recitation of the Veda, the recitation of mantras, the chanting, and the praise are performed.
1.2.24	But not elsewhere, except for half a verse. Recitation is not done before the recitation of the Abhihinnakaras. The practice of Abhihinnakaris is not done in many places by nature.
1.2.25	Not in the beginning of the Avaccheda.
1.2.26	The Abhihinnakarah is only in the weapons of the Hotrkaras.
1.2.27	In the Agni Mahamasah Brāhmaṇabhāratīti Nigada Avāsaya with the last Pranava of the Samidhenis.
1.3.1	He chooses the priests of the sacrificer, as many as there are.
1.3.2	The highest is the first.
1.3.3	The priests of the king are the priests of the city.
1.3.4	Or the royal sages are the kings.
1.3.5	There is doubt about all of them being human.
1.3.6	The Agni who is kindled by the gods, praised by the sages, delighted by the Brahmanas, praised by the poets, sharpened by the Brahmanas (is invited). He who is offered with ghee, the leader of sacrifices, the charioteer of rites, the inviolate Hotri, the swift, the bearer of oblations, the vessel of resolutions, the ladle of the gods, the goblet of the gods, like a friend, Agni, the rim, thou carriest the gods around. Thou art the protector of this. Thou bringest the gods to the sacrificer. Having approached the deity with the second case, he says, "Bring the directions, bring the directions." He invites, flooding the beginning.
1.3.7	The first deity is invoked with the formula, "O Agni, do thou bring."
1.3.8	The two Ajyabhaga offerings are made with the formulas, "Agni and Soma."
1.3.9	At the Full-Moon sacrifice the offerings are made with "Agni and Agni-Soma."
1.3.10	At the New-Moon sacrifice the deities are invoked with the formulas, “Indra and Agni” and “Agni-Soma.”
1.3.11	One invokes either Indra or Mahendra.
1.3.12	The Aitareyins invoke Vishnu between the two oblations.
1.3.13	The Agniṣomīya (animal) is offered on the full-moon day, the Viṣṇu (animal) on the new-moon day. Some offer one, others offer none.
1.3.14	For other Upāṃśus, "Do thou bring, Svāhā, to the dear abodes, this oblation, the greater" (is recited) loudly.
1.3.15	Those who are mentioned elsewhere, indirectly, they are offered loudly, or silently.
1.3.16	Silently, directly.
1.3.17	The invitation is the offering.
1.3.18	All (the verses) should be recited once, after having been duly selected.
1.3.19	In the other collections of hymns, one should recite them as if they were one.
1.3.20	(The verses) should be of the same deity and of the same purpose.
1.3.21	(The recitation) should be uninterrupted in the collections of hymns.
1.3.22	Having invoked the deities of the Oḍas, Āvāpikās, Ājyapas, Agni, Hotr, his own greatness, Jātavedas, and Sujaya, he should sit with knees raised, arranging the grass on the ground towards the east, and perform the Pradeśa rite, saying, "May Aditi, the mother, not injure me. With Agni as the deity, the Trivṛt Stoma, the Rathantara Sāman, the Gāyatrī metre, the Agniṣṭoma sacrifice, the Vasatkara, and the thunderbolt, I strike him who hates us and whom we hate."
1.3.23	He should address the one who is about to announce, "Announce the sacrifice to the gods, announce me to men for fame, for glory, for radiance." The one who is being chosen, "O god Savitar, he chooses you as the Hotri, Agni with his father Vaishvānara, may heaven and earth protect me, Agni is the Hotri, I am the human." Having heard the Adhvaryu say "human," he should rise with his own life, with the life of the plants, with the juice of the plants, rising with the abodes of Parjanya, following the immortals. He should rise.
1.3.24	Sixty are the Adhvaryu's, ninety are the Pāśas, the Hotar Agni has been separated in between. The one who knows the cooking well comes forth. Having risen,
1.3.25	"One should follow the Adhvaryus with the words, "I follow the path of truth, O Hotar." Having advanced, one should follow the Adhvayu with the left hand placed on the shoulder,
1.3.26	or with the left hand on the side, or with the left hand at the elbow."
1.3.27	We invoke Indra, the priest, the chief priest, by whom the gods, the Angiras, went to the highest heaven.
1.3.28	One should rub one's face three times towards oneself with the Sammārga grass, saying, "You are the Sammārgas, may you be favourable to me with offspring and cattle."
1.3.29	Once with a mantra, twice silently. This is the procedure in all cases of repetition of rites.
1.3.30	Having touched water, he should recite the mantra over the Hotr's seat: "Standing here, O Dadhiṣāvy, may you sit in his abode, whoever is more worthy of our cooking."
1.3.31	With the thumb and little finger, he should remove the grass from the Hotr's seat towards the south, saying, "The removed one is Parāvasu." He should sit down, saying, "I sit in the seat of Arvāvasu," on the seat with the right and left thighs.
1.3.32	These are the rules for removing and sitting down. They apply to all seats, and to all people, even at the first sitting of the day.
1.3.33	Gautama says twice.
1.4.1	When the Brahmana is about to eat the Brahmana-food, at the Agni-adhyaya.
1.4.2	Returning from the Bahispavamana, at the Soma.
1.4.3	The Hotri proceeds.
1.4.4	At the pouring of the ladle in the animal sacrifice.
1.4.5	Not at the Patnisamyajika.
1.4.6	Other than the Hotri, says Kautsya.
1.4.7	Sitting down, "I sit down to thee, O divine altar, for thy own sake."
1.4.8	"For the Hotr indeed is the most prominent one among those who sit on the sacrificial grass." Having touched the sacrificial grass with the head bent down, he should recite the verse thereafter.
1.4.9	Obeisance to the Lord of the Earth, obeisance to the Lord, obeisance to Him who is the Lord of beings, obeisance to him who is the Lord. I resort to Prāṇa, Apāna, Vyāna, Vāc, Cakṣus, Śrotra, Manas, Ātman, Gāyatrī, Tristubh, Jagatī, Anushtubh, Chandaḥs, Sūrya, the protector from heaven, obeisance to those who are great, obeisance to children. All the gods have instructed me. May the Hotṛ, the most learned one, be seated here. This is the first speech of the day. Having completed this, the blazing fire should be placed in the two ladles with the recitation of the Nigada mantra.
1.4.10	Let Agni, the Hotar, be the Hotar of Agni. Let the Praitr be the Praitr. The deity to whom you offer is good. He who knows Agni as the Hotar, he is not deceived.
1.4.11	Then he should conclude with the ladle containing ghee, saying, "O Adhvaryu, let us have the divine and universal-ruling one. We invoke the gods. We invoke other gods. We honour those who are worthy of honour. We offer to those who are worthy to be offered to."
1.4.12	At the end of this recitation, the Adhvaryu announces.
1.4.13	The Agnidhra, standing at the place of the heap of wood, taking the wooden sword and the bundles of wood, and facing south, should announce. The Satyayana says that one should pronounce the word "srausat" while pouring water.
1.5.1	They perform with the Prayajas.
1.5.2	These are five in number.
1.5.3	Each one of them is sent to perform the sacrifice.
1.5.4	The Yagya-s are performed in the order of the Yagya-s, excluding the Anuyaga-s.
1.5.5	The Yagyas begin with "Ye yajamahe" and end with "Vasat".
1.5.6	The Yagya is performed louder than the Anuyaga.
1.5.7	The Yagyopavita is worn by the Adhvaryu.
1.5.8	The Yagyos are performed till the end.
1.5.9	If the last syllable of the Yagya is not a vowel, then the Yagya is performed with the last syllable as a vowel.
1.5.10	The word to be dismissed is one that ends in a consonant other than a nasal.
1.5.11	The other is the word to be dismissed.
1.5.12	The word to be dismissed ends in a nasal.
1.5.13	It is the first that takes the third.
1.5.14	Always with the letter ma.
1.5.15	We offer oblations, the oblations, O Agni, may the oblations be consumed. Vashat! Thus is the Vashat-call.
1.5.16	Thus is the first.
1.5.17	The Adhvaryu recites the Vasat-call, saying "Ojas is speech, Ojas is in me, Prāṇa and Apāna." He recites the Vasatkāra after every recitation.
1.5.18	The Vasat-call is the fame of the day.
1.5.19	So is the recitation.
1.5.20	This is the indication of the Yajya.
1.5.21	"Tanūnapāt Agni, do thou partake of the ghee," is the second (verse), except for Vasishtha, Shunaka, Trivṛt, Ashva, and Rajanya.
1.5.22	"O Agni, may I partake of the ghee." This is the first verse.
1.5.23	"O Agni, may the Idas partake of the ghee" is the third verse.
1.5.24	"May Agni partake of the ghee outside" is the fourth verse. Having recited the fifth verse, "Svāhā to this, svāhā to that," following the sequence as prescribed, and having recited the verses not prescribed in the sequence, "Svāha to the gods who partake of ghee," "O Agni, let the Idas partake..."
1.5.25	Therefore, with the Mandre.
1.5.26	And above, from the Samyuvakā.
1.5.27	With the Madhyame, the Havis up to the Sviṣṭakṛt.
1.5.28	With the Uttama, the remainder.
1.5.29	"Agni has destroyed the foes" is the Anuvakya of the eastern portion of clarified butter. "Thou art Soma, the lord of truth" is the Anuvaakya of the northern portion. "May Agni, accepting, partake of the clarified butter" is the Yajya of the eastern part. "May Soma, accepting, partake, of the clarified butter, the oblation" is the Yaja of the northern part. He offers them at the same time.
1.5.30	All the Anuvakyas are without the call. The others are without the response.
1.5.31	and those which are between the Sāumikī and the Vaiśvānara offerings to the wife.
1.5.32	These two are the Vārtraghna offerings at the Full-moon sacrifice.
1.5.33	The difference in the names of the Anuvākyās and the Liṅgas is due to the difference in the names. There is a discussion on this.
1.5.34	In the Nitya-yājyā.
1.5.35	The two verses ending with "Vridhanvan" are recited at the new moon. Agni is praised with the ancient hymn. We praise you with songs, O Soma. This is the recitation of the speech.
1.5.36	Between the Yajya and Anuvakya, the recitation of the Nigada, the chanting of the Shashtra, and the recitation of the Mantras, one should begin and complete the practice.
1.5.37	Other than the means of performing the sacrifice.
1.5.38	One should recite "May the gods protect us from danger."
1.5.39	Or any other Viṣṇu-form.
1.6.1	The deities have been mentioned. The Yajya and Anu-yajya mantras are: "Agni is the head of the earth, this Agni is a thousandfold." "Vishnu, the knower, has traversed the earth three times." "This Agni, the knower of the truth, has come to this earth." "O Agni and Soma, you two, with the truth, have come to this." "These shining ones in the sky." "O Indra and Agni, with the verses, the sage, desiring to attain the truth, has approached." "O Indra, you have conquered the enemy, the great one, with your strength." "O Indra who is called by many, you have conquered." "O Indra you are great by means of Brahman." If there is an Upamshu-yaja offering to Agni and Soma, the mantras are: "O Agni and Soma! Today, the one who was born from the womb of the sky, was brought by the one who bestows rain."
1.6.2	Then, having recited the Anuvākyā "O Agni, Svishtakṛt, may you delight the gods, the most powerful, the most excellent,"
1.6.3	one should recite the following: "We invoke Agni, the Svishtakṛta, the most excellent. Having said 'Agni,' one should then address the deity in the sixth case and recite 'the most excellent, the most excellent.'
1.6.4	In this way, the subsequent verses should be recited. However, before them, one should recite 'the most, the most.'
1.6.5-6	Having recited the Anushtubh verses of the Agni-sutra, he recites the verses of the Agnihotra. The verses of the Agnihotri priest are recited. The verses of Agni are recited. The Agnihotra verses are recited. The verse of the Agnihotra is recited. The verse for the Agnihotra is being recited. The verse is being recited. Translation: Having recited the Anushthubh verses of the Agnisutra, he recitess the verses of the Agnicayana. The verses of Agnicayana are recited. The Agnicayana verses are recited. Agnicayana verses. The Agnicayani verses are recited. Agnihotri verses. The Agnihotri verses are recited. Verses of the Agnihotra. The Agnihotra verses are recited. Verse of the Agnihotram. The verse of Agnihotram is being recited. Verse is being recited.
1.7.1-2	Having drawn the Prāṇāyāma, he should offer the Prāṇāhuti. Having drawn the Prāṇa-control, he should offer Prāṇāhutis. Having drawn Prāṇāyama, he should offer Pranahuti. Having controlled the Prāṇa, he should offer Prana-hutis.  Having controlled the Prāṇas, he should offer Praṇāhuti. Having controlled the Prānās, he should offer Pronahuti.  Having controlled Prāṇā, he should offer Proṇāhuti. Translation: Having drawn the Prānāyāma, one should offer the Prānāhutis. Having controlled the Pranas, one should offer Prānāhuti. Having drawn the Pränāyāma, one should offer Prānāhuties. Having controlled the Prana, one should offer Pranahutes. Having controlled the Praņas, one should offer Praṇahutes. Having drawn the Pranayāma, one should offer Pranahutes. Translation: Having controlled the Pränas, one should control the Pränas and offer Pranahutes.
1.7.3	Having touched the water, he should take it in a cup, and having placed it in his left hand, he should then place his left hand with the fingers pointing towards the north, and should make the cup with the fingers pointing downwards.
1.7.4	Between the thumb and the fingers, he should take the second one himself.
1.7.5	Having regained it, he should grasp it with the thumb and withdraw it.
1.7.6	Having made the fingers into a fist, and having taken hold of the Ida on the right side, which is equal to the mouth, or equal to the breath, one invokes.
1.7.7	May Ida, invoked, be worshipped with the bright heaven and with Aditya. May Ida be invoked, with the heaven and with Aditya, with the bright heaven. May Ida be worshipped with the wind and with the heaven and Vāmadevya. May Ida be called with the heaven and the wind and Vāma devya. May Ida, invoked with the wind and Vamadevya, be worshipped with Agni and the heaven and Rāthantara. May Ida be praised with Agni and the sky and Rāthantara. May Ida, praised with Agni and Rāth antara, be worshipped with heaven and earth and Rāthantra. May Ida be prayed with heaven and earth, and Rāthāntara. May Ida be invited with heaven and earth. May Ida be honoured with heaven and earth.. May Ida be worshipped. May Ida be saluted. May Ida be bowed to. May Ida be adored. May Ida be revered. May Ida be venerated. May Ida be glorified. May Ida be blessed. May Ida be pleased. May Ida be satisfied. May Ida be delighted. May Ida be happy. May Ida be joyful. May Ida be auspicious. May Ida be propitious. May Ida be gracious. May Ida be kind. May Ida be benign. May Ida be benevolent. May Ida be favourable. May Ida be friendly. May Ida be loved. May Ida be beloved. May Ida be dear. May Ida be adorable. May Ida be worthy of worship. May Ida be the best. May Ida be supreme. May Ida be excellent. May Ida be perfect. May Ida be pure. May Ida be spotless. May Ida be stainless. May Ida be without blemish. May Ida be free from sin. May Ida be sinless. May Ida be faultless. May Ida have no faults. May Ida be blameless. May Ida not be blamed. May Ida be beyond blame. May Ida be above blame. May Ida not have to be blamed. May I be worshipped by Ida. May Ida be my friend. May Ida be mine. May Ida be for me. May Ida be with me. May Ida belong to me. May Ida not leave me. May Ida never leave me. May I not be separated from Ida. May Ida not abandon me. May Ida protect me. May Ida guard me. May Ida shelter me. May Ida cover me. May Ida keep me safe. May Ida keep safe. May Ida be safe. May Ida not perish. May Ida not die. May Ida not pass away. May Ida not depart. May Ida not go away. May Ida be immortal. May Ida be deathless. May Ida be undying. May Ida be imperishable. May Ida be indestructible. May Ida be invincible. May Ida be unassailable. May Ida be unconquerable. May Ida be invulnerable. May Ida be unharmed. May Ida be untroubled. May Ida be undisturbed. May Ida be tranquil. May Ida be peaceful. May Ida be at peace. May Ida be in peace. May Ida not suffer. May Ida not grieve. May Ida not sorrow. May Ida not lament. May Ida not mourn. May Ida not weep. May Ida not cry. May Ida not shed tears. May Ida not feel pain. May Ida not experience pain. May Ida be painless. May Ida be pain-free. May Ida be exempt from pain. May Ida have nothing to do with pain. May Ida know no pain. May Ida never know pain. May Ida's pain be removed. May Ida'S pain be destroyed. May Ida' s pain be annihilated. May Ida' S pain be eradicated. May Ida' $ pain be eliminated. May Ida' pain be abolished. May Ida' 's pain be abolished. Translation: May Ida, invoked together with the heaven and Aditya, be worshipped. May the heaven and Aditya be invoked together with Ida. May Ida, together with the heaven, Aditya, and the wind, be worshipped. The heaven, Aditya, the wind, and Vāma Devya be invoked together with the wind. May Ida, the rain, be worshipped together with heaven and earth... May Ida be worshipped together with the heaven. May Ida, worshipped, be worshipped. Ida, invoked, may be worshipped. May I be honoured by Ida. May I be praised by Ida. May the heaven, earth, and Ida be worshipped. The sky, earth, and heaven be worshipped. The wind, heaven, and earth be worshipped. The earth, heaven, and wind be worshipped. The sun, heaven, and sky be worshipped. The moon, heaven, and sun be worshipped. The stars, heaven, and moon be worshipped. The gods, heaven, and stars be worshipped. The sages, heaven, and gods be worshipped. The Rishis, heaven, and sages be worshipped. The Vedas, heaven, and Rishis be worshipped. The Veda, heaven, and Vedas be worshipped. The sacrifice, heaven, and Veda be worshipped. The sacrificial rites, heaven, and sacrifice be worshipped. The oblations, heaven, and sacrificial rites be worshipped. The offerings, heaven, and oblations be worshipped. The fire, heaven, and offerings be worshipped. The Agnihotra, heaven, and fire be worshipped. The Soma, heaven, and Agnihotra be worshipped. The Somas, heaven, and Soma be worshipped. The Gomas, heaven, the Soma, and the Somas be worshipped. The Brahmanas, heaven, and Gomas be worshipped. Heaven, earth, and the Brahmanas be worshipped. The Brahman, heaven, and Brahmanas be worshipped.
1.7.8	Having invoked, he should eat the Upāṃśu portion. "O goddess, accept our share. Increase the cattle. You are the ruler of prosperity. Grant us that. Give us that. We have eaten your share. Of all the beings, of all the bodies, of all the heroes, of all the men, of all the males."
1.8.1	Having purified himself, they perform the Anuyājas.
1.8.2	Having covered the cup with the Paristaraṇa, he sprinkles water over it. That is the Marjana.
1.8.3	The Anuyājas are the Devas.
1.8.4	The Vītavatpadas are the last.
1.8.5	There are three.
1.8.6	He offers each one separately.
1.8.7	The god Barhi, the god Narāśaṃsa, the god Agni Svishtakṛt, the wise, the gentle, the true, the one who knows no deceit, the Hotṛ, the Hotṛ of the Hotṛ, he who knows, O Agni, the gods whom you have invited, whom you have invited to come, they have been pleased with your Hotṛ-ship. The Hotṛ-ship which is yours, which leads to the gods, we have offered in heaven to the gods. May Agni Svishtakrit be the Hotṛ, O Agni, in the forest of wealth, for the one who has wealth. "Recite the invocation of praise, saying, "May there be no end."
1.9.1	The two heaven and earth, sent by the reciter of the Sūkta, have been auspicious. May the reciter of Sūkta and the reciter of Namas prosper. May the reciters of Sūkta prosper. O Agni, you are the reciter of sūktas. May the two heaven and earth be present at this sacrifice for the sacrificer. May the two be present. May the two, the heaven and earth, be present. May they be present. May heaven and earth be here. May they be here. May heaven and Earth be here. May the two Heaven and Earth be here, the two Heaven and earth, the two Heaven, the two Heaven. May the two Earth and Heaven be here. May Heaven and Earth be present. May Heaven and earth be present. May those two Heaven and Earth, the two Heaven-and-Earth, the two Heavenand-Earth, be present. The two Heaven and Earth are present. May the heaven and earth be together. May the heaven be together. May heaven and heaven be together. The heaven is together. May heaven be together. Heaven is together. May the two heavens be together. May Heaven and Heaven be together. May those two heavens be together, the two heavens, the two heavens. May the two earths be together. May earth be together. Earth is together. May earth and earth be together.
1.9.2	Thus the others.
1.9.3	The unoffered is offered, as it is in reality.
1.9.4	The Upaṃśu has been mentioned.
1.9.5	The gods, having run to the end of the pouring, have enjoyed the clarified butter, have increased, have become greater. Those who have not offered Agnihotra have enjoyed this oblation, have increased, become greater. This sacrificer desires the life, the prosperity, the offspring, the nourishment of wealth, the heaven-going Hotr, the northern, the divine, the greater oblation-making, the divine abode, the universal love, which he desires by this oblation, may he obtain it here. May the gods grant it to him. May Agni, the god, bow down to the gods. We are human beings of Agni. May the two, the desired and the obtained, be ours. May the heaven and earth protect us from sin. May this be the way of the good. This is the salutation to the gods.
1.10.1	The Adhvaryu sends it to the Sāmavedin with the words, "I have chosen this for you, O Sāmavedins." He says this like the Anuvāka, without the Pranava.
1.10.2	The Adhvaryu gives the Veda to him.
1.10.3	He should take it with the words, “You are the Veda, the Veda is to be known.”
1.10.4	Having risen with the verse, "For life," and having sat down behind the Garhapatya, they offer Soma, Tvashtri, the wives of the gods, and Agni, the householder, with clarified butter.
1.10.5	May you grow, may you be united. May your streams be united, and may your powers be united. Tvashtar is the foremost, that is our fourth. May the wives of the gods, the diligent ones, protect us. These are the two Agni, the Hotar, the Householder, the King, the bearer of oblations, Agni, the immortal, the Father. These are the Patnisamyajas.
1.10.6	Then one desiring offspring should offer to Raka, Sinivali and Kuhu, before the householder.
1.10.7	The two verses of invocation and offering are "I offer to Raka" and "I offer to Sinivali and to Kuhu".
1.10.8	I know Kuhu, the well-spoken, the most hospitable at this sacrifice. May she grant us the hearing of the Pitrs. To her, O Goddess, we offer this oblation. Kuhu is the wife of the immortal gods. May she hear our oblation. Let her give much wealth to the one who is eager. May she bestow prosperity on the sacrificer. One should pour the clarified butter into the palm of the hand. Having invoked Ida, one should eat all of it.
1.10.9	May there be peace or not.
1.11.1	Having given the Veda to his wife, the Hotṛ or the Adhvaryu should recite: "Thou art the Veda, thou art the knowledge. Thou art the deed, thou art the instrument. Thou art the union of action. Thou art the uniting. May the Veda give the horse, the one who is full of ghee, the one who has a family, the one who nourishes wealth, the one who possesses a thousand, the one who many people depend on, the one who controls the people, the one who knows the truth. May he know the offspring, may he know the desire. For thee, O desire."
1.11.2	If he desires offspring, he should touch the navel with the tip of the Veda.
1.11.3	Then he should release the yoke, saying, "I release you from Varuna's noose."
1.11.4	Placing the noose twice the length of the Gārhapatya towards the east, he places the Veda grass above it, with the tips pointing towards the north.
1.11.5	In front, a full vessel is joined with the Veda grass.
1.11.6	Then he should recite, touching it: "You are full, may I be full. You are very full, may I become very full. You are in the assembly, may I be in the assembly. You are all, may I be all. You are the earth, may you not harm me."
1.11.7	Then he makes her recite the verse while sprinkling water from a full vessel in each direction: "The gods, the priests, may they sprinkle in the eastern direction; the months, the ancestors, may they sprinkle the southern direction; the houses, the cattle, may they sprinkle towards the west; the waters, the plants, the trees, may they sprinkle to the north; the sacrifice, the year, Prajapati, may they sprinkle upwards." Or "may they sprinkle."
1.11.8	Then, having placed his outstretched palms below the yoke, and having placed the full vessel on his left side, he should recite: "May I not injure the offspring that belongs to us. You are the one who is in the ocean. May you lead us to our own path."
1.11.9	Taking the sacrificial grass of the Vedas, shaking it, and continuously strewing it, he goes to the Ahavaniya from the Garhapatya, weaving the thread, following the light of the rays.
1.11.10	Having placed the remaining (material) to the south of the sacrificial fire, standing up, taking it with the ladle of the vessel, one should offer all the expiations with mantras ending with "svāhā", if not recited in the mantra.
1.11.11	Whatever is offered elsewhere.
1.11.12	Thus, the offerings of the unseen fire, the installation and the offerings.
1.11.13	The two verses, "O Agni, the unblamed ones, the true ones, you are the unwearied one, made by the unwearied ones, the unwearied brings the offering. Grant us healing. Svāhā. May the gods protect us from here." With two Vyāhṛtis, "Bhūr svāhā, Bhuvaḥ svāhā, Svaḥ svāha. Bhūr Bhuvaḥ Svaḥ svāhākāraḥ."
1.11.14	Having offered oblations, having worshipped with the Sthāñjapas, having emerged from the sacred place, the rules are observed.
1.11.15	"Oṃ, my voice is yours, my sacrifice is yours, and my salutations are yours. Whatever is deficient in you, to that I offer. Whatever is excessive in you, to you I offer salutations." This is the Sthānjapas.
1.11.16	Thus of the Hotṛ.
1.12.1	Now of the Brahman.
1.12.2	The sipping of water, wearing of the sacred thread, and cleanliness are performed.
1.12.3-7	The direction in which the performers of the rites proceed, that is the east. In the rites where there is no mantra, there is option between standing and sitting. One should stand in the rites where there are oblations and Vasat-utterance. One should sit in other rites.
1.12.8	Having gone around the Ahavaniya fire with all the fingers of the right hand, he should sit on the Kuśa grass to the right.
1.12.9	"Having sat down, he should recite, "Brihaspati is Brahma, he will be in the Brahma-house. O Brihaspati, protect the sacrifice."
1.12.10	This is the Brahma-japa, which is to be recited in all sacrificial rituals where one sits down near the fire."
1.12.11	Having sat down, one is protected by Ati-sarya.
1.12.12	Having heard the Brahman say, "I shall offer water," one should recite "Bhūr Bhuvah Svaḥ, Brihaspati-born," and then let go, saying "Offer." This applies to all cases.
1.12.13	The instructions are according to the ritual.
1.12.14	The Pranava is recited loudly.
1.12.15	Above the Pranava.
1.12.16	From here onwards, the speech is restrained until the offering of oblations and the sprinkling.
1.12.17	Until the sprinkling, in the case of an animal.
1.12.18	The Somas, the Gharmādis, the Atipraiṣas, and the Subrahmaṇyā are included in the Prātaranuvāka.
1.12.19	The Antaryāma is included in the Prātarānūvākya.
1.12.20	The Anusavana is included in the Harivata and the Edā.
1.12.21	The Atiśarjanas and the Vasatkara are included in the Stotras.
1.12.22	The Pavamānas are included in the Oḍṛca.
1.12.23	And whatever else is Mantric.
1.12.24	The Hotr is included in the remaining.
1.12.25	And the Āpatti is included.
1.12.26	Where the Agni is carried forward even with Soma, then the beginning of that is the silence.
1.12.27	And while going towards the south, he recites the Sūkta "Āśuḥ śīṣan"
1.12.28	The conclusion of the sitting down has been mentioned.
1.12.29	But in the carrying forward of the Soma, there is no Brahma-recitation.
1.12.30	Elsewhere, having released his speech, he speaks little, with his mind on the sacrifice.
1.12.31-33	If the mantra is interrupted or if the rite is mentioned or indicated, one should offer a ladleful of oblation. If it is from the Ṛg Veda, one should offer at the Garhapatya with "bhūr." If it is from the Yajur Veda, one should make an offering at the Dakṣiṇāgni with "bhuvaḥ." If it is the Somas, one should offer with "svar" at the Āhavanīya. If it is from all (Vedas), or if it is unknown, one should offer only at the Āhavaneya with "bhūr bhuvaḥ svar".
1.12.34	Before the Prajapa rites, he should place the embers outside the enclosing sticks with the ladle-stick, saying, "May the penance not burn, may the sacrifice not burn, may not the lord of sacrifice burn. Obeisance to you when you are stretched out, obeisance to you when stretched out, obeisances to you when you sit down."
1.12.35	"Do not injure this one, do not injure this one" - thus the Adhvaryu and the Yajamana (recite) in each direction. If the Brahmana and the Yajaman are in front, the Hotri and the Patni are on the right, the Agnidhra and the Yajman are behind, and the Brahman and the Yajmana are on the left.
1.12.36	Then he should strike him back, saying, "I have placed the sacrifice at the presence of Nirriti. I give it to the gods, knowing (this). May you be well-born, for a hundred have eaten me here. May the gods bestow protection on me."
1.12.37	He should offer it with the formula, "May the thousand-horned bull, the knower of beings, the Stoma-backed, the ghee-possessed, the well-directed one not harm us. I am offering you, the one who harms. I do not abandon you. Grant us the nourishment of cattle and the nourishment of heroes. Svāhā."
1.13.1	When the food is being brought, he looks at it, saying, "I look at thee with the eye of Mitra." "I receive thee with the impulse of the divine Savitr, with the arms of the Asvins, with the hands of Pusan." Having received it in the hollow of his hands, he places it on the navel of the earth, on the lap of Aditi. Having placed it on the kuśas with the handle towards the east, he should eat it with the thumb and the little finger, without breaking it. "I eat with the mouth of Agni, with the mouth of Brihaspati." Having sipped water, he should say, "I desire thee with truth." "Those deities who are in the waters, may they appease my eye, ear, and breath. May they not injure me." "I place thee in the belly of Indra." He should touch the navel. Having washed, he should thrice pour the water used for bringing the food into himself.
1.13.2	Having sprinkled it, he should place the portion of Brahman in it.
1.13.3	Afterwards, the portion of the sacrificer on the Kuśa grass.
1.13.4	He should look at the Anvāhārya portion: "May this be the portion of Prajapati, nourishing, full of milk, and not perishable. Do not look at me in this world and the other world."
1.13.5	"Protect my Prāṇāpāna (vital airs). For Kāma (Cupid) thee." Having touched it with the thumb and the little finger, having taken the remaining part, he should place it in the Brahmabhaga.
1.13.6	Hearing, "O Brahman, we are about to depart," Brihaspati, the Brahman, sat in the abode of the Brahman. O Brihaspati, you have protected the sacrifice. Protect the sacrifice, protect the lord of the sacrifice, protect me.
1.13.7	Having recited the verses "Bhūr Bhuvaḥ Svaḥ, Brihaspati-born," one should permit the kindling wood with the words "Pratiṣṭha." When the last of the priests has finished, one should offer all the expiations. The others should touch him.
1.13.8	Or the Hotr.
1.13.9	These are the regular offerings.
1.13.10	All the priests stand up with the concluding recitation.
2.1.1	The animal sacrifice and Soma sacrifice have been prescribed for the full moon day.
2.1.2	One should perform the sacrifice on the new moon day or the full moon day with these.
2.1.3	A king should offer Agnihotra.
2.1.4	One should offer food to a Brahmana who is a recluse at other times.
2.1.5	One who is truthful and righteous should always offer Soma.
2.1.6	In the case of many, the injunction of many is in close proximity.
2.1.7	Two each for the Yajya and Anuvakya.
2.1.8	In the case of unseen injunctions, it is always so.
2.1.9	The Agnihotra rite.
2.1.10	In the Krittika, Rohini, Mrigashira, Phalguni, Vishakha, Uttaraphalguni, and Pushya constellations.
2.1.11	In any of these.
2.1.12	A Brahmin should perform the Agnihotra rite in the spring season.
2.1.13	The Kshatriya and Vaishya castes should perform it in the summer, rainy, and autumn seasons.
2.1.14	He should place it in any of the seasons.
2.1.15	One who is going to perform a Soma sacrifice should ask about the Nakshatra, but not about the stars.
2.1.16	One should bring the kindling woods from the base of the Asvattha tree, without looking back.
2.1.17	"The Asvattha tree that has grown from the base of a Shami tree, I bring you with the Veda, with the auspicious signs." The Agnihotra rite ends here.
2.1.18	If the Iṣṭis are many, then (the Hotr) should recite the Agni-verse.
2.1.19	In the first (verse) Agni is Agni, Pavamāna.
2.1.20	O Agni, thou art the life-giver, O Agni, thou art purifying, thou art the giver of wealth.
2.1.21	When the Svishtakṛt-offering is mentioned, one should recite the Sauvishtakṛtī verse.
2.1.22	In all cases where there is a change of deity, the Nitya verses are omitted.
2.1.23	Those who are Sviṣṭakṛt and the two Antaryājas, they are in that place.
2.1.24	This is the similarity of the same class.
2.1.25	In the second, Agni is in Vṛdhanvant, Agni is in Pāvaka, Agni is pure, he shines for us, Agni shines, Agni shines with light, Agni is the most pure, O Agni, your purities shine.
2.1.26	I invoke Agni, the all-conquering, the priest, at the second Samidheni offering, one should pour out the Soma before the last (verse). Pṛthupāja, the immortal, two (verses).
2.1.27	Having said, "Do thou go," he should go with these (verses). "May we obtain wealth with Agni, the nourisher, the remover of grief, the remover of evil." The optional verses are "Agni and Soma, Indra and Agni, Vishnu."
2.1.28	Aditi.
2.1.29	O Aditi, we invoke thee, the great, the mighty, the mother of the well-disciplined, the wife of truth, the ruler, the imperishable, the far-reaching, the well-armed Aditi, the well-guiding.
2.1.30	The two verses "Agni is kindled" and "Agni is praised" are to be recited at the Samyajya. The three verses beginning with "O Agni, do thou come" are to be uttered.
2.1.31	The first and the last verses should be recited.
2.1.32	Or the first.
2.1.33	In that case, it is in the same Viraj.
2.1.34	Thus, one should understand that the Viraj is in the mere modification of the Veda.
2.1.35	From the beginning, the twelve nights are without interruption.
2.1.36	But those who have lost their glory completely.
2.2.1	Having kindled the Garhapatya in the afternoon, one should bring the Dakṣiṇāgni and offer it from the Vitskula of one who has wealth and is of the same caste. Some say that one should offer it from the fire that is being maintained or having churned out fire from the kindling wood, one should take the Āhavanīya from the burning Garhapatya.
2.2.2	One should take it with the verse, "I offer you, the god, to the gods for victory."
2.2.3	"When he is being lifted up, he should say, 'Lift me up from sin, whatever I have done unknowingly or knowingly during the day. Protect me from all that, and lift me up from it.' He should offer this prayer."
2.2.4	I offer the oblation of immortality into the immortal, Agni into the earth, the womb of immortality. By that I conquer the endless desire. Prajapati, the first, conquered this. Agni into Agni, Svāhā. He should place it facing the sun.
2.2.5	Thus in the morning, facing the same sun when it has risen.
2.2.6	If he is going to sleep, he should say, "The night has come."
2.2.7	From now on, the householder who has established the sacred fire should observe the vow until the offering.
2.2.8	One who has not offered the morning oblation should offer it at sunrise.
2.2.9	The oblation should be offered at sunset.
2.2.10	One should always sip water.
2.2.11	One should sip water, reciting, "I sprinkle you with truth and reality." One should sip water three times, taking water again and again.
2.2.12	There is an option in the case of immediate necessity.
2.2.13	The right one is known first. The father of the fires is the Garhapatya, the son is the Ahavaniya. Therefore one should sprinkle thus.
2.2.14	One should carry a stream of water from the Garhapaty without interruption, like a weaver weaving a thread, from the Ahavaniya.
2.2.15	Then, having sat down behind the Garhapatya, he should remove the embers towards the north, saying, "You have performed well, you will perform well."
2.2.16	He should place the Agnihotra on them, saying, "Placed, placed, placed."
2.2.17	The place of Ida is full of ghee, the moving and the unmoving. O Jātavedas, accept this oblation. Those domestic animals of various forms, of those seven, may there be prosperity in me. So be it.
2.2.18	Some say that one should not keep curd.
2.3.1	There is always a sacrifice with milk.
2.3.2	Barley-gruel, cooked rice, curd, ghee, for those who desire villages, food, sense-organs, and energy.
2.3.3	One should kindle the fire on which the oblation has been placed.
2.3.4	If it is not on which the oblations have been placed, one should say, "May Agni not harm your energy."
2.3.5	Sprinkling with a ladle, one should say "May there be peace for you. You are immortal."
2.3.6	There is no transgression of these two.
2.3.7	Again, he should remove it with the burning (fire). Three times, he should remove the Rakshas, the evil ones.
2.3.8	Carrying it upwards like drawing out the roots, he should place it upwards, saying, "For the sky, for the atmosphere, for the earth."
2.3.9	Having performed the Suhuta rite, having thrown the embers, having heated the spoon and ladle, he should say, "The Rakshas have been repelled, the evil spirits have been repelled, Rakshas has been burnt, the evil spirits burnt."
2.3.10	Having placed the spoon to the north of the pot, he should say "Take it up."
2.3.11	Having performed the Agnihotra, having sipped water, having gone beyond the altar, having sat down towards the south, having heard this, he should recite "Oṃ, let it be uttered."
2.3.12	Having been uttered, he should recite the Sruva-filling verse: "Bhūr Idā, Bhuva Idā, Svaḥ Idā, Vrīd Idā."
2.3.13	"The eldest, the eldest, the most full, he who desires the prosperity of his sons, the eldest."
2.3.14	He should offer a full oblation to the son who is dear to him.
2.3.15	Having touched the pot, the kindling wood, and the ladle, and having brought the Gārhapatya fire, he should place it on the Kusha grass near the Āhavanīya fire, the size of his own breath. Having touched his knees, he should place the kindling wood with the mantra, "I place the silver fire-light, the evening brick, with Svāhā."
2.3.16	Having placed the kindling wood, he says, "You are lightning. You are lightning. May you remove my sin." Having touched the water with faith, he should offer the blazing fire at a distance of two fingers, saying, "Om, Agni is light, light is Agni. Svāhā."
2.3.17	Having offered the first oblation, having placed it on the Kuśa grass, he should look at the Garhapatya fire, saying, "Grant me cattle."
2.3.18	Then the second oblation silently, larger, not mixed, either in front or to the north.
2.3.19	He should meditate on Prajapati mentally, silently in all oblations.
2.3.20	Having placed the oblations in the ladle, he shakes it thrice and cleans it by the roots of the Kuśa grass, saying, "For the animals."
2.3.21	He makes the fingers of them face downwards towards the south, facing east, silently or saying, "Svāhā to the Pitṛs."
2.3.22	Having sprinkled water,
2.3.23	You are the rain. Bestow on me (the power of) rain.
2.3.24	One who has established the sacred fire should recite this mantra.
2.3.25	Having recited the rite of establishing the sacred fire, he should recite the following verse: "May I be firm like Angiras, with that sage, that Brahman, and that deity." This is said while offering the kindling wood.
2.3.26	"Those are your offerings and praises," he says for the first oblation.
2.3.27	Having worshipped, he desires the northern direction, looking at the earth, the heaven, the heaven, may I have good offspring with offspring, good heroes with heroes, good nourishment with nourishment.
2.3.28	With the Agniye'bhiḥ.
2.3.29	With three verses beginning with "O Agni, you bestow long life."
2.4.1	In each year.
2.4.2	One should offer oneself on the Parvan day with barley gruel or milk.
2.4.3-9	The priest should eat at a different time. Or the student. Having touched water, he should eat, turning towards the north. Or having offered to the other two fires. "He should eat the first portion with the formula, "For your life I eat you." The second portion with the formula "For your food I eat you." Having silently placed the kindling wood, he should offer to the Garhapatya fire with the formula, "Svāhā to Agni, the householder." The offering is always made to the Garha-patya fire.
2.4.10	Having placed the kindling-wood silently, he offers with "Svāhā to Agni, the lord of the house", on the right side, or with "Svāha to Agni, the eater of food, the lord of food".
2.4.11	The offering is always made facing north.
2.4.12	Having eaten, he offers water to himself with the ladle, three times with "Svāhe to the serpent-gods and people".
2.4.13	Then having washed her with Kuśa grass, she should be taken to the four directions, east, north, south and west, with the mantras, "Svāhā to the seasons, Svāhā to the directions, Svāhāto the seven sages, Svāhāsto the other people."
2.4.14	"He offers the fifth oblation in the Kusha country, saying, 'I offer nectar to Agni Vaisvānara, svāhā.' He offers the sixth oblation behind the Garhapatya, saying, 'He offers the nectar of life, svāhā.'"
2.4.15	Having heated it, he should place it inside the altar.
2.4.16	He should give it to the officiating priest.
2.4.17	Having gone forward beyond the Ahavaniya, he should place three kindling woods, facing north.
2.4.18	The first one with a mantra.
2.4.19	"He should say, "May it blaze in the Ahavaniya!" "May it blaze!" in the Garhapatya, and "May it blaze and blaze!" in (the fire) on the right."
2.4.20	The sprinkling has been mentioned.
2.4.21	One should sprinkle them together.
2.4.22	But before the sprinkling.
2.4.23	So also in the morning.
2.4.24	After sunrise or when the sun has risen.
2.4.25	"Then, with the words, "For truth and prosperity," he sprinkles. With the words, ">>>I shall offer," he offers the oblation. With the words "I offer thee, the tawny one, the oblation of the sun, the unburnt brick, svāhā," he places the kindling wood. With the words "Bhūr Bhuvaḥ Svaḥ Oṃ, the sun is light, light is the sun, svāhā," he offers the oblations and sweeps.
2.5.1	One who is about to depart, having kindled the fires, sips water and stands up after crossing.
2.5.2	"He says, "Protect my cattle" at the Ahavaniya; "Protect my progeny" at the Garhapatya; "Protect me from the Atharva-pitrs" at the Dakshina. He looks at the Garha-patya and the Ahavaniya, "May Mitra-Varuna protect these houses of mine, the undestroyed, the uninjured, Pusan may protect them for our return."
2.5.3	Then, having returned in the same way, he stands to the right of the Āhavanīya fire and says, "May my name be the first, O Jātavedas, that my father and mother gave me at first. You may again bring it to me. I shall bear your name, O Agni."
2.5.4	One should depart without looking back, reciting the Sūkta, "May not go."
2.5.5	One should release speech from a distance from the fires.
2.5.6	May the path of my father always be auspicious. Having descended the path,
2.5.7	If the fire is not attended to and one goes away, then one should say here, "I am here, you are there. I am bearing you in my heart, speech, and mind. Do not abandon me. I am here. I am standing with you in the direction of the fire of the sun." Having attended the fires in each direction,
2.5.8	But we have found the path.
2.5.9	Having heard the blazing fires with hands full of Samit wood and controlled speech, one should approach and gaze at the Ahavanīya fire, saying, "Those who bring the all-giving fire, with a mind free from distress, O Agni, may I not offend against your dwelling place. May there be your praise to you, O Agni, the Praiser. May there be praise to you in the sacrificial grove. O Agni, may you shine forth your body. May you unite me with prosperity."
2.5.10	Having placed the kindling-sticks in the fires, he approaches the Āhavanīya fire with the verse, "O Jātavedas, may your name and mine be like two garments worn by us. We shall wear them for you, for your favour and life, as is proper. O Jātaveds, for our bodies."
2.5.11	Then he should place the kindling-wood.
2.5.12	"He offers on the Āhavaniya with the verse, "We have come to the Āhavaniye, the all-knowing, the most bountiful of wealth, O Agni, the lord, the invincible, the most powerful. Svāhā!" On the Garhapatya with the verse,"This Agni is the householder, the Garhapaty, the most bounteous of wealth for progeny. O Agni, the householder, the invincible, most powerful. Svāhà!" On the Dakṣiṇāgni with the verse," "This Agni is the purifier, the bestower of wealth, the increaser of prosperity. O Agni, purifier, the invincible, and most powerful. Svähä!" He looks at the Garhapatyāhavaniya fires with the verse," "May Mitra-Varuna protect my houses from destruction, from injury. Pūṣan has protected them for our return."
2.5.13	Then, having returned as he came, having assembled, having sat down in the northern quarters, he should utter the words "Bhūr Bhuvaḥ Svaḥ".
2.5.14	After having passed ten nights, one should offer four spoonfuls of clarified butter with the verse, "May the mind and light enjoy the clarified butter. May it join this interrupted sacrifice. To those dawns that are desired and those that are not desired, I unite with the oblation of ghee. Svāhā!"
2.5.15	In the Agnihotra offering.
2.5.16	Some offer a counter-offering.
2.5.17	He should look at the houses, even if he has not kindled the sacred fire. "He should say, "May the houses be like the protector. May you be well-being to us and may you have offspring. May the guardian not harm you." He should enter the houses, saying, "I am entering with a good mind. The killer of heroes, the most heroic, the very heroic, carrying the goddess, pouring out ghee, in them I shall dwell with a good mind." Looking three times, saying, "May it be auspicious, may it be auspicious, the auspicious one of the auspicious one."
2.5.18	If they know that it is false, they should not announce it on that day.
2.5.19	If he knows that he is safe, he should approach him and say, "May you be safe. May I be safe." When he returns, he should say, "Day by day."
2.6.1	The offering of balls to the ancestors is done in the afternoon on the new moon day.
2.6.2	One should offer a single oblation to the fire in the south, saying, "Those who are Asuras, abandoning their forms, moving according to their own nature, supporting the cities of others and their own, may Agni drive them away from this world."
2.6.3	All actions are in that direction.
2.6.4	Having arranged both of them, having spread them out, he should place the vessels one by one towards the south, east, and north of the southern fire - the pot for the cooked rice, the winnowing basket, the pestle, the mortar, the ladle, the ladle-stand, the black antelope skin, the fresh wood, the mirror, and the water pot.
2.6.5	Having ascended to the south of the fire, he should sprinkle the pot filled with rice grains.
2.6.6	He should place the Parisamnas (bricks) in the middle.
2.6.7	Having made a black antelope skin and a mortar, he should make his wife carry the other (bricks) without discrimination.
2.6.8	Having carried them once and washed them, he should cook them in the southern fire.
2.6.9	With a wooden sword, he should draw a line towards the east, beyond the Atipraṇīta (brick), with the formula, "The Asuras and Rakshas have been driven away, the Vedi is occupied."
2.6.10	Having sprinkled it once, he should place it with the Avashishtas. Having poured clarified butter, ghee, or fresh butter, or having poured clarified butter into the Dhruva vessel, he should place the clarified butter to the right.
2.6.11	Anointing, applying, and sprinkling are the means of purification.
2.6.12	Having placed the fire-wood in the east, having taken it with the ladle, he should offer with the oblation of Avadāna, saying, "To Soma, the father, Svāhā, salutations to Agni, the carrier of oblations, Svāhā."
2.6.13	With the exclamation "Svāhā," the one wearing the sacred thread in the east, first offers to Agni.
2.6.14	Having struck the ground with the Meṣaṇā grass, having turned towards the east, he should offer the writing three times with water, saying, "May the fathers be purified, may the grandfathers be purified, may great-grandfathers be purified."
2.6.15	He should scatter the balls of food in that (water), with his right hand, saying, "This is for your father, grandfather, and great-grandfather, and for those who follow you here."
2.6.16	Gaṇagāri says that the offerings should be made to the respective deities. One should worship the other deities directly, because they are for the sake of the deceased.
2.6.17	Tāvalli says that one should make offerings to all the deities. Because they are qualities of the action.
2.6.18	Gautama says that one should offer to the deceased only for three days. Because the action is for the sake of accomplishing the purpose.
2.6.19	The special means of the living and dead.
2.6.20	One should not offer to others, because they are not authorized, nor should one offer to the living, because it is not directly perceived.
2.6.21	One should also not offer to those who are hidden from the living.
2.6.22	One should offer to the living.
2.6.23	All offerings are for all living beings.
2.6.24	One who does not know the names should recite "the great-grandfather and great-great-grandfather."
2.7.1	He should offer the oblation to the departed ancestors with the verse, "Obeisance to the departed ancestors, may they be pleased with this oblation. May they be pleased with the oblation."
2.7.2	Having turned to the north and having sat down as much as one is able, one should turn around and offer the oblation with the verse, “The departed ancestors have drunk as much as they are entitled to.”
2.7.3	One should eat the food of the departed ancestors.
2.7.4	It is always to be offered.
2.7.5	"Anoint this one, anoint that one," he says, while anointing the lumps of clay.
2.7.6	He gives a garment, or a garment with a fringe of wool, to one who is fifty years old or more. "This is your garment, O Fathers. Do not let us be deprived of it. Do not let other Fathers deprive us of it."
2.7.7	Then he should address them thus: "Salutations to you, O Fathers, to the food; salutations to you, Fathers, to the energy; salutations to the Fathers, to the heat; salutations to them, O Fathers, the harmless; salutations to thee, O Fathers, for life; salutations to ye, O Fathers, that are for life; salutatious to you, O ye Fathers, to your own; salutations to your Fathers, to these; salutations to ours; may we be here, O ye living, with the living."
2.7.8	"We invoke thee, O Agni, with three (verses).
2.7.9	Then he should lead them forth with the verse, "O departed fathers, ye who are friendly, on the deep and ancient paths, having given us wealth, may ye bestow on us good fortune and prosperity. May ye bestow on us all-heroic prosperity."
2.7.10	He should go to Agni with the verse, "O Agni, today we invoke thee with praises like a horse."
2.7.11	"If I have harmed my mother, my father, the earth, the sky, the Gārhapatya fire, may Agni, the Gārhaptya fire, release me from that sin and make me sinless."
2.7.12	"The middle ball of the oblations is given to the son, saying, 'Give my son, O Fathers.'"
2.7.13	He should make his wife eat, saying, "The fathers have placed the embryo, the young one, the lotus-garlanded one, so that he may be without enemies."
2.7.14	In the waters, the other two.
2.7.15	Or in the Atiprāṇita (waters).
2.7.16	One whose speech is not affected by desire for food should eat.
2.7.17	One afflicted with a great disease should eat, as he goes to one of the two destinations.
2.7.18	Thus one who has not established the sacred fires should do it always.
2.7.19	Having melted it well, one should offer.
2.7.20	The vessels are to be discarded twice.
2.7.21	Grass is the second, if there is an excess.
2.8.1	One who is about to perform the Darśa-Pūrṇamāsa sacrifices should offer the Anvarambhaṇīya (oblation).
2.8.2	Agni-Viṣṇu, Sarasvatī, Sarasvatī and Agni, Bhagi.
2.8.3	O Agni-Vishnu, with your consent, may the Angiras prosper. Come with your splendor and strength, O Agni-Vishņu, of great power, We delight in your beloved path, the secret of ghee, in every place. Your praise comes to us, your tongue drinks ghee. O Sarasvati, the purifying one, the purifying maiden, The drinker of the bright-colored drink, the divine hawk, the great, The son of Savitar, as he says, "May he bring us the gifts."
2.8.4	If one who has performed the Ādhāna rite becomes afflicted with a disease, or if one's wealth becomes afflicted, one should perform the Prāyaṇīya Iṣṭi.
2.8.5	In that (Iṣṭi), one should offer the Prāyaṇya and Anuyāja offerings with Vibhakti mantras.
2.8.6	"The mantras are: "O Agni, may the kindling woods, the kindling woods be offered. May Tapanu Pāda offer Agni. May Agni be offered with ghee. May the Idas be offered with Agni. May Agni, the kindling wood, be offered with ghee."
2.8.7	The two Ajyabhāga offerings are to Agni, with the verses, "I praise Agni, the kindler of the fire, the one who is in the heaven."
2.8.8	They are called "the two with the word 'intelligence' and 'moon'."
2.8.9	There is a similar sequence.
2.8.10	And there is worship.
2.8.11	The Brahmanas always recite the first verse.
2.8.12	The second verse is "O Agni, may your life-giving rays shine forth."
2.8.13	The word "oblation" is always used in the second verse.
2.8.14	The Agniya oblation is indeed Agni. Today, O Agni, with these hymns of praise, we sing to thee, the good, the wise. With these hymns of praise. Today, O wise Agni, we sing to thy horse. With the Stoma. The divine Agni, the divine Narasamsa, the divine Agni, the lord of wealth, may he be pleased with the offering of wealth. The divine Narasamsa may he be pleased.
2.9.1	The Aggrayan sacrifice is to be performed with Vrīhi, Shyamaka and barley.
2.9.2	One should not eat the harvest without offering the Agnihotra.
2.9.3	One should perform the Aggrayan sacrifice when one is satisfied with the rain.
2.9.4	The gods say that one should perform the Agga-ryan sacrifice when one is satiated with the rain. One should offer the milk of the Agnihotri cow.
2.9.5	Or one should perform the rite with barley.
2.9.6	The Iṣṭi is for the king.
2.9.7	All of them are one.
2.9.8	In the Śyāmākā-Iṣṭi, there is a cake for Soma.
2.9.9	Having recited the Avantara-eda, he should take it in his left hand and touch it with the other hand, saying, "I take the Soma for Prajapati for my prosperity, for my fame, for my food."
2.9.10	May the gods have chosen for us the good and the auspicious. By your grace we have attained you. Be our friend, like a father. Be auspicious to us, to the bipeds and to the quadrupeds. Having eaten, he should rinse his mouth and touch his navel. You are the life. I am speaking the truth. You are all. You have entered all. Remove old age and disease from my body. Be without disease for me. May we prosper. In Indra.
2.9.11	By this (verse) the eaters of food, in all (cases), at the new meal.
2.9.12	Now, in the case of barley and rice, in the Viraj offering.
2.9.13	Agni and Indra, or Indra and Agni, or all the gods, or Soma, or if there is Shyamaka, or Heaven and Earth,
2.9.14	The first who kindle Agni, the well-doing, the radiant, the divine, all the gods who have come, the bright ones, may the great, the uninjured, the great heaven and earth be for us. May the new-born fathers be for us.
2.10.1	Now the optional ones.
2.10.2	One who desires long life should perform the Iṣṭi with those who desire life.
2.10.3	O Agni, with your good counsel, O Soma, for great prosperity. Agni is the one who bestows long life, Indra is the protector.
2.10.4	May this Agni, the most desirable, bestow on you life on all sides. May your breath return to you. I send away your disease. May Agni, the giver of life, accepting the oblation, being the receptacle of ghee, being of the nature of ghee, having drunk ghee, the sweet, the charming, the product of cows, may he protect this one as a father protects his son. May Indra, the protector, the saviour, protect you from this disease. Do not let it harm you. O Agni, protect us with your constant protectors. O Agni, do thou protect us with the new (protectors). This is the Samyājyā.
2.10.5	We have protected ourselves with the Svastyayana.
2.10.6	O Agni, protect us from harm. You, O Soma, from all sides.
2.10.7	Agni is auspicious. May he be auspicious for us. O Agni, from heaven and earth, protect us from excess, protect us from evil. The Saniyajya is as mentioned earlier.
2.10.8	In the Putrakameshti, Agni is the son.
2.10.9	To whom you were born, O Agni, for good deeds, to whom you, O Agni, are worshipped by the mind, O Agni, the most venerable, O Agni, most venerable. Two Samyagya verses.
2.10.10	The northern one is addressed to Agni.
2.10.11	The eternal one is addressed to the head.
2.10.12	To you, O Agni. The Angirasas worship you, O Agni; the desire of you, O Agni is for desire.
2.10.13	The northern verse is addressed to Vaimardhi.
2.10.14-15	O Indra, do thou destroy the foes, like a terrible deer, the most powerful, the most excellent, the most excellent of all, the most excellent in the world, the most excellent among the gods, the most excellent one, the most excellent. O Indra, do destroy the foes, the foes of the past, the foes of today, the foes of tomorrow, the foes of future times, the foes of all times, the foes who are in the sky, the foes who will be in the sky, those who are in the heaven, those who will be in heaven, those who are on the earth, those who will come to the earth, those in the east, those in the west, those in the north, those in the south, those who are near, those who are far, those who are above, those who are below, those who are within, those who are without, those who are inside, those who are outside, those who are at the door, those who are not at the door, the foes who have come, the foes who come, the foes of this world, the foes of other worlds, the foes who belong to us, the foes who do not belong to us, those who are our enemies, those who are the enemies of others, those who are enemies of the gods, those who are friends of the gods, the foes who were in the past, the enemies who will be in future times, the enemies who are in the present, the enemies who have been destroyed, the enemies who were destroyed, the enemies of the past, those who will become enemies, those who will not become enemies, those enemies who are in heaven, those enemies who will be on earth, those enemies who have been born, those enemies who were born, those enemies of the
2.10.16-17	Whatever wealth, O Indra, thou hast taken away in anger, do thou, O Indra, be pleased with us again by this oblation. Again and again may Indra, the bountiful, the wealthy, the lord of Suradhas, grant us wealth. May he, when entreated, grant us our desire. May Indra not be deprived of our oblation. To the guardians of the directions.
2.10.18-19	To the four Immortals, the Guardians of the Quarters, to the Overlords of this world, we offer oblation. I unite all the Quarters with honey, all the waters and plants be free from disease. May this Sacrificer be free from foes. May all animals be uncaptured. Lokeshti
2.10.20	Earth, sky, heaven, these are the deities.
2.10.21	I invoke the mother earth, the great earth, the spacious sky for protection. The heaven supports the whole universe. Earth and sky spread out. The great heaven yields milk. The great earth, the great sky, for my welfare. The heaven is my great protection. The three are for the three.
2.10.22	In the first, the first is the best, the middle is the middle.
2.11.1	Maitraviṇḍa, Mahāvairāja.
2.11.2	Agni, Soma, Varuna, Mitra, Indra, Brihaspati, Savitar, Pusan, Sarasvati, Tvashtri - these are the single offerings.
2.11.3	Agni Soma Varuna Mitra Indra Brihaspati Savitar who is thousandfold Pusan may bless us with cattle Sarasvati Tvashtri may anoint the sacrifice with form.
2.11.4	Having recited the verses in the reverse order, one should offer oblations to Tvashtri, Sarasvati, Pusan, Savitar, Brihaspati, Indra, Mitra, Varuna, Soma and Agni. Tvashtri bestows forms, Sarasvati bestows wealth, Pusan bestows prosperity, Savitar bestows, Brihaspati bestows, Indra bestows a thousand, Mitra bestows, Varuna bestows, Soma bestows, Agni bestows.
2.11.5	There are eight Vairaja rites.
2.11.6	The first six of them are offered with one oblation.
2.11.7	One who wishes to injure his daughter-in-law or brother-in-law should offer this sacrifice.
2.11.8	Indra, the Sun, has crossed the realms. My daughter-in-law is an enemy, my father-in-law am I. I conquer enemies, rejoicing. I conquer the prize in the contest for the prize. Indra, the Sun is the first, the creator of all, with the Maruts, with his kinsmen. May my daughter-in- law and my father-in law, who have entered, speak words and thoughts to each other as enemies.
2.11.9	The Agni who is praised by the Dāmnas, the Agni who is praised for great prosperity, at the Samyājyā.
2.11.10	For the purpose of agreement among those who are in disagreement, the Sannīti.
2.11.11	Agni is the possessor of wealth, Soma is the possessor of Rudra, Indra is the possessor of Maruts, Varuna is the possessor of Adityas, at the Ekapradāna.
2.11.12	May Agni, the first, protect us with the Vasus; may Soma, with the Rudras, protect us with his own self; may Indra, with the Maruts, do according to the seasons; may Varuna, with the Adityas, grant us protection. May Agni, with the Vasus, protect us; may Soma, by his own bodies, with the Rudra; may Indra, the giver of gifts, with the Marut; may Varuna with the Adity, the knower of all.
2.11.13	Those who desire to distinguish between Indra and Maruts.
2.11.14	For when the Maruts are exhausted, they are scattered for the wind.
2.11.15	Having recited the Indra verse, one should offer to Maruts; having recited the Maruts verse, one should make an offering to Indra. In the Vedic texts, Indra is mentioned first, then Maruts.
2.11.16	Or Indra is mentioned first because he is the chief, then Maruts are mentioned.
2.11.17	Those who desire to attain the natural state should recite the Maruts verse.
2.11.18	The Indra-Brhaspati (officiating priests) are being superseded.
2.11.19	If they are to be offered to Indra and Brhaspati, then they should be offered to Indra-Brhaspatis.
2.12.1	In the Pavitresti rite.
2.12.2	This is the way of the waters, the abode of the ocean. May other afflictions torment us. Be auspicious to us, O Pavaka. Obeisance to thee, O Haras, to the shining one. Obeisance to thy radiance. May other afflications torment us. Be thou auspicious to us, be thou auspicious to us. The two verses are called Pavakavatī.
2.12.3	The two portions of clarified butter, like fire, are offered to the two fires. The one who offers the two verses "Pāvakaye" and "Pāvakavante" offers them in the Yajya.
2.12.4	"What is your pure light, flowing in the pots," these are the Pavitras.
2.12.5	Agni Pavamana, Sarasvati, the beloved, Agni Pavaka, Savitar, the giver of truth, Agni Sucir, Vayu, the controller, Agni Vratapati, Dadhikrava, Agni Visvavarar, Vishnu, Shivi-sht, May we be dear to you in what is dear and what is not dear. We offer these oblations to you with salutations. Vayu, the leader, the delight of sacrifices, O Vayu, the bright one, I approach you. I have done what Dadhikrava did. Dadhikrava by his power, the five ploughings, the beloved, the one who is pleased, Agni, the one who strives for great good fortune. At the Samyajya.
2.12.6	This is the rite for one who has stayed away from home for a year and desires purification. This is the hymn of the sacrifice, sung by those who desire purification: "The Vaisvānara, the Vratapati, the Pavitresti, and the Ritavritti, he who employs them purifies ten men."
2.13.1	The Varshakarameshti is the Kariri.
2.13.2	In her, in that, I praise the beautiful Agni, the lord of the house, with salutations, O Dhayya.
2.13.3	Those who are the Varṣakāma-Iṣṭi and Apsumant.
2.13.4	"Agni is in the waters, your Soma told me."
2.13.5	Agni, the lord of houses, Maruts, and Surya.
2.13.6	Three Piṇḍis and the northern ones.
2.13.7	The golden-haired one, the spreading of the dust, these two are thy unchanging abodes. The whole world is established on them. The lightning flashes like a cloud. The great mountain was afraid. They send forth the ray with their strength. Moving with the swiftest, thou goest to the thread. The Maruts, having raised it, come from the sea. The Maruts have come with their power. The men, the givers of good gifts, have given to the giver. The men, with the lightning and the stone, the dark-coloured, the hawks, the birds, the conquerors of the village, like men.
2.13.8	Agni, do thou restrain the wicked. The Grahas know him. Agni, the divine, the shining, the bright, the pure, the pure, Agni, the divine. Those who recite the verses of the Samyajya and offer them with the Yajus formulas, they offer together.
2.13.9	When the sacrifice is over, one should stand in all directions, reciting the verses beginning with "O Agni, do thou protect us" and ending with "O Agni do thou protect us".
2.14.1	From here onwards are the rites of the Iṣṭi.
2.14.2	The Saṃvatsarika sacrifices.
2.14.3	Their performance is in the full moon of Phālguna or Caitra.
2.14.4	The Turāyana sacrifice.
2.14.5	The separate offerings to Agni, Indra and the Viśve Devas are performed at each meal.
2.14.6	One may perform the Ekā or the Trihavis.
2.14.7	At the Dākṣāyaṇa sacrifice one should perform two full moon and two new moon sacrifices.
2.14.8	The first of the two is to be offered at the new moon, in accordance with the order of the deities.
2.14.9	The second is to be offered to Indra at the full moon.
2.14.10	The Maitrāvaruṇa is to be offered on the new moon.
2.14.11	"The Prājāpatya is to be offered below, with the verse, "O Mitra and Varuna, may we obtain the most excellent, the most generous, the most beneficial."
2.14.12	Prajapati, none of these are yours. These worlds, the directions, the regions, the distant, the near, the above, the below, Prajapati, the creator, the giver of life, this oblation of ours, O god, do thou receive. This is the path of heaven and earth.
2.14.13	From the full moon to the new moon, from the new moon to the full moon.
2.14.14	In the absence of mention, the modification of the ritual is implied.
2.14.15	The Adhvaryu should recite as he remembers.
2.14.16	In the case of the fire-kindling, the Vairāja.
2.14.17	Some say in the case of the Dhaiyya.
2.14.18	The Yajya and Anuvākyā are characterised by the deity.
2.14.19	The Gāyatrī verse is recited with the Avati, Hūtavati, and Upuktavati, and the Anuvākyās are characterised by the Purāstalaṅgā.
2.14.20	The Tristubh verse is recited with Vītavati, Juṣṭavati, and the Anuvaśya is characterised by the Upariṣṭalaṅgā, or of another metre.
2.14.21	But not the Yajyas are less.
2.14.22	Neither Ushnih nor Brihatis.
2.14.23	But one should avoid those which are burnt, destroyed, lost, or burnt.
2.14.24	But if the deity is clear, then likewise.
2.14.25	The characteristics are also clear.
2.14.26	Not attaining all.
2.14.27	Non-attainment by the Agniyees.
2.14.28	Or by the Vyahrtis.
2.14.29	Having designated the deity, one should offer and worship.
2.14.30	Or with the head bent down.
2.14.31	Listen to this invocation, O Agni, whom we invoke with our songs. Sit on this spread out grass, sit on the spread out grass, come to this place. Come here today, O Agni, with a friendly mind. Accept this offering, the well-prepared oblation. Come, O Agni, to this well-prepared oblution. Come, O Jātavedas, to this wellprepared oblation. O Agni, come to this well-offered oblation. O Jātaveda, come to this oblation. O Agnī, come to this offering. O Jātamādha, come to this sacrifice. O Agni, accept this oblation. Come to this oblation, O Jātamādhya. Come to this sacrifice, O Jātamadha. Come to this offering, O Jātimant. Come to this well-performed sacrifice, O Jātiman. Come to this Agni, O Jātyant. Come to the well-performed sacrifice. Come to this Jātyant Agni. Come to this excellent sacrifice. Come to the excellent Agni. Come to the Agni who is the best. Come to the best Agni. Come to Agni, the best of the best. Come, O best Agni, to this excellent sacrifice." Thus one should recite the Anirukta verses of Agni.
2.14.32	The Anirukta of Agni.
2.15.1	One who is about to perform the Cāturmāsya sacrifices should offer on the previous day to Vaiśvānara and Parjanya.
2.15.2	Vaiśvānara Agni has generated a new mind for us, growing in strength, asked in heaven, asked on earth, sing for Parjanya. The winds blow, the lightning flashes. The Upāṃśuhomas are performed from the Agnihotra onwards.
2.15.3-11	Those of Saumaika Those of Prāyascittika Those of Anvayātya Those of Ekakapāla Those of Varuna Those of Savitri in the Catutrmasya Those of Pradhanahaviṃsa Those of Pitryopasad Those of Puna-raadheyi Those of Sumandratantra
2.15.12	The Praṇava and the Vasat-call are to be pronounced loudly everywhere.
2.15.13	So also in the Agaryā (Agnihotra) the Agriya (Sāman).
2.15.14	The Praṇava, which is continuous with the Prāṇa, is to be taken up for the Puronuvākyā.
2.15.15	So also the Gurvaṣṭaka for the Yājyā.
2.15.16	The Tantra-svaras of the Upāṃśu are to be pronounced high.
2.15.17	The Tantara-svaras are to be pronounced low.
2.16.1	The Agni-Māntanīyī verses are recited in the morning after the Vaishvadevī verses have been recited. They are recited after the place of the Sāmidhenī verses, standing at a distance of a foot and uttering the sound "abhi".
2.16.2	"O Agni, we have come to you from the Puṣkara lake." Having recited the last half of the verse of the three goddesses, one should wait until the instruction.
2.16.3	Elsewhere also, at the end of the Rg verses, when the end is being formed, it is formed here only.
2.16.4	"One should recite the verse "O Agni, O swan". The verse "O Atri". One should recite again and again until birth."
2.16.5	Having heard the born, one should continue the remaining with the next Pranava.
2.16.6	With the remaining, the next one.
2.16.7	"Let the people speak, the eater with his hand." The second half of the verse should be recited. "The god, the god of the gods." Two verses. "Agni is kindled by Agni. For you are Agni, O Agni." "They sought the well-intentioned one with sacrifice, the gods with sacrifice." One should recite this.
2.16.8	One should know that the last verse is to be recited everywhere.
2.16.9	The two Virājas are to be offered. The four Prāg-offerings are to be offered before the last one. The four Prāk-offerings are offered before the last offering. The four Prâg-offerings, the four Prâgofferings, the three goddesses, the four Prāgofferings, and the four Prâgaofferings are offered.
2.16.10	Agni, Soma, Savitr, Sarasvatî, Pûshan, the Maruts, the self-luminous ones, all the gods, heaven and earth.
2.16.11	May we today, O Savitar, the All-God, the good Lord, obtain the good, and tomorrow, O Pusan, in thy law. Some of your light we worship, some we worship here. Here be your gifts, O ye who are rich in gifts, for the praise of the bright sun, for the praise.
2.16.12	The nine Anuyājas, six above the first, the goddesses, the doors, may be in the forest of wealth, for the sake of wealth. The goddess Ushas, the goddess Jyoti, the goddess Joṣṭrī, the goddess Urjāhuti, the divine Hotr-priests, the three goddesses, the three goddesses may be in the wood of wealth, for wealth.
2.16.13-14	After the Anuyājas, after the Sūktavāka and the Śamyuvāka, one should not offer the Vājinam to the Vājinis without the Adhiṣṭhā. "May the Vājinīs be favourable to us in our prayers. In every race, O Vājinīs, come!" One should recite the Yajya with the knees raised and without the Adhikaraṇa.
2.16.15	"O Agni, do thou eat!" is the second Vasat-call. Where there is a single call to action, the two Vasat-calls are to be pronounced together. One should repeat twice in such cases.
2.16.16	And there should be no repetition of the subsequent call.
2.16.17	One should wish to receive the oblation like a cake for Vājinī.
2.16.18	"O Adhvaryu, do thou invoke; O Brahman, do thou invoke. O Agnid, do thou invoke."
2.16.19	"Whatever semen is shed by me, whatever goes away from me, whatever is born again, may that be auspicious to me. May that make me strong. I eat of that which is strong and drunk by thee, which is invoked, I eat of that invoked." He should eat the Pranabhakṣa (food).
2.16.20-25	Thus the Adhvaryu, the Brahman, and the Agnidhra. The sacrificer himself, and the others who are initiated, directly. Having performed the Full-moon sacrifice, one should undertake the observances of the Caturmāsyas. One should let the hair grow, or shave the beard, lie down facing downwards, and avoid honey, meat, salt, and the three kinds of writing. One should approach one's wife during the season.
2.17.3	"The god with the divine mind, three times, Ida, the god, Agni, with all the gods, the half-verse should be recited while sitting, the first verse in a low voice, and the last verse in a loud voice."
2.17.4	There, from that place, one moves to another place, reciting the Pranava, without breathing out, and then takes up the next verse.
2.17.5	It is known that the Pranava is continuous with the breath.
2.17.6	Following the northern Agni, one should go to the northern direction.
2.17.7	"Here, the first one has come with the creators, for the great sacrifice. This is the first verse for the king and the vaishya."
2.17.8	Standing behind the northern Veda,
2.17.9	In the case of Soma sacrifices, it is the northern Veda.
2.17.10	Having placed the fire, the Hotṛ, having settled in his own world, the Hotṛ who knows, having placed the two Paridhi-sticks, and having sat down on them, he should release speech with the words "Bhūr Bhuvaḥ Svaḥ".
2.17.11	Also elsewhere, where one recites following.
2.17.12	In the case of standing and instructions, the release of speech is the same.
2.17.13	The Agni-Māntana and other rites are common to all the deities.
2.17.14	In place of the offerings, the sixth and others are Indra-Agni, Maruts, Varuna, Ka
2.17.15	Indra and Agni have gone to the place where Vritra was slain, and the Maruts bestow strength. He who is the lord of the sacrifice, like a king, is the most excellent of all. O Varuna, hear me, I approach you with prayer. The golden embryo has emerged, the first. The Pratiprasthātṛ says this to the sacrificer at the third pressing.
2.17.16	They go to the Avabhrtha when the Soma has been consumed.
2.17.17	There the Avabhrtha-sacrifice is performed.
2.17.18	We shall explain it later. In the two months, the animal-sacrifice to Indra-Agni.
2.18.1	Thus, then the Sāka-medha.
2.18.2	On the previous day, three Iṣṭis are performed as the Anusavana.
2.18.3	In the first (verse) Agni, having a host, (is invoked) for the sake of one having a host. We invoke Agni with hymns. May he protect us from the enemy. With the host, the very generous one, may he be with us. In the second (verse) the Maruts, having increased, the scorching ones, the scorching ones. This is the oblation. O Maruts, if you are angry with us, the Maruts, the purifying ones, the Maruts who purify the house, the Maruts beginning with the offering of clarified butter and ending with the Iḍā.
2.18.4	The householders have come, they are singing the great hymn at dawn.
2.18.5	The two Viras, who are nourished, are to be offered in the Anigada sacrifice.
2.18.6	Also elsewhere, where there is no invocation.
2.18.7	Also in the invocation, in the Pitrya animal sacrifice.
2.18.8	There is much food to be produced in this night.
2.18.9	If it is postponed, they should offer the Pūrṇadava oblation.
2.18.10	In the bull, the roaring one.
2.18.11	Or at the thunder.
2.18.12	Some people make the Agnidhra cry, saying that he is the son of Brahma.
2.18.13	If they were to invoke the Hotar, then the full ladle would fall down and return full again. Like a seller of wool, O hundred-strong one, give me wealth and energy. I give you, give to me. Hold mine, hold yours. Like the waters, like the mother, the giver gives. The giver gives.
2.18.14	To the Maruts, the playful ones, the northern one.
2.18.15	Let the people say, "This is the slayer of Vritra, the unseen one." The two verses are for the slaying of Vritra.
2.18.16	The play of your Maruts, O Sharad, is the great one, those Maruts who are self-moving.
2.18.17	O Agni, the beloved, the great one, the one who brings good fortune, the one who is praised, the one who has been spoken in the Mahendra sacrifice, the one who avoids the bath, the one who eats the food of Varuna.
2.18.18	The places of the seven oblations beginning with the seventh are Indra, Vritrahan, Mahendra, or Visvakarman.
2.18.19	O Indra, the slayer of Vritra, come to us. O great one, O Visvakarman, the giver of wealth, I have grown by offering oblations. Those highest and lowest abodes of yours.
2.19.1	Having gone beyond the fire of the Dakshina, one should offer to the Pitryas.
2.19.2	That is the one ending with Shamyu.
2.19.3	The Hotr, who has forgotten his recitation, should recite the Vasat-call without the Anumantrana-recitation and the Hiṃkāra-recitation.
2.19.4	The rites are performed towards the east.
2.19.5	The other rites are performed in the same way.
2.19.6	The Anvaya-recitation is done three times with the verse, "O Ushanas, we praise you."
2.19.7	The conclusion is done with the last Anuvaka, "May the gods and ancestors lead the sacrificer."
2.19.8	At the place of this (verse) one should invoke Agni Kavya-vahan.
2.19.9	And at the end of the Prajapa one should conclude before the Ajyapas.
2.19.10	And at this place (of the verse) "Agni with the Hotr"
2.19.11	Here there is no Pradesa.
2.19.12	There is no Barhis at the Prajapa and Anuyaja, nor is there eating and being eaten at the Ida.
2.19.13	There is also no Marjanam.
2.19.14	There is no injunction of the Sūktavāka.
2.19.15	One should sit down after saying, "O Hotṛ, I have seen."
2.19.16	The Jīvātumanta-s are seated on the left and right sides, facing east, and they perform with oblations.
2.19.17	The Agnīdhra is on the right, the Adhvaryu on the left. The two Anuvākyas are half the distance apart.
2.19.18	"Om, let there be the invocation with 'svadhā'. Let there be the response with 'svadhă'. Let there be 'anusvadhā'. Let there be sending forth with 'svadhã'.
2.19.19	Those who have gone with 'svadhâ', those who are great with 'svadhà', those who are with 'svadhá', 'svadhā', 'svadhâ' - this is the Vasat call.
2.19.20	The long vowels are always used.
2.19.21	The Fathers are Soma-possessed, Soma is the measure of the Fathers, the Fathers are seated on the sacrificial grass, the Fathers are Agni-possessed, Yama,
2.19.22	Let the lower one rise up, the higher one go down. For by thee our fathers, O Soma, have been invited first. The fathers who are invited, the fathers who are not invited, O Soma, thou knowest their thoughts. Soma gives a cow, Soma gives a swift horse. Thou, O Soma, hast agreed with the fathers. The fathers who sit on the grass have come. I have known the fathers who are far away. Let there be reverence to the fathers today. The fathers who eat Agni, come hither. Those fathers who are here and those who are not here, those who are burnt by Agni and those who are unburnt by Agni, come to this Yamarāstra. The two who are going away follow the great flowing ones.
2.19.23	If the middle oblation is for Yama.
2.19.24	Those who are thirsty, longing for the gods, your Agni, your thoughts, being born with the new, with the sudden.
2.19.25	Agni is the well-done, the carrier of the Kavya.
2.19.26	The natural order is above.
2.19.27	In the action of Vasatkara, above the two portions of clarified butter, due to the omission of the mantra.
2.19.28	And each is an Anuvakya.
2.19.29	The Agni who carries the oblation, thou art Agni, invoked, the knower of beings. At the Samyājyā (oblation).
2.19.30	Having eaten the Pranabhāksas at the Bhāksas, they should strike the sacrificial grass. Having turned towards the south, they stand near the southern fire, after the Prāg and Anuyājas have been performed.
2.19.31	In the absence of the Avritti, the Anatiprāṇita-charya.
2.19.32	The most excellent one, generating the hills, he, indeed, is the giver of wealth, the great one, for the praise of the giver. He has turned back the morning, the first of the sweet ones, when he makes his own body to be firm.
2.19.33	The other two (fires) are covered.
2.19.34	The Āhavanīya fire is seen well. The Gārhapatya fire is Agni, the mind.
2.19.35	One recites this verse, not a hymn.
2.19.36	Then they approach him, reciting, "Do not go away, O Agni, you are ours."
2.19.37	Having completed the Gārhapatya Sūkta with the eastern (verse), they go around to the left, reciting the Tryambaka verses.
2.19.38	There the Adhvaryus perform the rites.
2.19.39	Having returned, they perform the rites with the Aditya verse.
2.19.40	The two verses on Puṣṭi and Dhāyī are Viraj.
2.20.1	On the fifth full moon day, with the Śunaṣīrīya verse.
2.20.2-3	The sacrifice of the Vājasaneyins is to be performed as prescribed in the Veda. The sacrifice of the Vaisvadevas is to be performed according to the rules of the Vājiyas. The sacrifice to Vayu is to be performed in the place of the sixth and other sacrifices. The sacrifice is to be performed to Vayu, to Vayu and Sunaṣīra, to Indra and Sunaṣira, to Indra and Sunahsipati, to Indra and Suparna, to Indra and the Sun, to Indra and Surya, to Indra and Agni, to Indra and Soma, to Indra and Varuna, to Indra and Yama, to Indra and Nirriti, to Indra and Sarasvati, to Indra and Pusan, to Indra and Savitr, to Indra and Dhātar, to Indra and Aryaman, to Indra and Mitra, to Indra and Varuṇa, to Indra and Ananta, to Indra and Bhaga, to Indra and Vishnu, to Indra and Rudra, to Indra, to Indra and Parjanya, to Indra and Vasava, to Indra and Prajapati, to Indra, and to Indra and the Maruts.
2.20.4	O Vayu, come to us, the drinker of pure (Soma), with your steeds, to the one who is devoted to the gods. You are the lord of our minds, the one who has given the offering. O Shunahshepa and Shunahshepa, may you accept this speech. May the reapers of the harvest spread the earth. O Indra, we call upon Shunahshepa in this place for our share in the cattle. May he be present among the cattle. We call upon the one who is present among the horses, cattle, and wealth. May we call upon the generous Indra, the one who is among the horses, among the cattle, and among the wealth. The one who is present, the all-seeing, the bright, has risen up, the wonderful array of the gods. These are the Yajya and Anuvakya verses.
2.20.5	If he is unable to do so, he should offer a sacrifice with an animal.
2.20.6	Or the Cāturmāsya sacrifices again and again.
3.1.1	In the animal sacrifice.
3.1.2	The Iṣṭi is on both sides or on one side.
3.1.3	Or the Agniyești.
3.1.4	Or the Agnāvaiṣṇavī.
3.1.5	Or both.
3.1.6	Or one in front.
3.1.7	The Agnihotra has been mentioned.
3.1.8	Then, having sat down on the sacrificial grass, he should recite the verse "They sprinkle you in the sacrifice, O god-deserving one," with the last statement, and should rest for half an ardha-rc.
3.1.9	"Grow up, O tree, being placed in front of the burning fire. May the two verses, 'May the two verses, "May the two verses be uttered" and "May the two be uttered" be recited. The verse, "The born one is born for the bright days" should be recited. The young one, well-dressed, having covered himself, has come."
3.1.10	Where in one ritual many animals are bound together and are praised without making any sound, saying, "Those whom the men who desire the gods have bound together," with six verses.
3.1.11	Some do it with five verses without repetition.
3.1.12	The churning of fire has been mentioned. The oblations of clarified butter are offered before and after the offering. In the invocation, the deity of the animal is followed by the tree.
3.1.13	Having wiped (the fire) with the Sammārgās, he should offer the oblations.
3.1.14	May he be agreeable to speech, may he be agreeable to the lord of speech, O goddess, whatever is the sweetest of speech, in that do thou place me. To Sarasvatī, to speech, svāhā. Having again taken (the oblations), he should offer the five-fold oblation. Svāhā to speech, svāhà to the lord of Speech, svāhā to Sarasvatī, svāhā, to Sarasvatī and the great ones, svāhā.
3.1.15	Soma alone is one.
3.1.16	Having instructed the chastiser with the rite, he should give him the staff with his right and left hands, saying, "I am giving you the staff of Mitra and Varuna, the chastiser, for instruction."
3.1.17	Thus, with the two appropriate ones, the other one is taken with the arms of Mitra-Varuna, the two who rule, with the instruction of the one who rules. "Be without crookedness, be without deceit."
3.1.18	Having taken the right path, one should go beyond the Hotr, taking the staff to the right. One should not touch oneself or others with it, except when instructed.
3.1.19	The other sacrificial implements also should be used, but not in a manner that would cause them to be destroyed.
3.1.20	Standing humbly at the Hotr's seat, holding the staff on the altar, he should recite the instructions and the order.
3.1.21	The Anuvakya should be recited before the instructions, at the time of the announcement.
3.1.22	The Parigni, Stoka, and the Sooktas being carried out.
3.1.23	Soma is seated elsewhere.
3.2.1	There are eleven Prayājas.
3.2.2	Their instructions are given.
3.2.3	The first instruction is given in the first verse, the second in the second verse.
3.2.4	The Maitrāvaruṇa instructs the Hotṛ with instructions sent by the Adhvaryu.
3.2.5	The Hotṛ offers with the Apṛs, which have the form of instructions.
3.2.6	"The Agni is kindled" (is the formula) for the Śunakas. "Accept our kindling wood" (is the verse) for the Vasīṣṭhas. "The Agni is today kindled" (is common to all).
3.2.7	As per the Rṣi.
3.2.8	In the case of Prajāpati, the formula of Jamadagni is common to all.
3.2.9	In the Dasasūkta, the Maitrāvaruṇa recites the verse "Agni is the Hotṛ, sent by the ten" three times in succession.
3.2.10-14	"O Agni, the messenger, the servant, the Hotṛ, he has spoken, Agni has spoken, the servant, he has spoken the command, having spoken the command, he places the staff within the altar." "O Hotṛ, O Agni, the servant, O Agni, he has spoken. The Hotṛ has spoken. The servant has spoken. The command has been spoken. Having spoken the command, one places the staff within." "The Hotṛ has spoken, O Agni, O servant, the servant has spoken. Having spoken, he places the stick within." "O Agni, the servant has been spoken. The servant, the servant, has been spoken. O Agni, the Hotṛ has been spoken." "O servant, the servant. The servant has been spoken." The servant has been mentioned. "O Agni. The servant has not been mentioned." The servant has not mentioned. "The servant has been mentioned." The Hotṛ has been mentioned. The servant has mentioned. "Having spoken the command, the servant places the staff within. Having spoken the truth, the servant places it within." "Having spoken, the servant places within. Having spoken, the servant has placed within." "He places within. He has placed within." The servant has placed within. "Having placed within, the servant has not placed within." The Hotṛ places within. The servant has placed. "Having not placed, the servant has mentioned." The servant places within. The Hotṛ places. The servant has said. "Having said, the servant places." The servant has said.
3.2.15	The truth is above and below the two, other than the twins.
3.2.16	In all the Vedic recitations.
3.2.17	In the effective recitations in the original.
3.2.18	The words of the mantras are indeed original.
3.2.19	Even in the substitutes.
3.2.20	The words "nabhīr upamā me 'do havir" are not to be recited.
3.3.1	O divine Smṛti-s, begin. Let men bring (the Soma). From the source of wisdom, seeking wisdom, let them bring it to the lords of wisdom. O Agni, let them spread the grass. Let his mother, father, brother born of the same womb, friend, companion, follow him. Let them place his feet towards the north. Let them direct his eyes towards the sun, his breath towards the wind, his belly towards space, his ears towards the directions, his body towards the earth. Let them cover him with one garment. Let them cut out the fat from the belly, leaving the navel. Let them stop the heat within. Let them make his chest like a hawk, his arms like a lion, his shoulders like a bull, his waist like a reed, his thighs like a post, his knees like a joint, his shanks like a reed, and his feet like a horse. Let them make him twenty-six crooked. Let them make each part of his body crooked. Let them dig a pit for him in the earth. Let him be united with the Rakṣas. Let them not injure his genitals. Let them not think of his thighs. Let them not be injured by him in his offspring. Let the Smṛti-rs not be injured. Let the Smrti-s be well-smoothened. Let the Smriti-s be smoothened.
3.3.2-4	The Raksas is bound by the Asna. The Smitiras say, "May there be no sin." "One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven, twelve, thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, sixteen, seventeen, eighteen, nineteen, twenty, twenty-one, twenty-two, twenty-three, twenty-four, twenty-five, twenty-six, twenty-seven, twenty-eight, twenty-nine, thirty, thirty-one, thirty-two, thirty-three, thirty-four, thirty-five, thirty-six, thirty-seven, thirty-eight, thirty-nine, forty, forty-one, forty-two, forty-three, forty-four, forty-five, forty-six, forty-seven, forty-eight, forty-nine, fifty, fifty-one, fifty-two, fifty-three, fifty-four, fifty-five, fifty-six, fifty-seven, fifty-eight, fifty-nine, sixty, sixty-one, sixty-two, sixty-three, sixty-four, sixty-five, sixty-six, sixty-seven, sixty-eight, sixty-nine, seventy, seventy-one, seventy-two, seventy-three, seventy-four, seventy-five, seventy-six, seventy-seven, seventy-eight, seventy-nine, eighty, eighty-one, eighty-two, eighty-three, eighty-four, eighty-five, eighty-six, eighty-seven, eighty-eight, eighty-nine, ninety, ninety-one, ninety-two, ninety-three, ninety-four, ninety-five, ninety-six, ninety-seven, ninety-eight
3.3.5	Maitrāvaruṇa.
3.3.6	When the animal is turned around, the Brahman and the sacrificer should turn around the animal.
3.4.1	When the omentum is being roasted, he is sent to recite from the Stoka verses, "Do you accept this offering, O Agni, with your own form."
3.4.2	The invocation has been mentioned for the forms of Svāhā.
3.4.3	The offerings of ghee, the offerings of fat, the offerings of the heart, the offerings of meat, the offerings of marrow, the offerings of blood, the offerings of flesh, the offerings of bone, the offerings of sinew, the offerings of skin, the offerings of hair, the offerings of nails, the offerings of teeth, the offerings of excrement, the offerings of urine, the offerings of ashes, the offerings of smoke, the offerings of fire, the offerings of oblations, the offerings of Soma, the offerings of Agni, the offerings of Svāhā, the offerings of ghee, and the offerings of fat are the offerings.
3.4.4	The offerings of the heart and the offerings of meat are the offerings of the animal.
3.4.5	They are separate and for different deities.
3.4.6	And the Manotā.
3.4.7	Some say that the Manotā is not to be offered.
3.4.8	Their offerings are with signs.
3.4.9	In them, the animal deity for Agni and Soma is the one that is there.
3.4.10	Goat, sheep, cow, ram, calf, horse, and horse are the animals mentioned in the context of the Anvādheśa (the section on the Anvādhas).
3.4.11	Similarly, the Vanaspati, Svishtakrit, and Suktavaka are mentioned in the context.
3.4.12	In the case of the Prajapati-fire, some perform the animal-offering to Vayu, and in the case of the Vayu-fire, the animal-offering of Prajapati. The teachers say that by this the animal-deity is nourished, because of the predominance of the animal-offering.
3.4.13	In the cases of the Puronuvakya-s, where the animal-offering is like the animal-offering, except for the exclusion of the ghee, there is a common offering.
3.4.14	The animal is called Medha Rabhiya.
3.4.15	"The gods have taken, have eaten, have enjoyed, have seized, have increased."
3.5.1	When the oblation of clarified butter has been offered, those who are with Brahma sprinkle themselves in the sacrificial hall, having placed the staff aside, Maitravaruna.
3.5.2	"O waters, carry this away with your friendly (waters). May the plants be friendly. May it be for him who hates us and whom we hate."
3.5.3	This much is the scraping of the animal.
3.5.4	Having gone out by the Tīrtha, one should sit down from the offering of the Purorāśa.
3.5.5	Having performed that, one should perform the Svishtakṛt.
3.5.6	If, however, there are Anvāyātya sacrifices, one should perform them first.
3.5.7	But there is no repetition of their Nigamas.
3.5.8	There is no repetition of other sacrifices after the invocation.
3.5.9	"O Agni, the giver of many gifts, the giver of wealth, the Hotṛ, may he offer the Purorāśa. May you enjoy the offerings. May you shine with the rays of the sun." This is the Purorāsa Svishtakṛt.
3.5.10	Above the Ida.
3.6.1	"You are sent by Manotā. You are the first, O Agni." This is the Avāha.
3.6.2	They move with oblations.
3.6.3	Here, in the case of the Prāṣa, the Maitrāvaruṇa alone is the deity, according to the Aitāreyanas.
3.6.4	In other cases, the deities are the two deities, except the Maitrāvaruṇadevatā.
3.6.5	Because it is seen thus.
3.6.6	The Gaṇḍa is the natural one.
3.6.7	When the Smṛti is born, the modification is meaningless in the case of a difference of meaninglessness.
3.6.8	The Vasahomas should be performed between the Yajyā and the Antarārcā.
3.6.9	The Vanaṣpati and the Prāṣaṇḍa are chanted in the Anuvāka.
3.6.10	The Ajyabhāgas are chanted at the place where the Agni is offered with the Ajya.
3.6.11	The Ida is invoked with the Svishtakṛt, and the Prāsaṇḍas are chanted with the Anuyājas.
3.6.12	The Prāṣaṅgiya Sūktas are chanted at the third place.
3.6.13	The two supreme (verses) are to be recited first: "May the divine tree, the lord of wealth, be taken in the forest of wealth for the sake of wealth. May the divine sacrificial grass, the lord of the Varitīnas, be taken in a forest of wealth for wealth."
3.6.14	One should send forth the Anāvan (verse) and offer the Anāvan sacrifice.
3.6.15	The supreme (verse) has been mentioned.
3.6.16	At the Suvakapraisa (verse) and the first Nigama, while taking the Ajyabhāga verses, it is said here:
3.6.17	Binding the one to the other, binding the one to the one, he binds the animals and the deities.
3.6.18	The animals and the deities are of one kind.
3.6.19	The animals are of one deity.
3.6.20	The northern oblation is with ghee. The oblations are mentioned in the eastern part.
3.6.21	Having completed the injunction, one should strike the stick in the fire at the end of the Anubhrtha.
3.6.22	At Avabhrtha, elsewhere.
3.6.23	Having gone out by the Tīrtha, they should perform the rites of Agni and Pāśu, and should recite the Hṛdayaśūla mantra, saying, "You are the curse, he who hates us and whom we hate, may he be cursed."
3.6.24	He touches it above. The house of the king Varuna is measured on the island. It is golden. May the king who is firm in his vows release us from one abode to another. From one abode to another, O king, may Varuna release us. Whatever sin we have committed against the waters, we confess to Varuna. Therefrom, O Varuna, release us. Do not injure the waters and plants. From all sides you have become. Therefrom, Varuna, release me. May the waters and plants be friendly to us.
3.6.25	Not touching, not looking, not touching, they go forth, making three oblations, one by one.
3.6.26	"You are the kindling of Agni, you are brilliance, give me brilliance." This is the first. "You are the kindler, we kindle." This is the second. "You are kindling, we kindle."
3.6.27	Having come, they stand up and say, "Today we have followed the waters." Then they place the kindling woods, saying, "The kindling wood of Agni," "You are brilliance, give me brilliance, svāhā." "The kindling of Soma," "Protect me from evil, svāhā. You are the kindling of the ancestors, protect me from death, svāhā."
3.6.28	Then the recitation at the end of the rite. This is the ritual for animals.
3.7.1	The injunctions of the gifts have been stated.
3.7.2	The Yajya and Anuvakya verses for them.
3.7.3	The Anuvakya verse is at the beginning of all, then the Yajya verse.
3.7.4	The distinction is due to the deity and the animal.
3.7.5	O Agni, lead us on the good path, O Agni, protect us with your ever-present protectors. O Agni, protect us. O Agni! O Agni! O Agni! O you who are like the sun! O you whose rays are like the sun!
3.7.6	Sarasvati, the one, is among the rivers. May Sarasvati be gracious to us. Sarasvati may lead us to prosperity. She has come forth with her own power, the young maiden, the purifier, the one with the bright life, whose breast is yours, who is yours, who has become yours.
3.7.7	You, O Soma, are the most excellent in counsel. Two (verses). You, O Soma! protect us from all sides. Your abodes are in heaven and on earth. You are the most excellent one in battles, the most excellent one among the enemies. Those who worship your abodes with oblations.
3.7.8	O Pūshan, thy two boats are within the ocean. Two are the directions that Pūshan knows. One is thy bright (boat), the other is thy boat for sacrifice. Pūshan was born on the path of paths, the lord of the path of speech.
3.7.9	O Brihaspati, the highest, the supreme, the highest. O Brihaspati! When the noble one surpasses the noble one, the priests follow him, the praises of him whom the lowing ones lead, the lowing ones, to the father, to the all-gods, to the shining one.
3.7.10	All ye Gods, O ye Maruts, all-knowing, come to the place of sacrifice. May the Gods come to us, may all the Gods come to me. All ye Gods, hear this call of mine, ye who are greater than the greatest, ye who are more than the most. O Agni, go to the place of the messenger, O Marishani.
3.7.11	The men invoke Indra, the knower of the way, for the sake of the great world. O Puruhuta, you have conquered the enemies, the knower, for our welfare, with the horses and the leader.
3.7.12	The pure offerings of you pure Maruts, O Maruts, are firm, full of heroes. The Hotar calls you from the assembly. The singers praise your bright light. Like the last day, they are there for you, the protection that is for him who seeks your shelter.
3.7.13	O Indra and Agni, the two of you, who are invoked, may we be worthy of your gifts. The sage, desiring the praise, wishes to please the most generous ones in the battles. O Indra and Agni, who are invoked,
3.7.14	The god Savitar, the giver of good gifts, the god Savitar, with the good, has come. Two (verses) are recited: "The most intelligent of the poets, the god Savita, the giver of wealth, the giver of strength, the giver of food." Two (verses) are said.
3.7.15	May Varuna stand firm like the sky, like the ocean. This is your own right, O Varuna. You should pay homage to the great Varuna. I come to you with homage and with the Brahman. The Asura who knows all paid homage to the sky and the earth.
3.8.1	Agni and Soma, these two, have given me this. "We have come to Mitra-Varuna, to the one who is agreeable. "O Mitra-Varuna! Give us what is agreeable. You have spread out the garments, the ones that are made of fat. "The golden embryo has emerged first." "The wonderful army of the gods has arisen." "May you be auspicious to us with your eye. May you be auspicious to our eye." "May we be auspicious to you with our eye. May you, O Vayu, be auspicious to our eyes." "May Vayu, the one who is to be approached with gifts, come to us. May the tawny bull, the one who shines, come to us." "The golden-skinned one, the one who has the color of honey, the one who knows the truth, has come to us." The one who is to perform the sacrifice, the one who gives strength, the one who bestows strength, the one whose strength is to be praised, the one who brings strength, the one to be praised, Indra, the one who destroys Vritra, the one who possesses truth, the one who rules, the one who grants strength, the one with the golden skin, the one who causes the sun to rise, the one who makes the sun rise, the one with a golden body, the one who holds the golden body, the golden-bodied one, the one with golden skin, the golden-skinned one. "The gods have generated the divine speech. The gods have generated the one who is born first." "May the golden-winged one, the one from the sky, the great one, the one whose power increases among women, the one whose vow all animals follow, the one whose animals follow the vow, the one whose waters stand in the vow, the lord of prosperity, the one who stands in the vow, that Sarasvati, may we invoke for our welfare."
3.8.2	Thus the animals.
3.8.3	The Somas are both gentle and created.
3.8.4	The Nirmita is for Indra-Agni.
3.8.5	The Saṃvatsara is for six months.
3.8.6	The Prajapati, Upāṃśu, Savitṛ, Sūrya, Viṣṇu, and Viśvakarman are the ones for whom these are prescribed. We shall describe the modifications of the Upāṃśuyāja here.
3.8.7	The Āgu is at the beginning of the Prāṣa.
3.8.8	"Take, eat, give" - these are to be recited in the proper order in a low voice.
3.9.1	In the Sautrāmaṇī sacrifice:
3.9.2	The animals are dedicated to Indra, Agni, and Soma, or to Indra, Agni and Varuna, or to Indra and Savitr. The animal oblations are dedicated to Indra and Varuna.
3.9.3	Having sprinkled the Soma, the Adhvaryu says, "Do you both sprinkle the Soma, O Asvins." The Hotr recites the Puronuvākyā for the Grahas, "Do you two, O Asvins, Indra, the Sutrāmaṇ, and Sarasvati, enjoy the Soma and Sura, drink and become intoxicated with the Soma and Sura. O Hotr, do you offer." This is the Prāṣa. "Do you both, O Asvins like sons to their fathers," is the Yājyā.
3.9.4	"O Agni, do thou drink!" is the Anuvṣṭakāra. "O Agni, drink thou the Soma!" is the Anūcāra. "Your seat is different, O gods, for drinking Soma. We shall drink you in the highest heaven." "Thou art Soma, the strong one." Having looked at the Soma, he says, "This is Soma."
3.9.5	Whatever nectar is here, the son of the Rasis, which Indra drank with Shachi, that I now consume here with a benevolent mind, the king Soma, with this mantra one should consume.
3.9.6	Here is the mantra for consuming the Soma.
3.10.1	Expiation for violation of the rules.
3.10.2	Substitute in case of absence of the prescribed.
3.10.3	If the Anvahitagni is to be taken away, the fires should be taken separately.
3.10.4	Having offered the oblation of the Vājas, he should place it (on the fire).
3.10.5	"This is your natural place of offering." Having heated the kindling woods on the Garhapatya fire,
3.10.6-7	The hands which are thine, O Agni, the body which is thine, come hither, mount on them. Thou, becoming the sacrifice, hast sat down on the sacrifice, the womb of the born Jātavedas. Thus the Agni whose fire has not been transferred, without offering.
3.10.8	If one were to churn the fire-wood by touching the two hands, one should say, "O Jataveda, come down again. Carry our oblation to the gods, knowing. Bestow on us progeny, nourishment, and wealth. Be auspicious to the sacrificer."
3.10.9	Having lit the Ahavaniya fire, one should say "This one is one, the other one is one" while moving it back from the distance of a yoke.
3.10.10	If one should pass beyond (the prescribed time), if one should pass beyond the new or full moon, if one should offer to the fires of another, if another should offer to one's own fires, if another fire should enter one's fires, if the Agnihotra-offering should be made when the oblation is already placed (on the fire), or when it is not yet placed, if a dog or a man should obstruct the path, if one should be lost on a journey, there is an Isti.
3.10.11	Agni is the maker of the path.
3.10.12	"You know the way to the gods, you have gone the way of the gods." The bull is the Dakshina.
3.10.13	In case of a dispute, one should cross over the cow between the fire and the place of sacrifice.
3.10.14	One should sprinkle the dog's foot with ashes, saying, "This is Vishnu's stride."
3.10.15	He should extend the thread between the Garhapatya and the Ahavaniya fires, between the water of the kingdom and the kingdom, saying, "Extending the thread, he seeks the light of the rays."
3.10.16	Having followed the Havaniya (fire) and having again brought it forward, he should stand up. "The place where Agni, having been sent forth earlier, stretched out the rays of the sun, there may the most prosperous one be born. " "May you unite us with good intentions and strength. You, O Agni, are the one who bestows prosperity."
3.10.17	If a cow dies during the course of a sacrifice, they should offer silently the Agnihotra with the milk of a cow that has a calf of another breed, until the time of the assembly.
3.10.18	If a person who has established the sacred fires dies in the dark fortnight, they should transfer him to the bright fortnight with oblations.
3.10.19	If there is a shortage of sacrificial materials, they should complete the Iṣṭi with ghee and then perform the Ijyā again.
3.10.20	The oblations are defiled by hair, nails, insects, flies, or other disgusting things.
3.10.21	And by being sprinkled.
3.10.22	They should be taken away in water.
3.10.23	One should offer the Saṁnāyya on a mound of earth, with the middle leaf of the Palāśa tree, saying, "O Prajāpati, these are not yours, but mine."
3.10.24	If the earth and heaven are sinking, they should offer in the middle of the boundary.
3.10.25	If there is a fault on one side, they should proceed after avoiding it.
3.10.26	Or a cake at that place.
3.10.27	If there are faults on both sides, they should offer a rice-gruel with five potsherds to Indra and Agni.
3.10.28	They should proceed separately for them.
3.10.29	Some say only for Indra.
3.10.30	At the offering of calves, barley gruel to Vayu.
3.10.31	If the Agnihotra-fire has been set up, one should recite this verse over the flowing semen: "May the semen flowing be without poison. Agni is the Hotṛ, the earth is the Antarikṣa. Whatever has fallen from there, it does not reach Agni. Nirṛti is beyond that."
3.11.1	If one sits down while the Agnihotra cow is being milked, one should recite this verse: "From fear you sit down, from that make us safe. Protect all our cattle. Obeisance to Rudra, the nourisher."
3.11.2	Then she should be made to rise, saying, "The goddess Aditi has risen; she has placed life in the sacrificial garment. For Indra, Mitra, and Varuna, she has made a share."
3.11.3	Then, having milked into a vessel on her udder and mouth, he should make a brahmin drink it, who would eat it, for as long as he lives, or for a year.
3.11.4	He should give fodder to the cow being milked, saying, "May she be blessed with good fodder."
3.11.5	Having mixed blood with milk, one should offer it in the Garhapatya fire.
3.11.6	If it is broken or sprinkled, one should recite this mantra: "I send you to the ocean, may you go to your own place. May our heroes be unharmed, may the cows be in my care."
3.11.7	If the cow, when being milked, shakes while being let loose for the Agnihotra, then having touched that which has fallen, he should recite: "Whatever milk has flowed today onto the earth, whatever has flowed over the plants, whatever water, milk in the houses, milk in the cow, milk in the calves, may that be mine."
3.11.8	If there is anything left over, one should offer with that.
3.11.9	Or by another.
3.11.10	This is the milking, etc., till the bringing forward of the oblations.
3.11.11	"Thou art the oblation offered to Prajapati, the supporter of the universe," - here the touching of the oblations that have fallen down.
3.11.12	One should offer with the remaining (oblations).
3.11.13	Having again brought forward, with the remaining (offerings).
3.11.14	Ghee with the remaining (offering).
3.11.15	This is till the offering.
3.11.16	Having recited the Varuni mantra, one should offer with the Varuni mantra.
3.11.17	Fasting from the time of the other Homa.
3.11.18	And again Homa, says Gaṇagāri.
3.11.19	One should recite the verse "Agnihotra is equal to the arrow and the arrow-bearer" while reciting the name of the enemy.
3.11.20	One should say "The earth and heaven are flowing down" and take the ashes of the Ahavaniya fire to the end.
3.11.21	Like the Sāmnāyya, one should do it for the sake of fear.
3.11.22	When it rains, Mitra torments the people, saying so and so. This is the kindling of the Samit.
3.11.23	"Where do you know, O Lord of Plants?" This is the scattering of the northern oblation.
3.12.1	The time for Homa is at dusk.
3.12.2	The time is at dawn.
3.12.3	Having taken it, one should offer four spoonfuls of ghee.
3.12.4	If it is evening, then one should offer the Agnihotra with the mantra "Namaḥ svāhā" and if it is morning, then with the mantra "Prātar vaster namaḥ svāhā". Having prepared the Agnihotra, one should recite the mantras "Bhūr bhuvaḥ svar" and give a boon, then offer the oblation.
3.12.5	And the Iṣṭi is dedicated to Varuna.
3.12.6	Having offered the oblation in the morning, one should give a boon.
3.12.7	Having followed the Havirdhāna, he should again offer it here. Be peaceful, do not abandon me, this human son of mine.
3.12.8	Then the Iṣṭi, Mitra is the Sun.
3.12.9	He who with power goes to heaven, may that man be prosperous. When the wife has settled down, having restrained speech, he should sit near the blazing fires, eating the food of the day.
3.12.10	If there are two, one should offer the Agnihotra with milk.
3.12.11	When another is placed, one should offer a second.
3.12.12	The morning Iṣṭi.
3.12.13	Agni is the upholder of vows.
3.12.14	O Agni, thou art the upholder of vows, pure, O Agni, bring hither the gods. Come to our sacrifice and our oblation. Bearing the vows, the guardian of vows, the unerring, the worshipper, the immortal, the giver of good heroes, bestowing treasures, the kindly, the protector, O Agni, for life, O Jātavedas.
3.12.15	This is the weeping of distress.
3.12.16	If the Āhavanīya fire is not set up, a learned Brāhmaṇa should set it up with Darbha grass, and silver should be placed in front of the fire being carried.
3.12.17	When the sun has risen, four spoonfuls of ghee and silver should be carried in front of the silver.
3.12.18	Then one should offer this clarified butter, sitting facing west, with the formula, "Oṣā, may you enjoy with the banner, svāhā."
3.12.19	If the time is exceeded, the remaining (rites) are to be performed.
3.12.20	But here the fire is not to be followed.
3.12.21	If the Āhavanīya is being carried away, and the Garhapatya follows it, one should make it churned in its own place. If the other follows, one should follow it.
3.12.22	If there is no Kṣāma, one should churn with the ashes and the Arṇī, reciting, "From these sources was born the first, the knower of beings. He carries the oblation to the gods, knowing, through the Gāyatrī, the Tristubh, the Jagatī, and the Anushtubh."
3.12.23	Having churned and having taken up the Āhavanīya fire, he should stand by reciting, "O Agni, be the lord of prosperity, of wealth, of strength, of light, of offspring. You are the lord of prosperity. You are the self-lord. The two Utsa priests have praised you. They have placed you as the eater of food, as the lord of offspring."
3.12.24	Some people take it up from here only after bringing it back to the right.
3.12.25	Having placed the ashes together in the place of the Garhapatya, one should then take out the Ahavanīya facing east.
3.12.26	Then the Agnihotra is performed: Agni is the ascetic, the generator, the possessor of fire.
3.12.27	Come, O Agni, with thy heat to the people, with thy shining light, to this my praise. Come, O Agni with thy heat to people, O Agni, the purifier, the shining one, the one who is ready to act, the one who places oblations among the gods. The Iṣṭi is performed after the Prāghosa and Anugaha rites.
3.12.28	Agni is luminous, Varuna is
3.12.29	If all the stars were to rise at the same time, or if the sun were to rise or set, then one should perform the Agni-installation or the Re-installation.
3.12.30	When the stars have risen, one should perform the Charani-installation.
3.13.1	Then come the Agni-offerings.
3.13.2	In the case of transgression of a vow, to Vrata-pati.
3.13.3	In the case of the Agnihotra-fire being carried away by fire, to Agnivat.
3.13.4	In the case of the house being burnt down by Kshama, to Shuchi, in the case of contact with fire, to another fire.
3.13.5	If they are separated from each other, to Vitya.
3.13.6	To Garhapatya and Ahavaniya, for union.
3.13.7	To Gramya, for control.
3.13.8	To Vaidyuta, to Apasmata, to Vaishvantar, to Vimata, for eating food.
3.13.9	This is the rite to be performed when a skull is lost or not cleansed.
3.13.10	Or when it is announced.
3.13.11	The word "dead" is used for one who is still alive.
3.13.12	You are the guardian of the vows, O Agni. If we transgress the vows, Agni is kindled by Agni. For you are Agni, O Agni, by Agni. You, O Agni, protect us from the evil spirits. Agni has cried out, like a son of heaven. Your flames are blown by the wind from all sides. O Agni, human beings praise you. O Agni, come to our feast. He who offers Agni for the feast of the gods, for our prosperity, do not abandon us in this great wealth. O Agni, let us be united in the waters. What Agni has been born in heaven, Agni has become the most worthy priest. He has made the good feast for the gods. Today, if his wife or son should give birth, there is an offering to the Maruts.
3.13.13	The fire-god, Indra, the bestower, Vishnu, the destroyer, is placed in front of the sacrificial food, when the moon has risen.
3.13.14	"O Agni, give to the giver, to the one who is seeking, the wealth. O Vipra, may your goad be long. Your hands are auspicious, your hands are well-fashioned. Vashat to you, O Vishnu, I arrange. That is known as your name today. One should offer a full oblation to that and that deity, it is known."
3.13.15	If the oblations have been spilled, one should touch them, saying, "The sacrifice has gone to the people. May its blessing protect me. May prosperity increase with ghee. May the sacrifice release the lord of sacrifice from sin. To the lord of the earth, svāhā! To the lord of worlds, svāhā!" To the lord of beings, svāhā. "May the sacrifice release the sacrifice from sin. May the sacrifice be released from sin. May it be released from sin." The drop has spilled from the sacrifice, from the praise, from the offering, from the offering-praise.
3.13.16	If the oblation is outside the enclosing sticks, the Adhvaryu should offer it.
3.13.17	He should give a full vessel to the one who has offered.
3.13.18	If the deity, the Anuvākyā or the Yajya are transposed, or if the oblations of clarified butter are transposed, or the oblations of cooked rice, then one should offer a libation of clarified butter with the verse, "O gods, whatever you have transgressed, whatever you have done by speech and by the means of speech, the Maruts, the destroyers of the gods, have attacked us with evil intentions. May they place us elsewhere." Having offered the oblation of clarified butter, one should give the principal wealth.
3.13.19	Having risen from the place of the deity without invoking her, one should invoke her.
3.13.20	Some say, "To the mind" and should offer oblations to the deity without a fixed place.
3.14.1	If the oblation is spoiled, one should feed Brahmins with rice cooked in four pots.
3.14.2	Having performed the remaining rites, one should again offer oblations.
3.14.3	If there is no remainder, one should repeat.
3.14.4	If there are faults before the invocation,
3.14.5	Even for those who are extremely good.
3.14.6	The principal ones were mentioned earlier in the Svishtakrit.
3.14.7	In the case of the fault of cutting, the cutting is from the place of cutting.
3.14.8	Here, one should give the Dakshina to the one who hates.
3.14.9	In the giving of Dakshina, one should give fertile land.
3.14.10	Having joined it with the Gayatri verse of a hundred syllables, they should sprinkle water. The Hotar who has been injured goes back to his own place. The kindling wood, the altar and the enclosing sticks, may all follow the life of the sacrifice. The thirty-three threads which are spread out, those who offer this sacrifice with their own oblations, may they be united with the unbroken (sacrifice). Obeisance to the Yajatra! Svāhā! May the sacrifice go to the gods.
3.14.11	Thus the earthen vessels were broken.
3.14.12	The water alone went to the other earthen vessels. The earth went to the earth. The mother went to the mother. May we be with sons and cattle. Let him who hates us be broken.
3.14.13	If the sacrificial cake should break or fall down, then having placed it on the sacrificial grass, he should recite this verse: "Why do you fly? Why do you fly? O peaceful one, come here to the peaceful one. Having become the silent one fit for the sacrifice, you have come to your own abode. You have come to your abode. Do not injure me, O god, impelled by the ghee, by the brilliance of the ghee. Do not harm us in any way. For the sake of peace and well-being, come to this sacrificial grass."
3.14.14	If the fire for the Agnihotra offering is not available, one should offer the oblation in another fire.
3.14.15	The later is to be used if the earlier is not available.
3.14.16	If the fire is not available, the oblation may be offered in the hand of a brahmin, or in the ear, or in the darbha grass, or in water, or in wood, or on the ground.
3.14.17	If the oblation is offered in the hand, it should be offered after churning.
3.14.18	If the hand is used, there is no restriction.
3.14.19	If the ear is used, one should avoid eating meat.
3.14.20	If the darbha grass is used, one shouldn't sleep on it.
3.14.21	If there is no distinction in water,
3.14.22	This is a vow for a year or for life.
3.14.23	When the fire has gone out, one should offer the oblation of gold between the two oblations. One should offer the oblution of gold between the oblations.
4.1.1	Having performed the New and Full Moon sacrifices, the Isti-animal sacrifices, and the Catu-r-māsyas, then with the Soma.
4.1.2	Above the Darsha-Pūrnamāsa sacrifices, some perform the Soma sacrifice. Some perform the Soma sacrifice before the Darsha-Purnamāsa sacrifices.
4.1.3	His priests are:
4.1.4	Four priests, each with three persons.
4.1.5	Each of them has three persons above him.
4.1.6-7	The Hotṛ, Maitrāvaruṇa, Acchāvāka, Gravastut, Adhvaryu, Pratiprasthātṛ, Neṣṭṛ, Unneṣṭṛ, Brahman, Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin, Agnīdhra, Potṛ, Udgātṛ, Prastôtṛ, Pratihartṛ, Subrahmaṇya—these officiate at the Ahīna and Ekāha sacrifices.
4.1.8	These are the householders who have kindled the sacred fires, who have performed the Iṣṭi and Prātaḥ-sava sacrifices, and who, having initiated themselves and brought the sacred fires, are observing the Satra rites with their faces towards the fires.
4.1.9	The proper explanation of their initiation and other rites is found in the Iṣṭika Tantra.
4.1.10	Initiation and other rites for those without the sacred fires.
4.1.11	"The statement "Agni is the face" in the Yajya and Anuvakya mantras."
4.1.12	In the bestowal of the staff.
4.1.13	In the case of injunctions, in the case of the Nivitas.
4.1.14	In the case of ghee and Soma.
4.1.15	In the Kuhu and Nigada.
4.1.16	In the challenge and counter-challenge.
4.1.17	The Arshas are the chief of the householder, the self, and others.
4.1.18	Similarly, the second, third, and fourth.
4.1.19	As many as are not separated and of the same Gotra, they should be performed once.
4.1.20	Or, the rites may be repeated in accordance with the nature of the substance.
4.1.21	Some say that the oblation to be offered in the fire should be offered in the fires kindled for the sacrifice.
4.1.22	Agni is Brahman, Agni is the lord of the Kshatriyas, Agni is the holder of the Kshatriya.
4.1.23	With this Agni, O Brahman, do thou grow. O Jatavedas, thy Brahman and thy homage, O Agni, are many. O Agni, the bestower of many boons, the bestower, the bestower. The bestower of many, the bestower who bestows, the bestower bestows. The bestower bestows the bestower. O Agni, thou art the lord of the bright, great, royal power. I praise thy good will. Come hither. From here onwards the rites are performed in a gradual manner.
4.1.24	This is also from the Full-moon sacrifice.
4.1.25	The Soma-carrying rite is upto the Prāyaniya.
4.1.26	There is no restriction in the Upavasatha rite after the first one, the Agnipraṇayanīya.
4.1.27	In the Madhyādinasa.
4.2.1	In the Dīkṣaṇīya, the Dhāyyā and the Viraj.
4.2.2	Agni and Viṣṇu.
4.2.3	Agni is the first, Vishnu is the last, of the gods who have come together. Having taken the gods, he should consecrate them for the sacrificer. The Agni and Vishnu, the supreme heat, the great, the protectors of consecration, the Shakra, the two who are agreed upon by all the divine and sacrificial gods, should give consecration to this sacrificer.
4.2.4	The Vaishvanara, the Adityas, Sarasvati, Aditi.
4.2.5	The Adityas support the world. These two are for the Bhuvadvatas, the lords of the worlds.
4.2.6	This is not the place for the Aditi-Marjanam.
4.2.7	This is the place for the Agurashi in the Aditi and the Suktavaka.
4.2.8	This sacrificer is invited to the sacrifice, may he attain the goal of the sacrifice. Thus he is invited.
4.2.9	This sacrificer is hoping for the sacrifice, may it attain the goal of this sacrifice. Thus he hopes.
4.2.10	And here there is no name-addition.
4.2.11	The last one is by nature above the animal sacrifice.
4.2.12	The course of the initiated is between the Garhapatya and the Ahavaniya fires, because of the carrying of the fire.
4.2.13	The number of days of initiation is unlimited, beginning with one day.
4.2.14	From one day up to a year, but the Savarman is only for a year.
4.2.15	In the twelve-day Tapashchitta, the Upasads are as many as the Sutyas.
4.2.16	The ritual procedure is for one day.
4.2.17	One, three or five consecrations, three Upasads, the Sutiya day is the best.
4.2.18	At the end of the consecration, the king's purchase.
4.3.1	That day is the Pravargya offering.
4.3.2	"O Agni, lead us on the good path, to the path of the gods. We have reached. O Soma, thou knowest the thoughts, thy abodes in heaven and on earth. The all-knowing, the lord of all beings, who knows all these beings, the all-knowing, lord of all beings. The all-knower, the lord of the universe, who knows all beings, the allknower, lord of the universe. The all-encompassing, the all-embracing, the all-pervading, the all-encompasser, the all-knower. The all-pervader, the all-compeller, the all-subduer, the all-conqueror, the all-suppressor, the all-destroyer, the all-devourer, the alldevourer. The alldevourer, all-devouring, all-devour, all-devoured, all-devouress, all-devours, all-devoura, all-devoure, all-devourable, all-devoury, all-devouri, all-devourage, all-devouret, all-devouren, all-devore, all-devor, all-devora, all-devorous, all-devorer, all-devored, all-devourse, all-devors, all-devura, all-devu, all-devur, all-devuri, all-devury, all-devurie, all-devuria, all-devuries, all-devurity, all-devurities, all-devurit, all-devuris, all-devuru, all-devus, all-devuse, all-devuses, all-devuss, all-devussa, all-devusse, all-devusses, all-devussy, all-devussi, all-devussia, all-devissies, all-devissit, all-devisss, all-devissu, all-devissa, all-devisse, all-devisses, all-devissy, all-devassi, all-devassit, all-devi, all-devit, all-devis, all-devita, all-devites, all-deviti, all-devits, all-devitt, all-devitti, all-devitta, all-devitte, all-devitty, all-devat, all-devats, all-devata, all-devates, all
4.3.3	Those who do not partake of the sacrificial butter.
4.3.4	When the sacrifice is over.
4.4.1	They buy the king.
4.4.2	He will tell it later. Standing at a distance of three steps from the fire, having placed the right foot on the path, he should recite, "O Agni, you are sent forth, you are the destroyer, you are the sage, you are the wise one, you are the supporter of all, you are the remover of the fear of the unborn." Moving the right foot forward, he should recite three times, "Go from the good to the better. May Brihaspati be your leader. May this be your boon. May you strike down the enemies from the earth. May you be victorious over all." Standing.
4.4.3	Following the northern direction, he goes along the path.
4.4.4	"O Soma, those of yours who are bountiful," thus three verses. All rejoice with the coming of fame. O god, may the sacrifice increase. He should begin with this half-verse. Standing on the right side of the sun, having advanced from the right wing, he stands facing the king.
4.4.5	When the king is being led forward, the Anusamvara should follow behind.
4.4.6	When the king is placed in the fire, one should offer oblations to his abodes with the verse, "This is the wisdom of the one being instructed by the gods." One should touch the king while offering.
4.4.7	In the garments or in the rays.
4.5.1	Then the rites related to guests and offerings.
4.5.2	The churning of the fire for that (king).
4.5.3	O Agni, the guest-honorer, the kindler of the kindling wood, may you prosper. May he be united with you. This is Vishnu. Vishnu has strode. His dear path is to be known. The Hotr, the variegated chariot of the sacrifice, Agni, the hearer of the Bharatas, is going forth. At the end of the Samyajya, they touch the clarified butter, saying, "May it be untroubled, may it be untroublable, the strength of the gods, the destroyer of curses. May it be without curses, may it be without curses. May it come to the truth. May it be yours."
4.5.4	Having touched the water, they make the king flourish.
4.5.5	This is the beginning of the verses recited at the Upasads.
4.5.6	"O Indra, may the Soma that belongs to you flourish for the sake of knowing the one wealth. May Indra flourish for you. May you flourish for Indra. May you flourish us, the friends, with the means of knowing. May the Soma, O god, flourish for you for the sake of the Soma-pressing."
4.5.7	Having touched water, they place their hands on the stone, stretched out, the right ones first, then the left ones. "They say, "May the rays be desired, may the left ones be desired. May the rays be desired. May Bhaga be desired. May truth be desired. May there be salutations to the truth-tellers. Salutations to heaven, salutations to earth."
4.6.1	Having touched water with the Pravargya rite, one should go to the north, circumambulate the horse, and then sit behind it. Having been sent, one should recite the Rgavanam.
4.6.2	Having recited each Rgavanam, one should bow down.
4.6.3	Brahma, the first-born, the foremost, has gone forth from the boundary, the bright one, to your praise. The Sabudhnas have come to his dwelling place, both of the existent and the non-existent. This is the first, the foremost, the father, the lord of the people, the most excellent. To him they offer this bright Agni, the foremost, who is the deity of the Sabudhnas, the lord of all. I praise that divine Savitar, the giver of good gifts, the one with the power of the poet, the giver of the true, the beloved, the wise, the one whose mind is upright. The one with the golden hands, the wise one, has measured out the light in the heaven. The one with good protection, the one with good protection. The one with goodness, the one with goodness. The one with heaven, the one with heaven. The one who is great, the one who is great. The one who has been anointed, the one who has been praised. The one who shines, the one who shines. The one who makes the sun shine, the one who makes the moon shine. The one who causes the sun to shine, the one whose name is Agni. The one who knows the name of Agni. The one whose name is Indra. The one who praises Indra. The one whose praise is Indra. The ones who are praised by Indra. The ones praised by Indra. The one who is praised by Indra. Those who are praised by Agni. Those who are Agni. Those who know Agni. Those who praise Agni. Those who have Agni. Those who possess Agni. Those who belong to Agni. Those who follow Agni. Those who go to Agni. Those whose Agni is Agni. Those who offer to Agni. Those for whom Agni is the deity. Those who are the deity of Agni. Those who worship Agni. Those who sacrifice to Agni. Those to whom Agni is the sacrifice. Those who are sacrificed to by Agni. Those for which Agni is the sacrifice.
4.7.1-3	Then the northern (rite). When they have sat down, the Adhvaryu calls out the milking of the Gharma with the call and the northern (rite) without making a sound.
4.7.4	Having invoked the well-milked cow, the two verses, "O Agni, do thou, the well-milker, milk the well-milking cow for us." "O Agni, the well-knower, do thou, with the ladle, milk the well milked cow for us." "O Agni, the good knower, do thou with the ladle, well-milked, milk the well milking cow for us." Having said this, he stands up. "The well-milked one has been milked." "The well-yielding one has been milched." "The well yielding one has been milcked." "The well milked one has been well milched." "O Agni," having said this, he goes to the Hotṛ. "The well milched one has been milcheď." "The well yielded one has been milced." "The well yield-ing one has been milcted." "The well milking one has been well-milched." "O Hotṛ," having said this he goes to the Brahman. "The well milking cow has been well milked." "O Brahman," having said this and having gone to the Udgātṛ, he says, "The well milking has been well milced." "O Udgātṛ," having said thus and having gone to Prastotṛ, he says "The well milking, has been well milcked." "O Prastotṛ," having said so and having gone to Pratihartr, he says, "The well milking has ben well milched." "O Pratihartr," having said so, he goes to Nestrtr and says, "The wel milking has been well-milchd." "O Nestrtr," having said this to the Adhvaryu, he says, "The well milking has bean well milched." "O Adhvaryu," having said this the Hotṛ says, "The weli milking has been well mulched." "O Hotr," having said thus, he goes to Pratihartṛ and says, " The well milking has been wel milched." " O Pratihartṛ," having said thas, he goes to Udgātṛ and says, "The wel milking has bean well mulched." "O Udgātā," having said this be goes to Prastot and says, "the well milking has been weli milched." "0 Prastot," having said this
4.7.5	In the best (Sutra) one should pour out the oblation for the best (Satra), the great abode of the gods, the oblation for those who offer oblations.
4.8.1	Then the Upasads.
4.8.2	In that (Upasads) the Japas are with the Pitryas.
4.8.3	In the Pradesha and Upaveshana.
4.8.4	The Upasth is according to the original.
4.8.5	To the Upasadya, to the nourisher, thus three, each three times, without repetition, those are the Samidhenis.
4.8.6	With the supreme Pranava, one should worship Agni, Soma, and Vishnu.
4.8.7	Some say one should not invoke. Even in non-invocation, these are the same deities.
4.8.8	Agni, the destroyer of foes, like a fierce hunter, thou art the true lord, the bestower of wealth, the remover of evil. This Vishnu has strode, he has strode three steps. The Svishtakrit and others are omitted. The Prayajas and the Ajyabhaga offerings.
4.8.9	The Apayana and the Nihnana are always performed.
4.8.10	This is done in the afternoon.
4.8.11	These are the Sāmidhenī verses: "I am this Agni, I am this Agni." The Yajus and Anuvākyā verses are reversed. This is the Upasads.
4.8.12	In the morning and in the afternoon.
4.8.13	In the counting of days beginning with the king's purchase, there are three days.
4.8.14	Or six.
4.8.15	In the Satras, there are twelve and twenty-four years.
4.8.16-21	The first sacrifice is performed by some at the Gharmāyana. Both the morning and evening of the Upavasatha day. When the first Upasad has been performed, the Hotṛ is sent to the Puroḍāśa-offering for the Puroḍāsa-offering, and the Diksita. The sacrificer is not Diksita. He stands a foot behind, makes the Abhihiṅkāra sound, and recites three times in a low voice, "The Puroḍāśas are the fires," with the Pranava. Or very slowly.
4.8.22	He should follow them when they go.
4.8.23	When they stand, he should say, "Let us be released from speech."
4.8.24	Then, having kindled the fire, he should praise it with the following verses:
4.8.25	Sitting behind the tail of the fire, he says three times with the middle voice, "I am Agni, born by birth, the knower of all."
4.8.26	He offers to Vaiśvānara on this very seat.
4.8.27	These three are to be done when the fire is kindled.
4.8.28	Having recited the Brahma-apratiratha, he should sit outside the altar to the right of the fire, until the invocation with the Udumbara.
4.8.29	The bringing in of the fire has been mentioned.
4.8.30	The initiated one should approach the stream of Soma.
4.9.1	They make it flow in the Havirdhana.
4.9.2	That has been mentioned in the Soma-carrying.
4.9.3	Between the southern Havirdhāna and the northern Cakra, there is a path for the feet.
4.9.4	"You two, O Agni and Soma, are yoked together with the ancient Brahman, with salutations. You two, O Agni-Soma, are the guardians of the sacrifice. You two, like Yama, are striving for it. When you two have placed this Ukthya speech between the two, the half-verse should be recited. If there is no pause, then there should be a pause."
4.9.5	"O wise one, release all forms." In the case of a pause.
4.9.6	When two kinds of meat are placed together, one should place it around with the verse, "O thou who art praised, thy praises are around thee."
4.10.1	The Adhvaryu, having gone to the northern bank of the river, approaches the place of the Āgnīdhra and the Sadas by the northern door, approaches the Patnīśāla, goes beyond the door of the Śālāmukha, sits down behind it, and says, "O Savitr, do thou send forth the first, the father, the Varṣamaṇa, the Varimāṇa, to him. Now to us, O Savitr, the father of all, do thou send the abundance of wealth, the abundance of cattle, for each day." While sitting.
4.10.2	Following the Uttarās.
4.10.3	May the divine Brahmanaspati, the immortal, go forth as the Hotṛ. May Agni, the divine, the immortal, be in front. "O Agni, every day, every day, may I spread the two layers of gold. May I approach the agreeable, the most agreeable." One should recite the half-verse at the Āgnīdhra fire when it is being offered. Having completed the recitation, one should conclude with the Praṇava.
4.10.4	The Soma, knowing the way, goes beyond the Agni-dheya (fire) in the north. The king Varuna and the Asvins are his (Soma's) half-verses.
4.10.5	The king who is approaching, the others should approach. The king should say, "May I be like Aditi, like a hawk, having made a nest with wisdom. May the Asura who knows all, may he support the sky." He should place it with the northern direction. Or he should place it with a peaceful practice.
4.10.6	Brahman should approach in the same way, going beyond the altar and sitting to the right of the door of the hall.
4.10.7	If he were to offer the king before rising from the Hotṛ-seat, he should go back to the place from which he came.
4.10.8	It has been said that one should not offer the king before (rising from the seat).
4.10.9	Having reached the Havirdhāna, having offered the king to the householder, he should go to the Havirdhānā, either in front or behind, and sit down to the south of the Āhavanīya.
4.10.10	If there is a fire-pit, then with the fire-pit.
4.10.11	This is the Brahmanical seat for the animal sacrifice.
4.10.12	And in the morning, after the Avapāha-homa.
4.10.13	If one is to go forward, then after the Prapaḍya-homa.
4.11.1	Now they perform the Agniṣomīya sacrifice.
4.11.2	On the northern altar, until the giving of the staff.
4.11.3-4	Having given the staff, having gone beyond the Havirdhāna-cart by the northern side, taking the Maitrāvaruṇa-priest in front, having entered the Sadas by the eastern door, having gone beyond his own Dhishnya-cart by the north, the Hotṛ sits down at the back of his own Dhishn
4.11.5	If they were to go to the oblations of the gods, Agni would be the householder, Soma the tree-lord, Savitar the truth-giver, Brihaspati the lord of speech, Indra the eldest, Mitra the truthful, Varuna the lord of dharma, Rudra the cattle-possessor, Pashupati.
4.11.6	You, O Agni, are the great, the bearer of oblations, the imperishable, the father of us, and you, O Soma, are our lord. The Brahman of the gods, the path of the poets, the divine Savitar, the lord of all, the one who is praised, the one who has the highest position, the one who knows the highest, the one who sees the highest, the highest, the supreme, the one who gives the highest, the lord of the highest, the most excellent, the one who bestows the highest, the best, the one who grants the highest, the foremost, the one who brings the highest, the chief, the one who causes the highest, the leader, the one who leads to the highest, the guide, the one who guides to the highest, he who is the highest, the great, the one who makes the highest, the creator, the one who creates the highest, the maker, the one who produces the highest, the producer, the one who generates the highest, the generator, the one who begets the highest, the begetter, the one who conceives the highest, the conceiver, the one who understands the highest, the knower, the one who comprehends the highest, the comprehender, the one who grasps the highest, the grasper, the one who seizes the highest, the seizer, the one who takes the highest, the taker, the one who holds the highest, the holder, the one who possesses the highest, the possessor, the one who controls the highest, the controller, the one who rules the highest, the ruler, the one who governs the highest, the governor, the one who manages the highest, the manager, the one who administers the highest, the administrator, the one who directs the highest, the director, the one who shows the highest, the demonstrator, the one who points out the highest, the pointer, the one who indicates the highest, the indicator, the one who reveals the highest, the revealer, the one who discloses the highest, the discloser, the one who proclaims the highest, the proclaimer, the one who announces the highest, the announcer, the one who declares the highest, the declarer, the one whose highest is declared, the one whose declaration is highest, the one whose proclamation is highest, the highest of those whose proclamation is highest. You, O Indra, are great by means of Brahman, without decay, rejoicing with the Iḍa. May that mortal be prosperous who approaches you. The one who is lost seeks you. You protect from all worlds by means of Dharma. You protect from the sun by means of Dharma.
4.12.1	If Agni is the Gāyatrī, Trivṛt, Rāthantara, spring, Indra, Traiṣṭubha, Pañcadaśa, Bāṛhaspatya, summer, Viśve Devas, Jagatī, Saptadaśa, Vaivarūpa, rainy season, Mitra-Varuṇa, Anushtup, Ekavimśa, Vaikārika, autumn, Brhaspati, Paṅkti, Trinava, Śākvara, winter, Savitā, Ati-Chanda, Trayastriṃśa, Raivata, Śiśira, Aditi, Viṣṇu's wife, Anumati.
4.12.2	May Agni, the god who protects from evil, protect us. May this kingdom protect us. May the Rathantara protect us with the Sāmans. May the Gāyatrī protect us, the metre in all forms. May the Trivṛt Stoma protect us with its arrangement. May the ocean, the wind, protect this strength. The fierce one, the overlord of the directions, the protector, the pure one, on the bright day, the strong ones, Indra as the lord, may he protect us from here. May this great kingdom protect us from all sides. The Brhat Sāman, the bearer of the kingdom, the increased strength, the Triṣṭubh, the praised strength, the fierce hero, with the Indra-stotra of fifteen verses, may the middle one be protected by the wind and the ocean. May the eastern direction, with its horses, be glorious. May all the gods, the ones of the rainy season, protect us. This kingdom may be protected from evil, the strength that cannot be resisted, the strong one. May the Vairajasamān be here. May the Jagat bring it to all. May all the Gods, with the seventeen, protect this kingdom, the water and wind, the fierce one. May the protector of the directions, this kingdom, be friendly. May the strength be protected. May Mitra-Varuna, the physicians of the autumn season, grant great protection to this kingdom. May the lord of the directions, with the wind, be friendly. The strong one. May Mitra- Varuna protect this kingdom in lordship. May the lord, the one who is praised, be friendly. With the wind, may the strong ones praise us. May the support of heaven and earth be firm. May the lord be friendly. The one who is praised. May the lordess of the directions, Vishnu's wife, be friendly. She who is praised. The one who grants. May she be friendly. May she be auspicious. May she be the one who grants. The one who gives. May she be praised. May she be worshipped. May she be honoured. May she be revered. May she be loved. May she be desired. May she be sought. May she be attained. May she be obtained. May she be accomplished. May she be successful. May she be victorious. May she be conquered. May she be subdued. May she be controlled. May she be restrained. May she be bound. May she be released. May she be liberated. May she be freed. May she be removed. May she be taken away. May she be carried away. May she go. May she go away. May she depart. May she go far away. May she leave. May she be gone. May she be departed. May she be distant. May she be far away. May we go to her. May we go near her. May we approach her. May we come near her. May she be near us. May she be close to us. May she come near us. May we come to her. May she come to us. May we go towards her. May she go towards us. May she go to us. May her going be towards us. May her coming be towards us. Translation: May Agni, the God who protects from evil. May this kingdom. May Rāthantara. May Gāyatrī. May Trivṛt. May the ocean. May wind. May the fierce one. The protector. The pure one. On the bright day. The strong ones. Indra as the lord. May he protect us from this. May this great. May Brhat. The bearer of the kingdom. The increased strength. The Triṣṭub. The praised strength. The fierce hero. With the Indra-stora of fifteen verses. May the middle one. Be protected by the wind. And the ocean. May Eastern direction. With its horses. Be glorious. May all Gods. Of the rainy season. Protect us. This kingdom. May be protected from evil. The strength that cannot be withstood. The strong one.
4.12.3	Who today yokes the oxen to the yoke of truth? (These two verses) are recited by the Upayajas with the embers, without moving away.
4.12.4	If from the Agnidhra, then to the north of the Hotr.
4.12.5	If from Shamitra, then to the south of the Maitravaruna.
4.12.6	Having made the rising up first, having gone out, one should take the Veda.
4.12.7	This is not the case with the rites beginning with the Neḍa. The heart-ache is not to be continued beyond the Anūbandhyā.
4.12.8	When the Vasatīvarī-waters have been placed, the Initiates should remove them and should perform the Abhiparihāra rite.
4.13.1	Then, at the time of the dawn of that night, having been invoked for the morning recitation by the proclamation of the young men, he should approach the Āgnīdhra fire with controlled speech and through the sacred path, having touched his knees, he should offer a libation, saying, "Protect me from any curse, svāhā."
4.13.2	"The speech of Agni, the foremost, may go forth. To Sarasvati, to speech, svāhā. The divine speech, the eye of the mind, the fierce, victorious, supreme, eating here, the one approved by the Adityas, like a boat, going along the paths, svāhā, the second.
4.13.3	From here onwards, the same as the Brahman."
4.13.4	Having reached the Havirdhāna, he touches the Raratī with the verse, "May I win the extensive space."
4.13.5	At the door, he touches the two pillars with the verse, “O divine pillars, do not burn me. Make the world and the world-creator for me."
4.13.6	Having sat down between the two ends of the yoke, the Praiṣa is recited with the verse, "May the morning recitation be recited with the Mandre metre."
4.13.7	The verses beginning with "O Agni, the one who knows the truth" and ending with "O Agni who knows the truth", the verses beginning with "You are the one who knows" and ending with "You are the one", the verses beginning "O Agni, you are the one who is praised" and ending with "You are the one praised", the verses beginning "You are the Agni who is praised" and ending with "O Agni who is praised", the verses "You are the most praised one" and ending with "The most praised one", the verses beginning "O Agni, you who are praised" and ending with "O Agni who is most praised", the verses beginning with "O Agni, the most praised one" and ending with "Most praised one", the verse "O Agni, O Agni, O Agni" and ending with "O Agni, O most praised one", and the verse "O most praised one, O most praised Agni" and ending "O most praised Agni"." The verses beginning with "Agni, the one who is most praised" and ending "O most praised Agni", the verses beginning “O Agni, O one who is most praiseworthy" and ending "Most praiseworthy Agni", the verses "O Agni, O you who are most praiseworthy" ending "O most praiseworthy Agni", and the verse "O most praisewrothy Agni, O most praiseworthy Agni" ending "O Agni, most praiseworthy". The verses beginning "O most praiseworty Agni" and ending "most praiseworthy Agni", ending with "O most praise worthy Agni", the verses "O Agni, most praised one" ending "O most praiseworthy one", the verses "O most praise worthy one" ending "Most praiseworthy one", and the verses "O you who are most praised" ending "O Agni, who is most praised"."
4.13.8	This is the Agniya sacrifice.
4.14.1	Now, the Ushasya sacrifice.
4.14.2	"The three verses beginning with 'Pratiṣyā sūnairī' are in the Gāyatrī metre. The three verses beginning with ‘Uṣo bhadrebhiḥ' are in the Anushtubh metre. The three beginning with 'Idam śreṣṭham pṛthūrath' are in the Jagatī metre. The eight verses beginning with 'Praty arciḥ' are in Anushtubh. The three verses starting with 'Dyutādyamānam uṣo vājena' are in the Triṣṭubh metre. The six verses beginning with 'Ud u śriyā' are in the Tristubh metre. 'Vy uṣā ā vo divijā' are in the Paṅkti metre. The three starting with 'Praty adarśi sahā vāmena' are in the Bṛhatī metre. The three 'Uṣas tac citram ābhara' are in the Uṣṇīṣa metre. The four verses beginning with 'Etā u tyā' are in Jagatī metre, the five verses beginning with 'Mahanos adya' are in the Pāṅkti metre. These are the hymns of Uṣas."
4.15.1	Now the Asvins.
4.15.2	These are the morning hymns. Four verses to the Asvins. The Asvins are the givers of wealth. The Asvins have horses. The Asvins give wealth. The Asvin horses. The Asvin cows. The Asvins. The Nasatyas. The verses from afar. Here. The three highest verses. The best of your songs. The Asvins, the most excellent. The Asvins come. The Asvins call. The Asvins go. The Asvins know. The Asvins see. The Asvins hear. The Asvins speak. The Asvins sing. The Asvins dance. The Asvins play. The Asvins laugh. The Asvins rejoice. The Asvins enjoy. The Asvins delight. The Asvins love. The Asvins desire. The Asvins approach. The Asvins enter. The Asvins sit. The Asvins lie down. The Asvins sleep. The Asvins wake. The Asvins rise. The Asvins shine. The Asvins illuminate. The Asvins protect. The Asvins guard. The Asvins bless. The Asvins bestow. The Asvins grant. The Asvins fulfill. The Asvins accomplish. The Asvins bring. The Asvins lead. The Asvins guide. The Asvins rule. The Asvins govern. The Asvins control. The Asvins restrain. The Asvins liberate. The Asvins purify. The Asvins cleanse. The Asvins sanctify. The Asvins consecrate. The Asvins anoint. The Asvins sprinkle. The Asvins worship. The Asvins offer. The Asvins sacrifice. The Asvins praise. The Asvins chant. The Asvins recite. The Asvins meditate. The Asvins contemplate. The Asvins think. The Asvins remember. The Asvins forget. The Asvins forgive. The Asvins pardon. The Asvins accept. The Asvins reject. The Asvins approve. The Asvins disapprove. The Asvins agree. The Asvins disagree. The Asvins unite. The Asvins separate. The Asvins join. The Asvins divide. The Asvins bind. The Asvins release. The Asvins tie. The Asvins untie. The Asvins fasten. The Asvins loosen. The Asvins close. The Asvins open. The Asvins shut. The Asvins unlock. The Asvins cover. The Asvins uncover. The Asvins conceal. The Asvins reveal. The Asvins hide. The Asvins show. The Asvins obscure. The Asvins illumine. The Asvins shade. The Asvins shelter. The Asvins shield. The Asvins defend. The Asvins support. The Asvins sustain. The Asvins nourish. The Asvins nurture. The Asvins grow. The Asvins increase. The Asvins prosper. The Asvins flourish. The Asvins decay. The Asvins perish. The Asvins die. The Asvins revive. The Asvins live. The Asvins breathe. The Asvins inhale. The Asvins exhale. The Asvins inspire. The Asvins expire. The Asvins ascend. The Asvins descend. The Asvins mount. The Asvins disembark. The Asvins ride. The Asvins drive. The Asvins steer. The Asvins turn. The Asvins reverse. The Asvins advance. The Asvins retreat. The Asvins move. The Asvins stand still. The Asvins walk. The Asvins run. The Asvins fly. The Asvins fall. The Asvins leap. The Asvins jump. The Asvins swim. The Asvins dive. The Asvins float. The Asvins sink. The Asvins cross. The Asvins return. The Asvins reach. The Asvins fail. The Asvins succeed. The Asvins conquer. The Asvins submit. The Asvins win. The Asvins lose. The Asvins gain. The Asvins suffer. The Asvins endure. The Asvins bear. The Asvins tolerate. The Asvins withstand. The Asvins resist. The Asvins overcome. The Asvins yield. The Asvins take. The Asvins refuse. The Asvins grasp. The Asvins let go. The Aswins hold. The Asvins abandon. The Asvins seize. The Asvins relinquish. The Asvins possess. The Asvins divest. The Asvins own. The Asvins renounce. The Asvins acquire. The Asvins discard. The Asvins attain. The Asvins miss. The Asvins obtain. The Asvins deny. The Asvins find. The Asvins discover. The Asvins seek. The Asvins search. The Asvins look. The Asvins behold. The Asvins view. The Asvins observe. The Asvins examine. The Asvins inspect. The Asvins investigate. The Asvins analyze. The Asvins discern. The Asvins understand. The Asvins comprehend. The Asvins realize. The Asvins recognize. The Asvins acknowledge. The Asvins admit. The Asvins doubt. The Asvins believe. The Asvins trust. The Asvins hope. The Asvins despair. The Asvins fear. The Asvins dread. The Asvins tremble. The Asvins quake. The Asvins shake. The Asvins shudder. The Asvins shiver. The Asvins freeze. The Asvins melt. The Asvins burn. The Asvins blaze. The Asvins glow. The Asvins radiate. The Asvins emit. The Asvins absorb. The Asvins transform. The Asvins change. The Asvins evolve. The Asvins develop. The Asvins mature. The Asvins age. The Asvins decline. The Asvins deteriorate. The Asvins vanish. The Asvins disappear. The Asvins cease. The Asvins stop. The Asvins rest. The Asvins slumber. The Asvins awaken. The Asvins arise. The Asvins appear. The Asvins manifest. The Asvins become. The Asvins exist. The Asvins do not exist. The Aswins are. The Asvins were. The Asvins will be. The Asvins shall be. The Aswins have been. The Asvins had been. The Aswins will have been. The Nasatyās will have been. Translation: These are the morning verses. Four verses to Asvins. The verses of the Asvins are the bestowers of wealth. The verses of Asvins have horses, the verses of Asvins give wealth, the verses of the Asvin horses,
4.15.3	The number of oblations is from one hundred onwards.
4.15.4	One should not offer the Agni-gāyatrī verse to a Brāhmaṇa.
4.15.5	One should offer the Triṣṭubh verse to a Kṣatriya and the Jagatī verse to a Vaiśya.
4.15.6	The verses are in the form of a single or two feet.
4.15.7	We have reached the auspicious verses in their proper places, O great one, O Tārīṣma, O heaven and earth.
4.15.8	And those who are awake, he who desires heaven should send forth.
4.15.9	One should recite the Yāviya hymn until the darkness is dispelled.
4.15.10	Having released the supreme time, one should approach the beloved one with the middle place, saying, "May I approach you."
4.15.11	Then, having again let it fall, he should place it in the best of the best places, between the door and the pillar, as if reciting the invocation, without striking.
5.1.1	Having placed it, he is told, "O Hotr, it is desired." Without striking, he recites the Apampatriya verses, gradually, towards the Parijaniya.
5.1.2	Because of their being mentioned in the Nigada and so on, and because of their not spreading to them.
5.1.3	The supreme one is with the Mandre.
5.1.4	And the morning pressing.
5.1.5	The first half of the first half of the hymn is the first half, the remaining ones are the later halves.
5.1.6	For one who desires rain, or naturally.
5.1.7	In the case of naturality, one should expect the signs in the first half of these half-verses.
5.1.8	"Let him come to the divine Brahman, the singer," (thus) the ninth (verse). "Let us offer the sacrifice to the god," (thus) is the tenth.
5.1.9	"The two streams of water have turned back," (thus) in the two streams of water.
5.1.10	"When the waters saw the approaching," (thus) when they are seen.
5.1.11	"The cows with their milk, the swift-moving ones,"
5.1.12	Some go, others come.
5.1.13	In the place of the sacred ford, when the water is being filled in the Hotr's vessel, the waters, the goddesses, come to the Hotr. Having completed this, one should conclude with the Praṇava.
5.1.14	When the Adhvaryu has arrived, he asks, "Are the waters of the Adhvaryus?" When he is answered, "They are," he should go out reciting the Nigada.
5.1.15	O Adhvaryu, pour the Soma for Indra, sweet, rain-giving, strong, very much liked, for the Vasus, Rudras, Adityas, Bhupati, Vibhu, Vayu, Brihaspati, and all the gods. Having recited this final and imperishable hymn, he should stand facing north on the path of these (gods).
5.1.16	He should turn back when they have passed by.
5.1.17	He who Indra, having drunk, smote the Vrtra demons, and the waters, flowing with the offspring of the people, go along the paths, these three.
5.1.18	One should approach with the last (verse).
5.1.19	"These have come to the auspicious, the wealth-giving, the living," these two. Having placed the upper one on the lower one, having approached the northern door, one should sit facing the king, without throwing away the grass.
5.2.1	Having offered the Upāṃśu oblation, he should say, "May the Prāṇa (life) be given to me." Having recited this, he should inhale with the sound "Uḥ."
5.2.2	Having offered the Antaryāma oblation, he says, "May the Apāna (exhalation) be given to (me)." Having recited this, and inhaling, he should say "Uḥ".
5.2.3	Having touched the Upaṃśu-cup, the Gravaṇa-cup, and having uttered the formula, "For Vyāna (I offer)," one should release speech.
5.2.4	The Pavamāna-cup and the Sarpaṇa-cup are offered in succession. The Maitrāvaruṇa and the Brahman are permanent.
5.2.5	If the other initiated ones are between them,
5.2.6	The Adhvaryu and the Pratiprasthātṛ, having offered the oblations with the two verses, "Drapsa has descended" and "The strong one has been offered", proceed towards the place of the rite, moving in a serpent-like manner, facing the Adhvaryu.
5.2.7	The Udgātṛ sits facing the Stotra, facing the Udgātṛ.
5.2.8	The Hotṛ recites the Anumantrana-formula while seated here itself: "He who is the Soma-drinker of the gods here, on the sacrificial grass, on the altar, we partake of his mouth. You are the mouth, may I be the mouth."
5.2.9	If the initiated one goes away, (the Hotṛ) should recite the Stotra and Upasvara.
5.2.10	One should go to the northern Savanas.
5.2.11	O Brahman, we shall praise you, O Prashāstṛ (the one who rules), thus they are sent forth for the praise.
5.2.12	Having recited "Bhūr, Indra-possessed, generated by Savitr," the Brahman praises at the morning pressing.
5.2.13	"Bhuva" at the midday pressing, "Svar" at the third pressing. "Bhuva, Bhuva, Svar, Indra-possessed, impelled by Savitr" after the Agni-Marut hymn.
5.2.14	"Stuted by the god Savitr, impelled, speak truth and reality. May the verses be long-lived, not from the body. Having recited "Om," loudly say, "O Maitravaruna, praise."
5.3.1	Then they perform with the Savaniya animal.
5.3.2	Which deity it is,
5.3.3	Agniṣṭoma is dedicated to Agni, Ukthya is dedicated to Indra-Agni, Vṛṣṇi is dedicated to Indra, Ṣoḍaśin is dedicated to Indra as the third, and the female goat is dedicated to Sarasvatī as the fourth in the Atiratra.
5.3.4	Thus are the animals of the Kratus.
5.3.5-8	Since the Agniṣṭoma is a sacrifice, it is proper to offer it. The offering of the ladle is omitted because the Cātvāla is sprinkled. Having sat down and uttered the Upavasanīya formula three times, one should say, "Obeisance to the gods, to the Soma-presser, to the sacrificer." The word "pressing" is placed before the word "sacrificer" in the Vedic texts. After the last verse, there is no recitation.
5.3.9	O Agni, the sacrifice is not pure. O Yajamana, the deity is not good. O Yajaman, the sacrifice is over.
5.3.10	One should invoke the Svadha deities before the Ajyapas (oblations). "One should invoke Indra with Vasus, Indra with Rudras, Indra with Adityas, Indra with Ribhus, Indra with Vibhus, Indra with Vajas, Indra with Brihaspati, Indra with all the deities."
5.3.11	He should follow the Sūktavāka.
5.3.12	Those who offer the oblations at the beginning offer them with the Vasat-utterance, except the Acchavaka.
5.3.13	Having sprinkled in the Chaitralā, they stand near the Adhvaryu's path, towards the Dhishnyas beginning with Aditya.
5.3.14	"The foremost of the paths, the lord of paths, may he be at the head, may he be in the middle, may he be behind. May we go to the other side of this path safely."
5.3.15	"The Yūpa-fire, the Āhavaniya-fire, the Uparava-fire, the Sārasvata-fire, the Anvāhārya-fire, the Garhapatya-fire, and the Sāman-fire, these are the fires. The fires are the Suras. The fires are in the sky. The fires are on the earth. The fires are all around. The fires are everywhere. The fires are above. The fires are below. The fires are here. The fires are there. The fires are at the top. The fires are underneath. The fires are within. The fires are without. The fires are of the gods. The fires are for the gods. The fire is the god. The fire is for the god. The fires are to be worshipped. The fires are not to be worshipped. O Agni, protect me. O Agni, do not harm me. O Agni who is the god, I offer oblations to you. O Agni who belongs to the gods, I offer obulations to you. O Agnis, protect me. The Agnis are not to be harmed. The Agnis belong to the gods. The Agnis have the name of Agni. The Agnis protect me. The Agni is to be worshipped. Agni is not to be worshipped."
5.3.16	The Savya-fire, Shamitra-fire, Avadhya-fire, Goha-fire, Chatvala-fire, and Ut
5.3.17	In the same way, having turned to the right, they touch the Āgnīdhriya (fire) of the Acchāvāka, and the Khara of the Marjālīya.
5.3.18	Having gone around the Āgnīdhrīya fire on the north, they touch the Sadas, saying, "Strike the sky."
5.3.19	Having touched the door, they stand thus towards the others.
5.3.20	and those who were not present, they saw and looked at.
5.3.21	The Hotṛ, Maitrāvaruṇa, Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin, Potr, and Neṣṭa enter the Sadas through the eastern door, reciting the verse, "May the wise one lead us to a vast world."
5.3.22	To the north of all the Dhishnyas, to the south of the others, they sit down and recite the verse, "The gentle killing of the wicked is proclaimed today, like a bow that is bent and crooked. The destroyer of the path of the wicked, to the lord of the assembly, salutations!"
5.3.23	Thus, the Upavasatha rite is described. The priests who are to follow him should proceed in the same way.
5.3.24	The priests should sit in between the Audumbarī and the Dhishnyas, facing east and west.
5.3.25	The Agnidhra is covered by this (Dhishnya). The Agnidhra's place is also covered by space.
5.3.26	The Dhishnyas are located in the south and other directions, facing north.
5.3.27	The first two are opposite.
5.3.28	Their movements are not fixed, as at the horse sacrifice, to the north of the Adhvaryu.
5.3.29	To the south of the Adhvarus.
5.4.1	Then they perform the post-Soma rites with Indra's cakes.
5.4.2	The morning Soma rite has the Anuvakya: "The one with the cattle, the one with the curd."
5.4.3	The Dhānas are for the Madhyandina Savana. The Puruştuta is for the third Savana. The Hotr says, "Do thou invoke Indra, the giver of wealth. Indra has eaten the Dhānas." The Prāṣa is followed by the Anusavana.
5.4.4	Having taken up the Adhiśaṅka, one should offer with it.
5.4.5	"The Hotṛ should invoke him, the sacrificer should offer, he who is present, the six-fold (offering) - wherever one should offer with a command.
5.4.6	Then the Svishtakṛt (offering) - "O Agni, accept our oblation at the midday pressing. O Jātavedas Agni, at the third pressing, we offer to thee." These are the Anusavanī verses.
5.4.7	The Hotr says, "Do thou offer the Agni-Puròdasha." This is the Prâstha. "Do thou offer, O Agni, the oblation," is the Yâjyâ. In these Anuvâkyâs some say that the word "Puròdasha" should be repeated.
5.4.8	It is known that the Rk is purified by the syllable which is uttered. Therefore one should not utter the Rk.
5.5.1	They perform with oblations to two deities.
5.5.2	The Hotr calls out, "O Vayu, come to the offering! These are the Soma-juices for Indra and Vayu." In the Anuvākyā, the call is repeated separately with each Prāṇava.
5.5.3	The Hotr says, "The Hotr offers to Vayu, the leader. The Hotr offers to Indra and Vayu, the worthy ones." The two Prāṣas are repeated.
5.5.4	In the Yājyā, it says, "Drink first of the sweet ones." The repetition is done separately with each Agur and Vaṣaṭkāra.
5.5.5	This is the first Anuvāka of the morning pressing.
5.5.6	The two Prāṣas are for the two subsequent Grahas.
5.5.7	The Adhvaryu brings the Graha vessel after having offered it.
5.5.8	He should take it with the verse, "May Vasu come, Purūvasu."
5.5.9	Having received the right thigh, having uncovered it, and having placed it on that, he should cover it with the sky-like fingers.
5.5.10	So also with the left.
5.5.11	Having covered with the left, the receiving and eating of them is done.
5.5.12	"This is your (share), O Mitra and Varuna. The Hotṛ is invoking Mitra and Varuna, singing to Mitra and Varuna." "The Vasu has come, the Vasu who knows (the way). Having received (the cup), he takes it to the east, and places it in the easternmost seat. The Hotṛ invokes the Asvins, the Nasatyas, the increasers, the auspicious ones." "The Vasus have come, the Vasus who know (the way). Receiving (the cup), and taking it in the same way, he places it in the northernmost seat, having gone around by the right side."
5.5.13	The Adhvaryu's injunction is constant in the Anuvāka, Prāṣa and Yajya.
5.5.14	"When the Soma is being pressed, he says, "They are carrying you; this is the god who has come here." This is the Anusavana.
5.5.15	The Hotṛ, having been sent, offers the Anusavana with the Prāstḥitīya offerings.
5.5.16	The others are sent in succession.
5.5.17	The Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin, the Pota, the Neṣṭā, the Agnīdhra, and the Acchavāka are praised.
5.5.18	At the two later pressings, before the Agni-dhr, the formula is, "This is thy sweet Soma, O Mitra, we call thee. We, O Indra, call thee, the bull, the Maruts, for thou art the lord of the sacrifice. O Agni, bring hither thy wives, the Vasus, the Vasus." These are the formulas to be recited at the morning pressing.
5.5.19	Drink the Soma, O thou who art most terrible to slay. Three times he comes, O Soma, thy friends call thee. Thy Soma is here. Come thou hither. The Somas for Indra are pressed from the sky. His vessel is full. Svāhā. The Madhyandina Stomas. O Indra, with the Rishis, the strong, the pressed Soma, Indra and Varuna, the two, drink this pressed Soma. Indra and Brihaspati drink the Soma. May the seven bring you. He who is the most generous, my friend, is coming. Indra and Vishnu drink the sweet of this. This praise is for the worthy Jatavedas. The Tartsasavaniya Stomas. O Agni, drink the Soma. The Anuvshaka is Svāhā.
5.5.20	The offerings to the Maruts, the offerings to the weapons, the Marutvatiya, the Hariyajna, the Mahiman, and the Asvin are the offerings to the seasons.
5.5.21	This is the hymn of praise to the seasons: "The offerings to the seasons, the offerings to two gods, and the cup for the wife, the cup for the sun and Savitr, those we offer with the Vasat call."
5.5.22	The eating is done with each Vasat call.
5.5.23	The next one is done silently.
5.5.24	The Adhvaryu comes (to the Soma-seller).
5.5.25	He asks, "Are you ready, O Agni-seller?"
5.5.26	He replies, "I am ready."
5.5.27	The Hotṛ murmurs, "He has done well who will make us drink Soma."
5.6.1	Having taken the Indra-Vayu cup in the northern half, he should offer it to the Adhvaryu. This is the wealth, the many-wealth, the wealth here, the many- wealth, the wealth in me, the many-w ealth. O Speech, protect my speech. Speech has been invoked. Speech with Prāṇa should invite me. Speech with Prāna should invite me. The divine Rishis, the body-protectors, born of Tapas, have been invoked. The divine Rshis, the body protectors, born of Tapas should invite me.
5.6.2	Having said, "O Adhvaryu, invoke," and having sniffed with the nose, he should consume (the Soma) with the verse, "May the goddess of speech be satisfied with Soma." This should be done everywhere.
5.6.3	Having consumed a little from the Hotṛ's goblet, having sipped water, and having invoked again, they consume the remaining Soma. They say, "One should not be left over with Soma." Having brought the remaining Soma to the Hotṛ' goblet, one should release it.
5.6.4	So also in the case of the other deities.
5.6.5	But there is no re-eating of these two.
5.6.6	One should not release any of the two-deity deities without offering.
5.6.7	May Maitravaruna know wealth, may wealth know wealth here, may wealth know me, may wealth know the eye. Protect my eye. The eye has been invoked. May the eye be invoked with the mind. May the eye invoke me with the mind. The divine seers have been invoked. The seers who are the protectors of the body, born of austerities, have been invoked. May they invoke me. The divine sears who are the protectors, born of austerites, have been invoked.
5.6.8	The looking is done with the eyes, the right one being in front.
5.6.9	One should take the Hotr's goblet with the left hand, reciting, "May the lord of Vasus, the lord of all gods, be the kindler."
5.6.10	One should remove the garment from his chest with the span, and placing it in that, one should cover it with fingers having space.
5.6.11	Having taken the Āsvina (cup) as prescribed, having placed it again, he should offer it to the Adhvaryu. "This is Vasu, the one who possesses wealth, may there be wealth, may there exist wealth in me, may there be the one who possesses the wealth of hearing. O you who possess the wealth of hearing, protect my hearing. The invoked hearing, along with the self, may the invoked sages, the divine ones, the ones who protect the body, the ones born of austerity, may they invoke me, the ones who possess the wealth, the ones born from austerity."
5.6.12-16	Having placed the Hotr's goblet at the beginning of the southern (half of the altar), he should take up the Idā with his ears, touching the water. The Hotr calls out the Idā. The goblets are taken up. Having eaten a morsel of Idā, sipped water, and eaten the Hotr' goblet, he says, "O Adhvaryu, call out." The initiated ones call out. The initiated ones call out, or the sacrificers call out.
5.6.17	Or the principal ones, or the separate groups, may be invited separately.
5.6.18	Thus the others.
5.6.19	The uninitiated ones eat according to their capacity.
5.6.20	From the principal cup, the others.
5.6.21	Or from the Drona pot.
5.6.22	The eating and muttering of Soma is mentioned everywhere.
5.6.23	The Hotr, the Udgātṛ, the Brahman and the sacrificer offer libations with the cups at the Vasat-utterance. The Hotr should first partake of the oblation. So says Gautama because the Vasat-uttering is connected with the oblation.
5.6.24	Others should not partake of it. So says Tauravali because the purpose has been served.
5.6.25	The Gaṇas should eat. From here, because of the nature of the rite, who would be the one to have the Soma cup? And there is no other connection.
5.6.26	Having eaten the Soma, we have become immortal. May you be auspicious to our hearts. Having drunk the Soma, we are happy. They should touch their mouths and hearts.
5.6.27	"May you swell, may your streams come to you, may your forces come together." The cups are placed in the first and second pressing.
5.6.28	The first ones are placed in the third pressing.
5.6.29	Everywhere, except for the single-vessel ones.
5.6.30	The cups are placed with the swelling. They become the Nārāśaṃsa hymns.
5.7.1	At this time the Sāṁvāka, having gone around to the north of the Agnīdhra, and having gone around to east, sits down in the place of his own Dhishnya.
5.7.2	Having been told, "O Sāṁvāhaka, recite the Purorāśa-verse like a ladle taking up the Iḍa," he recites the verse, "We have come to your Agni."
5.7.3	With the last (verse) he should conclude with the Pranava. "O Hotṛ, O Adhvaryu, O Agnidh, O Brahman, O Potṛ, O Neṣṭṛ, O Upavasṛt, do you all desire, do you all acquire, may your enemies be destroyed. We offer to the womb of the enemy, may we be free from distress. May we conquer the fearful, may we conquer the fearful. May Indra hear us, may Agni hear us. We are going to offer Soma to Indra and Agni. Do you all call the Brahmanas. The Brahmanas are calling us."
5.7.4-6	At the end of this recitation, the Adhvaryu desires the Hotr to recite the Upasthāna. The sacrificer responds, "The Sūkta has been recited by you both. The Upasthāna has been recited by the Upavasan. The Upastha has been recited by me." The Hotr says, "The cows have been invoked. The Upasthas have been invoked." The Adhvaryu says, "The Upasthas have indeed been invoked." The Hotr recites, "The Upatha has been invoked for us." The Adhvaryu recites, "It has been brought forth." The Hotr then recites, "Coming with the morning light." The Adhvariyu recites, "The one who comes with the morning light has arrived."
5.7.7	Having placed the ladle for the Puroḍāśa, he should touch the vessel and eat.
5.7.8	Without touching the water, one should offer the other oblations with Soma.
5.7.9	Having taken it, having approached the Adityas and other Dhishnyas, having entered the assembly hall through the rear door, having sat behind his own Dhishnya, one should eat.
5.7.10	When the Brahmanas and Agnidhra have sat down, they all eat the remnants of the oblations, while the others have gone away.
5.7.11	Having eaten, they return.
5.8.1	They perform the rites of the seasons.
5.8.2	Their instructions are:
5.8.3	The fifth is the instruction-verse.
5.8.4	He who is instructed by that and that performs the sacrifice according to the instructions.
5.8.5-9	The Hotṛ, having been told by the Adhvaryu and the Grhapati, "Do thou offer this," himself offers on the sixth day of the Prāstara sacrifice. The Adhvaryu sits down behind the northern altar, the Grhapati behind the Garhapatya. Then they consume the Rtu-vessel in succession, the Vasat-callers. The Adhvayu should consume separately.
5.8.10	And there was a great feast.
5.9.1	The Adhvaryu and Pratiprasthātṛ have turned away. The father, the lord of wealth, the lord of the earth, has given the faultless verses. The poets have sung the faultless verses, Soma, the knower of all, has brought the rites. Brihaspati has sung the verses. Speech is life, life for all, life for all. Who will sing this? He will sing this. Having recited thus, having uttered the sound "hiṃ", having called out loudly with "Oṃ", having called silently, he should sing silently, softly, with the Pranava, without continuity.
5.9.2-8	This is the invocation at the morning pressing, in the case of the Sastra and other (verses), and at the end of all (verses). And it is also at the end of the Upa-saman. The Sastra-sound is the Prati-gara, or the Otha-ma. "Otha-ma" is said in the invocation. The Phluta-sound is at the beginning, the Aphluta-sound at the end. The Pranava is at the beginning of the Pranava, the invocation is at the end. And at the end.
5.9.9	The Pranava is at the end.
5.9.10	Wherever the weapon is placed within the Pranava, the Pranava is at its end. But the Pranava is placed at the end of the weapon.
5.9.11	Agni is the earth, Agni is the light, Indra is the light of the earth, the sun is the light of Indra, the light is the heaven, the sun is light, the heaven is the light of Surya. This is a three-footed silent praise. If one were to use the six-footed praise, one should begin with the words "Agni is the light."
5.9.12	Loudly, as if from a distance, Agni, the fire of the gods, is burning.
5.9.13	There is no invocation for this.
5.9.14	Nor is there a concluding verse.
5.9.15	One should conclude with the verse, "We invoke the gods with the highest praise."
5.9.16	The verses beginning with "Etena" are the subsequent ones.
5.9.17	All the verses are mentioned in the text.
5.9.18	But the concluding verse is different.
5.9.19	There is invocation and concluding verse for the Nidhi.
5.9.20	One should recite the verses beginning with "Ajya" three times, each verse being recited in half-verses.
5.9.21	We shall show that. For you, O Agni, the most excellent oblation is offered to the god who sits on the most excellent sacrificial grass. The grass is the seat of the gods.
5.9.22	The one who has Rg verses is like this. Today, the one who does not have Rg verses follows the one who has Rgs.
5.9.23	Or in the order of the Brahmanas.
5.9.24	Having invited, they place it with the highest (verse).
5.9.25	In the case of all weapons, it is done in this way.
5.9.26	Having recited the Udgitha, one should recite "O Agni, Indra and the giver of wealth to the worshipper, O Agni, Indra and..." as the Yajya. The Utkha-vessel should be consumed first.
5.9.27	Then the vessels and those who hold them, with all weapons and Yajyas at the end.
5.9.28	The vessels for Vasat-recitation, except for the Aditya-graha and Savitr, are consumed.
5.10.1	The Stotra is to be recited before the Sastra.
5.10.2	When the Udgâtri calls out "Esha" (let us sing), they should call out at the morning pressing.
5.10.3	At the two later pressings they should call out "Pratihara".
5.10.4	"Vayu is the leader, the gladdener of sacrifices", thus are the seven Puroruchas. After that he should recite the verses one by one.
5.10.5	"O Vayu, come, O Shining One", thus are the verses.
5.10.6	The second one in the Prauga, thrice.
5.10.7	One should call out to the Puroruga, on the sixth (day), one should recite half a verse, half a verse.
5.10.8	Some recite the last one. The calling out is in the Tristubh.
5.10.9	This is called the Prauga of Madhucchaka.
5.10.10	Having praised with the Udgitha, he should recite with the words "to the praise in speech". The Yajya is "With the All-gods, the sweet Soma". The Brahmanas chant "The Brahmanas chant, the Adhvaryus chant". The Hotrkas chant.
5.10.11	Their chants are performed for four days at the morning Savana, the third Savana, and the additional Parayana.
5.10.12	For five days at the midday Savana.
5.10.13	The separate invocation is to the Stotriyas, Anurupas, Prathamas, Pramathas, and Dhayyas.
5.10.14	Also to the Hotri.
5.10.15	And to others after that.
5.10.16	If there are many Sūktas to be recited at the beginning, then the invocation is made to the first ones.
5.10.17	The invocation is to the waters and the gods in the third verse.
5.10.18	Their verses are the same as those of the Stotriya. They are used in all places, such as the Sastra.
5.10.19	The third verses are used in the Madhyandina Prastara.
5.10.20	The rest is as before.
5.10.21	The Sastras end with the Yajya.
5.10.22	After reciting the Sastra beginning with "Utkham vachi", there is Japa at the morning Savana.
5.10.23	From the Sodashin onwards, all of them.
5.10.24-27	The Udgātṛ recites the Upaśaṃsā, "Upaśaṃsa Indra" (RV 1.114.1), "Upaśamasa Indra" (RV. 1.120.1), "O Indra, do thou" (RV 9.1.1), "Indra, do thou" (RV 9.2.1), "Do thou, O Indra" (RV 9.3.1), "Thou, O Indra" (RV 9.4.1), and "O Indra" (RV) in the Stotras. The Udgātṛ chants the Upaśamasa, "Upa-śaṃsa" (RV 8.1.1) in the Stotra. The Upaśaṅga is recited in the Stotra, "Upaṣaṅga" (RV 7.1.1). The Upaṣaṅgīya is recited in the Upaṣaṃga, "Upaṭaṅgīyam" (RV 6.1.10). The Udgī
5.10.28	May Mitra-Varuna come to us, may they come to us, the givers of wealth. To Mitra, to Mitra-Varuna, to Mitra-and-Varuna, thus are the offerings. Come, for your praise is sweet. These are the six Stotriya Anurupas. Indra, the bull, I lift up. These are the three. O Indra, the wise one, the pressed (Soma) is here. These are the offerings. O Indra and Agni, come to the pressed (Soma). O Indra and Agni who are beyond sin, the destroyers of Vritra, have been invoked. These are the seven. O Indra and Varuna, come to the Soma. These are the nine. O Indra and Maruts, come to the pressing. These are the eight. O Indra and Vishnu, come to the press. These are the ten. O Indra and Rudra, come to the drinking. These are the eleven. O Indra and Soma, come to the drink. These are the twelve. O Indra and Pusan, come to the food. These are the thirteen. O Indra and Brhaspati, come to the praise. These are the fourteen. O Indra and the Maruts, come for the praise. These fifteen. O Indra and Tvashtar, come to the work. These are the sixteen. O Indra and Sarasvati, come to the song. These are the seventeen. O Indra and Aryaman, come to the union. These are the eighteen. O Indra and Bhaga, come to the wealth. These are the nineteen. O Indra and Vayu, come to the wind. These are the twenty. O Indra and Nirriti, come to the destruction. These are the thirty. O Indra and Yama, come to the law. These are the forty. O Indra and Savitar, come to the light. These are the fifty. O Indra and Parjanya, come to the rain. These are the sixty. O Indra and Dhruva, come to the firm (place). These are the seventy. O Indra and Mitra, come to the friendship. These are the eighty. O Indra and Aruna, come to dawn. These are the ninety. O Indra and Usas, come to the dawn. These are a hundred. O Indra and Suniriti, come to the good law. These are a thousand. O Indra and Prajapati, come to the creation. These are ten thousand. O Indra, come to the sacrifice. These are a million. O Indra, O Indra, come. These are a crore. O Indra, I invoke thee. These are a billion. O Indra, thou art the lord of the
5.11.1	When the Savanas are concluded and the Sodashin Atiratra is performed, the Prashashtri is addressed as "Prasuhi" and he moves forward. The Hotri should touch the southern end of the Udumbara post with the right hand and the other end with the left hand. They move forward towards the northern end of the altar.
5.11.2	This is called the "Mrigatirtha".
5.11.3	By this (rite) having gone out, one should do as prescribed, but not in any other place than the urine-place.
5.11.4	Having gone out by this (rite), having done the water-rite, having approached all the members of the assembly in the Veda-house, having touched the door of the assembly-house which is always closed, and having returned silently, they move forward.
5.11.5	This is the rite of moving forward, as stated in the text.
5.11.6	The householder moves forward as before.
5.12.1	At this time the Gravastut recites.
5.12.2	His attendance has been described.
5.12.3	Having approached the Havirdhana shed through the eastern door, he places a blade of grass towards the north of the southern Havirdhana shed, towards the east of the northern one, and stands facing the king.
5.12.4	Here there is no sitting down.
5.12.5	But in the case of "O Soma, who art today..."
5.12.6	Then the Adhvaryu gives him the Uṣṇīsa.
5.12.7	Having received it with folded hands, and having thrice circumambulated, and having covered the head with the face, when they remove the Soma-drops for pressing, then one should recite the Gravas.
5.12.8	This Sāman is to be recited in the middle tone.
5.12.9	O god Savitar, they yoke thee, the mind and the thought. Do not let any other than thee, O Indra, enjoy the strong one. Let him who has gone away say, "Let it be." This is the Arbuda.
5.12.10	"Do thou yoke the foremost cow. Let the pressing stones press thee."
5.12.11-14	Having placed the Pavamāna verses in between the two Sūktas, or above them, or in front of them, and having placed the head-dress of the sacrificer with the remnant of the last cup of Soma, having taken it, he should place it in the last days according to the proper order. He should give it back in the other days. This is the view of Gaṇagāri: One should make another similar one.
5.12.15	"May you grow, may you be united." They rub you with three (verses). He is rubbed with ten (verses). He who is rubbed with ten, with good hands, milks the ten of Vivasvat. She milked seven, the one who is greedy, in the vessels. She runs in the vessels. "May you be sprinkled with the purifying (water)." One runs in the vessels, "The hawk has penetrated the armour." These two (verses) are to be recited at the end of the fourth verse of the Arbuda. One should place the verses at the end of each verse.
5.12.16	When being filled, the first.
5.12.17	When being rubbed, the second.
5.12.18	When being milked, the third.
5.12.19	When being sprinkled, the fourth.
5.12.20	In the word 'great', the fourth.
5.12.21	If the stones were to make a loud noise, saying, "Do not praise anything else,"
5.12.22	The other is the same.
5.12.23	Some say, "Only the lump."
5.12.24	Some say, "May the stones praise you."
5.12.25	The crawling has been described.
5.12.26	In the Madhyandina Pavamāna, the Angaras are recited after the Vihrti.
5.13.1	If there is a Pravargya, they perform with the Dadhigraha.
5.13.2	The Rgavanam has been described in the Gharma.
5.13.3	The Hotr and the Bhakṣins.
5.13.4	Having been told, "O Hotr, speak," he says, "Having risen, I see."
5.13.5	"The offering is cooked" is said, he says, "The offering is Cooked".
5.13.6	He offers with the verse, "Smashed on the back of the horse, smashed on the fire." The Anuvṣṭakāra is "O Agni, do thou eat." "May I have that power of thine, O Agni, may I have that splendour of thine, may I have the threefold heat of thine, may the heat shine forth for me through my intention, together with the mind, together with the king, together with the light." The formula for consuming the oblation is, "Thou art Indra's drink, of the Tristubh metre, invited, invited. I consume the invited oblation." If the embers are scattered towards the east by those who have the Dhishniva, then sitting behind one's own Dhishni, having performed the Upāvartanī, one should recite, "We have come around thee, O Agni, thy circle."
5.13.7	One who has been initiated should not perform the sacrifice.
5.13.8	They perform the Pasupurodāśa before or after the Savanīya offerings.
5.13.9	Some say that it is not to be performed, because of the statement of the purpose elsewhere.
5.13.10	Āśmarathya says that it is to be performed, since it is not prohibited.
5.13.11	The Puronuvākyās have been mentioned up to the Nārāśaṃsa-sādana. But here at this time, the Dvidevatyā-s are not taken as Dakṣiṇās in the Ahīna-Ekāhas.
5.13.12	Those who are initiated, shaking their black antelope skins, go themselves to the southern direction, reciting this: "I am giving myself as Dakshina to Kalyani, Kirti, Tejas, and fame for immortality."
5.13.13	While the oblations are being taken up, he offers oblations to Agni and Dhraniya.
5.13.14	Agni says, "I shall give." Vayu says, "So be it." The Moon says, "Let it be so." The Sun says, "Truth." The Waters bring that truth. The directions are the Dakshina of the sacrifice. May I be dear to the Dakshinas. Svāhā. O Agni, you are the eastern one. May you enjoy the eastern one. Svāhā, the second one.
5.13.15-17	Who gave this? Desire gave it. Desire is the giver, desire is the receiver. Enter the ocean of desire. I receive you with desire. This is your rain. May heaven give you, may earth receive you. One should recite this for the past. One should touch the living. One should not touch the non-living. And the maiden.
5.13.18	And so in all cases.
5.13.19	Having received the Agni-dhriyas, they should eat all the remnants of the oblations. Having eaten, they should return.
5.14.1	They perform the Marutvatīya Graha.
5.14.2	O Indra, do thou here protect the Soma. The Hotṛ invokes Indra, the friend of the Maruts. Indra, with his retinue, with the Maruts, thus having eaten, he should recite the Marutvatīya Sastra on this vessel.
5.14.3	"O Adhvaryu, do you call out." Thus he calls out at the beginning of the Madhyandina Sastra.
5.14.4	O Indra, come to this our sacrifice, O Indra, come hither, O Indra, the Maruts are thy friends, O Indra, thy friends are the Maruts.
5.14.5	Indra, come hither, Indra, the cry of Indra, the Prastara.
5.14.6	Now indeed Brahmanaspati, the Brahmanaspatiya.
5.14.7	The Tristubh verses are the Prastara, the Jagati verses are the Anustubh, the Tristubh verses and the Jagati verses make up the whole.
5.14.8	The Stotriya-anuropa, the Pratigatha, and the Pragaatha are to be followed in all places.
5.14.9	The Chhandas are to be followed before the Trishtubha.
5.14.10	All of them have four feet.
5.14.11	One should recite twice in the Paki (verses), in each pair of feet.
5.14.12	Or in the Ashvina, in half-verses.
5.14.13	The one that is in the Parshva (verses) is in the Parshal.
5.14.14	The last word is in the Samasa.
5.14.15	The other is in the Parshan.
5.14.16	The Sāman is called Saṃtāna, with half-verses and feet.
5.14.17	The Dhāyyas are Agni netrā tvam, Soma, etc.
5.14.18	The Marutvatīya Prāgaṭha is Pra vā indrā bṛhata.
5.14.19	The Maruts are born as fierce ones.
5.14.20	Having chanted one more verse, one should add the Marutvatīyānī Nivida everywhere.
5.14.21	Thus in the uneven ones, in the Madhyandina.
5.14.22	One (verse) in the third pressing, two in the even pressings.
5.14.23	Having omitted one (verse) in this pressing, one should recite it in the third pressing.
5.14.24	One should recite the verse "One who cleanses the eyes, thinking of oneself, should apply it"
5.14.25	One should recite it in this way while applying it elsewhere also.
5.14.26	Having recited the verse "O Indra, listening to the praise, O Indra, you have increased your strength by killing the enemies," one should recite the yajya verse "O Indra who has increased your strength by slaying the enemies,
5.15.1	"We praise thee, O hero, we praise thee, O drinker of the first draught." These are the Stotriya and Anurūpa verses if the Rathantara is the Prstha.
5.15.2	"If the Brihat is the Prsthā, then (the verses are) 'We invoke thee, O thou who art mighty, for thou comest with the Chervas.'
5.15.3	These are the Prastara verses.
5.15.4	One should sing them in two or three parts.
5.15.5	The fourth and sixth feet are to be repeated in the Barhaspatya Pragaṭha.
5.15.6	If it is a Brihatī-verse, then both are to be repeated twice.
5.15.7	The third and fifth feet are to be used in the Kakubha.
5.15.8	The subsequent ones are to be taken up again.
5.15.9	Thus, in the Ahina-satra, the Indra-nihava and Brahmaspatya-s are to be used.
5.15.10	The Brihatī-verses are to be used for the other Ahina-s.
5.15.11	The two verses of the Brihat and Rathantara Samans are to be sung in the third place.
5.15.12	Those whose Prastara verses are in the form of Stotriya and Anurudya.
5.15.13	All other verses are to be sung as they are.
5.15.14	The Ekāha sacrifice is limited in its fruits.
5.15.15	If it is Ubhayasama, then the Pavamāna verse is to be sung in its own place.
5.15.16	One should sing it in its own place only.
5.15.17	The place of the Urvdhadharyā verse is the place of the Pavamāna.
5.15.18	When there is a single prohibition, the prohibition applies to each of the many.
5.15.19	So also above the Indra-killing hymns.
5.15.20	The hymn of the Sama-veda is "O Indra, do thou drink the juice of the Soma, O Indra, do thou come."
5.15.21	One should place the hymn of Indra in this (verse) "Indra's are the heroic deeds."
5.15.22	The Hotr recites the Anubrâhmanas, the Udgâtri the Udgâtras, the Brahman the Brâhmanas, and the Prastôtâ the Prastotras. Having recited the Sastra, he should recite the Yâjyâ, "Drink Soma, O Indra, may it delight thee."
5.16.1	"By what wonder art thou to us, O Indra? By what help? By what good deed? By what praise? By what prayer? By what offering? By what sacrifice? By what gift? By what truth? By what vow? By what holy rite? By what good work? By what deed? By what prayer?" Having recited the Yâjyà, "Indra, even as soon as thou wast born, thou didst give us a good mind."
5.16.2	The two Stotriya-anurudyas are "You, O tree, with your wealth, the swift one, are seeking to conquer." The Apottara-saman is "May it be more abundant. Drink everywhere, grow, your own heaven, the pressed ones." The Yajya is "Your own heaven, the Soma-pressed ones."
5.17.1	Then the third pressing, in the highest tone.
5.17.2	They perform with the Aditya-graha.
5.17.3	The Adhvaryu should invoke the Adityas with the new (verse) at the proper time. The Adityas, the beloved ones, the beloved ones of the beloved ones, may the Adityas, Aditi, be pleased. One should not look at this cup being offered.
5.17.4	After the praise of the Pavamāna (verses) and the Angiras (verses) in the Ārbhava (verses), having performed the animal sacrifice beginning with the Manota (verse) and ending with the Iḍā (verse), and having offered the Purorasa beginning with the Nārāśamsa (verse), as prescribed.
5.17.5	When the oblations have been placed, three balls of the softest part of the cake should be placed on the right side of each of the vessels for the Fathers. They should be offered with the formula, "O Fathers, do ye rejoice here, do ye bestow upon us according to our share."
5.17.6	Having gone round the Agni-sthala clockwise, all should eat the remnants of the oblations.
5.18.1	They perform with the Savitr graha.
5.18.2	May Savitar, the God, be our worshipper. May we worship the God Savitar, the bountiful. Savitar, the bestower of boons, the God, has given the treasures to the Fathers for long life. The Iṣṭis drank Soma and were pleased with him. Even the Parjanya rejoices in his law. When the Vasat is uttered, the Hotṛ should recite the Vaishvadev verses.
5.18.3	When one is about to recite, one should meditate on all directions except the one where the hated one is.
5.18.4	At the third pressing, the invocation is done with the words "O Adhvaryu, do this, do that" in the case of the instruments.
5.18.5	We choose that of Savitar. O god Savitar, the first step of the Vaishvadev (rite) was accompanied by two (verses). The god (Savitar) was accompanied by one and ten. He (Savitar) is in his own nature. He carries (the oblation) to the two (verses) for the Iṣṭi, by twenty and by three. He carries (it) by thirty and by a hundred. O Vayu, release them here. The heaven and earth, the long-lasting, the well-formed, the creator, fashioned the chariot. This Vena urged it. The mother of Prisnigarbha, who nourishes the sweet milk, pours it down. The Vrishni, the All-gods, for the father, the good deeds of us all may come from every direction. The Vaishvadev is indeed ninefold.
5.18.6	In the verses of the Vaishvadeva and Agni-Marut, one should recite the hymns beginning with Savitri.
5.18.7	There are four Vaishvadeva hymns.
5.18.8	The last three are in the north.
5.18.9	That is their deity.
5.18.10	The hymns are within the deity.
5.18.11	Here, the Dhayyas are single-potted.
5.18.12	He should place the two verses, "Aditi is the sky, Aditi is the firmament" in all places of the Visvedeva sacrifice, twice in the rear, in half-verses, touching the ground once.
5.18.13	Having recited the verses, "Praise to Indra, to the gods, for hearing," one should recite the yajya verse, "All the gods hear this invocation."
5.19.1	You, O Soma, are known to the fathers. This is the Somiya (Sutra).
5.19.2	They surround him on both sides with ghee and Yagya.
5.19.3	Agni, who is offered with ghee, who has ghee as his back, who is established in ghee, whose abode is ghee, may the green ones carrying ghee carry you. Drinking ghee, you worship the gods. In front. O Vishnu, extend yourself widely. Extend yourself widely for our prosperity. Drink ghee, O ghee-born one. Going beyond the lord of sacrifice. Above. If Agni and Vishnu are on either side, then (one should recite) "O Agni and Vishnu, your abode is great. Your abode is dear." Only on one side.
5.19.4	Having taken the Soma, he should look at it and say, "May the eye that is yours in heaven, that is in the Suparna, by which you conquered the single kingdom, the long and endless eye of Aditi, may Soma, the eye of men, bestow that on me."
5.19.5	Seeing, touching the heart, touching the sacrifice, bestowing radiance, bestow radiance upon us. Whatever my mind has gone to Yama, or whatever has not come back to me, with that king Soma, we have it in us. We have it in us, may we have it in ourselves. May we hear good with our ears. May we see good with our eyes. May we smell good with our nose. May we taste good with our tongue. May we touch good with our skin. May we know good with our mind. May we be happy with our mind.
5.19.6	With the thumb and little finger, one should anoint the eyes with ghee for the Chhandogas.
5.19.7	When the Salakas have been distributed, the Agnidhra priest offers the Patnivat oblation with the verse, "O Agni, come with your swift horses." He offers it facing the north.
5.19.8	The Neshtar priest should not follow the moving of the Salakas and then sit down near him and eat.
5.20.1	Then he returns as he came.
5.20.2	The Agni-Marut oblation is offered facing east.
5.20.3	If the first and last parts of a verse are the same, then the middle part is the same.
5.20.4	The other half is the same. The middle part is the middle part.
5.20.5	The continuity is with the highest words.
5.20.6	May the Agni who is the All-God, the All-Shining, the All-Ruler, the All-Lord, the All-King, the All-God of the All-Gods, the All-Knower, the All-Seeing, the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing, the All-Wise, the All-Powerful, the All-Mighty, the All-Strong, the All-Valiant, the All-Heroic, the All-Victorious, the All-Conquering, the All-Subduing, the All-Vanquishing, the All-Overcoming, the All-Mastering, the All, the All-Pervading, the All-Embracing, the All-Encompassing, the All-Surpassing, the All-Exceeding, the All-Transcending, the All-Superior, the All-Supreme, the All-Highest, the All-Most-Excellent, the All-Best, the All-Greatest, the All-Foremost, the All-First, the All-Chief, the All-Principal, the All-Preeminent, the All-Excellent, the Most Excellent, the All-Glorious, the All-Illustrious, the All-Splendid, the All-Bright, the All-Brilliant, the All-Radiant, the All-Luminous, the All-Illuminating, the All-Illumining, the All-Enlightening, the All-Revealing, the All-Showing, the All-Displaying, the All-
5.20.7	He should desire to lead the Dhruva with the supreme utterance.
5.20.8	Having praised with the Utkha, "To Indra, the god, the heard," he should recite, "O Agni, with the Maruts, the auspicious, with the Rikvas." The Agniṣṭoma ends with the Yajyā. The Agniṣṭom is the Agniṣṭoma.
6.1.1	But in the Utkha it is the Hotrkas.
6.1.2	Come, let us speak. Agni went to the Bharata country, which was held by the tribes. He established it. The two verses beginning with "O Indra and Varuna, you two kings, O Indra and Varuna..." are the offering verses. "We have come to you, O new one, who is this, who is that before?" are the Anustubh verses. "All directions are yours, O most powerful one. We have come to Indra, O Brihaspati, you two, Indra and Vasu..." are the offering verse. "O Indra, O singer, O Indra, O singer. May I be a mortal friend. Your work, O Indra and Vishnu, lords of intoxication, is for the sake of intoxication." are the offering verses.
6.1.3	Thus ends the Ukthya.
6.2.1	Now the Sodashi.
6.2.2	"Asavi soma indra te" are the Stotriya and Anurudya verses.
6.2.3	"A tvā vahantu haraya" are three Gayatri verses.
6.2.4	"Upasu shrinuhi giraḥ, supandrisham tvā vayam maghavan" are one Pankti and two Panktis.
6.2.5	"O Indra, the one who is to be sacrificed to in battle, may this be yours, O tawny one." The two verses beginning with "O Indra, may this be..." are in the Usnih and Barhaspatya meters. "May he come to us with the wind." This is a verse with two feet.
6.2.6	O Brahman, O hero, enjoying the Brahman-making (rite), this is Brahman, the one who is fit for the rite. Indra, whose name is known, I sing, as the well-known paths. Your gifts, O Indra, are sought by those who desire. You, O lord of desires, are sought by the words that are restrained. Three verses with two feet each: I have made a great offering to you. I praise the two bay horses. Three verses in the Triṣṭubh meter: In the three-peaked mountains, the bull, the leader of the barley-eaters, is the foremost chariot for him. Two verses in the Ati-chanda-s meter.
6.2.7	The last two are of two kinds.
6.2.8	The northern one is in the Anushtubh metre, and the southern one in the Gāyatrī metre.
6.2.9	"O Pracetas, drink with Pracetas, O Soma, O Kratu, O Chanda, O Truth, O Brihat, O Sun, O Vasus, O Vasus," this is the Anushtubha metre. "O Vasus, O Triṣṭubh, O Vasus! O Vasus, you two, O Vasus!" this is the Tristubh metre. "O Soma, O Vasus who have removed the obstacles," this is the Jagatī metre.
6.2.10	Having placed the best of the best, one should place the best of the offerings.
6.2.11	We shall explain the verses in order, O you who are like the serpent Vritra, the conqueror of the waters, the generous one, the one who is in heaven, the ocean, and the mountains here.
6.2.12	"He recites the verse, "He has gone to the highest place of the heaven," for the Paridhananiyas are indeed the highest. He recites, "Indra, indeed, is the lord, Indra, indeed, is powerful, Indra, indeed is the lord," and offers the libation with the verse, " "O Indra, drink the Soma juice of the former ones."
6.3.1	Having enjoyed, O Indra, enjoy the flowing stream. Go, O hero, the bay steeds are here. Drink of the Soma. The mind of the Soma is charming for intoxication. O Indra, fill the new belly with Soma. The golden ones are yours. Your songs are well-spoken. Indra, the Turāṣaṇ, Mitra, has slain Vṛtra. The Yati has broken the strength. Bhṛgu has conquered the enemies. Listen to the call of the Soma. O Indra, accept the songs. O Indra, with the strong ones. O Indra, be subdued by the lightning for intoxication. For the great battle. May the sages approach you. O Indra, Tvaṣṭṛ has filled the belly. Soma has increased the strength. O hero, listen to the call. The good one, the greedy one, the Rbhū, the brave one, the one who is like a thief, the one who has gone, the terrible one, the one like Viṣṇu, the one who conquers the enemies, the one who possesses the good mind, the one who praises, and the one who is suitable.
6.3.2	Then he should recite the Stotriya and Anurūpa verses above that, and should recite the same verse again.
6.3.3	He should recite the verses by dividing them into half-verses.
6.3.4	The earlier verses should have the earlier verses.
6.3.5	The Gāyatrī verses should be in groups of five.
6.3.6	But two groups of five verses should be left out, and one should recite them.
6.3.7	The Uṣṇīṣa metre is to be made with the Brihatī metres. The last two feet are to be made Uṣṇīsa.
6.3.8	The first foot has four syllables.
6.3.9	Having divided the two feet into four parts, the first foot is to be made Triṣṭubh and the last foot is to be Jagatī.
6.3.10	The fourth syllable of the last foot is the last and the first syllable of the previous foot is the first of the next foot.
6.3.11	In the second and third feet of the second and third verses, he should place the word 'Pracetana' at the end. In the eastern direction, he should say 'Pracetana', and in the northern direction, he should also say 'Pracetan'.
6.3.12	Having made the other feet in the northern direction as the sixth, he should recite the Anushtubh verse.
6.3.13	The Stotriya and Anuroma are above the Atah. The Stotriya and the Anuroma are the two verses that are recited after the Atah. They are the two verses of praise that are recited after a particular section of the Veda.
6.3.14	There, the Prati-gar is Otha-mo, Daivam-ade, Mada-amo, Daivom, and Athi.
6.3.15	One should approach the Yajya with recitation.
6.3.16	Indeed, indeed, the waters of the former Hara-vas, indeed, the Soma of Indra, and this offering alone belong to you. Indeed, Shakra, the powerful one, has drunk the sweet Soma. O Indra, be powerful. Shakra, with the pouring of rain, pour into the belly.
6.3.17	The rest is similar.
6.3.18	The call is "To the Stotriya, to the Nivida, to the Paridhanin."
6.3.19	They consume the sixteen-spoonful offering together with the Soma-juice.
6.3.20	Those who consume the Soma in the Gharmashālā.
6.3.21	The Maitrāvaruṇa, the three Chandogas,
6.3.22	Indra, the sixteen-fold, the vigorous, thou art among the gods, make me vigorous, long-lived, and shining among men. Of that Indra, of the Soma drunk, of the Anushtubh metre, of the invited, I eat the invited portion. This is the formula for eating.
6.4.1	In the Atiratra, the praise of the Pravargya has been mentioned along with the praise of the Hotr and the Hotr-priests.
6.4.2	In the first section, except for the first verse of the Hotr, they recite the first words of the Stotriya and Anurūpa verses twice, and then conclude.
6.4.3	Having completed the remaining verses, they recite them.
6.4.4	Taking the middle verses of all the sections, they recite them with the last verses.
6.4.5	The last verses with the last.
6.4.6	The Acchāvāka has four verses.
6.4.7	The four-fold rites are the alternatives.
6.4.8	The first is of the Hotṛ.
6.4.9	The alternatives are before the Yajyās.
6.4.10	May Indra, the protector, protect you. The sheep is brought to Indra by the Adhvaryus. The verse is recited: "May Indra be pleased with the Soma." The Yajus is recited: "For Indra, the drinker, the Soma is pressed." The verse is recited, "The Soma is pressed for Indra, the drinker." The Yajush is recited, "For Indra, who is praised, the Soma is brought." The verse is repeated, "The Soma for Indra is brought." The Yajish is recited, "Indra, the drinker, is praised." The verse is said, "Indra is praised." The Yajis is recited, "Soma is brought to Indra." The verse is spoken, "Soma is pressed for Indra." The Yaj is recited, "May Indra drink the Soma." The verse is uttered, "May Indra be praised." The Yaji is recited, "Let Indra drink the Soma." The verse is recited. "May Indra drink." The Yajih is recited, "To Indra, the drinker of Soma." The verse says, "To Indra." The Yaji says, "To the drinker of Soma." The verse says, "To the drinker of the Soma." The Yagh is recited, "He who drinks Soma." The verse recites, "He who is praised." The Yagh says, "He who praises." The verse says. "He who is pleased." The Yajuh says, "He is pleased." The verse says: "He who is satisfied." The Yaj says: "He is satisfied." The verse says "He who is satiated." The Yajh says: "He satiates." The verse says "He satiates."
6.4.11	Thus are the variations.
6.4.12	The Gāyatrī verses, except for the variations.
6.5.1	When the Āśvina (verses) are arranged, one praises.
6.5.2	Having announced (the sacrifice), having gone out with the moving (of the sun) in a different direction, having placed the knees on the Agni-dhri, he should offer oblations. Agni is the lord of the sacrifice, with the Gayatri metre, I follow him who is not yet departed. May he protect me, to him salutations. Ushas is the lord of sacrifice, with the Tristubh metre, I follow her who is not yet gone. May she protect me, to her salutations. The Asvins are the lords of sacrifice, with Jagati metre, I follow them who are not yet departed. May they protect me, to them salutations. You are the great one, you are the sun, with these two (verses). Indra, you are on all sides, with this (verse).
6.5.3	Having eaten the remaining ghee, he should sip water and rinse his mouth. It is known that this is the chariot of the gods, and the Hotr does not want to make it a mere axle with water.
6.5.4	Having eaten and returned, he should sit behind his own sacrificial post, with his thighs and knees touching the ground, and his buttocks resting on the two elbows, like a bird about to take off.
6.5.5	If the Aśvina is recited, then it should be recited as follows:
6.5.6	"Agni is the Hotṛ, the householder, the king." The Pratipada is recited in the reverse order.
6.5.7	One should recite the Agniya Gāyatrī with this.
6.5.8	According to the method of the Prātaranuvāka, one should recite the Sahasrāvamanam Odetas of that very text.
6.5.9	The three verses of the Barhaspatya hymn are to be chanted in the order of the deities, in the order of their respective metres.
6.5.10	Or in any other order.
6.5.11	The two-footed verses are to be chanted at the end.
6.5.12	The one-footed verses are chanted in the middle.
6.5.13	The verses following them are to be chanted.
6.5.14	The verses not belonging to the metre are to be chanted separately.
6.5.15	Or the chanting may be done according to the principle of the Barhas-patya hymn.
6.5.16	But not later than the Tristub and Jagati.
6.5.17	When the Paṅkti is mentioned, the Sūrya verses are taken up.
6.5.18	The Sun, the knower of all, has risen for us in the sky. O Indra, bring us the praise of Mitra, the most radiant of the gods. O hero, many of us praise you, O Sun-eyed One. The great heaven and earth are ours, for they are the heaven and earth, the source of all good. The goddess of the universe, the mother of all creation, has seized this wrath. These are the two-footed verses.
6.5.19	Brihaspati, thou hast gone beyond the worthy one. This is the Paridhananiya verse.
6.5.20	The Paridhananiyas are recited at the beginning of the Praushas.
6.5.21	If the Brihat-saman is used, then the second or third verse is used as the source.
6.5.22	Or not.
6.5.23	They perform with the Ashvina graha and the Purorasa.
6.5.24	These Soma-pressings, O Asvins, are hidden from view. They stand forth for your drinking. The giver of oblations has come to you in his chariot. Drink together. Thus is the Anuvākyā. The Hotṛ says, "Do you invoke the Asvins, the Soma-pressings hidden from view." The Prāṣaṇṇī verse is, "Your most intoxicating draughts have stood forth. Drink together, O Asvins." The Yājyā is half of the Anuvāka.
6.5.25	If they were to perform the Svishtakrit rite with this cake, then they should offer the Samyajya oblations with the verses, "O Agni, cooking, O Agni, the offered oblation has grown."
6.6.1	If the Parayana oblations were to be interrupted, they should collect them all together.
6.6.2	The Hotṛ should take the first, the Maitrāvaruṇa the second, the Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin the third, and the Acchāvāka the fourth.
6.6.3	If there are two, the first should be taken by both, and the fourth by both.
6.6.4	Or all may be recited in the manner of Stoma-nirhras.
6.6.5	The first and last verses of the Stotriya-anurupas should be recited.
6.6.6	Only one should be reduced.
6.6.7	Some say that the Hotri should be excluded.
6.6.8	The Stotriya for the Asvinas is Agni vivasvat usas.
6.6.9	He should recite the hymn of his own deity in front of him, as it is praised in his own Veda.
6.6.10	There are three hundred and sixty hymns in the Asvinamantra.
6.6.11	When the waters of different rivers meet together, or when they are obstructed by a mountain,
6.6.12	Some say that even when they are obstructed.
6.6.13	In that case, the deities are invoked quickly.
6.6.14	With which auspicious (verse) one should recite at the beginning of the Marutvatīya hymn.
6.6.15	"With which verse one should recite at beginning of the Niskavalya hymn.
6.6.16	" "With which verse one recites at the beginning of Vaishvadev hymn."
6.6.17	One should place the Niviḍa in these (verses) and remove the other verses.
6.6.18	If the Niviḍ is placed in the wrong place, one should recite the hymn at the beginning and place it in another deity.
6.7.1-3	At the Soma-surplus, the praise and eulogy are added. At the morning pressing, there are the Stotriya and Anurūpa verses, "Soma is here, this is the pressed Soma, the cow is giving milk to the Maruts." The verses are chanted with the verses addressed to Indra and those addressed to Vishnu. One should offer the Stoma with the verses addressed either to Indra or to Vishnu.
6.7.4	The hymn to Indra-Vishnu is so called because of the predominance of the deity.
6.7.5	"May your deeds be united, may your wishes be united."
6.7.6	In the Madhyandina Recension, the Stotriya and Anurupya Stomas are "O great one, the sun has risen, shining with its radiant form." The Yajya is "Who among men is great like Indra? Who among men is great? Who among men has the power to know the minds of all?"
6.8.2	The Havirdhāna-carriers may be placed uncovered or covered.
6.8.3	They may be covered.
6.8.4	They should anoint another king.
6.8.5	If there is no harvest, they should sow Pūtikas and Phālgunas.
6.8.6	Other plants should be sown with Pūtikas.
6.8.7	Having performed the expiation, one should begin the subsequent rites.
6.8.8	One should consider the Sutyā-sūkta alone.
6.8.9	At the morning pressing, one should recite the Prati-dhuk.
6.8.10	Cooked rice at the midday pressing.
6.8.11	Curds at the third pressing.
6.8.12	The Sraiyantiya Brahma-sastra, if the Falgunas are to be chanted, the Varavantiya in place of the Yagyajnyiya.
6.8.13	Some say the Sraiyantiya.
6.8.14	Having established the sacrifice with one Dakshina, one should again offer sacrifice after the Udasaya.
6.8.15	In that one should give Dakshina to the former.
6.8.16	At the Soma-acquisition, according to the original.
6.9.1	Having offered a Brahmic oblation with the verse, "O Lord of nourishment, give nourishment, sight, sight to the eyes, breath, breath to the breath, self, self to the self, speech, speech to this one again, svāhā," and having brought together cold and hot water, having placed twenty-one barley grains and Kuśa grass in them, one should perform the rite with those waters, and sprinkle him with them. "May the bones of the living revive this one, may the bones of the livelihood revive this one, revive this one, the bones of the revived ones revive this one, and may the bones of those who are revived revive this one." With the verse from the Oṣadhi Sūkta.
6.9.2	He should sprinkle and wipe.
6.9.3	The Upāṃśu and Antaryāma (cups) protect thy Prāṇa and Apāna; the Upāṃśusavana (cup) protects thy Vyāna; the Indra-Vayu (cup) protects thine speech; the Maitrāvaruṇa (cup) protects both thine eyes; the Āsvin (cup) protects thee hearing; the Āgrayaṇa (cup) thy power of speech; the Uktha (cup) thy limbs; the Dhruva (cup) thy life; the Sāvitra (cup) thy body.
6.9.4	The circumambulation is according to the seat.
6.9.5	"The Tarksya and others say, "Indra, the protector, Indra, the saviour."
6.9.6	If the Vaishvadev is different from the one-day ritual, then one should offer the oblation to Svashti in the Atreya.
6.9.7	The natural disease.
6.10.1	Having taken out the Avabhrtha with the Tithi rite, they perform the rites for the dead.
6.10.2	They anoint the hair, beard, body-hair and nails.
6.10.3	They anoint with Nalada.
6.10.4	They put on a garland of Nalada.
6.10.5	Some, having made it without excrement, fill it with fresh ghee.
6.10.6	Having cut off a foot-measure of the rope of the new garment, they anoint it towards the south, towards the north, towards the east and towards the west.
6.10.7	His sons will make the cutting.
6.10.8	Having placed the fires of him (the deceased) outside the altar to the south, they should cremate him.
6.10.9	One who has not offered the oblation to the departed should do so with the Ahavaniya fire.
6.10.10	And his wife.
6.10.11	Having returned, they should conclude the day.
6.10.12	In the morning, without repetition, without uttering, without reciting the mantras, without praising, without eulogizing.
6.10.13	Having gone out by the Tīrtha before the Grahagrahaṇa, they sit down after circumambulating the Āyatanas three times.
6.10.14	After that the Hotr.
6.10.15	The Adhvaryu is to the north, behind him the Chandogas.
6.10.16	He praises in a low voice, "The spotted cow has moved forward."
6.10.17	When praised, the Hotr, going around the Āyatan in a clockwise direction, follows the Stotriya without interruption.
6.10.18	and the Yāmis.
6.10.19	"Go, go by the ancient paths," thus one should recite the third of the five verses. "O Agni, do not burn me, do not grieve me," thus six. "Pūṣan may he separate you from this, the wise one," thus four. "Approach this mother earth," thus four. Soma to the one.
6.10.20	The two Urusas, the two Asutripas, the two Udumbaras, having completed and contemplated, having gone to the sacred place, they should go to their respective seats.
6.10.21	Having eaten the Pranabhakṣa food, they should take it to the right side of the Marjālīya or to the right side on the Vedi platform.
6.10.22	The seventeenth day is the Trivṛt Pavamāna, with Rathantara as the Prstha, and Agnistoma.
6.10.23	Some, when the Avabhrtha is over, go to this day, making a loud noise.
6.10.24	Having burnt it with the Nirmanthya, and having buried it, they should perform the Agniṣṭoma sacrifice after a year.
6.10.25	Or they should consecrate the Neḍīṣṭhin.
6.10.26	Or the rising of the householder.
6.10.27	The variations of the Sūkta and Sastra have been mentioned.
6.10.28	One who is performing the one-day sacrifice should sleep on the sacrificer's seat.
6.10.29	When the Apāyantika rites are completed, they should proceed to the Avabhṛtha rite, says Ālekhaṇa.
6.10.30	They should burn the Sadas with the eastern fire, says Āśmarathya.
6.10.31	This is the Avabhṛta rite.
6.11.1	The Agniṣṭoma, Ati-Agniṣṭoma, Uktha, Ṣoḍaśī, Vājapeya, Ati-Rātra, and Aptoryāma are the concluding rites.
6.11.2	The animal whose flesh they consume is the tail of the sacrifice.
6.11.3	The animal is mentioned after the Anuyājas.
6.11.4	The last one is the Sūktavāka-invocation.
6.11.5	"The Purorāśa-deity is mentioned as "avīvṛdhatet"."
6.11.6	If they were to offer the Pasupuroḍāśa of the Savanīya animal, one should say, "They have increased with the Purorāśas."
6.11.7	Indra grows with the Savanīya offerings, with the animal cake, the animal deity.
6.11.8	Above the Samyuvāka, the one who is to be taken up.
6.11.9	O Indra, go to the Soma that has set, drink the Soma, drink from Indra. I yoke you with the Brahmaṇas, with the Keśin.
6.11.10	Thus in the Anuvāka, in the last days.
6.11.11	"Stand, O Maghavan, do not go away! This sacrifice is for the gods, this for the men." So in the other (verses).
6.11.12	"Go away, O Maghavan! Come back!" So in the subsequent verses.
6.11.13	When the Vasat-call is not repeated, the Maitrāvaruṇa says, "Here, O Maghavan Indra, your horse."
6.11.14	"Today" at the Atiratra.
6.11.15	and on the day of the son.
6.11.16	Having heard that, Agnidhra said, "Tomorrow, at the Sutyā (rite), I will tell you about the Sutyā. I am telling you about it for Indra and Agni, Mitra and Varuna, Vasus, Rudras, Adityas, All Gods, Brahmanas, Somas, and Soma drinkers. O Brahman, restrain your speech."
6.12.1	Having taken the Droṇakalaśa, having brought it, having taken the Iḍā, having worshipped, one should look at it.
6.12.2	Having eaten the food of the sacrifice, having given it to the Adhvaryu, having filled himself, having gone as per his duty, having offered the oblations at the Agni-sthala, they offer the oblations with the verses, "This Indra, having drunk Soma, has become the lord of the world. This Brāhmaṇa, praising speech, has controlled himself. This Soma, the king, does not obstruct the friend of anyone who is hostile. Svāhā. This gift of wealth, given by Agni, has come. Fame, radiance, strength, and power have come. For long life, for a hundred autumns, I accept it for great strength. Svāhā."
6.12.3	On the Āhavaniya fire they place six pieces of wood each, saying, "This is the expiation for the sin committed by the gods, svāhā. This is the expiation of the sin committed by ancestors, svāhā, this is the expiation committed by men, svāhā; this is the expiatory for the sin committed against us, svāhā." This is the expiator for the sin committed, svāhā.
6.12.4	Having taken the food from the pot, they should look at it and say, "May you be filled with strength and may you be filled with offspring and wealth. You are Indra's wish-granting cow, grant me my desires, offspring and cattle."
6.12.5	Having sniffed, they should scatter it in the direction of the inner boundary.
6.12.6	Having returned, they go to the place of the sacred waters, carrying the full vessels counterclockwise.
6.12.7	Having wiped the green grass, they sprinkle themselves three times with water from their respective cups, with their right hands.
6.12.8	Or with the other hands, moving clockwise.
6.12.9	"Svāhā to the father, svāhā to the grandfather, svāhā svāhā to great-grandfather."
6.12.10	It is said for the living and the dead.
6.12.11	Having placed the hands in the cups, having sipped water, having sipped the Soma which is drunk by the wise, which is praised, which is praised by the Stoma, which is praised in the Uktha, which is praised with the Iṣṭi, which is praised as the oblation, which is praised for the cows, which is praised to be for the horses, which is praised at the Upāṃśu, which is praised when called, I sip the Soma which is called. Having sipped the Soma, he should go to the shade with the verse, "May the shadow of the Maruts come to you."
6.12.12	Having eaten the drops of curds at the Āgnīdhra fire, they release the friendship, saying, "Both the poets, the young ones, the lords of truth, have released the friendship according to the truth."
6.13.1	Having performed the Patnīsaṃyājas, they proceed to the Avabhṛtha.
6.13.2	Proceeding, they attain the end of the Sāman.
6.13.3-7	Those who stand at the Avabhrtha sacrifice move around. The Prajās and Anuyajās are not offered in this sacrifice. The Prajās are not performed on the Barhis. The Anuyajā are performed in water. They are in the Gāyatrī metre. The oblation is to Varuna. "The two verses, "O Varuna, by salutations I seek to escape from thy wrath. Agni and Varuna are for the purpose of Sviṣṭakṛt."
6.13.8	"You are our Agni, knowing Varuna's (ways), thus (they say) when the two (cows) are standing still, they put their feet in the water. 'Salutation to Varuna, the noose of Varuna is bound.'
6.13.9	Then they rinse their mouths: 'You are the rinsing after eating, you are the rinsing after having eaten, you are the rinse after eating is done.'
6.13.10	They spit out with the first (verse), and they speak with the other two.
6.13.11	Then having sipped water, they say: "May the waters, our mothers, purify us. May these waters flow with the friendly waters and plants."
6.13.12	The uninitiated should sprinkle themselves with this (verse).
6.13.13	The Unnetr carries them.
6.13.14	The Uddhatar recites the verse, "O Uddhatar, lead us, lead us to prosperity, lead us to the highest heaven." They recite while being led.
6.13.15	"We have risen above darkness," they recite while rising.
6.13.16	From here onwards, they stand together with the recitation of the Hridayashula.
6.13.17	Those who have completed their rites stand together with the Santhajapa.
6.14.1	They perform the Garhapatya and Udayaniya rites.
6.14.2	That is the Pravargya.
6.14.3	The Pathya is the best of the oblations with ghee.
6.14.4	The Yajya and Anuvakya are reversed.
6.14.5	Those who perform the Pravargya should do so.
6.14.6	The Sannayya is performed according to the prescribed procedure.
6.14.7	When the Anubandhya is completed, the Maitravaruni performs.
6.14.8	Some perform it in the assembly.
6.14.9	Some perform on the northern altar.
6.14.10	When the omentum has been offered, having performed the Agnisomiya sacrifice with the Ekadashina rite, they proceed to the Garhapatya with the animal dedicated to Tvashtri.
6.14.11	Having sprinkled it with ghee and set fire to it, they release it for non-return.
6.14.12	If the Adhvaryus were to conclude with ghee, the Hotri should do likewise.
6.14.13	The instructions are as in the Saman-chanting.
6.14.14	The animal is the same as the oblation.
6.14.15	If they were to offer the animal sacrifice and the oblations of the evening and morning meal in succession, then the oblations would be Dhātā, Anumati, Rāka, Sinīvālī and Kuhu.
6.14.16-17	May Dhatr, the bestower, grant to the worshipper long life, the eastern one, the imperishable. We have understood the good counsel of the god, the possessor of strength. Dhatr rules over the creatures and wealth. Dhatr has created this entire world. Dhatr sees the fields with unblinking eyes. One should offer oblation to Dhatr, with ghee, saying, "This is to be offered to Dhatr." If the goddesses are the sun, heaven, dawn, the cow, and the earth,
6.14.18	"May Purandhi come to us" (RV 10.10.1) are two verses. "You, O Goddess, with your rays, bring the cattle to be nourished. They do not reach the one who is greedy, the one who is envious. The thief does not harm them. The firm ones among the mountains, even the trees, are here."
6.14.19	In the case of not getting cattle, the Maitrāvaruṇa's Payasyā is to be recited in the place of the Anūbandhyā.
6.14.20	From the offering of clarified butter to the end of the Vājina.
6.14.21	The performers of the sacrifice should consume the Vājina (oblation).
6.14.22	All are initiated.
6.14.23	All who have risen from initiation, having separately piled up the fires, having churned the fires for the gods towards the north, they perform the Udasaniya sacrifice.
6.14.24	The repetition is without modification.
7.1.1	Of the sacrifices.
7.1.2	The initiation and Upasads have been described.
7.1.3	By this day the Sutyas are completed.
7.1.4	The Prātar-anuvaakā and the Udavasaniyas are the last ones.
7.1.5	The others are upto the Patnīsaṃyājas.
7.1.6	In the case of the Drapsaprasana, Saṃghavīsa and Visarjana, the last one alone is performed.
7.1.7	The Dhruvas are the last of the Sastras.
7.1.8	The Suktas are performed in the places of Suktas where they are not lost.
7.1.9	The arrangement is according to the deities.
7.1.10	The Tṛcas are at the beginning.
7.1.11-13	The Abhyasa and Atipraisa are performed on the first day of the month, with the forms of all the deities being worshipped. On the last day of the month (i.e., the full moon day), after reciting the Paridhananiya Sastra, one should recite the last word twice and then recite the Tarksya mantra, which is the first of the Niskevalya Sutras, saying "Tyam U Su Vajinam Devajootham".
7.1.14	We offer Soma to Jātavedas, to Agni and Maruts, to the Jātavedasa gods.
7.1.15	The Hotrkaras recite the Ārambhaṇīya verses on the second and subsequent days, saying, "The crops are ready, the crops are ready."
7.1.16	All these verses are recited everywhere, except on the last day.
7.1.17	The optional verses are recited in the middle of the Agniṣṭoma days.
7.1.18	Or in the Agniṣṭomāyana rites.
7.1.19	The Kautsa school says that the other rites are optional, because they are mentioned in the context of the compulsory rites.
7.1.20	Gautama says that the rites of the Hotṛ are compulsory, because they are performed in the context of a collective rite and because the word "acyuta" is used.
7.1.21	Gāṇḍa-gāri says that the rites for the Hotr are also compulsory, because they belong to the Sattra rites.
7.1.22	In the case of the Prāgātha, Tṛc and Sūkta, one should recite the Ekāha (Sūkta).
7.2.1	In the twenty-fourth (Sūkta), the Hotr is born. This is the Ajya (Sūkta)
7.2.2	"O Mitra-Varuna, we invoke Mitra, we call Mitra, the pure-minded. This is your Mitra-Varuna. The great one is indeed there. The sun has risen for you." These are the six Stotriya Sūktas of Mitra-Varuna.
7.2.3	Come, for your songs are most charming. The bards have sung to Indra. You are united with Indra. You have come to your own abode. One verse. Two verses. Indra and Dadhici, rising with his strength, broke through all the enemies. The Brahmanas chant this.
7.2.4	Indra-Agni, come to the pressed (Soma). To Indra-Agni be great praise. To whomsoever this belongs, to you both, O Indra-Agni. You two are young, you are the priests of this sacrifice. Thus says the Praisa.
7.2.5	He who is praised in them is the Stotriya.
7.2.6	He who will be praised tomorrow is the Anurupya.
7.2.7	The day which is the next to the one on which the Stotra is recited, is the Anurūpa day. If all the days are not Anurūpa, then the days which are the next to the six days are Anurūpa.
7.2.8	If so, then the day which is the first of the six days is Anurūpa
7.2.9	And the last day also.
7.2.10	Having chanted the Ārambhaṇīya hymns, they should pour out the remaining Soma for the Caturvimśa, Mahāvrat, Abhijit, Viśvajit and Viṣuva sacrifices.
7.2.11	In all the Stotras and all the Prsthas.
7.2.12	The verse "The sun has risen above the pouring down, it has passed through the sky, the dog and the horse, the one who pours Soma" is the final verse of the Praisa.
7.2.13	The Maitrāvaruṇa's six-day Stotra is the final one with the verses of the Praisa as the last.
7.2.14	One should perform the rite of the deity in the place of the previous one.
7.2.15	If there is another calamity, one should recite the three verses of the Sūkta without interruption. One should recite twice in the same seat.
7.2.16	If one recites the Mahāvālabhid, one should recite from the beginning or from the Anurūpa verses. The Trikas should be recited in the Gāyatrī meter.
7.2.17	The Maitrāvaruṇa recites the verse, "He who embraces with his arms," and the Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin recites the verse "Indra and Upamant," and the Āchāvāka recites the verse "They are the bearers of the middle."
7.3.1	In the Marutvatīya Sāman, the Brahmanaspati recites the verse beginning with "Rise, O Brahmanaspati," and the Brahmanaspatiya Sāman recites the verse starting with "The two eternal ones."
7.3.2	O Indra, sing to the great one, Sudasa, the chariot. Thus the Marutvatīya verses. From the upward-moving Nitya.
7.3.3	"With "By what good" one should recite the Marutvatya verses at the beginning of the Sukta."
7.3.4	Thus the Prastara verses should be repeated again and again on each day in the Prsthya and Abhipaga.
7.3.5	One by one of the Brahmanaspatya verses.
7.3.6	Thus of the Marutvatlya verses.
7.3.7	Dhruva, Indra-nihava.
7.3.8	Dhayyas.
7.3.9	Brihat, Prstham.
7.3.10	Rathantara.
7.3.11	If either of these is not performed, one should recite the Yoni.
7.3.12	Of Vairupa, Vaireja, Sakvara and Raivata.
7.3.13	The Yonis of the Prsthya Stotriyas.
7.3.14	Half verses.
7.3.15	Their arrangement is daily.
7.3.16	Above them are the Samagatha
7.3.17	The Rathantara has been described.
7.3.18	The Brihat is heard in both ways.
7.3.19	O Indra, you are the refuge in three places. O Indra, in your impetuousness, I am yours. You are the one who protects from evil. The Sadvipadi praises you. The other verses praise Indra, the deity.
7.3.20	Each day, the Prsthya is sung separately.
7.3.21	Then he should recite the Puroruk verse before the Sukta.
7.3.22	The Ukthapatra and the Antaratirya cups are consumed in the Nishkevalya.
7.3.23	The consumption of the oblations is a constant practice.
7.3.24	Those who consume with the Sodashapatra.
7.4.1	Of the Hotrakas.
7.4.2	What wondrous thing has happened to us? What is it that you have done for us? Do not be angry with us for what these people have done. The Stotriya Anurupas are the verses of the Maitravaruna priest.
7.4.3	That your strong one, the subduer of foes, that we may approach you, O Indra, for great strength. We have approached you, O Indra the giver of wealth, the giver of wealth who is well-known. Who among us, O Indra, knows you, the giver of strength, the conqueror of all foes? Him Indra, the man, I invoke. "O Indra, who has given you strength, two have increased Indra for the sake of intoxication. He has given us the giver of good form for the sake of protection. The most powerful one for the sake of help." They are like the sun. You are the great sun. You have risen with a shining form. You have risen, the most sweet one. You, O Indra, in your impetuousness. You, O glorious Indra. You, O best Indra, give us the highest will. You, O most excellent Indra, give us what is best. To you, O Indra. A thousand, a hundred. You, O sun, have risen. Thus the Brahmanas chant.
7.4.4	The trees, with their wealth of fruit, are eager to serve you. We, the men of the day, are eager to do so. We are the men of the Day. He who is the king of the people, he who is the destroyer of the enemy, the destroyer of the people, the sweet one, is thus the one who is the most distant. Thus indeed is Soma the one who is inebriated. When you, O Indra, the hundred-armed one, are inebriated, both the worlds are inebriate. No one can overcome you by his deeds. The great ones, the mountains, hear both your words. Be gracious, O Purandara. Never have you been stingy. Never have you let go. When we are afraid of you, O Indra. Like a cow that has been driven away. When you, Indra, are in the east, like a cow that has driven away. Thus says the Prashāstar.
7.4.5	If they were to chant the Stotriya-anurupas in accordance with the Stotriya, then the Stotriya would be in accordance with the Anurupas.
7.4.6	Above the Stotriya and Anurupas, who is that Indra? Which wealth? Which new? Which of the flax? Which has not been done by him? The Prastara verses end with the word "kadva" (who).
7.4.7	O Indra, drive away all the enemies. I yoke thee with thy Brahmanical power. Thou knowest our wide world. Thou extendest it. These are the verses to be recited at the beginning of the sacrifice for those who recite the Kada verses.
7.4.8-9	The verse "Sadyah-jata" is to be recited on the day of commencement. The verse "Asma id u pratavase" is to be chanted on the day of the Ahina sacrifice. The verse "Udbrahmaani abhitashte" is to be sung on the second day of the Ahinasutra. The verse "Ud u brahmani abhitashte veti" is to be repeated on the subsequent days.
7.4.10	The last one is certainly the best.
7.4.11	The six hymns of the Ahyana Sūkta are to be recited at the beginning of the six-day Stotraya sacrifice.
7.4.12	"The three verses beginning with "The god Savitar has risen up with the golden one" are for the Visvedevas. "
7.4.13	"The verse beginning with "For the growth of the powerful, the powerful, the strong, the strong, by means of sacrifice" is for Agni and Maruts."
7.4.14	This is the Agniṣṭoma day.
7.4.15	Or the Ukthya.
7.5.1	The Abhipava-Prsthya ones.
7.5.2	The Rathantara-Prsthyas are the odd ones.
7.5.3	The Brihat-Prsthayas are the even ones.
7.5.4	In the third and other days, the Prsthya ones are the ones of the second kind, the Vaivāhavas, the Vaivasvatas, the Śākvaras and the Raivatas.
7.5.5	One should recite the Yonis in the performance of these in their proper places.
7.5.6	And in all cases, except the Asvinī, where the animal is not of its own kind.
7.5.7	But if the Yajñāyajñīya is not performed, then one should recite the appropriate verses, beginning with the appropriate verses, and ending with the appropriate verses.
7.5.8	The Hotr priests recite the remaining verses.
7.5.9	We invoke Mitra, we invoke Mitra, the pure-acting. This is your Mitra, O Mitra-Varuna. Mitra-Varuna, O Mitra- Varuna. The first three verses are addressed to Mitra-Varuna; the second verse of the four should be taken as the second; the next six verses are addressed to both Mitra and Varuna; the next three verses are addressed only to Mitra; the next four verses are addressed to Varuna; the last three verses are addressed both to Mitra and Varuna.
7.5.10	One should offer this thrice, the Maitrāvaruṇa priest, from the regular (Sāman) onwards, for the purpose of increasing the Stoma.
7.5.11	Five, seventeen, nine, twenty-one, twelve, twenty-four, fifteen, twenty-seven, twenty-one twenty-three, thirty-three, thirtytwo, forty-four, thirty-six, forty-eight.
7.5.12	Or one may offer fewer.
7.5.13	The Ekāha sacrifices are the most numerous.
7.5.14	The Antyas, the Ekāhas, and the Tṛcas are not to be commenced. They are to be performed in the place of Parāsa.
7.5.15	The Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin priests recite six hymns, beginning with "Suroopakritnumūtayā."
7.5.16	The Maitrāvaruṇa priest has recited the Avāpa.
7.5.17	Here, O Indra and Agni, come, Indra and Agni, I invoke you, by whom this is. This is the ninth verse. My mind is yours. This is the eleventh verse. You are in the sacrifice. This is the twelfth verse.
7.5.18	May Indra come to the house. This is the Marutvatiya verse. May Indra come to us. This is the Niskavaliya verse. The first verse of the Abhiplatika.
7.5.19	This is the Madhyandin verse. This is said. One should proceed with these verses.
7.5.20	The place of the Ahīna Sūkta is indeed thee, O Indra. The great Indra, the Indra of the past, the one who breaks through, the one who has sharp horns, he who desires this, they desire thee, the burning one. These are the concluding verses.
7.5.21	Three each for each.
7.5.22	They are mentioned in the Marutvatīya verses.
7.5.23	"They yoke the mind here, here we call. Four verses beginning with 'Devas huve' are for the Visvedevas."
7.6.1-3	The second (verse) is recited with twenty-four syllables. "The two verses, "Those of yours, O Vayu, who are a thousand..." and "The fierce Soma-juices have come...", one verse, "The shining one, the divine, touches...", two verses, ". "The bright one, the first, the head of the cow...", one, "This is for you, O Mitra-Varuna...", five verses. This is called the Gartsamada Prauga.
7.6.4	The lord of the Vasus, Indra, the drinker of Soma, is one. This is the first verse of the Marutvatīya hymn. The verse "O Indra, that power of yours" is for midday.
7.6.5	If Bharadvaja is the Hotṛ, then by nature.
7.6.6	The Catuśvimśa is the third pressing. The first verse is "The All-God, the leader of the gods." The second verse is "The Savitar, the desirable one." The third verse is "The all-god, the seventy." These are the verses for the Visvadevya pressing.
7.6.7	The verses for the Ajyaprauga pressing are the first and the last verses of both the pairs. This is the order of the verses in the Abhiplva.
7.7.1	The third pressing has three verses. The middle verse is "He who is born, the Arya."
7.7.2	"O god, with ghee, heaven and earth." The three verses beginning with "The immortal one is born from the sky" are for the Visvedevas. "For Vaisvānara, the Dhāravaras, the Maruts, you, O Agni, are the first Angiras." The fourth verse is for Agni-Maruts. "The strong one was born in the fourth" is for the Niskévalya.
7.7.3	"I invoke Agni, may the heaven and earth be mine." These three verses are addressed to the All-gods.
7.7.4	"Vaisvānara in the mind," these three verses are addressed the Agni-Maruts.
7.7.5	"Who are the five shining ones, the sharp-horned one?" These are the verses for midday.
7.7.6	But in the case of the Kāsūbhīya, the ninth is the best, even where there is a repetition.
7.7.7	"The verse "Ghrtavatī, the most excellent of worlds, O Indra, with the Rbhus, the strong," is the first; "Kad u priyāye," is the Vaishvadeva.
7.7.8	To the strong, to the strong, to Prikṣa, to the strong one, to the strong-one, to the strong. The Agni-Marut hymn is in the sixth (day), the Savitr-Arbhava in the third (day), the Vaisvantarīya in the fourth (day). Which dawn is earlier? The Vaishvadevam is in the Prayajya (day). This Stoma is in the Agni-Marut (day).
7.7.9	Thus the Abhijit Saptaha.
7.7.10	The Agni-stoma and the Uktha are at the beginning and end, and the Uktha in the middle.
7.7.11-12	The Udgītha is the Udgītha. The Stotriya and Anurūpa are the Stotriya and the Anurūpa. Of Maitrāvaruṇa.
7.8.1	Come, I will tell you. Agni has gone to the Bharatas. Your steeds, with their strength, have gone to the places of sacrifice. Sing to the most bountiful one. O Agni, with your powerful ones, we worship Agni, the growing one, the Agni whom we worship at the sacrifice, the most excellent one. We have approached you, O Agni, with the kindling wood and the oblation. We worship you, O Agni. Both of you are very bright, with ghee. Two (verses) and one (verse). I think that Agni is the one who is the giver of wealth. Your calf, O Agni, has come with the mind. Bring us the most excellent wealth. The most excellent guest, the most excellent, the most excellent Agni, O Bharata, is the best. Our Agni, well-offered, is offered with ghee. Those who kindle Agni, they are praised by us.
7.8.2	Then (the Hotri) sings the Brahmanacchasa (Sutra). "The Brahmanacchasa is a hymn of praise. "Thou art my brother, thou art not my enemy, thou art not old, as thou art, so thou art, thou art the son of truth, we sing thy praise, we sing to thee, we sing to thy praise. "We sing to thee, O thou who art not old, who sang this and this before Indra, we, the friends, desire to sing. "He alone knows, O Indra, who drinks Soma, O Indra, be our protector, the most intoxicating of the sweet ones. "Let us now praise Indra, the friends, praise Indra, O thou who hast horses, thou art Indra, O thou whose name is Indra, we sing to Indra, O thou, who art not old. "Come, O thou who singest the Indra hymns, O thou who sangest this and this before, O thou who didst sing this and this before."
7.8.3	Then the Açavaka (priests) have increased Indra with all (their) praises. Listen to the call of him who is to be praised by Indra. Listen to the cry of him who is far away. The Soma has been pressed for you, O Indra. Drink this Soma, O Indra, which has been pressed for thee. O Indra, if thou art pleased with the praise of him who is thy nearest friend, then do thou, O young and wise one, O bull, pour down (gifts) for the sake of the giver. The Gāyatra (priests) sing to thee. Thy praises come to thee as if they were thy charioteers.
7.8.4	Having recited each of the Sūktas, they poured down.
7.9.1	In the increasing Stoma.
7.9.2	"These your praises, O Indra, are thinking," three; "Who is your friend?" in the Sūkta; "Your sacrifice is heard, you two men purify; these are your shares," thus the Maitrāvaruṇa (recites) according to the meaning.
7.9.3	The one who has stood firm, the one who has broken the mountains, at the sacrifice, in heaven, in this hymn, may Indra, the lord of wealth, come to this thought. This is the Brahmaṇācchaṃsin's verse.
7.9.4	In the hymn "Who is Vishnu's?" the Acchāvāka says, "The highest."
7.10.1	In the Abhiplva of the Pratiṣṭh, the first verses are recited on the first day.
7.10.2	The third Savanas are recited daily.
7.10.3	The first day is called "Upa pra yanta" and the second day is called "Agniṃ dūtam".
7.10.4	The third day is called "Yuksva hi".
7.10.5	"Come, O Wind, with thy friends" (is one verse). "O Wind, come with thy friends, with thy blessings" (is another). "Indra and Vayu, the drinkers of these libations" (is another verse). "We have come twice to Mitra and Varuna" (is another), "O Asvins, come hither" (is another) "Come with the mountains, with the pressed (Soma), with the All-gods" (is another); "To our dear and not-dear ones" (is another Uṣṇihā verse).
7.10.6	The Anushtubh verses in the Uttara-saman are four syllables long.
7.10.7	No.
7.10.8	The Madhyandinah is mentioned in the third verse with the Abhiplavaka metre. "Tam tam id radhase mahe trayas indrasya somas" is the Anushtubh verse of the Marutvatīya Sāman. "Yadi dyau" is the Anustup verse of the Vaivāhika Sāman. The Anushtubha verses "Yadi dyav" and "Yadi dyāv" are the Anushtubha and Anushtubha-like verses of the Anushtubhi Sāman.
7.11.1	In the fourth day, the Nyuṅkha is the first half of the Prātaranuvāka.
7.11.2	The second tone is the O-tone, which is three-mātrās long and acute. It is repeated three times.
7.11.3	Above each of them are five Vārḍhoukāras, which are anudātta.
7.11.4	But for the last one, there are three.
7.11.5	The first syllable is destroyed when the Nyuṅkhas are being measured.
7.11.6	We shall cite it as an example.
7.11.7	Water, water, water
7.11.8	"Agni, not with your own words," is ghee.
7.11.9	Its highest part is the third foot, which is Nyuṅkha and Ninarda.
7.11.10	Nyuṅkha has been explained.
7.11.11	The one beginning with the svaras and ending with the anusvara is the fourth Ninarda.
7.11.12	The first and the last are acute. The other two are anu-dattas. The last anu-dattā is anuttarā.
7.11.13	The first is pluta, ending with ma, and the last is uttama. We shall cite examples for illustration.
7.11.14	We choose thee Agni, the Hotar, with our own words. We choose thee, O Agni, for the sacrifice.
7.11.15	Oṃ. The Prati-gar is uttered.
7.11.16	Or from the acute to the acute, the acute to the anudatta, the acute to svarita, the acute to udatta, the acute is the fourth.
7.11.17	We shall cite an example to illustrate this also. Agniṃ na svavṛktibhiḥ ho-tāram tvā vṛṇīmahe yajño prati-garah.
7.11.18	The Adhvaryu should recite the second half of the first verse with a low tone.
7.11.19	From the first or the second.
7.11.20	Some say that it should be stopped.
7.11.21-22	Or as they may be composed. O Vayu, I am coming to you, O Vayu, I have come to you, O Indra and Vayu, the invoker of these Soma offerings, the one with good intentions, come to us with all your powers. This is your unfailing, offspring-giving, enemy-destroying, river-crossing, water-crossing, and river-crossing hymn. This is the Anushtubh Prauga hymn.
7.11.23	The Ekapatiniyas are the first.
7.11.24	"O Indra, we invoke thee with sacrifices, this Soma juice, O Vasu, for thee." These are the introductory verses of the Marutvatīya Sāman.
7.11.25	"Hear the call, O Indra, the Marutvan." This is the Marutvatya Sāman."
7.11.26	One should place the final Niviḍa in the case of many verses.
7.11.27	If the verse is from the Vairāja metre, then the Stotriya and Anurūpa verses should be recited as "Indra, drink the Soma, may it please you."
7.11.28	The Niskevalya verse should be recited as “Kuhaśruta Indra, fight! Hear this!” The first half of the Haviṣya verse should be used in the beginning of the verses, and the Nyuṅkha verse should be used at the end.
7.11.29	This is how the Kuhaśrutiya verse is used.
7.11.30	In the middle feet of the Vairāja verse.
7.11.31	The Nitya verse should be used here as the Pratigara, with the Nyuṅkhada verse.
7.11.32	The Praṇava is at the end of the Praṇava, and the Praṇava is the first of the Kuha-srutiyas.
7.11.33	And this is recited in half-verses, with the highest verse as the last.
7.11.34	Your songs, O Turasi, I cannot bear. Give to you, O great one, O great one. These are four and three Virājas.
7.11.35	Above these, they would pour the verses beginning with the Ārambhaṇīyas.
7.11.36	The first verse is of Maitrāvaruṇa, the last verse is of the Adhvaryu. The third verse is of the Brahmanācchaṃsin.
7.11.37	The fourth verse is of the Acchavāka.
7.11.38	The second verse is "We invoke Indra, the giver of the thunderbolt." It is the same.
7.11.39	On the fifth day, the verse "O Soma-drinking one, you are the truth" is recited one by one, the same.
7.11.40	On the sixth day, the heaven, in the form of Indra, bowed down to the Asuras. In the same way...
7.12.1	In the increasing Stoma, who today, with the wind, comes to the forest? One should sow eight verses above the Paruchhepinis.
7.12.2	With those, one should sow the Indra-related verses, the Tristubh verses, and the Marut-related verses.
7.12.3	But these are not to be recited with the recitation of the Anushtubh verse.
7.12.4	At the morning pressing, with one or two verses.
7.12.5	At the two later pressings, with an unlimited number of verses.
7.12.6	The five verses beginning with "This is your guest, the knower of the dawn" are to be recited at the morning pressing.
7.12.7	"May our sacrifice reach the sky" (x2) "May our life be long" (x1) "Many with the chariot of wide-ranging speed, with the sun as their eye, these your praises, O gods, are in heaven. Drink the juice of the pressed (Soma), O gods, for the sake of the gods, for the gods, for greatness. Sing the god, the god, the great god." The Barhaspatya Prauga.
7.12.8	The Pramathas are sung by some, except the second and the last.
7.12.9	The first two verses of the Marutvatīya Sāman are "Indra, the drinker of Soma, has entered the five-fold (Sāman), he is the only one" and "O Indra, you have been the protector, now drink for yourself".
7.12.10	If the Śākvara Sāman is the Prstha, then the Anustubh verses are to be sung in the Mahānāmnī Sāman. They are to be sung for one and a half times, making nine in total.
7.12.11	One should sing the verses of the Pūriṣa Sāman in between.
7.12.12	The first five verses have five syllables each.
7.12.13	All the verses are to be recited as they are in the original.
7.12.14	In the case of the Yoni-sthanas, the verses with excreta and feet are to be recited in the original order, and the verses with the word "sutanah" are to be recited with the word "santana".
7.12.15	The three verses beginning with "Svadah" are to follow the original order, the verses beginning with "Up" are to be followed by the verses beginning with the word "Hari", and the verses beginning with " are to be followed in the original order.
7.12.16	The verse beginning with "Pretam" is to be followed by "Brahma Indra" and the verse beginning with "Madaya" is to be recited in its original form.
7.12.17	In the Paṅkti, in the Sūkta, in the Marutvatīya, in the Paṅkti and in the Niṣkevalya.
7.12.18	In the first, the Tristubh is the best.
7.12.19	At the end of those two, "O Shatakratu, you have conquered many enemies" in the Marutvatiya.
7.12.20	"O lord of Śacī, today" in the Niṣkēvalya, in the Niṣkāvalya.
8.1.1	At the morning pressing of the sixth day, they perform the offerings of the Prāstḥāpya priests, placing them before the regular priests, and then both offer the Anāvananta offerings.
8.1.2	O Indra, the drops of Soma, like bulls, have come to the well-pressed (Soma) with the mountains. The pressing (of Soma) has reached its end. Do not be angry with us. O Agni, listen to our praise. I think Agni is the Hotar, the giver. Dadhyan, my father, was the first Angiras.
8.1.3	In the same way, at midday, one should drink half of it, without the Anāvan.
8.1.4	"Indra, drink the Soma well pressed, for Indra, the sky, the Asura, has bent down." These are six verses.
8.1.5	Above that, there are the verses for the seasonal offerings.
8.1.6	Having recited the Prāṣa, Sauyaja, and Anāvan verses, one should instruct the sacrificer, saying, "Recite the Rg verses."
8.1.7-11	Thus they offer. "He who is praised by Vasishtha, he who is praised by the Vasishthas, he who is to be praised by the Vasistthas, he who praises the Vasishthas." "This one is born, the protector of men." One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven, twelve, thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, sixteen, seventeen, eighteen, nineteen, twenty, twenty-one, twenty-two, twenty-three, twenty-four, twenty-five, twenty-six, twenty-seven, twenty-eight, twenty-nine, thirty, thirty-one, thirty-two, thirty-three, thirty-four, thirty-five, thirty-six, thirty-seven, thirty-eight, thirty-nine, forty, forty-one, forty-two, forty-three, forty-four, forty-five, forty-six, forty-seven, forty-eight, forty-nine, fifty, fifty-one, fifty-two, fifty-three, fifty-four, fifty-five, fifty-six, fifty-seven, fifty-eight, fifty-nine, sixty, sixty-one, sixty-two, sixty-three, sixty-four, sixty-five, sixty-six, sixty-seven, sixty-eight, sixty-nine, seventy, seventy-one, seventy-two, seventy-three,
8.1.12	The two verses beginning with "The grass is spread" are the Stomas. The two verses beginning "You have come with the mountains, O young ones" are the Stotras. The two verses "O Indra, O Indra, O Indra" are the Stoma. The two verses, "O Indra, the bull, O Indra, listen to me" are the Stotra. The two verses "O Agni, listen to us, you who are invoked" are the Stomas. The two verses "The gods who are in heaven, the eleven, have given us the place." The two verses beginning "The one who has fallen into debt, the one who has fallen" are the Prāgas. Two and one make five. The two verses at the end of the fifth are the Ekapatinī. The two verses are the Stotras and the Stoma. There are two verses at the beginning and two at the end. The two verses in the middle are the Stoma and the Stotra. There are eight syllables in the Stoma and eight in the Stotra.
8.1.13	Or not.
8.1.14	The former is the great Indra, Soma, the Marutvatīya, the two verses, "Which chariot of thine, O Indra, and "Who art thou, O Indra, the bull, the Marut," are the three Marutvatīyas.
8.1.15	One should advance with one, then retreat with two, then advance with two, then retreat with three, where the last is the Paruṣchepya.
8.1.16	If the Raitava is the last verse, then the Revati is our companion in the same heaven. The Revata praises. These are the Stotriya and Anurudya verses.
8.1.17	O Indra, come near us. Do not be angry with us. You alone are the only one. This is the Niskavalya verse.
8.1.18	"O Agni, the god Savitar, the giver of wealth, the giver of food, the giver of light, the giver of strength, the giver of life, the giver of happiness, the giver of prosperity, the giver of offspring, the giver of cattle, the giver of all good things, the giver of the good path, the giver of heaven, the giver of immortality, the giver of everything, the giver of good things, the god Savita, the giver of riches, the giver of radiance, the giver of brilliance, the giver of splendor, the giver of glory, the giver of fame, the giver of renown, the giver of greatness, the giver of power, the giver of might, the giver of courage, the giver of valor, the giver of victory, the giver of conquest, the giver of sovereignty, the giver of lordship, the giver of dominion, the giver of control, the giver of freedom, the giver of independence, the giver of self-rule, the giver of autonomy, the giver of authority, the giver of command, the giver of rule, the giver of governance, the giver of government, the giver of administration, the giver of management, the giver of guidance, the giver of direction, the giver of leadership, the giver of supervision, the giver of oversight, the giver of inspection, the giver of review, the giver of examination, the giver of scrutiny, the giver of investigation, the giver of inquiry, the giver of research, the giver of analysis, the giver of discernment, the giver of understanding, the giver of knowledge, the giver of wisdom, the giver of insight, the giver of comprehension, the giver of awareness, the giver of consciousness, the giver of cognition, the giver of perception, the giver of observation, the giver of sight, the giver of vision, the giver of illumination, the giver of clarity, the giver of brightness, the giver of luminosity, the giver of radiant light, the giver, the giver of giving, the giver of gifts, the giver of generosity, the giver of charity, the giver of alms, the giver of donations, the giver of offerings, the giver of sacrifices, the giver of oblations, the giver of worship, the giver of veneration, the giver of reverence, the giver of respect, the giver of honor, the giver of esteem, the giver of praise, the giver
8.1.19	Having recited the excellent Sūkta, three times.
8.1.20	"This is the Raudra (Sūkta), namely, "Idam ittha..."
8.1.21	" "Having recited the excellent Sûkta, "Pra-upottāmayā ye yajñena..."
8.1.22	" The excellent Sûkta is recited in half verses, starting from the fourth verse.
8.1.23	Having recited the remaining verses, "May the Asvins, Bhaga, and Sarasvati grant us welfare." These are the three verses.
8.1.24	Thus is the Visvadev (Sûkta).
8.2.1	The Hotr recites the Ukthyas in the Dvipadis of the Hotrakas.
8.2.2	The Silpas should be recited above the Anarupas.
8.2.3	The Maitravaruna recites the Stotriyas and Anarupyas beginning with "O Agni, thou art our last Agni, O Agni, be well-kindled, well-kindled." Then he should recite the Valakhilyas.
8.2.4	This has been said in the Sodashin.
8.2.5	The first and second verses of the Sūktas are recited in order.
8.2.6	In the third and fourth verses, the verses are recited in half-verses. In the fifth and sixth verses, one should recite in alternation.
8.2.7	The first verse of the previous Sūkta is recited with the second verse of the subsequent Sūkta.
8.2.8	The firstverse of the subsequent Sūkta is recited with thesecond verse of the previousSūkta.
8.2.9	There is no difference in the verses.
8.2.10	One should recite the first and second feet, and recite the third and fourth feet. One should recite the third and last feet, and recite first and second feet.
8.2.11	Thus alternating half-verses, the next verse should be in the opposite order. Thus alternating verses, the next verse is in the opposite order,
8.2.12	One should alternate the last verse of the hymn, the Gāyatrī, everywhere.
8.2.13	"These are your shares." Having called out to the one who is in front, one should ascend the Dūrohaṇa.
8.2.14	"The swan, the pure one, is in the rear." Reciting the fourth pada of the first half and the fourth pada of each half, one should recite the seventh pada of the first and second halves.
8.2.15	This is the Dūrohana.
8.2.16	"We are the two kings." This is recited daily.
8.2.17	Thus the two Hāundins.
8.2.18	Now the Mahāvālabhit.
8.2.19	These six verses are to be recited in the reverse order, the half-verses in the reverse order and the verses in the reverse order.
8.2.20	And at the end of the Prastāras, one should recite the Anusātanas, the Rgāvas and the Ekapadas.
8.2.21	Indra is the protector of the universe, Indra is the lord of the earth, Indra is the protector, Indra is the king of the universe. These are the four verses.
8.2.22	One should recite from the Mahāvrata.
8.2.23	Twenty-three verses with eight syllables each, from the Mahānāmikā with the Purīṣa.
8.2.24	The Pratigraha is mentioned in the Ṣoḍaśī, except for those with one verse.
8.2.25	Having drawn out one foot, and not moving, he should recite the fourth verse.
8.2.26	The rest is the same.
8.3.1	The Brahmanaschamsin recites these verses: "Which worlds did we enjoy?" "The five-fold praise, the divine benefit, I have obtained." The Stotriya and Anurupya verses.
8.3.2	"Indra, the praise, the good fame, the east." The Sukirti verse.
8.3.3	Its half-verses are the fourth verse.
8.3.4-8	Then one should praise Vrishakapi, as the Hotri, at the fourth (verse) beginning with ghee. Here, the praise of the Panka group. The Pratigraha ends without the Prastara, at the end of the second Panka group. Then onwards, the Kuntipa. From that onwards, one should praise the Virgraha, having praised the Kuntipa first, and then the Virgraha.
8.3.9	In the third foot, if the first syllable is accented and the second is unaccented, then it should be recited as such.
8.3.10	We will now cite an example to illustrate this: "O people, listen! The praise of Narashansa will be sung for sixty-nine thousand times. We give the Homa to the gods of the Aruśa-s."
8.3.11	"Othaamo Daivoṃ iti pratigaraḥ."
8.3.12	On the fourteenth day, there is a dispute between one and two.
8.3.13	The remaining (verses) are half-verses.
8.3.14	These are the seventy verses beginning with "The horses are swimming."
8.3.15	Or eighteen.
8.3.16	The first nine.
8.3.17	"Aalaabuka is buried," "How is it killed?" "What is the purpose of the repetition?" These are the seven.
8.3.18	"The two rays are spread out," these are the six Anushtubh verses.
8.3.19	O Jātavedas, we invoke thee at the sounding of the drum. O Jātaveda, we invoke thee in the house of the gods. O Jātavda, we invoke thee when the night is joined with the morning. O Jātava, we invoke thee for the food of the morning. O Jatavda, we invoke thy foot when it is placed on the ground. O Jāṭavda, we invite thee for the future generations. O Jāțavda, we invke thee for the future generation that will be born. O Jāța-veda, we invoke thy future generation that will live. These are the invocations at the end of the rites.
8.3.20	Here, there, in front, behind, above, below, east, west, north, south, in the four directions, in the two directions, the Praṇava is extended.
8.3.21	"O Jātavedas, we invoke the gourds. O Jātavedasa, we invoke the prickly pears. O Jātavda, we invoke the ashvattha and palāśa trees. O Jātava, we invoke the anthill." These are the invocations in the Praṇavas.
8.3.22	The three words "Bhug," "Abhigat," and "Yathāniśāntam" are used in the proper order.
8.3.23	"Otha mo daiva" are the three words of the Anushtubh metre.
8.3.24	"O thamo daiva" are two words of the Anustubh metre.
8.3.25	The Adityas, O Jarti, gave Dakshina to the Angiras. There are seventeen verses. "O Jarti, the last one is divine. Thus, O Jarti," the two Pratigaras are exchanged in the middle.
8.3.26	The Pranava is supreme.
8.3.27	"You, O Indra, to the one who is afflicted by grief." This is a verse of praise.
8.3.28	These are the three Anushtubh verses. "What is her affliction?" This is said.
8.3.29-32	The fourth (verse) is said to be about ghee, etc. "These are the verses: "The cow is the earth, the man is the sky, the wind is the breath, the sun is the eye." "This is the beginning, this is the middle, this is the end." "What is this? What is this? O! O! O! Om! Otha! Otha! Daivom!" This is the response to them." "The Anushtubh verse "I have performed for the one who offers ghee" and the four verses "The Soma juices are the sweetest"
8.3.33	Avadrapas and Anshumati are the three verses.
8.3.34	"Achama indram" is the eternal Ekāhika.
8.4.1	Then the Stotriya and Anurūpa verses of the Acshavasya are "Pra va indra" and "Vrtrahantmaye".
8.4.2	Then the verses spoken by Vrishakapi to the Maruts.
8.4.3-6	O3 U U U U U O3 U U UU O3 U U M ADE This is the reply to "O3 U U U" The eternal ones are the ones for one day. Thus the Utkhyas are where they are sung in the two-footed ones. This day is the eternal craft. And the Vishvajic.
8.4.7	If they were to sing the two Agniṣṭoma hymns in the Ukthya hymns without the two-footed ones, then the Maitrāvaruṇa would sing the Śilpas beginning with the Madhyandina and continuing from the Ārambhaṇīyas.
8.4.8	The Suktas of the Barhītas are of the Valakhilyas.
8.4.9	The Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin sings the Sukti of Sukīrti and the Paṅktisaṃsin sings the Vṛṣākapi.
8.4.10	The Dyau is the leader of Indra. This is the Acchāvāka.
8.4.11	This is what they call the Prati-Evyāmarut.
8.4.12	The Hotr, the Evyāmarut, the Agnimāruta, in front of the Maruts, the Maruts behind, in the last place.
8.4.13	In the sixth place, having recited the Prsthya days, the Maitrāvaruṇa should ascend the Dūrohana, having recited the days one by one.
8.4.14	The Sampāta Sūkta is to be recited in the Ekāhi-bhūtas.
8.4.15	For in the Ekāhibhūtas, the crops are not sown every day, nor are they sown at the beginning of every month.
8.4.16	Having recited the Nitya Prāgāthas in place of the Kadvatas, the Sampāta Sūktam in the Sampāta-bhūtas, and the other Sūktas in the other days, then the last ones in the Ekāhika.
8.4.17-23	In the case of the Sāman-recitations, the Sāman hymns and the Sāman recitations are to be recited in all the Prstha-sāmans. The Prstha-samans are to be recited at the end of the Prstha. The Agnistoma is the first, the Sodashin is the fourth, and the Ukthya is the other. Thus is the Prstha sacrifice. The Pṛṣṭhas are to be recited directly. The other Pṛṣṭha-sāmans are to be recited indirectly.
8.5.4	Drink Soma, praise him. These are the midday verses.
8.5.5	Others should recite them before the verses of the one-day Soma sacrifice.
8.5.6	Gautama says that they are the same because of the seventeen verses.
8.5.7	The verses of the midday Soma sacrifice should be as many as the number of blades of grass in the bundles of nine or ten. This is the great rule.
8.5.8	In the last verse of the Marutvatiya Stotra, the order is reversed.
8.5.9	The third pressing is of twenty-four (sāmans).
8.5.10	The first day is the Abhipava, with the Svarasāmans.
8.5.11	Here the Svaras are the Prsthas.
8.5.12	Their Stotriyas are as follows: "O you who are born in the Jaayathi, O you who are born from the Apurvya, O you who have come from the Matsyapāyi, may I know this one, this one."
8.5.13	The first one is of all.
8.5.14	We are the sons of your son. These are three Brihatis. The best of your abodes. These are six Anushtubhas. These are Anurupas.
8.5.15	In the Stotriya, the Brihatis are as they should be, and the Anurupas are similar.
8.5.16	These are the permanent ones, as they are in the Brihat and Rathantara.
8.6.1	Visuvant and Divakirtti.
8.6.2	The morning recitation is recited after sunrise.
8.6.3	The six verses beginning with "Pṛthupāja, immortal" are the Sāmidhenī verses.
8.6.4	The Sūrya verse is to be recited at the Savanīya offering.
8.6.5	Or the Soma and Pūṣan verses.
8.6.6	The Ajya verse beginning with "From the ocean, a wave" and the Marutvatiya verse beginning with “Tam sumeṣam, with what auspicious" are to be recited.
8.6.7	The Mahādivākirti verse is to be chanted as the Prsthya verse.
8.6.8	If the Stotriya and Anurūpa verses are used for the Pavamānas of the Bṛhat and Rathantara, then one should recite the verses of their respective metres.
8.6.9	The Rathantara is the first.
8.6.10	In the first verse, one should recite with the other verses.
8.6.11	Here the Uttara is the Sāman-prathaga.
8.6.12	The men have praised thee, O most manly, with songs and praises. Three times (it is said): "He who is sharp-horned, he has attacked the ram." "The powers of Indra are indeed great."
8.6.13	Having recited the Indra-verse, one should recite the remaining six verses. "The Soma is pressed for him, the day is his, you are the first, the bull, the giver of joy, the most generous, the most bountiful."
8.6.14	Here is the Tarksya at the end.
8.6.15	Having recited one verse, one should call out and ascend the ladder.
8.6.16	Thus is the Niskhevalya. If the Brahmasama is higher than the Vikarna, then one should recite the verse, "We praise your invincible strength, the one who is capable of drinking Soma." The Brahmanasamsin should recite the verses from the two sources of the Shiyaitanaudhasa.
8.6.17	The verse from the Naudasa should be recited first, followed by the verse from the Shiyita.
8.6.18	This is the place of the Hotr-priests, and the Prastara-call. These are the five days, because of the unlimitedness.
8.6.19	The third pressing is mentioned by the highest Abhiplava.
8.6.20	The Ekāhika is the follower of the Pratipada.
8.6.21	The Bhaṃs is in the place of the Yajñāyajñiya.
8.6.22	The Stotriya and Anurūpa are "O Indra, the tawny, the red, the strong, the swift, the swift, O Indra, the tawny..."
8.6.23	The head of heaven, the navel of earth, the head of heaven, Agni, the navel of the earth.
8.6.24	If they are in other (sāmans) with such a form, then it is suitable.
8.6.25	The Svarasāmans are repeated.
8.7.1	Agni is the conqueror of the world, O men, is the ghee.
8.7.2	The midday is with the twenty-four.
8.7.3	The Vairāja is the back with the Nyuṅkha.
8.7.4	The Brhat and the Vairupa are the two original sources of the Hotr.
8.7.5	The Prsthastotras of the Hotr are the Sakvar, the Vairupa and the Raivata.
8.7.6	These are the original sources of the Stotras.
8.7.7	The Maitravaruna is the original source of the Vamadevya. The Brahmacchati is the original source for the Brahmacchati.
8.7.8	The Asvaka is the original source fot the Kaleya.
8.7.9	The Stotriyas of the Kaleya and the Asvaka are the original sources.
8.7.10	These are the Sāman-verses of the same Pṛṣṭhas.
8.7.11	The Madhu-sutra is the first of the hymns. The hymns are mentioned before the Madhu-satra. The third pressing is mentioned before the hymns. The Ekāha and Anupari are mentioned before the last day of the Brihat. If the Agniṣṭoma is Brihat, then the Stotriya and Anurūpa are mentioned as "Agni, you are the Agniṣṭomas." Thus the Navaratra is completed.
8.7.12	All Agniṣṭomas.
8.7.13	The Ukthas are one (in number) in the Svarasama.
8.7.14	The second is the Abhiplvika. The cow is the first, and the life the second.
8.7.15	In the three-day rite, the cow is the first and the life the last, as the two days are different from the first three days.
8.7.16	In the six-day rite, cow is the first in the pair, and life is the last in the pair.
8.7.17	In the ten-day rite,
8.7.18	The first three days are the Prstha, and the remaining days are the Chandomas.
8.7.19	But here there is no permanent irregularity in the third.
8.7.20	The first, which is in the metre, has two verses at midday.
8.7.21	At the winter solstice, the first verse is placed at the beginning.
8.7.22	The second has the verses "O Indra, drink Soma, thou art great, thou art mighty, thou art the great one, Indra like men." This is the Marutvatiya.
8.7.23	O Indra, you are the most excellent of the gods, O Indra, you have the greatest fame. O Indra, you are supreme. O Indra! Svāhā! O Indra, the third one! Svāhā. O Indra who is praised by the Maruts, O Indra who is praised. O Indra of the Maruts, these are for you.
8.7.24	The verses beginning with "They have gone to thee" are the Suktas. The verse "May I go to truth, may I be there, may I be endowed with power" is the Niskevalya. The verses beginning with “Come, O Vanaseman, O Kamba, O Babhru, O Ekaka" are the Sukta verses of the two-footed ones, which are before the verses of the Visvedevas.
8.7.25	Thus the collection is complete.
8.8.1	If the Vyuha is extended, then one should place the Niviḍa in the three Gāyatrī verses at midday of the three days of the Prsthya.
8.8.2	"We invoke this deceitful one, the one who is feared, the Maruts, Indra, the eloquent, that Indra whom we invoke, this one by whom this (world) was brought to us with the tawny ones, the pressed (Soma)."
8.8.3	The third pressing of these is in Trishtubh metre.
8.8.4	On the fourth day, the Vasishtha hymn, "May the god come to us, may he come to us", the Vaishvadev hymn, "May we be honoured by the Rishis, may we be honoured by those who are bright", the Vaishvadevaruta hymn, "In the good opinion of Vaishvanara, who is the Agni of men", the Agni-Marut hymn, the eighteenth and highest Viraj.
8.8.5	The two-footed ones are eleven, the Maruts are twenty-one, and the verses of the Visvedevas are twenty-one.
8.8.6	The five verses beginning with "The God Savitar, the bountiful, has risen" and ending with "The three great ones, heaven and earth, are here the eldest" are the four verses beginning with "I praise the universal Rbhus" and ending with the Vaishvadevya offering. The Agnihotra is the Agnihotra, the householder is the householder, the king is the king. The three verses beginning with "Agni and Maruts" and ending with "The highest" are the highest in the Vaishvadeva hymn. The highest in the Jātavedas hymn.
8.8.7	Having removed all superimpositions, one should remove (them).
8.8.8	The sixth verse begins with "O god, you have risen." What is the Gartsamada? "The best has come to us." The thirteenth verse and the four verses of the Vaishvadeva hymn should be recited. The last verse is Vaishvadeva.
8.8.9	"The day and the dark one, your name is honey." The Agni-Marut hymn is the Prsthya.
8.9.1	Now the Chandomas.
8.9.2	From the ocean, a wave. O Vayu, come to us with your purifying powers, with your gifts, to the worshipper of the gods. Come to us with your hundred-fold gifts, with your hundred-thousand-fold gifts. The one-winged ones have gone to you. The hundred-thousand gifts that are yours, the thousand gifts that are yours. The one-painters have gone to you, O Mitra-Varuna. The one-thousand gifts that belong to you. The one-hundred gifts that belong to the gods. The one-wingers have gone to you in the sky. The one-wings have gone to you on the earth. The one-pair have gone to you at the sacrifice. The one-pairs have gone to you for the sacrifice. The ones who have gone to you have gone to the sacrifice. The two-winged ones have come to you. The two-wings have come to you for the sake of the sacrifice. The three-winged ones have been brought to you. The three-wings have been brought to the sacrifice. O Vayu! The ones who have been brought to Indra have been brought to him. The ones who are brought to you have been brought to Mitra-Varuna, the ones who are brought for the sacrifice. O Mitra-Varuṇa! The ones who are being brought to you have gone up. The ones who belong to the gods have gone up. O Mitra-Vāruṇa! The ones that belong to the cows have gone up. Come to us, O god, with your strength, with your swiftness. The ones who desire the gods are praising you at the sacrifices. The ones who praise you are praising you. The ones who bring you are bringing you. The ones that are brought to you are brought to you.
8.9.3	In the Madhyandina recitation, one should place the two Nidhis in the reverse order.
8.9.4	Similarly, in the two later (recitations), the fourth and fifth.
8.9.5	"O Agni, come to us with these verses: "O God Savitar, I have approached you for the welfare of the sacrifice. This is for the birth of the god." This is the Vaishvadeva (verse).
8.9.6	The verses of the two-footed (animals) are regular.
8.9.7	The All-God generated, one, he created the seasons for the world. The lord, having released, goes to the age of sacrifice. The bull, the shining Agni, shines forth. O Agni, the All-God, the shining one, offered by the Jamadagnis, you go to the messenger of the Tristubh metre. This is the Agni-Marut hymn.
8.10.1	The second (verse) is the offering of ghee, "O Agni, the god, the one who is to be worshipped, the one who grows with praise, the one who bestows food and wealth, the wise one, the one who removes enemies, the one who rises above the shining days." The one-paținī verse is "O Agni, you are the messenger, the protector, the one who knows the extent of the body, the extent of strength." Two verses are "When the sun rises, we offer praises to you. The cow, the divine one, is yielding the desired (gifts). O Brahman, come near Indra. The wise one, Agni, has found the highest good will. May Sarasvatī be pleased with us." The Prāga verse is "O Sarasvatī, may you be pleased with us.
8.10.2	"O Agni, with golden hands, do thou protect us." These are four verses. The heaven and earth are our mothers. "The young ones, the fathers, again." These are two verses. "The gods have come to us." This is a verse addressed to all the gods.
8.10.3	We invoke the eternal heat of the one who is true, the lord of the light of truth, the great Agni Vaisvānara, who shines in heaven, who shines forth in the ancient abodes, the one who is to be, the one who was, the lord of all, he shines alone. Agni, the playful, the eager, the kind, is the Agni-Marut hymn.
8.11.1	The third (verse) we have come to, 'O Indra, we have come to thee.' The pure ones have spread forth, thinking with truth, in heaven, on earth, they have spread forth. The all-knowing Asvins have gone to us. This Soma, O Indra, is being pressed for thee. The Brahmanas and Angiras have come to Sarasvati, the divine, with prayers. From the lofty mountain of heaven, O Sarasvati, do thou lead us to prosperity. This is the Praugas verse.
8.11.2	The one-paținī is the best.
8.11.3	The fault has come, the great one has come, the divine one has come, these are the three verses. Indra gives us food, may he give us food. May he give us food, may you give us food. Which are thirty? This is the Vaiśvadeva.
8.11.4	May Vaiśvānara come to us from afar, may Agni come to our praises. Vaiśvānaran has come to this sacrifice, with the same intention. Agni with praise and strength, Vaiśvānāra to the Angiras, he has composed praise and eulogy. In these heavens, in the sky, the Maruts, whose is the Agni, the speech, is the Āgnimāruta.
8.12.1	On the tenth day.
8.12.2	In the place of the Anushtubh verse, the Agni hymn with the Dhriti verses, "From the kindling woods" is recited in the Agni rite.
8.12.3	"O Ushas, you have removed darkness" is recited three times at the end of the Ushas rite.
8.12.4	"The two of you, O Ashvins, have come in your own chariot" is recited in three verses in the Ashvin rite.
8.12.5	In place of the second and third verses of the Stokasūkta, one should recite "O Agni, with the thoughts of ghee, both of you, O Suśandra and Sarpiṣa."
8.12.6	"This water carries it." This is the place of this verse. "May the waters, our mothers, purify us." "For you, O Agni, in the assembly, for us." These are the places of the two verses. "For you, the shining one, the one who is heard, for you, the strong one." These are the two verses of the Acchāvāka.
8.12.7	"Here, in place of the verse, "We have come to thy protection, O Agni," one should recite, "O Agni, thou art the destroyer of the wicked;" in place of the line, "He who rises sees," one should say, "Rising with strength," and in place of the lines, "O Vishnu, extend thyself widely," one should chant, "May you be like a friend, like a kinsman, like a brother, like a father, like a mother, like a son, like a grandson, like a relative, like a kinsmen, like a friend, may you be like a protector, like a shelter, like a refuge, like a saviour, like a guardian, like a guide, like a leader, like a companion, like a helper, like a supporter, like a supporter of the sacrifice, like a supporter in the sacrifice, like an upholder, like a supporter at the sacrifice, like one who supports the sacrifice, like the supporter of the sacrifice."
8.12.8	In the daily recitation, one should recite the verse, "O Agni!" in the daily recitation of the group of verses, one should recite this verse.
8.12.9	Some say that one should recite the Sinivalī verses.
8.12.10	On this day, no one should speak to anyone else. This is what they call "silence."
8.12.11	If there is doubt, one should recite and practice outside the altar.
8.12.12	Some say inside the altar.
8.12.13	The meaning is not conveyed by the embellishment of words.
8.12.14	If one is successful, one should offer an expiatory oblation.
8.12.15	"O Agni, today that horse with praises" - this is the ghee.
8.12.16	The conflict is with five syllables or with ten syllables. "O Agni, your chariot, as it should be" - in place of this, "In the three-peaked mountains, the bull, the barley-eater."
8.12.17	"O friends, may we have blessings" - three Usnih verses. "O Indra, the friend of the Maruts" - the Marutvatiya verse.
8.12.18	"By what wonderful thing have we been brought?" Among these, the Rathantara is the background. One should chant its source.
8.12.19	And the Brihat, the Gana-garin, and the Dasaratra, because of the connection with the pairs.
8.12.20	Having chanted the Ekapada with the Tarksya, one should chant the Ekapada verses, "Indra, the lord of all cattle," and four more.
8.12.21	The last one is the Upasantana.
8.12.22	"O Indra, the drinker of Soma," (thus) the six Uṣṇīṣa verses. "The one who is the sole conqueror of the foe," (thus) a verse of the Niṣkevalya type.
8.12.23	"I choose Savitar's boon," (thus) in place of this verse, "I praise that divine Savitar, the one who is the protector of the weak."
8.12.24	The Rbhukṣaṇi is the Ārbhava. The two-footed one is the Tāyu. The Agni is kindled with kindling wood. The Gṛṇi is sung with speech. The three verses and the two-footed one are of Jātavedas.
8.12.25	The other hymns are to be chanted with the fourth.
8.12.26	The Vamadevya hymn, the Agniṣṭoma Sāman, Agni, the men with the rays, from the two kindling woods, are the Stotriya and Anurūpa hymns. This is the Agniṣṭomah day.
8.12.27	After the Patnīsaṃyāja offerings.
8.13.1	At the Garhapatya fire, the offering of "May we delight here, may you delight here, here is firmness, here is self-control, O Agni, svāhā, O Agni, Svāhā."
8.13.2	"He offers the Agni-dhrīya (oblation) with the formula, "The one who is born of Agni, the one who is born from the womb, the one who sucks the womb, may he bestow on us wealth, nourishment, food and energy. Svāhā."
8.13.3	Having gone to the assembly hall, he praises with mental (praise).
8.13.4	When he thinks that the praise has been completed, he calls out, "O Adhvaryu!"
8.13.5	The other responds, "O Hotr!"
8.13.6	"This cow, the speckled one, has gone forth," having chanted three times in a low voice, he should explain the four Hotr priests in a loud voice.
8.13.7	"The gods, O Adhvaryu, the lords of Prajapati, have been performing a sacrifice."
8.13.8	"O Hotr, so be it, O Hotr," the Adhvaryu responds after each verse, at the end of each verse, in ten places.
8.13.9	Their mind was the ladle, their mind was the ghee, their speech was the altar, their learning was the sacrificial grass, their banner was the fire, their knowledge was the fire-tending priest, their breath was the oblation, their Sama was the Adhvaryu priest, their speech was Vācaspati, their mind was Upavaktā.
8.13.10	They took hold of this Graha, O lord of speech, we shall arrange your name. Arrange our name. Go to heaven, O lord of the name, where the gods, the lords of creation, attained prosperity, may we attain that prosperity.
8.13.11	The Adhvaryu goes out.
8.13.12	Then he runs along the other side of Prajapati's body.
8.13.13	The Udyas of Brahma, the Udyas of Upamsa, the Udyan of Anna, the Udyani of Annapati, the Udyi of Bhadra, the Udyini of Kalyani, the Udyu of Anilya, the Udyuni of Apbhaya, the Udy of Anapta, the Udyni of Anapya, the Udyui of Anadhrishya, the Udyii of Apradhrishya, and the Udyuui of Apurva and Abhratrivya are the Udyas.
8.13.14	Some say that Agni is the lord of the house. He is the lord of this world. Some say that Vayu is the lord of house. He is lord of the world of the atmosphere. He is the real lord of the house, who shines yonder. The seasons are the houses. He who knows the lord of the houses as a god becomes the lord of the household. He prospers. Those sacrificers prosper, for whom he who knows the lord as one whose sins have been removed becomes the lord of household. He removes the sins. Those sacrificers remove the sins.
8.13.15	"O Adhvaryu, do it for me." Thus he says loudly.
8.13.16	This is the yajya.
8.13.17	This is Vasat-kara.
8.13.18	He does not say Vasat-kara after the offering. The Vasat-kara has been mentioned.
8.13.19	The Adhvaryu replies, "I am doing it for you."
8.13.20	Having mentally taken up the Soma, the Adhvaryu mentally brings the Soma for consumption.
8.13.21	In the mental offerings, the mental invocation is at the consumption.
8.13.22	Having nourished the self with the mind, they restrain speech beginning with the Udumbara (verse) till the sight of the stars. There they should desire to have their hands below.
8.13.23	They move facing the Adhvaryu, reciting the verse, "You two, O Indra and Parvata, in the battle," till the place of the crossing.
8.13.24	Some say, "By the path of the Adhvaryus."
8.13.25	Some say, "To the south of the Havirdhāna shed."
8.13.26	Having obtained the boons, they release their speech, saying, "Whatever wrong we have done here, whatever we have transgressed, may we go to Prajapati, our father."
8.13.27	Then they restrain their speech, saying "Let speech come, let speech come, let the speech come near, let the speech."
8.13.28	At the Utkara place, they thrice call out to Subrahmanya and then release their speech.
8.13.29	Here, the release of speech is always done.
8.13.30	This much is the Hotr's ritual, except for the Mahāvrata.
8.13.31	This is the hymn of the sacrifice. The Pravargya, the twenty-four, the Pratiprasthya, the Abhijit, the Svarasama, the Visuva, the Visvajit, the Chandramas, the tenth, and the supreme Mahavrata. The Aheina, the Ekah, the Sattras, and the nature of the sacrifices are described. If one recites something else, it is recited in relation to that. The last five days of the village are the twenty-five by which the year is measured. They are the source of these, three hundred and sixty. Thus it is said.
8.13.32-33	Now, those who are mentioned in the Chandogya and Adhvaryu texts as Haurtra-amshas, one should not perform them, because the Haurtra is incomplete.
8.13.34	The explanation of the Adhvaryu is based on the time, place, and Dakṣiṇās of the sacrifice, the consecration, the Upavasatha, the Prāyascitta, and the Udbhid. The number of Havis offerings is fixed. The chanting is loud or low, and the Havis offerings are in order.
8.13.35	We shall now explain the subsequent one-day sacrifices, which are less than these.
8.14.1	Having made the student who knows this, who is not deformed, and who is less than a year old, observe the vow, the teacher should tell him the next day.
8.14.2	The Mahānāmikīs are at the beginning.
8.14.3	In the northern solstice, in the bright fortnight, one who wishes to hear should cook a pot of rice mixed with sesame outside the village and inform the teacher.
8.14.4	If they have been made to commit a transgression by asking about the doubts of the vow, if they have been made (to commit a transgression) by a small quantity, if they have begun (the rite), one should offer into the fire: "Agni moves, the son of the sages, the king, has entered. To him I offer oblation with ghee. May I not be deprived of the share of the gods. He who deprives us of our share, svāhā. The one who lies down obliquely, the one who supports, I offer you with the stream of ghee, the one who pleases, svāhā." "To which desire, O king, we offer you, that desire may he grant to us. Having given that desire, then you drink this ghee, svāhā." "May this Agni of ours be gracious, may he break through the enemies, may he conquer the enemies, rejoicing, may he conquer in the race for the prize. Svāhā. To Asūryā and Anumati, svāhā, to Pradātṛ, svāhā separately with the Vyāhṛtis."
8.14.5	Having offered this oblation of cooked rice, he should eat everything.
8.14.6	Having eaten, he should place a full handful of water before the sun, saying, "You are the lord of vows among vows. I shall observe the vow. May I be able to do it. May I succeed in it."
8.14.7	Having completed and closed, he should restrain his speech, observing the time, when the teacher will perform the rite.
8.14.8	Because of the explanation of the chapter for one night.
8.14.9	Or for three nights, with the regular chapter.
8.14.10	Considering that time, the teacher, having wrapped his head three times clockwise with a new cloth, says, "I shall sleep like this for that time."
8.14.11	He should sleep for that time.
8.14.12	Having established the fire in the direction of Aparajita, having placed the sword, water pot, and stone to the north of the fire, having bound the calf to the cow with its head facing south,
8.14.13	the teacher should sit on the grass behind the fire, gazing in the direction of Apajita.
8.14.14	Having wiped off the unguent, having circumambulated the fire and the teacher, having taken hold of him, he should sit behind the teacher on the grass, facing south.
8.14.15	Having joined the back with the back, he should say with the mind, "Recite the Mahānāmnī verses."
8.14.16	Having again asked the one who is crying, he should recite with closed eyes three times, along with the words "with excrement and feet".
8.14.17	Having recited, having released, he should gaze at the sun, saying, "I look at you with the eye of Mitra, I look at you with Mitra's eye."
8.14.18	"Looking with the eye of Mitra, the directions with their contents. Again the sun. I look at you with the eye of Mitrāvaruṇa. He whom we hate and who hates us, may he fall into the jaws of death." One should touch the ground with the words, "O Agni, Ida, salutations. Ida, salutations to the sages, the creators of mantras, the lords of mantras. May there be salutations to you, O gods. Be auspicious and peaceful to us. O Sarasvatī, may your sight not be obstructed. May we hear good things with our ears. May Indra and Agni be auspicious to us with their words. I praise the people of good conduct with new verses. What beautiful thing has come to us?" "Three times, "May the earth be peaceful." Having completed, one should conclude with the exception of the contents.
8.14.19	This is the duty of studying for both.
8.14.20	One should be like a teacher.
8.14.21	From Phalguna onwards, one should study chapters not studied before until Sravanam.
8.14.22	From Taisya onwards, one should review chapters already studied.
9.1.1	The days of the Aheeina sacrifice are as described.
9.1.2	The days are determined by the Siddha days.
9.1.3-8	If there is no special mention, then the Jyotiṣṭoma sacrifice with one day and twelve hundred cows as Dakṣiṇā is prescribed for the one-day sacrifices. The Goāyuṣī sacrifice is prescribed for the two-day sacrifices. The Pṛṣṭyāha or Abhiplava-tryaha is the first of the three-day sacrifices. These are the general Dakṣiṇās for the sacrifices with a descending number of days. The Atiratra sacrifices are with a thousand cows as Dakṣinās. The two-day and three-day sacrifices.
9.1.9	Those which are more than three days and less than a thousand, having counted them in three days, then the thousands.
9.1.10	The Dakṣiṇās should be given at the end of the year.
9.1.11	The excess ones are more in the highest.
9.1.12	Because of the absence of any other form, the Stoma-Prstha-s are fixed.
9.1.13	The modifications are eternal and occasional.
9.1.14	In the Madhyandina recitation, the Stoma-making is prescribed in the Niskekvalya Sāman.
9.1.15	Here, the Upasthāna is to be done before the Tarksya Sūkta.
9.1.16	If there is omission, then it should be added from there itself.
9.1.17	If the Stomas are less than three, then the verses should be placed in the places of the Sūktas.
9.1.18	The Nividas should be recited as per the regular practice.
9.2.1	The Cāturmāsya rites have been described.
9.2.2	We shall describe the Soma-sacrifices in place of the Parvan-sacrifices.
9.2.3	Some perform the Ayūpaka-sacrifices. (They are performed)
9.2.4	at the Paridhi-sacrifice.
9.2.5	At the place of the Vaishvadev-sacrifice, the first day of the Prsthya-sacrifice is performed. The Madhyandina-officiating priests are employed. The Ekāhika-officiating priest is employed at all places. When the days of the first Sampaata are performed as one day,
9.2.6	The offerings to Vaisvânara and Pârjanya should be brought in at the Pasupurodâsa of the animal dedicated to Agni-Soma at the morning pressing. The offerings to the Visve Devâs should be brought in in the morning pressing. An animal is dedicated to the Visve Devas.
9.2.7	The Anubandhya is dedicated to Brhaspati.
9.2.8	The two days are in place of the Varuna-prastha.
9.2.9	At the morning pressing of the Uttarāyaṇa, the Varuna-prastha-homas should be offered in the sacrificial cakes.
9.2.10	The Marutvat and Varuna-vatsa are the animals.
9.2.11	The Maitravaruni is the Anubandhya.
9.2.12	The Agnishtoma is in the place of the Indra-Agni.
9.2.13	The three-day Atiratra is in the place for the Sāka-medha.
9.2.14	The second day's Soma-pressing is the same as the first day's. The oblations for the second day are the same as those for the first day.
9.2.15	Having offered the Upāṃśu and Antaryāma libations on the third day, one should offer the Kraiḍina libation in the morning Soma-pressing.
9.2.16	The libations for the midday Soma-pressing are the same as for the morning Soma- pressing.
9.2.17	Between the Ghrtayājyā and the Marjālīya, one should offer libations to the Pitrs.
9.2.18	There the offering is made in accordance with the rule of not being too refined.
9.2.19	The Pasupurodāśa of the Anūbandhyā should be offered to the Sun.
9.2.20	The animals for the Agniya and the Ekādaśina are for Indra and Agni.
9.2.21	The Anūbandhyä is for Surya.
9.2.22	At the morning pressing, the offerings of the Suna-sīrīya should be brought in place of the Agniṣṭoma.
9.2.23	The animal is dedicated to Vayu.
9.2.24	The Anūbandhya is dedicated to the Asvins.
9.2.25	Every day fifty Dakṣiṇās are given.
9.3.1	Now about the Rājasūya.
9.3.2	One should perform the Agniṣṭoma sacrifice with the Pavitra rite before the full moon of Phālguna.
9.3.3	One should perform the Cāturmāsya rites on the full moon day.
9.3.4	The Parvan days are fixed.
9.3.5	They move in the intervening Parvan days by means of the two wheels.
9.3.6	Either the day or the fortnight is reversed.
9.3.7	At the end of the year, on the same day, the consecration and the drinking of the Soma are performed.
9.3.8	The Ukthya, the Brihat, the Prstha, and the Abhisecaniya are performed with both Sama-verses.
9.3.9	When the Marutvatiya has been completed, sitting to the south of the Ahavaniya fire, the Shauna-shepa should be told to the king who is consecrated, surrounded by his sons and ministers.
9.3.10	He who is seated tells him who is seated. He who is seated accepts. Wealth is fame. He thus makes him prosper with fame.
9.3.11	"Om" is the verse. "Thus" is the reply. "Thus" are the verses.
9.3.12	"Om", indeed, is divine. "Thus" means human. He thus releases him from sin and misfortune by means of the divine and the human.
9.3.13	Therefore, if a king who has conquered (his enemies) does not offer sacrifices, he should still narrate this story of Shouna-Hshepa. Nothing is left out in it.
9.3.14	One should give a thousand to the narrator.
9.3.15	One hundred to the respondent.
9.3.16	(The participants) should sit in their respective seats.
9.3.17	Having performed the Sristi rites, one should perform the Dashapayi sacrifice.
9.3.18	There, ten should eat each of the ten portions.
9.3.19	Having enumerated the regular ones, they should be served.
9.3.20	Those who have performed the rites of their mother and father for ten generations, who have acquired knowledge and austerities, and who have performed meritorious deeds, and whose lineage on both sides is not Brahmanical,
9.3.21	Some say: "From the father."
9.3.22	The new-clothed Sut-somas, Indra, when he was with his friends, the new-clothed, are the first of the two who have been mentioned.
9.3.23	One should go to the one mentioned in the Sūkta-mukhiya.
9.3.24	In the northern half of the year, the Atiratra is performed on the Brihat-pṛṣṭha day, dedicated to Keshava.
9.3.25	The Vyustidvyaha is performed in the two months.
9.3.26	The Agniṣṭoma is the first sacrifice, the Atiratra is the last.
9.3.27	The Agniṣṭoma in the northern half of the month is the support of the Kshatriya.
9.4.1	Thus are the Rajasuya sacrifices.
9.4.2	The Dakṣiṇās are prescribed according to the rules.
9.4.3	In the case of the Abhisecanīya, thirty-two thousand each are given separately to the chief priests.
9.4.4	Sixteen to the second ones.
9.4.5	Eight to the third ones, four to the fourth ones.
9.4.6	The golden one to the Sristis, the calf-skin to the Agniya, the Avadhvasta to the Savitriya, the black one to the Pusya, the Shitiprishtha to the Bharadvarya, the bull to the Indra, the Mahanirastha to the Varunya.
9.4.7	The fee is a thousand cows.
9.4.8	These are the prescribed fees.
9.4.9	A golden garland for the Udgātṛ.
9.4.10	A horse for the Prastôtṛ, a cow for the Pratihartṛ.
9.4.11	A goat for the Subrahmaṇyā.
9.4.12	Gold and silver for the Adhvaryu.
9.4.13	Silver for the Pratiprasthātṛ.
9.4.14	Twelve pregnant cows for the Brahman.
9.4.15	Vasa is for the Maitrāvaruṇa.
9.4.16	Rukma is for the Hotṛ.
9.4.17	A bull is for the Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin, a garment of cotton for the Potṛ, a garment of flax for the Neṣṭṛ.
9.4.18	A single-yoked cart with barley is for the Acchavaka.
9.4.19	A bullock is for the Agnidh.
9.4.20	A three-year-old bull is for the Gravastut, a calf for the Unnetṛ.
9.5.1	One who thinks of himself as having drunk the Soma, should conquer with the Uśanas Stoma.
9.5.2	The Uśanas, when they came with the Sahasya, you, O Apot, were the protector of the Vasas. The Stoma-bhumi Stoma-vanaspati-sava Stoma-savas of the Stoma-bhūmi Stoma-vanaspatis are not attained by the Arvararenuka-kaṭa, they are not eaten, the thief does not afflict them. The firm ones among the mountains, O Vanaspati, the offerings, O Vanaspate, with the reins, you have bound. The Stomabhumi Stomavanaspati Savas are the Stomabhumi Vanaspati Savas.
9.5.3	One who desires lordship or brahmic glory should perform the sacrifice of Brihaspati.
9.5.4	His verses are in the places of the hymns.
9.5.5	Agni shines among the gods. The hymn beginning with "He who supports the earth" is to be recited at midday. "O Indra, with the Maruts, among men" is to be chanted at midday. "To you" is to be sung at midday. "The god Savitar has risen" is to be used at midday. "Agni, the all-pervading" is to be employed at midday. "Indra, with the Rishis, the strong ones" is to be utilized at midday. "May the Asvins, Bhaga" is to be applied at midday. "Vaisvānara, the all-gods" is to be invoked at midday. "Having deposited the mind in Agni, the all-god" is to be offered at midday. "Let the forces go forth with their powers" is to be uttered at midday. "Kindling Agni, the all" is to be praised at midday. "Praising Agni, the all, with the Samidha" is to be performed at midday. The Hotr priests should chant the first and last verses of the Stotriya Anurupas in the Agni-Marut hymn.
9.5.6	But at the Madhyandina Sāman, from the Prastara.
9.5.7	The Dakṣiṇās are eleven and eleven.
9.5.8	Or eleven and eleven thousand.
9.5.9	Or eleven hundred.
9.5.10	The horse is more at the Madhyandin.
9.5.11	One who desires to surpass his enemies should offer this sacrifice.
9.5.12	One who wishes for heaven should perform the Sadyaskriya, Anukriya, or Parikriya.
9.5.13	One who seeks food should perform the Ekātrika or Tryaka.
9.5.14	He who desires, "May my subjects be fond of giving," should perform the Gotamastoma sacrifice.
9.5.15	The seven have been mentioned. The Brihaspati Savana is the praiseworthy one.
9.5.16	You are the measure of the earth, O Indra, you are the measure of heaven, you are great by the Brahman. The bull, the young one, was born today. You are born today. O Indra, you have overcome the killer. The gods are above the god. He who gives to you, O great Indra, knows your services. Two are mine, and one is yours. Your strength is all. One knows you as the lord of the five peoples. Tryaruna is the deity of men. The great one has indeed come forth from him. For he is Soma, the Madhu, Indra has grown for the Madhu. These are the verses with the beginning of the Sukta.
9.6.1	They perform the Gotama-stoma as the Antaryāma.
9.6.2	If the Antaryāmas are taken up, one should pour out the Agni-Marut graha before the Paridhānīya with the verse, "O Agni, with the Maruts, with the Rk-singers, do thou drink with Indra-Varuna, with Indra-Brhaspati, with Indra-Vishnu, with the same aim."
9.6.3	Both are invoked.
9.6.4	If the Udgītha is in the Udgīthya stotras, then with the Yajñāyajñiya.
9.6.5	Or with their own (Stotras).
9.6.6	Having called the Stotriyas and Anurūpas once,
9.6.7	In the same way, when the Stotriyas are present together with the Anurūpas.
9.6.8	If the Udgīthas are in the Udgithya stotras, and if they are to be performed according to the original procedure with all the Udgīthiya Sāmans, then in that case,
9.7.1-8	One who is practising sorcery should offer to the two deities Svyana and Ajira. "At midday, one should recite the verses, "I am Manu, O Manya, in the womb, which is your mind." The remaining verses are to be recited with the Savana of Brihaspati." Those who are well-armed, wearing red turbans, and holding swords, should perform the sacrifice. The sacrificial grass should be made of reeds. The enclosing sticks should be made of wood. The sacrificial wood should be made of Vibhitaka wood. Or of wood from a tree struck by lightning.
9.7.9-19	Having removed it, he should announce. And he should announce in return. He should offer the Vasat-call as if cutting. He should make the offering as if pressing. The sacrificial grass is the sacrificial post. The northern altar is the threshing floor. The sacrificial post is the threshing rod. The sacrificial posts are made of wood. There is no cup. The cup is made of wood. These are the temporary modifications.
9.7.20	The other Adhvaryus know (the procedure).
9.7.21	When the harvest is accomplished, the Hotṛ should recite the Samprāṣa.
9.7.22	One who is afflicted with sin, or who is afflicted with a great disease, or who is unable to beget children, should perform the Agniṣṭoma sacrifice.
9.7.23	The verse "Stand, O Hari, who is born" is recited at midday. If all the Stotriya Anurūpa verses are to be recited, they should be recited in the Agniya form.
9.7.24-29	or one who is investigating. Or, in all cases where the word "deity" occurs, one may offer to Agni. If this is done, then one should offer to Indra at midday. "I praise Indra, I praise Soma, Indra." One who desires prosperity, or one who desires a village, or one who seeks offspring, "These are for you, O One, indeed." One who seeks offspring should offer to Indra and Agni at midday.
9.7.30-34	"Stand, O Hari, and praise him" (RV. 10, 95, 1) at midday, desiring victory with the Rishabha (verse). "O Indra, the Maruts, the strong ones" (RV. "Where is the hero of the fierce one, of the same age?" (RV. 8, 24, 1) At midday, attacking with the Vigha (verse). His praise is with the Ajira (verse). The departure of Indra and Vishnu, desiring heaven.
9.7.35	These are thy, O Indra, the heaven and earth. At midday, he who desires to go to the state of a hero and to sin, should offer a sacrifice with the Rtapayi (verses).
9.7.36	For the Rtapayis are the early verses. With truth they partake of the cups.
9.7.37	This earth is truth, this Agni is truth, this Vayu is truth, this Aditya is truth.
9.7.38	Soma-cup is the fee.
9.8.1	One who is going to perform the Ati-mūrti sacrifice should offer oblations to the Sun and Moon for a month.
9.8.2	The white one is the moon, the other is the sun.
9.8.3	Here are the Yajya and Anuvakya verses: "He found the cow, the new one becomes new when born, the remover of darkness, the bright one, the wonderful array of the gods has arisen."
9.8.4	He, having approached the earth, the moving, the unmoving, the sleeping, the waking, the moving, and the waking, by means of a dream, is mentioned in the beginning of the Sūkta.
9.8.5	The one praised by the Sun, desiring fame.
9.8.6	"Drink Soma, O Indra, I praise you." At midday, desiring food, by means of the sky.
9.8.7	The one praise by all the gods, desiring fame. "
9.8.8	Desiring cattle, by means of Pañcaśāradīya.
9.8.9	Of these three, which is the most auspicious? The midday (Sāman) is the one that is in the middle. The first two are common to both.
9.8.10	The Ukthya is the Pañcha-śāradīya. The Hotr chants "O ye Visvas, the guest" as the Ajya.
9.8.11	The Kanva-Rathantera is the Prstha.
9.8.12	The Goṣavī and Vivadha are for one desiring cattle.
9.8.13	Indra drinks Soma at this time. The midday (Sâman) is the most auspicious.
9.8.14	The Dakṣiṇās are ten thousand.
9.8.15	There are sixteen days.
9.8.16	The two verses beginning with "āyuḥ gaur" are to be recited in reverse order.
9.8.17	One desiring heaven should recite the verses beginning with "udbhid" and "balabhid".
9.8.18	The verses beginning with "Indra somaṃ" and "Indra pūrbhid" are to be chanted at midday.
9.8.19	The verses beginning "vinut" and "abhibhūti" and the verses beginning with the words "iṣu" and "vajra" are to be used in the Mantrī Sūkta.
9.8.20	One who is practising black magic should offer sacrifice.
9.8.21	The verses "tviṣy" and "pacit" are to be offered to the king, the verses "samrāṭ" and "svārāja" are to be given to the king, and the verses "rāj" and "viraj" are to be presented to the king on the Ekāhika day.
9.9.2	There are seventeen consecrations.
9.9.3	Or seventeen kinds of release.
9.9.4	The priests should be adorned with golden garlands.
9.9.5	The Hotr should wear a thunderbolt-shaped crest and a hundred-petalled lotus.
9.9.6	At midday, when the Marutvatiya and the Barhaspatya offerings have been completed, the Ajya offering is made. The Kya offering is made at the end of the Ajya offering. The Ajya offering is followed by the Kya offering.
9.9.7	The first of the offerings, beginning with the Ajya-bhagā and ending with the Idānti, is addressed to Brhaspati. Brhaspati, being born first, conquered the treasures. You are praised by the messengers. Agni, the well-shining, well-seeing, is praised in the Samyājyā.
9.9.8	If the Adhvaryus were to recite the Ajis, then the Brahman would recite in the sacred place and at the Mayukha. Having mounted the wheel released there, he would sing the Sama of the horses while going around it clockwise. The horses have come to the place of the race, the horses have come to their own place. The horses of the god Savitar have won heaven. The horses have won heaven.
9.9.9	If the Saman is not known, one should recite this verse three times. The third pressing is mentioned with the third pressing. If one is to chant the Stotras of the Citravatis, then the Stotriya and Anurupya for the Agniṣṭoma are "You are our bright one, O Agni, shining, O Uṣas." The Sodasi is here.
9.9.10	From here onwards, the Atiriktoktas (extra verses) are mentioned.
9.9.11	Prastena, O thou who art called Sipivista, and Prastena, Vishnu, with his strength, are the two Stotriya and Anurudriya verses.
9.9.12	Brahma, the first-born, was born before thee; what thou desirest to give, O lord of strength, is thine own.
9.9.13	Having left out one of the thirteen, one should ascend the Daurona mountain, calling out "Tam Prathanam".
9.9.14	Brihaspati, you and Indra, the Vasus, are the Paridhananiyas. The Yajyas are "May he drink the sweet Soma." The Dakshina is seventeen times seventeen cows, horses, chariots, horses, Sada, Vaha, Mahana, Dasis with golden necklaces, elephants with golden girdles.
9.9.15	The other ten are the groups of Dakshina, the lowest being a hundred.
9.9.16	Or one may practise the groups in order.
9.9.17	One should accomplish seventeen times seventeen.
9.9.18	Thus is the Vajapeya.
9.9.19	Having performed that, the king should offer the Rajasuya sacrifice, the Brahman the Brihaspati Sava.
9.10.1	The morning and third pressing of the Anirukta are twenty-four.
9.10.2	The Prāṇathai is the thirteenth Vaiśvadeva.
9.10.3	"The Kya śubhā tad id āse is the midday (Sāman).
9.10.4	The Hotrakas should chant the first Sampātas after the Prāthas.
9.10.5	Or the Ahīna Sūktas.
9.10.6	Thus in the earlier Savana, in the Brhatpṛṣṭhas which are not mentioned.
9.10.7	The Viśvajit Shilpa is for each one.
9.10.8	His Prastāra is the same as that of Viśvajita.
9.10.9	The two verses of the Brhaspati Savana are the Niṣkevalya and Marutvatīya.
9.10.10	These two verses are to be recited before the Ekāhika.
9.10.11	The Hotr priests should recite the hymns in the same form as they were recited before the Prastāra.
9.10.12	The Sāman hymns also.
9.10.13	The first three verses of the Ahīna Sūktas.
9.10.14	The last of the one-day sacrifices are the best.
9.10.15	The third pressing is common to all. The Nabhanedistha is before the Vaishvadeva in the Brihaspati Savana.
9.10.16	The Evyayamarut is before the Agnimarat in the Marut Savana.
9.10.17	Their procedure has been stated.
9.11.1	If cattle were to be taken away by others, or if they were to be led to other pastures, one should offer the Aptoiryāma sacrifice.
9.11.2	The Visvajit sacrifice is mentioned in the Madhyandina recension, except for the Silpayoni.
9.11.3	In one day.
9.11.4	If one were to praise the Garbhakara, then the Stotriya-Anurupas.
9.11.5	With the Rathantara first, then with the Vairāja, then with the Rathantara.
9.11.6	The Brhat and the Vairāja are to be sung in the same way.
9.11.7	The Vāmadevya and Śākvara are to be sung by the Maitrāvaruṇa at the Naudhasa and Vaivāḍa.
9.11.8	The Śyaita and Vaivāṭa are to be sung at the Vaivāḍas.
9.11.9	The Kāleya and Raivata are to be sung for the Acchāvāka.
9.11.10	Two Prathājas are to be sung without the Garbha, in succession.
9.11.11	The Atiratra is to be sung here.
9.11.12	If the Ukthya is in two feet, then the third pressing is at the equinoctial point.
9.11.13	The Ukthyas are beyond the Asvins.
9.11.14	"O Agni, thou art shining with Indra, the lord of the field, we (are) with thee." This is the Paridhananiya. "O ye gods, with the ancient intention." This is the Yajya.
9.11.15	"O Indra, the slayer of Vrtra, may the praises sung by you today be heard. O Maghavan, the lord of the fields, may the sweet waves of the morning Soma be heard. The Paridhananiya verse is: "O young gods, the three and eleven." The Yajya verse is:
9.11.16	We invoke that Indra, the great, who is mighty through his strength. Now, O Asvins, your chariot, the plants that are sweet, the heaven and the earth, the waters, the one to be taken away, the one to take away, that which is done for you, O Asvins. This is the offering verse.
9.11.17	"The Stotriya and Anurūpa verses are: "May the gods protect us from here."
9.11.18	"May we be foremost in your favor." This is the last verse of the Anurūpa."
9.11.19	I praise the two heaven and earth, the two divine Hotars, the first priests. This is the concluding verse. Your share is deposited in the place of sacrifice. These are the verses of invocation.
9.11.20	If one does not know, then the verses "The ancient abode, the friendship, your auspicious" are the four verses of invocation.
9.11.21	Then sing to him, O son of Sacī, your praise to Indra. He is the one who frightens his enemies. Your praises are in accordance with his wishes. Thus are the Stotriya and Anurūpa verses.
9.11.22	The Dakṣiṇā is unlimited.
9.11.23	The white horse and the mare, and the Hotr's Hotr.
10.1.1	The Jyoti is for one desiring prosperity.
10.1.2	The Navasaptadasha is for one desiring offspring.
10.1.3	The Visuvat stoma is for one who has an enemy.
10.1.4	The Gauh and Abhijit are for one who desires cattle.
10.1.5	The Gauhma and the Sarvas toma are for one who wishes to prosper.
10.1.6	The Ayus stoma is for a long-term illness.
10.1.7	For one who desires cattle, the Visvajit stoma is for those who desire Brahmic glory, strength, offspring, and prosperity. The Prsthya days are separate for those who desire these things.
10.1.8	Thus are the Atiratras.
10.1.9-15	The first three of these are the sacrifices for the harvest of one day. Thus are the sacrifices of one day. Now the sacrifices of many days. The sacrifices of many days are the Agniṣṭomas, etc., ending with the Atiratra, which are performed for twelve days, half a month, a month, and so on, and have unlimited initiation. The sacrifices for one day are the sacrifices of the Caitareyins. The Dakṣiṇās are in thousands. The Atiratras are in all.
10.1.16	The number of days is counted from the Abhijit to the end of the six days.
10.1.17	The Atiratra is the last one, taken for filling up the number of days.
10.1.18	In the case of loss, Vaisvânara is the additional one.
10.2.1	One desiring heaven should perform the Ângirasa.
10.2.2	One who is deficient in merit and does not desire it,
10.2.3	One desiring food should perform the Caitraratha, and one desiring heaven should perform Kapivana. These are the two-day sacrifices.
10.2.4	The third pressing of the first day is the third pressing.
10.2.5	The Ajya is "Thou art the protector."
10.2.6	One desiring heaven should perform the Garga-Trirastra.
10.2.7	The Vamadevya is the pressing of the middle day, the Visovishiya is the Agniṣṭoma Sāman.
10.2.8	The Vāravantyīya is the last pressing.
10.2.9	The Ājya is "Thou, O Agni, the Vasus."
10.2.10	One desiring sovereignty should perform the Vaidatra-Trirastra.
10.2.11	All the Atiratras are of three stomas.
10.2.12	The Chandomas and Pavamānas are for one desiring cattle.
10.2.13	The Parākas and Chandomas are for one desiring heaven.
10.2.14	Thus the three days.
10.2.15	The Garga three days are for prosperity.
10.2.16	Herein, the four heroes are for one desiring heroes.
10.2.17	His oblations are endowed with heroes.
10.2.18	The second day is called "O Agni, the most excellent in bestowing strength", the third "O Agni, who is mortal", the fourth "O Agni, O man".
10.2.19	The fourth is the one with sixteen syllables.
10.2.20	Among the Gāyatrī verses, the Rathantara is the Prstha.
10.2.21	Among the Anushtubh and Brhatī verses, the Bṛhat.
10.2.22	In the fourth (day) you are born from the mind of Bala, the unequalled.
10.2.23	One desiring prosperity should offer to Jamadagni.
10.2.24	His Upasads are with cakes.
10.2.25	One having enemies should offer to Vasishtha-Serpent.
10.2.26	Thus the four-day sacrifices.
10.2.27	One desiring cattle should perform the Sarvasena sacrifice; one having a rival should perform the Daivya sacrifice; one desiring cattle should perform Pañcaśāradīya; one desiring longevity should perform the Vratavata; one desiring to speak should perform the Vāvara.
10.2.28	Thus the five five-day sacrifices.
10.2.29	The seventeen days of the Pañcaśāradīya are the Indra-Maruts, with the Maruts and the Vatsatarīs, seventeen in number. The seventeen days of Agni are the Savanīya ones.
10.2.30	They should offer three each on the four days, and the remaining five on the fifth day.
10.2.31	But for one who is observing the vow, the third day is replaced by the Mahāvrata.
10.2.32	The Uttara-Sāman is the five-day-long Prāstara-Sāmans.
10.3.1	One desiring stability should perform the six-day-long Rtu-Sāmans,
10.3.2	either in the Prāstara or in the Vyuha form.
10.3.3	One desiring cattle should perform the Prāstāra-Sāmans with the Avalambana-Sāman.
10.3.4	The five-day- long Prāstara Sāmans are performed in the Abhyāsakta and Viśva-Vid forms.
10.3.5	The three days of the Prsthya and the three days of the Abhipaga are for one who desires life.
10.3.6	The seven days of the Rsis, the Prajapati, the Chandoma, the Pavamana, the Jamadagni, and the Mahavrata are for one who seeks prosperity, offspring, cattle, food, and the Maha-vrata.
10.3.7	The Mahavrata is the last.
10.3.8	The Vrata is the first Svashtoma.
10.3.9	The seventeenth is the second.
10.3.10	The Chandomā Pavamāna is the third.
10.3.11	The twenty-fourth is the Bahiṣpavamāna, the seventeenth is the remaining fourth.
10.3.12	The other Prajas are under Indra's control.
10.3.13	The Trikakruka, Abhijit, Vishvajita, Mahavrata, and Sarvasthomas.
10.3.14	The Janaka-saptaratra is for one desiring prosperity. The Ahbhiplava-caturha is for one desiring victory. The Vishvajiti-mahavrata is for one desiring the Jyotishtoma.
10.3.15	The Prsthya-stoma and Vishvajiti are the seventh for one desiring cattle.
10.3.16	The Ashtaratra is for him who desires divinity.
10.3.17	The Parshtha, Mahavrata, and Jyotishtoma are for him.
10.3.18	The Navaratra is for the one desiring longevity. The Prsthya and Trikadruka are for him.
10.3.19	The Trikakubha, the Prsthya, and the Avalambana are for one desiring cattle.
10.3.20	Thus in the Navaratra.
10.3.21	The Trikakubha is half of the Prsthyanavaratras, the Maha-trikakubha is the Navaratras, the Samudha-trikakubhas are the Samudhas.
10.3.22	The Catustoma-trikakubhadhyardha is the Abhijit. One desiring the preeminence of his cattle should offer with these four.
10.3.23	One who desires prosperity should recite the Kusuru-bindu three times each day for three days.
10.3.24	One who desires cattle should recite the Chandomas (hymns) in connection with the Prsthya Avalamva sacrifice, before the Vishvajita sacrifice, and the tenth day.
10.3.25	One who wishes to conquer an enemy should recite the Jyotirs (hymns).
10.3.26	The Jyotirs are the cows, the cows are the Abhijit, the Vishvajita is the life.
10.3.27	One who seeks prosperity should recite the Shalali-pishang (hymns)
10.3.28	The Abhijit is the first of the three days.
10.3.29	Thus the ten days.
10.4.1	The Paundarika, the Rddhikama, the Prsthya Stoma, the Chandoma, the Gautamashtoma, the Vishvajiti, the Vyuha, the Navaratra, the Mahavrata, and the Vaishvanara.
10.4.2	Now the two Samvaras.
10.4.3	The Atiratra, the twenty-four, the half-Abhijit, and the Prsthyo.
10.4.4	The Indra-Vajra for one with enemies.
10.4.5	In the first day of the Prsthya, there is a change till the Navaratra.
10.4.6	Then comes the Mahāvrata.
10.5.1	If there are twelve days,
10.5.2	there may be Sattrins or Ahinas.
10.5.3	The Dasha-atra has been described.
10.5.4	It may be combined or spread out.
10.5.5	It is surrounded by two Atiratras.
10.5.6	One may place the Vaishvānara in the two Samvaras.
10.5.7	The Atiratra, the twenty-four-day Soma sacrifice, the Navaratras, and the Mahavrata are performed for a year.
10.5.8	Now the Bharata twelve-day sacrifice.
10.5.9	They perform this one-day sacrifice separately.
10.5.10	The Atiratra first, then the Agnistoma, then eight Ukthyas, then the Agnistomas, then the Atiratra.
10.5.11	Thus the twelve-day sacrifice.
10.5.12	Those who desire to prosper themselves, their offspring and cattle, and to attain heaven, and who desire to be the best among their kinsmen, should perform the sacrifice.
10.5.13	Thus there is a distinction.
10.5.14	Now the general (principles).
10.5.15	Since Dharma is limitless, we shall describe its sections.
10.5.16	Just as limited syllables attain an unlimited range of speech, so also limited days attain unlimited masses.
10.5.17	But the days that have been accomplished, and whatever collection of them there is, the harvest is accomplished.
10.5.18	But in the doubt about the days, some establish it by the Stoma-Prstha-s.
10.5.19	Because the violation of the rule is seen to be incomplete.
10.5.20	The Chandogas having made an agreement, the Rathantara and Barhatarathantara are performed in one day. The Rathantara is not performed in one day, but in two days.
10.5.21	The Barhatas are performed in the second day, which is Abhiplvika.
10.5.22	Or the Kayasubhi and Tadidasa may be performed in the same place, and the other in one day.
10.6.1	One who desires to obtain all desires, to conquer all enemies, to surpass all prosperity, should offer the horse sacrifice.
10.6.2	One who is about to release the horse should offer two Iṣṭi sacrifices.
10.6.3	Agni is the head.
10.6.4	The two Viśvajit and Sannayājyā are the offerings.
10.6.5	The second is the Pauṣṇī.
10.6.6	You are the Agni with good radiance, O Soma, those of yours are the good-giving ones. The two have the word "good" at the end.
10.6.7	You are the one with the most brilliant fame, O Agni, that which is the best, that is yours. Having released the horse after the Samyājyā, having appointed the protectors, the three Savitrī Iṣṭis are performed daily according to the Vairāja system.
10.6.8	Savitar, the one who gives truth, the one who causes growth, Savitar.
10.6.9	The God Savitar, who moves through all these creatures, the giver of good gifts, may that God Savitar come to us for help.
10.6.10	When the rites have been completed, the king, seated on a golden throne to the south of the sacrificial fire, surrounded by his sons and ministers, should be anointed and addressed with the following words.
10.6.11	The Adhvaryu, seated on a golden couch, responds.
10.6.12	He should call out, "O Adhvaryu!"
10.6.13	The other responds, "Ho Hota!"
10.7.1	On the first day, Manu Vaivasvata, and his human subjects, are seated. The householder should have brought in the people to be initiated. He should point them out, and recite the verse from the Veda: "This is the hymn."
10.7.2	On the second day, Yama Vaivasvata, his father, and his relatives sit down. The elders are brought in for the initiation. He points them out. The Yajurveda is the Veda. This is the section.
10.7.3	On the third day, Varuna, Aditya, his Gandharvas, and his Visas are seated. The young and handsome ones are brought together. He points them out: "This is the Veda of Atharva. This is the remedy that will end at night."
10.7.4	On the fourth day, Soma is Vaisnava. The Apsarases are the Visas. They are here. They should be brought as young and beautiful women. He points them out. The Veda is Angirasa. This is the terrible night. If there is a terrible night, he should recite this.
10.7.5	On the fifth day, Arbudu, the son of Kadru, is born. The serpents are his teeth. They lie here. The serpents are the knowers of serpents. They should be brought together. He points them out. The knowledge of poison is the Veda. This is it. He should recite the knowledge of poison.
10.7.6	On the sixth day, Kubera, Vaishravana, his Rakshasas, and his classes of beings are present. They should be brought in with the words "Those who have committed sins." The knowledge of pishachas is the Veda. Whatever is connected with pishachas and ends with the night, that should be recited.
10.7.7	On the seventh day, Asita Dhanvan, the Asuras, and the Visas, they are seated here. Those who have been brought together for the day of idleness, he points them out. The Asura Vidya Veda, it is this. He should perform some kind of magic.
10.7.8	On the eighth day, the fish is offered with the verse, "The fish, the source of joy, are present here in the water." The fish should be brought in a bundle and placed in front. One who knows the ancient knowledge should say, "This is the ancient knowledge."
10.7.9	On the ninth day, Tarksya, the son of Vipaschit, his sons are the classes. They are here. The sons are the students. They should be brought for initiation. He should instruct them. The history is the Veda. He should say, "This is the history." On the tenth day, Dharma Indra, his sons are gods. They are here, the young students who do not accept gifts. They should be initiated. He instructs them. The Sama Veda is the Veda. This is the Sama. He should sing. Thus he should describe the year in this order.
10.7.10	Completing the tenth day.
10.7.11	At the end of the year, he is initiated.
10.8.1	There are three Soma sacrifices.
10.8.2	At the time of consecrating the animal for the second day, having brought a horse, they should place it outside the altar.
10.8.3	If it smells or turns around, one should know that there will be prosperity at the sacrifice.
10.8.4	If not, then he should recite the verse, "May there be good cattle for us, may there be good horses for us."
10.8.5	While standing, he praises him with eleven verses beginning with "He who cried out," without moving away.
10.8.6	Some say that it is a recitation.
10.8.7-8	Having sprinkled him with the formula, "O horse, do thou be firm," and having sprinkled him with the formulas, "O horse of twenty-six kinds, do thou be steady," and "O Mitra, do thou not injure us," and having sprinkled with the two formulas, "The horse has come forward for the pressing; the horse has come forward to the pressing," the wives of the sacrificer, having loosened the hair on the right side, and having tied the hair on the left side, strike the left thighs.
10.8.9	Then they make him lie down on the heifer.
10.8.10	The Hotṛ recites over him: "Thy mother and thy father, while thou wast playing at the foot of the tree, took thee away." "Thy father placed his fist on thy belly."
10.8.11	She reproaches the Hotri, and the hundred royal maidens, and thy mother and thy father, who were playing at the foot of a tree, and said, "Thy mouth is like that of a dog, O Hotri, do not speak much."
10.8.12	The wind has raised her up, like a load on a mountain, and now she returns to him in the cold wind.
10.8.13	She, having overcome Brahma, and having followed him, raises him up above a hundred royal maidens, like a mountain-carrier carrying a load. Then his middle becomes cold, and he returns to the wind.
10.8.14	Having always crept and wandered in the form of Svāhā,
10.9.1	They say Brahma is the source.
10.9.2	Who alone wanders? Who is born again? What is the remedy for cold? What is the great covering? The Hotṛ asks the Adhvaryu. The sun alone wanders. The moon is born again. Fire is the remedy for the cold. The earth is the great covering. He replies. What is the light equal to the sun? What is the lake equal to the ocean? Who is greater than the earth? Whose measure is not known? The Adhvaryu asks the Hotṛ. The truth is that the light is equal to the sun. The sky is equal to the ocean. Indra is greater than the Earth. The cow is without measure. He replies. I ask you, O Brahman, if you have thought here with your mind, in which of the three steps of Vishnu is he? In which does the entire universe enter? The Brahmaṇācārya asks the Udgātṛ. He is in those three steps where the entire universe enters. I roam over the earth and heaven in a single limb. The back of heaven is his. He replies. Having stepped out facing east, they ask the sacrificer one by one. "I ask you about the farthest end of the earth."
10.9.3	This is the altar, the highest point of the earth. He replies, "This is the altar."
10.9.4	The Vapas move around in front and above with their greatness.
10.9.5	The Self-existent One, the Lord of the Earth, first placed in the great ocean the embryo of the Ritu, from which Prajapati was born. The Hotar should invoke Prajapati. Let those who enjoy greatness drink and sip the Soma. The injunction is "May he win." "These worlds, the directions and the quarters are yours." The horse, the goat, the sheep, and the deer are Prajapati's.
10.9.6	The other animals move about.
10.9.7	The rite of the Visvedevas is prescribed.
10.9.8	The fifth day of the Prsthya Sastra is the day of the harvest of the spread out (grain).
10.10.1	We shall describe its special features.
10.10.2	"Agniṃ taṃ manye" is the ghee. The Ekāhika is above it.
10.10.3	In the Prauga verses, the Ekāhika verses.
10.10.4	In the Trikaddrukas, the Mahisha, the Yavashira, the Marutvatīya, the Ekāha, the Anucharas, and the last of the Sūktas, having taken out the last, and having added the Ekāha (Sūkta), one should place the Niviḍa in it.
10.10.5	Thus in the Niskelavya.
10.10.6	The first verse of the Visvadevya Sāman is the first verse of the Ekāha Sāman. The Ekāha Sūkta is to be recited in the place of the third verse. The Niviḍa Sūkta is also to be recited in this place.
10.10.7	The same is to be done in the case of Agni-Marut.
10.10.8	The fourth day of the Prsthya Sāman
10.10.9	Jyotiṣṭoma, Gauriṣṭoma, Āyusṭoma, Abhijit, Viśvajit, Mahāvrata, Sarvasvastama, Aptoryāma.
10.10.10	The Brahmanas, except the king and the men, give the Dakshina to the priests in the different directions. The Dakshina to Hotr is in the east, to Brahman in the south, to Adhvaryu in the west, to Udgatur in the north. These are the Hotrkas, the assistants.
11.1.1	Now we shall describe the special combination of these days, as they are suitable for the fulfilment of certain desires.
11.1.2	This very Ekāha Atiratra is the first, the Prāyaniya.
11.1.3	This is the last, the Udayaniya.
11.1.4	The middle one is indistinct.
11.1.5	In the Ahīna sacrifices, this is the Vaishvānara.
11.1.6	Between them is the Vyuḍha Dasātra.
11.1.7	This is the natural order of the sacrifices.
11.1.8	Herein is the procedure of the Avasthānas.
11.1.9	For a sacrifice lasting ten days or more, the Mahāvrata is performed on the last day.
11.1.10	For other sacrifices lasting less than ten days, it is performed on the first day.
11.1.11	For a two-day sacrifice, the Goāyusī; for a three-day sacrifice, Trikakruka; for a four-day sacrifice, both Trikakruka and Mahāvrata.
11.1.12	The Abhipava-Pañcaha is the fifth day of the five-day period. The third pressing is on the sixth day of the six-day period.
11.1.13	The Abhipava-Saḍaha is the six-day Abhipava. The Avapas are in this manner.
11.1.14	The six-day periods are repeated again and again.
11.1.15	The complete six-day period becomes a system.
11.2.1	There are two thirteen-day periods.
11.2.2	For those who desire prosperity, the first one is the Prsthya, the Chandomas in between, and the Atiratra with all stomas.
11.2.3	For those who are fit for the rite and desire stability, the second one.
11.2.4	Three fourteen-night rites, the first one being Sarvakamika.
11.2.5	Two Prsthyas, the latter one being repeated.
11.2.6	For those being examined in a bed, in water, or in marriage, the second one.
11.2.7	The Trikarduka (rites) are to be performed on the two sides of the Prishtha.
11.2.8	Those who desire prosperity should perform the third (rite) after having performed the two rites in accordance with the rules.
11.2.9	Those who wish for divinity should perform four fifteen-night rites, the first being the fourteen-night rite of the first month, with the Mahavrata in the middle of the Prishthas.
11.2.10	Those who desire Brahmic glory should perform the second one. The Agniṣṭoma is the next to the Prāyaṇīya of the second fourteen-day ritual.
11.2.11	Those who desire both worlds should perform the third one.
11.2.12	The Agniṣṭoma in the place of the Prāyaṇya of the third fourteen-day ritual is the Trihāraparijana, which is properly arranged.
11.2.13	Those who desire prosperity should perform the sacrifice for three days, which is prescribed by the rules of Nyaya.
11.2.14	Those who desire food should perform the sacrifice lasting for sixteen days, which is generated by four days.
11.2.15	Those who seek cattle should perform the sacrifice of seventeen days, which is produced by five days.
11.2.16	Those seeking longevity should perform the sacrifice that lasts for eighteen days.
11.2.17	Here, the six-day sacrifice is completed. We shall now describe the generation of the independent sacrifice.
11.2.18	The Ekānnāviṃśati-rātra is for those who are about to sacrifice the domestic and wild animals.
11.2.19	The Viṃśati-rātṛ is for those who desire prosperity. The Abhijit and Viśvajit are to be performed after the Abhiplī.
11.3.1	The two Ekāviṃśatirātras are for those who desire stability. The first of the three Abhiplī sacrifices is the Antarātrī.
11.3.2	Those who desire Brahmic glory perform the second Navaratra in the place of Abhijit and Vishvajita, with two Prsthya sacrifices, the latter being repeated.
11.3.3	They say that it is equal to a year.
11.3.4	Those who desire food perform the twenty-two-day sacrifice with four-day increase.
11.3.5	Those who seek cattle perform the twenty-three-day sacrifice with five-day increase.
11.3.6	Those who desire progeny or cattle should perform the two twenty-four-day sacrifices first.
11.3.7	Here, the six-day sacrifice is completed. We will describe the method of attaining heaven. Those who desire to attain heaven and the highest region of heaven should perform the second sacrifice.
11.3.8	The Prsthya Stoma is of thirty-three stomas, the Visala is of twenty-one, the Anirukta is of twenty-seven. The three days are in reverse order, the next three days are in forward order. The Visala is also in reverse order. The Anirukta Stoma is in forward order.
11.3.9	The Trivrit Stoma is Anirukta.
11.3.10	The Jyotiṣṭoma sacrifice is performed with both the Sāman chants.
11.3.11	This is called the path of the Sāṁsāras. Those desiring food perform the Pañcaviṁśa-atra, with one night added. Those desiring stability perform the Ṣaḍviṁśa, with two nights added. Those desiring prosperity perform the Saptaviṁśa with three nights added. Those desirous of brahmic glory perform the Aṣṭāviṁśa. Those desiring the highest victory perform the Ekānnatriṁśa, adding five nights. Those desiring food, perform the Triṁśa. Here the six days are completed. We shall now describe the addition of the Satantra. Those desiring food add one night to the Ekātriṁśa. Those desiring stability add two nights to the Dvātriṁśa.
11.4.1	The three Atirātras of the first set of three sets of thirty-three nights are for those who desire prosperity. The Atirātra is placed above the three sets of three.
11.4.2	The second set of four sets of five nights is for those who desire Brahmic glory. The Atirätra is placed above and below the two best sets of five nights.
11.4.3	May both the worlds be obtained. In the middle of the six five-day rites, there is the Viśvajit Atiratra.
11.4.4	The three northern ones are repeated.
11.4.5	The thirty-four-day rite, generated by the four-day rite, for those desiring food.
11.4.6	For those desiring cattle, the four northern ones, the thirty-five-day rite, and the five-day rite generated.
11.4.7	The thirty-six nights are the six days. We shall describe the generation of the Satantra. The thirty-seven nights are the one-day generation.
11.4.8	Those who desire the endless glory of the thirty-eight-night sacrifice, the two-night sacrifice, and the thirty-one-night sacrifice, those who desire the forty-night sacrifice, which is generated by three nights, those who desire to attain the supreme Viraj, the forty-night, which is generated from four nights, those who attain the forty-one-night and the subsequent ones up to the fifty-night, which are generated by the fifty-night and the sixty-night, which arise from the sixty-night and the fifty-nine-night.
11.4.9	There are the Vrata-days of one night and four nights.
11.5.1	Those who are going to live for seven, one, fifty-one, and forty-nine nights, live in the first (stage).
11.5.2	The Atiratra (Satra) consists of three Trivṛt days, the Atiratra consists of fifteen days, the Atiraira consists of twelve days, the Prsthya Atiratra consists (of twelve days), the Atiratra consisting of twenty-one days.
11.5.3	The first is the Agniṣṭoma with three stomas, the last is the Sodashin, and the others are the Ukthyas with fifteen stomas. This is what they call the Vidhṛta.
11.5.4	They desire the Yamatirastra and the Yamani, as if their prosperity were doubled.
11.5.5	Two Abhiplvas, the Goayushi and Atiratra, two Abhiplvas, Abhijit and Vishvajit, the Atiratra, one Abhiplva, the Sarvasthoman, the Navasaptadasha, the Atiratras, and the Mahavrata.
11.5.6	Those who desire to be the best among their own people, perform the third of the four Prsthya days nine times.
11.5.7	The first, sixth and seventh days of the nine groups are Agniṣṭoma sacrifices.
11.5.8	The other five are Ukthyas. The Mahavrata sacrifice is the last.
11.5.9	They call the Savitrī verse as Kakubha.
11.6.1	The three northern ones are the Abhiplava sacrifices.
11.6.2	The fourth day of the first group is the Sarvas toma Atiratra.
11.6.3	At the Upasads, on the Garhapatya, having separately cooked clarified butter with guggula and fragrant incense, they anoint themselves with the Nārāśamsa oblations, which are cooked, and with the Āñjīraka.
11.6.4	Those who do not know their own nature and do not fear it should approach this.
11.6.5	They are called Āñjana and Ābhyajana.
11.6.6	These are the same for those desiring prosperity, except for anointing and rubbing.
11.6.7	At the place of all Stotras, there is Mahāvrata.
11.6.8	Those desiring offspring at the end of Indra's stoma.
11.6.9	Having removed all Stotras from these, Mahāvrata is performed in its place.
11.6.10	Those desiring the year attain the supreme.
11.6.11	The Atiratra is the twenty-fourth, the three Abhiplvas are the nine nights, the Abhiplvas are two, the Goāyuṣī is the ten nights, the Vrata is the Atiratra.
11.6.12	They say that they are equal to a year.
11.6.13	Those who desire prosperity perform the Ekashashtirastra, the Navaratras of the Prishthya on both sides of it.
11.6.14	The latter is repeated.
11.6.15	Those who desire a hundred nights, fourteen Abhiplvas, and four days of increase.
11.6.16	Thus are the nights of the Sattra.
11.7.1	Now the Gavayana, for all desires.
11.7.2	Having approached the twenty-four Prayaniya, they perform the four Abhiplvas, the fifth Prishthya, and the five months.
11.7.3	Then they collect the sixth.
11.7.4	The three Abhiplvas, the Prsthya Abhijit, and the Svarasama are the (sastras) of the first two fortnights.
11.7.5	The two fortnights are filled with the first two (sastras).
11.7.6	Thus is the former fortnight.
11.7.7	Now the Ekavimsa (sastra) of the Visuva (equinox) is the (sastra) for the equinox.
11.7.8	It is not for the former fortnight nor for the latter.
11.7.9	The Svarasamas and the six days of the latter fortnight are reversed.
11.7.10	The Svārasāman, the Viśvajit, the Prāstāra, the three Abhiplānas, the Saptama, the Dvirātra, the Ekādasa, the Caturabhiplānas, and the four months of the Prāstara-sāman are performed.
11.7.11	Then they perform the Uttama, the three Abhi-plānas, Goāyuṣī, the Dasātra, and the Vratodayaniyas. The Saptama is completed.
11.7.12	Thus the northern half of the year is performed with a single collection.
11.7.13	Now, the two-fold collection.
11.7.14	In the Uddāyinī of the Vrata, the seventh of the Goāyuṣī is the best.
11.7.15	They should perform the Goāyuşī.
11.7.16	The Goāyuṣi is after the Viśvajit.
11.7.17	The Āyuṣa is before the Dasāhra.
11.7.18	Or, after the Viśvajita, they should perform the seventh Sāvana and the month, and then perform the Goāyusī and the Dasāhra.
11.7.19	Or the days may turn in the reverse order of the Uttarāyaṇa, and the six days may be in the reverse order. Or the days may be in reverse order, and the six-days may be in reverse.
11.7.20	Thus is the Gavāmayana.
11.7.21	All the six-days should be in the reverse.
12.1.1	The course of the Adityas has been explained by the Gavāmayani.
12.1.2	All the Parvas are of three, five and seven days.
12.1.3	The months are of nine days, except the last two of the Pushtiya and Madhyama.
12.1.4	In the place of the Abhijit and Vishvajit, there is the Brihaspati Savana and Indra Stuti.
12.1.5	In the places of the last two Parvas of the seventh month, there is the Trivrit, Dvyuhd, Dasha-ra-tra, Udbhid and Balbhid.
12.1.6	And the three extra days of the best month, having excluded the middle one, are the middle days of the Prstha.
12.1.7	The Dasaraatra is completed.
12.2.1	The path of the Angirases is explained by the path of the Adityas.
12.2.2	The Savana is with the three-fold extra days.
12.2.3	The first five months beginning with the Prstha are of the former half.
12.2.4	The four beginning with the eighth are the Upavasatha days of the northern half.
12.2.5	The three Saptadashi days at the beginning of the last month are also so.
12.2.6	The two Pratipadis would be the first.
12.3.1	The two Ayanas are the Dṛti and Vātavat.
12.3.2	The Prāyaṇīya Atiratra is the first.
12.3.3-7	The month is of three fortnights, the next of fifteen days, the next of seventeen days, the next month of nineteen days, the next twenty-nine days, and the last of thirty-three days. The vow is at the equinox. The months are in reverse order. The northern half of the month is the last. The Udayaniya Atiratra is the last. These are the days of the Atiratras.
12.3.8	If the time is filled up by other prescribed rites, then there is a restriction on the order of rites.
12.4.1	The course of the Kundapaṇis.
12.4.2	They become initiated for a month.
12.4.3	They buy Soma in that month.
12.4.4	They have twelve Upasads.
12.4.5	Having bound the Soma, having placed the Pravargya vessels, having bound them, they offer Agnihotra for a month.
12.4.6	They perform for a month with the Darśa and Pūrṇamāsa sacrifices.
12.4.7	For a month with the Vaiśvadeva sacrifice.
12.4.8	For a a month with the Varuna-prastha sacrifices, for a month with Sāka-medha sacrifices.
12.4.9	For one month with the Śunāsīrīya sacrifice.
12.4.10	On the day when the month is completed, having completed the Iṣṭi, having performed the rites of Agni-praṇayana and Dharma-utsādana, or having performed the Upavasatha rites, they should perform the Prāsunaya rite on the next day.
12.4.11	Now, some perform the Upasads immediately after the Agnihotra rites, because they have seen it so. But those who speak of the Sutyas as being the rites of the months of Agnihotra, etc.,
12.4.12	that is not proper.
12.4.13	For the setting up of the fire is for the sake of the animal sacrifice, and that is the cause of the Sutyā rites.
12.4.14	And there is a defect in the performance of the Atipraṇīta rites, as also in the Darsa-Pūrṇamāsa and Agnihotra.
12.4.15	The Sadas, the Havirdhana, the Agnidhra, the Agnishoma, the Vasatavari, and the Grahas are for the sake of the animals, while some say they are for the sake.
12.4.16	And they are of the same time and quality.
12.4.17	For those whose nature is fixed, there is no difference due to obstruction, as in the case of the Prishthya and Abhipava.
12.4.18	But for those whose nature is not fixed, there is either selection or increase.
12.4.19	But in the case of Subrahmaṇyā, it is absolutely so.
12.4.20	Because there is doubt about the time of the end of the sacrifice.
12.4.21	Some say that it is not so, because the qualities of the Upavasatha are mentioned.
12.4.22	But when the action has started, there is a fault in not continuing till the end.
12.4.23	The Trivṛt, Pañcadaśa, Saptadaśa, Ekavimśa, Trinava, Aṣṭādaśa, Trayastriṃśa, Dvādaśāha, Daśāha, Mahāvrat and Atiratra are the twelve months.
12.4.24	Those who perform this sacrifice are worshipped by all sacrifices.
12.5.1	This is the path of serpents.
12.5.2	The Goāyusī is the stoma of this kind.
12.5.3	In the forward order, for six months; in the reverse order, for six.
12.5.4	The Jyotiṣṭoma is the twelfth Stoma, at the place of the Viṣuva.
12.5.5	Those who desire light should approach it.
12.5.6	Those who want offspring should do it for three years.
12.5.7	The Gavāmayana is the first year, then of the Ādityas, then of the Aṅgiras.
12.5.8	There are four Tapascit sacrifices.
12.5.9	The first year of the Kṣullatapaścitsamvatsara is the one in which the Sadyopasat is performed.
12.5.10	Of that year, the four months of Sutyā are the first, sixth, seventh and last.
12.5.11	The three-year Tapaścitsamyatsara has the month of Sutyā.
12.5.12	The Jyotiṣṭoma, Gautama, Āyus, Abhijit, Viśvajit, and Mahāvrata are the four twenty-fourth sacrifices.
12.5.13	The Tapasci sacrifice is performed for twelve years. It has four Sautiya years, which are similar to the Gautama sacrifice in the same way.
12.5.14	The Maha-tapat-chits are thirty-six years. The twelve years of the Sautiyas are to be counted as the Gavayanas. The twenty-two months of the Savanas may be counted in the same way as the twenty-three months of the former Savanas.
12.5.15	The twelve years of Prajapati.
12.5.16	The three Trivṛt, the three Pañcadaśa, the three Saptadaśa, and the three Ekavimśa, with these Stoma-s, the thirty-six years of the Śākyas.
12.5.17	With each one, nine nine years.
12.5.18	With these Stoma- s, the hundred years of the Sādhyas. With each one, twenty-five twenty-five years.
12.5.19	With these very Stotras, the creators of the universe, each one, performed the thousand-year sacrifice for half-third and half-third years.
12.5.20	Of Agni.
12.5.21	The Agniṣṭoma-Sahasra.
12.5.22	This is called Sahasra-Savya.
12.6.1	Now the Sarasvatī-related ones.
12.6.2	They should be initiated at the western end of the water of Sarasvatī.
12.6.3	Having performed the consecration and the Upasads there itself, and having performed the Pravargya rite, the sacrificers should proceed to the Sarasvati river on its southern bank, at Shamiaprase, at Shamiaprasé, day after day.
12.6.4	The sacrificial post should be made of a pestle and mortar.
12.6.5	The Sadas and the Havirdhana sheds should be circular.
12.6.6	The Agnidhra shed and the Patniśala should be.
12.6.7	Having stood to the south-east of the Āhavanīya fire, the Brahman should strike the stone. Where it falls, that is the place of the Garhapatya fire. Then they should dwell there.
12.6.8	If it falls on uneven ground, they should remove it and dwell on even ground.
12.6.9	If they were to offer a cake to Varuna in water, then they should offer a rice-ball to the son of water. The son of water stands on the feet of water. Some go to the place of worship, others go to the place where the sacrifice is performed. From here onwards, all have the same.
12.6.10	The path of Mitra and Varuna.
12.6.11	Those who are going to the path of Kundapāyin should go back and forth for the first six months.
12.6.12	In every month the cows should be brought in pairs for the purpose of milking. The cows should be brought together for milking.
12.6.13	This is the first view.
12.6.14	Now the second view.
12.6.15	As the Atiratra is performed on the new-moon day, so they should be initiated.
12.6.16	Having established the Atiratra on the new- moon day, they should offer the milk of the cows on that very day in the manner of the Snannayya.
12.6.17	Having gone to the new moon of that fortnight, they should perform the rites of the full moon. Having gone to the full moon of that fortnight (again), they should perform the new moon rites. Having gone to Uttarāyaṇa (i.e., the northern solstice) at the full moon, they should perform rites for longevity at the new moon.
12.6.18	Thus, they should go on revolving.
12.6.19	The path of Indra and Agni.
12.6.20	By means of the Go and Ayushi rites.
12.6.21	The path of Aryaman is with the Trikakrukas.
12.6.22	The Sarasvati Parisarpanas are mentioned in the Gavam Ayana.
12.6.23	The Ekapatini days are the Atiratras.
12.6.24	The fourth day is the Prishthya.
12.6.25	Thus are the paths.
12.6.26	Now the Uthana (days).
12.6.27	The Uthana is reached after crossing the Plaksha and Prasravana.
12.6.28	They went to the river Yamuna for the Avabhrtha rite.
12.6.29	The Iṣṭi for Agni and Kama is performed when rising. It is based on the Vairāja Sāman.
12.6.30	In that (Iṣṭi) they should give a cow and a man as Dakṣiṇā.
12.6.31	This is your rising.
12.6.32	When there are one hundred bulls or a thousand cows,
12.6.33	or when there is a cow as Dakṣiṇa.
12.6.34	If a householder dies, they should perform the Udyattirātra sacrifice. If a householder dies during the year, they should perform it at the end of the year. If a householder becomes a thousandfold in cattle, they should perform this sacrifice.
12.6.35	Thus is the Sasyam.
12.7.1	Now the Savaniya sacrifices.
12.7.2	The Kratupashava sacrifices are performed at the end.
12.7.3	Either the Agnieya or the Vaindra Agnieya.
12.7.4	The Agnieya is performed in the Rathantara-pṛṣṭhas.
12.7.5	The Vaindra is performed in the Bṛhat-pṛṣthhas.
12.7.6	Or of the Ekādaśinī.
12.7.7	At the Prāyaṇīya and Udayaniya Atiratra sacrifices, they should offer all the animals together, or the Indra-Agni animal at the end of the two days.
12.7.8	Every day, one by one, the Ekādaśina animals.
12.7.9	But they should not offer the Ekādaśini animal less.
12.7.10	If the animal sacrifice is performed on the third day, then the Ekādaśina sacrifices of the Dasāhara are completed on the thirtieth day. Then in this Navāhara, they should offer animals in excess.
12.7.11	The Vaisnava Vāmana sacrifice is performed on Ekavimśa.
12.7.12	The Indra-Agni (animal) in the Tri-navatī (Stoma), the Visve Devī (animal) in Tri-triṃśatī, the Dyaus-Pṛthivī (animal) the cow in Catu-viṃśatī (Stomas), its calf the Vāyu (animal) in Catu-catvāriṃśatī; the cow of the Ādityas in Aṣṭa-catvāri-ṃśatī and the cow of Mitra-Varuṇa in the Atiratra without a Vakya.
12.7.13	The animal for Visvakarman in the Mahāvrata, the Agni (animal) in Udayanīya Atiratra.
12.7.14	If they are to complete the Ekādaśini, they should perform the Trayastriṃśa, Abhijit, Viśvajit, Viṣuva, and Dvipaśu sacrifices.
12.8.1	Now the rules for the Sattra:
12.8.2	The rules for the Dikshanā and Pitryā sacrifices and the natural rules for the Devas are discontinued.
12.8.3	They should completely avoid village life.
12.8.4	Going out.
12.8.5	Smiling openly.
12.8.6	sexual intercourse with a woman
12.8.7	speaking to a non-noble person
12.8.8	lying, anger, diving into water
12.8.9	raining
12.8.10	climbing a tree, or a boat
12.8.11	or a chariot
12.8.12	saluting an initiated person
12.8.13	an initiated person at the Upaṣada
12.8.14	both those who are offering
12.8.15	those who have agreed on the same conclusion, the one who starts first
12.8.16	or the one who is more heated
12.8.17	In all equality, according to age.
12.8.18	Dancing, singing and playing.
12.8.19	And other rites not prescribed in the Veda.
12.8.20	They should not be recited outside the altar.
12.8.21	Not those who are not initiated.
12.8.22	One should not go beyond the initiated ones or beyond the initiated ones.
12.8.23	If any of them is afflicted by some calamity, one should recite: "O Agni, you are the protector of vows."
12.8.24	Having narrated it to the others, he should desire to offer.
12.8.25	Having surrounded the Avakīrṇin with the same consecrated substances, they should consecrate him again.
12.8.26	At the time of Āgrayaṇa, they should offer nine Savanīya oblations.
12.8.27	At the consecration and Upavasu rites, they should give the Vrata food.
12.8.28	Their Vratas are:
12.8.29	Milk at the consecration.
12.8.30	After the lapse of time, on the fourth day, one should offer milk.
12.8.31	For three days, for two days, and for one day, one should do the same.
12.8.32	In the Sutyā rites, one should eat the remnants of the oblations.
12.8.33	If one desires to offer dhānā, karambha, parivāpa, and purorāśa, one should offer them in the order of their names.
12.8.34	The milking of the cow for curd is for the purpose of the curd.
12.8.35	They should offer the Soma-cup to the gentle or the one with a lump. So says Saunaka. They should think of it as being equal to a pot.
12.8.36	Some say it is for all gods.
12.8.37	Some say for Brhaspati.
12.8.38	Or all together.
12.8.39	Or else, having placed it again in the Garhapatya fire, they should perform the Upavasatha rite.
12.8.40	Or other wholesome food, except for roots and fruits.
12.8.41	They should be used in this way, along with the animal sacrifice.
12.9.1	We will now explain its division.
12.9.2	The nose and tongue belong to the Prastotar.
12.9.3	The chest and wings belong to the Udgatar.
12.9.4	The throat and neck belong to the Pratihartar.
12.9.5-6	The right hip is of the Hotri, the left of the Brahman. The right knee is of the Maitrāvaruṇa, the left of Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin. The right side is of the Sāman-chanter, the left of Pratiprasthātṛ. The right arm is of the Nestr, the left of Potṛ.
12.9.7	The right thigh of the Acchāvāka, the left of the Agnidh, the right arm of the Ātreya, the left of a member of the assembly. The right and left thighs of the householder.
12.9.8	The right feet of the householder who gives the vow to his wife.
12.9.9	The left feet of the householder. The lips of both are common. The householder alone should offer it.
12.9.10	They take the thigh-bone from the wives; they should give it to the Brahman.
12.9.11	The three Kīkasas of the shoulder-bones and the three Kīkasasa of the skull-bones.
12.9.12	And three Kīkasasas of the skull-bone and half of the skull-opener, of the two bones that are placed together, three each, and half of the Vaikartas, and the Klōma of the skull-remover, that he should give to the Brahman. 
12.9.13	If he is not a brahmin.
12.9.14	The head is for Subrahmaṇyā. The one who recites the Śvasutyā verse gives the skin to her. The Ida is for all the Hotr. These are the sixty-three single-footed ones that carry the sacrifice.
12.9.15	The Brihatī has thirty-six syllables.
12.9.16	The Barhītas are the heavenly worlds. They go to the heavenly worlds, standing on the vital airs.
12.9.17	This is the heavenly animal, which they divide thus. But those who divide it otherwise, it is as if those who commit sin were to kill an animal for Selga. It is like that.
12.9.18	Now that distinction of the animal, which the Vedic Rishi Devabhaga knew, he went away from this world without having taught it. He taught it to the human Girija Babhravya, and then the men of later times learned it.
12.10.1	All should belong to the same gotra. How can there be the recitation of the Apurva Sūktas and the Prayājas?
12.10.2	Even if they belong to different gotras, it is said by Śaunaka because of the pervasiveness of the scriptures.
12.10.3	The special features of the lineage of the householder's gotra.
12.10.4	The success of that is the success of all.
12.10.5	The Pravaras (the most eminent) would have been included in the Avartas, because of their being included in the Avapadharmma.
12.10.6	The sons of Jamadagni are five, namely, Bhargava, Chyanavana, Appnavana, Aurva and Jamadagni.
12.10.7	Then the sons of Jamadagna are Bhargava, Chayanavana, Appanavana.
12.10.8	The sons Arshtisena are Bhargava Chayanavana,Appanavana, Arshtisena, Nupa.
12.10.9	The names of the teachers of the Veda are Bida, Bharadvaja, Chyavana, Apnavana, Aurva, and Vaideti.
12.10.10	The names of the teachers are Yasa, Vahau, Maula, Mauka, Sharaka, Rakshita, Shartisa, Savarni, Shalankayana, Jaimini, and Daivatyayana. The names of the Bharadvaja and Vaideha teachers are Bharadvaja Vaideha.
12.10.11	The names are Shyaita, Bharadva, and Vaineya.
12.10.12	The three best are Mitrayu, Vādhryāśva.
12.10.13	The three best are Bhārgava, Daivodāsa, Vādharyāśva. The three best are Bhārga, Śaunahotra, Gartsamada.
12.11.1	The Angirasas of the Gotra of Gautama are called Asyagautama; the Angirasas of Ucthya are called Ucthyagautama; those of the Rhugaṇa are called Raahūgaṇyagautama, those of the Soma-rājaka are called Sauma-rājya-gautama; those of Vāma-deva are called Vāma-devya-gautama, those of Bṛhaduktha are called Bṛhadu-kt-ha-gautama; the Angi-rasas of the Prishadāśva are called Prishadāśvavai-raupa. Some say that there are eighteen Angirasas, and that the Prishadā-śva is the eighteenth.
12.11.2	The Angirasas, the Barhaspatyas, the Bharadvajas, the Matas, and the Vacas are the Rishis of the Ursa Major constellation.
12.11.3	The Angirasas, Gautamas, and Ushis are the Rishas of the Kshiras constellation.
12.11.4	The Chathyas and the Angirasas are the Rshis of the Dirghas constellation.
12.11.5	The Bharadvajas, Agnis, and Veshis are the Rshas of the Bharadvaja constellation.
12.12.1	Some say that the name of the father of Tarksya is Angirasa, and that of his son is Tarksya. Others say that the name is Angirasa and that of his father is Tarksya.
12.12.2	The Angirasas, the Paurakutsis, and the Trasadasyus are the Angirasas. The Garga Angirasas, Bharadvaja, Garga, and Shaini are the Angirasa Shaini Garga.
12.12.3	The Angirasa Ambarisha, Yauvanashva, and the Angirasa Ambari sha are the Angiras Ambari sha.
12.12.4	Some say that Mandhatar was the son of Angiras, and that Ambarisa was the son of Mandhatar.
12.12.5	The sons of Sankriti, Putimasha, Tandisha, Shambu, Shaivaga, and Gau were the sons of Angiras, Angiras, Gauri, Vitya, and Sankriti.
12.12.6	Shaktya was the son of Shaktya, and the sons of Shaktya were Angiras, Gau, Vitya, Sankriti.
12.13.1	The Angirasas of the Kanvas, the Angirasas of Ajmiida, the Angirasa-Ghoras of the Kanvas-thus do some say. But others say, "The Angirasas of Ghora, the Angiras-Ghoras of Ajmiida."
12.13.2	The Angirasas, the Angiras of Kapin, the Angirases of Urusaya, the Angirasases of Urusaya. Those who are mentioned twice, as the Saungas and the Saisira, the Bharadvajas and the Angas, the Angas and the Saisiris.
12.13.3	Choose one from among them, two from the other, and three from the other.
12.13.4	Two from the other, three from the other,
12.13.5	For there is no one better than four, nor is there any excess of five.
12.13.6	The Angirasas, the Barhaspatyas, the Bharadvajas, the Katyas, and the Kilis.
12.14.1	Here the names of the Atri-s are Ātreya, Arcana, Nasa, Śyavāśva, and Gavīṣṭhira. The names of the Gavīṣṭhiras are Ātreya-Gavīṣṭhira, Paurvātithi.
12.14.2	The names of the Chikitsa, Gālava, Kāla, Bava, Manutanku, and Kuśika are Vaiśvānara, Devārata, and Audala.
12.14.3	The names are Śraumataka, Kamāka, and Kāyana. The names of Vaiśvānāra, Devāśravas, and Devātarasa.
12.14.4-5	The Dhanañjays, the Ajakas, the Rohinas, the Puranas, the Varidhapayanta, the Devratas, the Puranas are mentioned in the text. The Dhanañjayas are mentioned as Vaishvamitra, Madhuchhanda, Dhananjaya. The Ajakas are mentioned as Vaishnava, Madhuchanda, Ajya. The Rohinas are mentioned as Vaishanava, Madhuchandasa, Ashtaka. The Puranas, Varidhapaynanta, Devratas, Puranas are mentioned as Vaishwamanta, Devratas.
12.14.6	The Vaisvānara, the Aghamarṣaṇa, the Vaisvānāraghāmarṣaṇa Kausika, the Renus, the Vaisvānaragāthina Vainava, the Vaisvaṇaragāthina Gāthina Vainavā, the Śālaka, the Śālakṣa, the Lohitākṣa, the Lohitijahnū, the Vaisvamitra, the Śālakanayanakausika.
12.15.2	The Upamaṇḍalas of the Vasīṣṭhas, Bharadvājas, Indrapramādas, Parāśaras, Vasīṣṭha-Śāktī-Parāśarīs, and Kauṇḍinyas are the Upamaṇṭalas of the Vasīsṭhas, Bharadvajas, Indrapamādas, Parasharas, Vasishtha-Shakthi-Parasharīs, and Kaunḍinyas.
12.15.3	The Upamaṇḷalas of the Agastyas, Dārḍachyutas, Dhārmas, and Somavas are the Upamanḍalas of the Agastyas, Dārḍhachāyutas, Dharmās, and Somavas.
12.15.4	The Purohita is the best among kings.
12.15.5	Now if they choose the Sarṣṭi, then it is called Mānava-Vailpa-Paurūravas.
12.15.6	Thus are the sacrifices.
12.15.7	They are without Dakṣiṇā.
12.15.8	At the end of them is the Jyotiṣṭoma with the Prsthya and Śamaniya.
12.15.9	It has a thousand Dakṣiṇās.
12.15.10	Or another known Dakṣiṇas.
12.15.11	It is known that those who have Dakṣiṇãs should perform the Prsthyas and Śamaniyas.
12.15.12	That very cause is the nature of the cause. Salutations to Brahman, salutations to Brahman.
12.15.13	Salutations to the teachers, salutations to the teachers.
12.15.14	Salutations unto Saunaka, salutations unto Saunka.
