1.1.1	We shall explain the (Vedic) sacrifice.
1.1.2-3	It appeṛtains to the three orders: the brāhmaṇa, the kṣatriya and the vaiśya.
1.1.4	What is prescribed without specification (in this book), is applicable to all.
1.1.5	When a specification is given, it differs.
1.1.6-7	During acts which refer to the Gods, the performer wears his upper garment over his left shoulder, over his right shoulder during acts which refer to the Fathers.
1.1.8-9	From the sipping of water onwards, he should not free (lit. separate) himself from the rite in which he is engaged; nor go away in between.
1.1.10-11	So is the specification about the mode of turning round (?).
1.1.12	It (viz. the sacrifice and the place of its performance) is approached from the left (or from the north side).
1.1.13-14	Acts peṛtaining to the Gods have the east as the norm, and those peṛtaining to the Fathers have the south as the norm.
1.1.15	The rule is that the Ṛgvedin should be seated. When the hotṛ and his assistants recite from the Ṛgveda, he should be seated.
1.1.16	Only if it is expressly stated, he should stand.
1.1.17	Moreover the hotṛ should perform what is not assigned (in this book) (to any other) assistant of his.
1.1.18	In groups of three or more than three verses, the first and last must be recited thrice; except the muttering.
1.1.19-20	Moreover (in the recitation of such verses), at the place of the last syllable immediately after its first consonant, the lengthened sound o of three moras, either pure (i.e. unmodified, not nasalized), or ending in the sound m (should be inserted).
1.1.21	This is called the prāṇava (the ‘humming’).
1.1.22	At the pause (the prāṇava) ending in m (is inserted) in all groups of verses, including the puronuvakya (invīting-verses).
1.1.23	Connecting by means of this (pure prāṇava) the first half-verse or quarter-verse of the following verse he makes a pause. This (mode of reciting) is called saṃtata (‘connected’).
1.1.24	This is the practice for all groups of verses, which are prescribed in connection with an act.
1.1.25	Even in acts which are far distant from each other he (the hotṛ) awaits, for the sake of connecting, between the first verse and the concluding verse with the half-verse (until the recitation is finished),
1.1.26	and the verses are resolved into (lit. follow the rule of) half-verses,
1.1.27	except when otherwise stated.
1.1.28	The verses of the Ṛgveda are recited in a loud voice.
1.1.29	When it is expressly stated they are whispered.
1.1.30-31	For the words the rule prevails that they have the same pitch and are mono-tonic.
1.1.32-35	The prāṇava is uttered on a higher pitch of the voice than the puronuvakya, the yājya on a higher pitch of voice than the prāṇava, the vaṣaṭ call is uttered either on a higher pitch than the yājya or on the same.
1.1.36	The prāṇava, the formula ye yajāmahe, the vaṣaṭ call, the sampraiṣas, the praiṣas are uttered loudly at the whispered offerings.
1.1.37	The name of the deity is also whispered at the places of their insertion.
1.1.38-39	The words bhūḥ, bhuvaḥ are to be muttered before (the yājya); and the (following) four ye yajāmahe, vausad, ojah sahah saha ojah, svaḥ at the end of all yājyas.
1.1.40	In the anuyājas, on the contrary, the formula ye yajāmahe is not found.
1.1.41	Neither at the second vaṣaṭ call (anuvaṣaṭkāra).
1.1.42-43	The vaṣaṭ call is connected with the yājya verse, of which the last syllable is either lengthened or not lengthened.
1.1.44	This (lengthening) is not applied at a whispered offering.
1.2.1	He should lengthen the syllable ā of the formula used for invīting the deity.
1.2.2	The formula ye yajāmahe is lengthened in the initial (syllable), before the yājyas.
1.2.3	Of four moras is the lengthening at the (Vedic) sacrifice.
1.2.4-5	Of diphthongs the two palatals (e,ai) become (in pluti) i3i, the two labials (o, au) become ā3u.
1.2.6	The other vowels remain unchanged,
1.2.7	and e and o, if they are pragṛhya.
1.2.8	at the end of a yājya verse.
1.2.9	The burring (riphita) visaṛga becomes r.
1.2.10	The non-burring visaṛga is dropped.
1.2.11	The sound m becomes anusvāra.
1.2.12	The other consonants (or syllables?) remain unchanged.
1.2.13-14	The sound au in the vaṣaṭ call and a following ṣ (in the same word) are of four moras;
1.2.15	or both the sounds remain unchanged.
1.2.16	or only the first (remains unchanged).
1.2.17	According to Jātūkarṇya, (only) the sound a remains unchanged:
1.2.18	he should utter the vaṣaṭ call in accordance with bṛhat and rathantara, long in the beginning, short in the end.
1.2.19	After the formula ye yajāmahe the deity should be indicated in (the rite) which is accompanied by a puronuvakya.
1.2.20	But it is not so in a (rite) to which belongs a praisa.
1.2.21	When the term ‘he pours out’ (juhoti) is used, melted and clarified butter (ghee) is to be understood (as the object).
1.2.22-23	The word svaḥa (is to be added) at the end of mantras used for offering (i.e. pouring out ghee) and of those used for putting the fuel sticks in the fire.
1.2.24	The difference of a mantra (indicates) the difference of an act.
1.2.25	The word iti stands at the end of a mantra (i.e. indicates that a mantra has been prescribed).
1.2.26	A (sacrificial) act should be made to fall in with the close of a mantra.
1.2.27-28	He (the hotṛ or one of his assistants) speaks the puronuvakya and the yājya verses after he has been summoned (to do so).
1.2.29	These (prescriptions) are applicable to all sacrifices.
1.3.1	After having fasted (the sacrificer) performs the sacrifice at full moon.
1.3.2	In the same way the sacrifice at new moon.
1.3.3-4	There are two days of full moon and two days of new moon.
1.3.5	The two days of full moon are: (1) the day on which the moon appears full about the setting of the sun, and (2) the day on which (it appears full) after the setting of the sun.
1.3.6	The two days of new moon are: (1) the day on which they remark “tomorrow it will not be visible”, and (2) the day on which it is not visible.
1.3.7	(The sacrificer) may perform the sacrifice on any of these days, according to his choice.
1.3.8-9	The difference (of the rites at the two sacrifices) is indicated by specific injunctions “this is at full moon, this is at new moon”, or by words connected therewith.
1.3.10	The rest is the same (for both).
1.3.11	The cake destined for Agni is common to both.
1.3.12-13	The whispered offering (upaṃśuyaja) (at both occasions) is destined for Agni-Soma or for Viṣṇu.
1.3.14-17	At the sacrifice of full moon the second cake is destined for Agni-Soma and at the sacrifice of new moon for Indra-Agni, in case he does not perform the sāṃnāyya; but if he does perform the sāṃnāyya it is destined for Indra or Mahendra.
1.3.18	But he who does not perform (at new moon) the sāṃnāyya destines the whispered offering for Viṣṇu.
1.4.1	The hotṛ, being called upon (by the adhvaryu), comes between the utkara and pranita water and treads upon the grass (of the vedi) with his right fore-foot.
1.4.2	His heel reaches the back side up to the end of the vedi.
1.4.3	He stands there with his feet asunder.
1.4.4-5	When he has been summoned (by the adhvaryu) to recite the verses for the kindling of the fire he mutters (the formulas): “Unto whom shall I go? “Unto him do I go. “What is thy sheltering metre, O Prajāpati? “Unto that I resort. “What I know of thee, O Viṣṇu, that shall I do for thee. “Impelled by divine Savitṛ shall I serve as priest. “Obeisance to Agni the seer, to Vāyu the hearer, to Āditya who looks from on high. “Today shall I speak words that gladden the Gods, that men are eager to hear, that bring svadhā to the Fathers, that are the support of the entire creation. “I, the prasastr, approach Prajāpati with myself, my progeny, my cattle. “May fearlessness be mine. “I shall proclaim what belongs to Prajāpati. “Speech shall be the priest. “To Speech do I come. “Our world! The other worlds!! The highest heaven!!!"
1.4.6	Then he pronounces thrice the syllable ‘him’.
1.4.7-13	With this ‘him’ he connects, reciting with intermediate voice, (the first kindling verse): (ll pra vo vājah (RV. 111.27.0). Then follow the two triṣṭichs beginning with agna a yahi vitaye and ilenyah (RV. VI. 16.10-12,111.27.13-15). Then the single verse (8) agnim dutam vrnimahe (RV. 1.12.1). Another one is (9) śamīdhyamano adhvare (RV. III.27.4). At the sāptadasya rite (lit. the rite in which 17 kindling verses are used), however, three verses (RV. III.27.4-6) are used. This is the case except at those sacrifices of full and new moon which contain an ayana (?). And lastly the two verses (10,11) śamīddho agna ahuta (RV.V.28. 6,6).
1.4.14	With the prāṇava (of the last verse) he connects (the formula): “O Agni, thou art great, thou who belongest to Brahman, to Bharata”.
1.4.15-18	Thereupon he utters the names of three ṛṣi-ancestors of the sacrificer from the remote and downwards; six for one who belongs to two ṛṣi-families; for a non-brāhmaṇa he takes the descent of his purohita; or he uses for all: “Thou who belongest to Manu”.
1.4.19	And reciting immediately afterwards (the following formula) he makes a pause: “Thou, kindled by Gods, kindled by Manu, lauded by seers, “Gladdened by brāhmaṇas, extolled by the wise, sharpened by Brahman, “Thou, who bears the butter to the Gods”.
1.4.20	He again makes a pause after the formula: “The leader of holy rites, the carrier of (Soma) sacrifices, “The unsurpassed hotṛ, the swift bearer of oblation.
1.4.21	“(Thou art) the mouth-vessel, the ladle of the Gods, “Thou, the cup from which the divine ones drink. “As felly the spokes, O Agni, so dost thou encompass the Gods.” After this formula he again makes a pause.
1.4.22	He now summons the deities, making a pause after each summons.
1.5.1	“Bring hither the Gods for the sacrificer.” This is the close of the nigada.
1.5.2	“Bring Agni hither, O Agni. “Bring Soma hither.” These are (the summons) for two butter-portions.
1.5.3	“Bring Agni hither. “Bring Agni-Soma or (if demanded by the ritual) Viṣṇu hither. “Bring Agni-Soma hither. “Bring Indra-Agni hither. “Bring Indra or (if demanded by the ritual) Mahendra hither.
1.5.4	“Bring hither the ghee-drinking Gods.
1.5.5	“Bring Agni hither for the function of hotṛ.
1.5.6	“Thine own greatness bring hither.
1.5.7-9	“Bring hither, O Jātavedas, and offer a good offering”. In this manner having summoned (the deities) he sits down with his knees raised and mutters, after having touched the earth with the span of his right hand: “May I not be separated from this firm standing, O Mother Earth. “Hurt me not, scoṚch me not. “I shall think what is sweet, wish what is sweet, engender what is sweet. “I shall today utter words sweet to Gods, dear to men. “Here do I by means of the fifteen-fold thunderbolt drive away my spiteful rival.” (When, however, seventeen kindling verses are ordained, he uses the words:) seventeen-fold thunderbolt.
1.6.1-2	When he hears (from the adhvaryu) the word ‘human’ he being chosen (as the hotṛ) mutters: “O divine Savitṛ, here they have chosen thee together with Father Vaiśvānara. “O Indra, Pūṣan, Bṛhaspati, speak forth and offer your offerings. “May we share the bounty of the Vasus, and the favours of the Rudras, “And be beloved of the Ādityas, “Unobstructed to attain to boundless freedom. “What at the choosing of hotṛ may escape the crooked eye this day, “That may Agni bring back, Jātavedas, the nimble one".
1.6.3	Thereupon he stands up and mutters after having caught from behind with the span of his right hand the right shoulder of the adhvaryu, as well as the right shoulder of the agnīdhra with the span of his left hand: “At the election of the hotṛ we lay hold of Indra as our purohita. “Through him the Gods ascended the highest heaven. “The Aṅgirasas the sky. “The sixty and ninety ties, O ye two adhvaryus, are loosened between Heaven and Earth. “They fetter the simple man. “I, the wise, pass over them. “These both, Heaven and Earth, are pleasant to me.
1.6.4	He relinquishes his hold (on them, with the words): “May the six wide ones protect me from anguish; Heaven and Earth, Day and Night, Waters and Herbs”.
1.6.5	Then he turns along his right arm (as axle, with the formulas): “I, make the turn of Indra, I follow the turn of Āditya”.
1.6.6	Now he casts away to the south-west a dry blade of grass which he has taken from the (grass-)seat of the hotṛ and has broken on both sides, (with the formula): “Cast away is he, who wards off abundance, “Cast away is he, who hates me, “And whom I hate”.
1.6.7-9	Having touched water he lays down a green blade of grass (on his seat) with the tip directed to the north and sits down (with the formula): “Here do I sit down on the seat of the Wealth-bestower”.
1.6.10-11	Having squatted with the right (knee) raised high and having stretched out his hands to the east he mutters, while fixing his looks on the Āhāvaniya and Gārhapatya fires: “Obeisance to Heaven and Earth, the primaeval hotṛs. “Ye All-makers, ye are the guardians of my life. “Protect my life. Do not hurt me. Do not scoṚch me”.
1.6.12	Having moved slightly northwards he says: “This is your space.”
1.6.13	He then mutters (the three verses): “All ye Gods, instruct me, etc.
1.6.14	After the words “May Agni as hotṛ accept the hotṛ-ship of Agni. May the deity be the right succour to thee, O sacrificer” he makes a pause.
1.6.15	Then he whispers: “Thou who hast chosen Agni for thy hotṛ”.
1.6.16	Whereupon he uṛges (the adhvaryus) to take up the two offering-spoons saying: “Take up, O adhvaryu, the spoon which is full of butter, which is devoted to the Gods, which is possessed of all boons. Let us praise the Gods, who are worthy of praise. Let us adore the adorable. Let us worship those who are worthy of worship”. Then follow the five fore-offerings.
1.7.1	The first (has as yājya the formula): “The kindling-sticks, may the kindling-sticks, O Agni, accept the ghee offering”.
1.7.2	The second: “May Tanūnapāt, O Agni, accept the ghee offering”.
1.7.3	For descendants of Vasiṣṭha and Śunaka, Atri and Vadhryaśva, Kaṇva and Saṃkṛti, and for kṣatriyas and those who are desirous of obtaining progeny, the second is: “May Nārāśaṃsa, O Agni, accept the ghee offering”.
1.7.4	The third: “May the Iḍs, O Agni, accept the ghee offering”.
1.7.5	The fourth: “May the Barhis, O Agni, accept the ghee offering”.
1.7.6	“svadhām agnim, svadhām somam, sudham agnim, sudham agnisomau or svadhām visnum, svadhām agnisomau, svadhām indragni, svadhām indram or svadhām mahendram, svadhām deva ājyapah — May they, O Agni, graciously accept the ghee offering”.
1.8.1	The two butter-portions (ājyabhagau) at the sacrifice of full moon, mention the slaying of foes, etc.: “May Agni slay the foes”, “Thou, O Soma, art the Mighty Lord, etc.” (RV. VI.16.34, I.91.5).
1.8.2	At the sacrifice of new moon they speak of growing: “Agni has grown by his ancient, etc.”, “O Soma, we make thee grow by our praises, etc.”
1.8.3	The two offering-formulas (yājya) are: “May Agni graciously accept the ghee offering”.
1.8.4-5	The invīting-verse (puronuvakya) for the cake destined for Agni is: "Agni, the head, etc.”, and its offering-verse is: "Thou hast become the leader of the sacrifice, etc.”.
1.8.6-7	The invīting-verse for the whispered offering (destined for Agni-Soma) is: "Hear, ye Agni and Soma, my call, etc.” And its offering-formula: “May Agni and Soma graciously accept the ghee offering”.
1.8.8-9	For the whispered offering to Viṣṇu: "Here did Viṣṇu stride out, etc.”. "I utter to thee the vaṣaṭ-call, etc.”. Or the offering-formula is: “(May Viṣṇu) graciously accept the ghee offering”.
1.8.10	(The invīting- and offering-verses) for the cake destined for Agni-Soma are: “Agni and Soma, accept our prayers, etc.”, "Ye placed these lights etc.”.
1.8.11	(The invīting-and offering-verses) for the cake destined for Indra-Agni are: "Indra and Agni, come with help, etc.”, "Ye surpass men in battle-call, etc.”.
1.8.12	(The invīting- and offering-verses) for the sāṃnāyya are: "Bring hither, O Indra, enduring wealth, etc.”, and “Thou dost endure the foes”.
1.8.13	(The invīting- and offering-verses) for the cake destined for Mahendra are: "Great is Indra, who by his might”, “Great is Indra, full of men, etc.”.
1.8.14	(The invīting- and offering-verses) "All prayers have caused Indra wax, etc.”, "Rejoice with thy bay horses, etc.” are destined for a cake to Indra, if he is not substituted (by Mahendra).
1.9.1	The invīting-verse for Agni Sviṣṭakṛt is: “Delight the Gods, etc.”
1.9.2	The offering-formula is: “Agni has worshipped the abodes dear to Agni. He has worshipped the abodes dear to Soma. He has worshipped the abodes dear to Agni. He has worshipped the abodes dear to Agni-Soma or to Viṣṇu. He has worshipped the abodes dear to Agni-Soma. He has worshipped the abodes dear to Indra-Agni. He has worshipped the abodes dear to Indra or to Mahendra. He has worshipped the abodes dear to the butter-drinking Gods. Let him worship the abodes dear to Agni, the hotṛ. Let him worship his own greatness. May he make by sacrifice the food worthy of sacrifice. May he, Jātavedas, graciously accept through sacrifices the offering. That this day, O Agni, thou comest to men, etc.”
1.9.3	After uttering vaṣaṭ he touches water.
1.10.1	(The adhvaryu) smears (a small quantity of the iḍā portion) on the index finger of the right hand (of the hotṛ), when he is going to call the iḍā; (he smears it) on the upper and middle joints (of the index finger).
1.10.2	With (the formula) “Of thee that has been offered by the Lord of Speech I eat for sap, for out-breathing” he (the hotṛ) smears his lower lip with the first iḍā portion (on the upper joint of the index finger). With (the formula) “Of thee that has been offered by the Lord of Mind I eat for strength, for up-breathing” (he smears) his upper lip with the second iḍā portion.
1.10.3	Then he touches water.
1.10.4-7	Keeping in his right hand the uttareḍā, and himself taking a fifth part with his fingers, which are neither outstretched nor made into a fist, (he calls the iḍā, all the while) holding it on a level with his mouth or his heart.
1.11.1	Before the calling of the iḍā he mutters the following formulas: “Hither do I call the bṛhat together with the sky, the sun, the eye. May the bṛhat together with the sky, the sun, the eye call me. Hither do I call the vāmadevya together with the intermediate region, the wind, the breath. May the vāmadevya together with the intermediate region, the wind, the breath call me. Hither do I call the immovable world. May the immovable world call me. Hither do I call the moving world. May the moving world call me. Called hither is the friend, the food. May the friend, the food call me. Called hither are the seven hotṛas. May the seven hotṛas call me. Called hither are the cows together with the āśir milk. May the cows together with the āśir milk call me. Called hither is the milch-cow together with the bull. May the milch-cow together with the bull call me. Called hither is the word together with the breath. May the word together with the breath call me. Called hither is the word together with the mind. May the word together with the mind call me. Called hither is the iḍā, the rain. May the iḍā, the rain call me. Called hither is the iḍā, the conqueror. May the iḍā, the conqueror call me. Oh, called hither art thou. O iḍā, accept me graciously.”
1.12.1	Then he calls iḍā: "Iḍā is called, called is iḍā. May iḍā call us. Called is iḍā who belongs to Manu, who is butter-pathed, who belongs to Mitra and Varuṇa. Brahman, fashioned by the Gods, is called. The divine adhvaryus are called, called are the human ones, that they may promote the sacrifice, that they may swell the Lord of Sacrifice. Called are Heaven and Earth, the primaeval, the law-abiding, the divine, whose sons are Gods. Called is the sacrificer unto the subsequent God-worship, called unto a more abundant preparation of sacrificial gifts. May the Gods here accept the offering graciously. To this he is called.”
1.12.2	Having called (iḍā) he smells it.
1.12.3-4	Between (the formulas of calling) iḍā, he inhales four times, or for the fourth time at the end.
1.12.5	He then eats the uttareḍā with the formulas: “Thou art iḍā, thou art delight, the dispenser of delight. Bestow upon us many children and happiness. O welcome one, may I find your favour; may I, being invited, enjoy thy invitation. I eat thee for the splendour of my face, for the fragrance of my mouth.”
1.12.6-7	After they (the four priests), with the sacrificer as the fifth, have eaten the other (iḍā), they restrain their speech till the cleansing.
1.12.8	They cleanse themselves inside the vedi over a vessel on which (two) grass-strainers have been deposited, having recited the triṣṭich: “Here, O Waters, carry ye off, etc.”
1.12.9	When the brahman's portion has been brought to him, they bring the anvāhārya (a mess of boiled rice).
1.12.10	This is the occasion when in all the iṣṭis the sacrificial fee is given.
1.12.11	In the case of iṣṭis where the fee is expressly prescribed, there is no anvāhārya-mess.
1.12.12	After he (the hotṛ) has muttered the verse—“This, O Agni, is thy kindler. Mayest thou grow and increase by it. And may we also grow and increase”—over the kindling-stick the three after-offerings are performed.
1.13.1-4	The three offering verses for the after-offerings are: (1) “The divine barhis may accept (the offering) of abundant obtainment, of abundant gift”. (2) “The divine Nārāśaṃsa may accept (the offering) of abundant obtainment, of abundant gift”. (3) “The divine Agni Sviṣṭakṛt, bestowing treasures, the charming kavi, the true-thinking, worshiping hotṛ, who worships better than any hotṛ, “O Agni, the Gods that thou hast worshipped and gladdened and who have rejoiced under thy hotṛ-ship” —here he makes a pause (and then continues) “Make thou this hotṛ-ship, which is bountiful, which reaches to the Gods in Heaven, elevate this sacrifice among the Gods. “And Agni Sviṣṭakṛt, (as) thou hast been (our) hotṛ, accept (the offering) of abundant obtainment, of abundant gift at the namovāka”.
1.14.1-2	When he (the hotṛ) has been addressed (by the adhvaryu with words ending with) “Recite the songs” (the hotṛ recites the sūktavāka): “Here a lucky act has been accomplished, O Heaven and Earth. We have accomplished successfully a song of praise, and the utterance of worship. May we have success with the utterance of good words. Agni, thou art the voice of the blessing” —(Here) he makes a pause.
1.14.3	(He continues): “Through the listening of Heaven and Earth. At this sacrifice may Heaven and Earth be thy guardians, O sacrificer” —(Here) he makes a pause.
1.14.4	(He continues): “They who bring solace to the household, who distribute widely, fearless, inscrutable (?), possessing wide pastures, bestowing fearlessness” —(Here) he makes a pause.
1.14.5	(He continues): “The rain-skied, the water-pouring, the benevolent, giving pleasure, full of strength, full of milk, easily approachable, of good abode” — with their knowledge” —(Here) he makes a pause.
1.14.6	(He continues): “Agni has graciously accepted the oblation. He has grown in strength. He has acquired greater power”.
1.14.7	“Soma has graciously accepted the oblation. He has grown in strength. He has acquired greater power”.
1.14.8	“Agni has graciously accepted the oblation. He has grown in strength. He has acquired greater power”.
1.14.9	“Agni and Soma have graciously accepted the oblation. They have grown in strength. They have acquired greater power”.
1.14.10	Or (alternately) “Viṣṇu has graciously accepted the oblation. He has grown in strength. He has acquired greater power”.
1.14.11	“Agni and Soma have graciously accepted the oblation. They have grown in strength. They have acquired greater power”.
1.14.12	“Indra and Agni have graciously accepted the oblation. They have grown in strength. They have acquired greater power”.
1.14.13	“Indra has graciously accepted the oblation. He has grown in strength. He has acquired greater power”.
1.14.14	“The butter-drinking Gods have graciously accepted the butter-offering. They have grown in strength. They have acquired greater power”.
1.14.15	“Agni by virtue of his hotṛ-ship has graciously accepted the oblation. He has grown in strength. He has acquired greater power”.
1.14.16-19	(He finishes the sūktavāka): “At this prospering sacrifice which goes to the Gods prays the sacrificer”. Here he inserts the two names of the yajamāna, and “prays for future worship of the Gods, for more abundant offering, for long life, for abundant progeny, for a heavenly abode. What he prays for through this sacrifice, may he obtain that, may that prosper, may the Gods grant him that. May the God Agni solicit that for the Gods, and we men from Agni. What has been offered and accepted, and also the Heaven and Earth, may guard him from anguish. Hither be the course of the boon, and this homage (shall be offered) to the Gods”.
1.14.20	Having placed on the strew (of the vedi) his folded hands (anjali) (pointing eastwards), he mutters “For homage”.
1.14.21	When he has been addressed (by the adhvaryu) with (the words) “Say the all-hail and the blessing” he speaks (the verse): “We long for that all-hail and blessing”. After that he touches water.
1.14.22-24	Beginning with the formula by which the hotṛ uṛges the adhvaryu to take up the sacrificial ladles up to the end of the sacrifice of butter-portions, (all is spoken by the hotṛ) in a low tone, afterwards in the intermediate tone, from the after-offerings on in a loud tone.
1.15.1	In the Gārhapatya they perform the patnīsaṃyājas in a low voice (inaudibly).
1.15.2	He worships Soma, Tvaṣṭṛ, the Wives of the Gods and Agni Gṛhapati.
1.15.3	For one (a sacrificer) who is desirous of progeny they worship Rākā and Sinīvalī before Agni Gṛhapati.
1.15.4	(The opening words of the invīting- and offering-verses are:) “Let them grow. Let the drinks gather in thee”. (For Soma). “Hither I call Tvaṣṭṛ. That procreant strength for us”. (For Tvaṣṭṛ). “May the Wives of the Gods help us. And may the Women accept us”. (For the Wives of the Gods). “Baka do I call. What are thy fair thoughts, O Baka”. (For Rākā). “O Sinīvalī. She with well-shaped arms”. (For Sinīvalī). “Agni the hotṛ, the Lord of the House. We have made thee, O Agni". (For Agni Gṛhapati).
1.15.5	Having muttered (the verse) “Even as ye did set free the buffalo-cow, O Vasus” he calls the iḍā.
1.15.6	Or (as contingency arises) he changes (the words of the nigada “Called is this sacrificer” of 1.12.1) into “Called is this consort of the sacrificer”.
1.15.7-8	The patnīsaṃyājas end with the (ceremony of) paṛtaking of the iḍā, or with the muttering of the śaṃyu formula.
1.15.9	With the verse “I loosen thee, etc.” he first unties the veda-bunch and then the cord (with which the mistress is girdled).
1.15.10	He lays the cord and the united veda-bunch into the joined hands of the mistress.
1.15.11-12	Whilst sprinkling water around (upon?) the veda-bunch and the cord (still in the hands of the mistress) he mutters (the formulas): “For desire thee. Thou art a bunch. Whereby thou, O bunch, hast become a veda for the Gods, thereby be thou a bunch for us. Vela art thou. Thou art gain. May I gain. Thou art the act. Thou art the deed. May I be able to act. Thou art the winning. Thou art the winner. May I win”.
1.15.13	Over the veda he causes the mistress to recite (the verse): “May the veda-bunch bestow increase in wealth, that be rich in ghee, rich in houses, a thousand-fold, and strong”.
1.15.14	She seizes some grass-blades (of the veda) and brings them between her thighs.
1.15.15	With (the verse) “Stretching the thread, etc.” he strews (some of the grass-blades of the veda) to the north of the Gārhapatya up to the strew (of the vedi).
1.15.16	With (the formula)— “Abundance thou art, completely filling. Fill me with progeny and cattle” — he addresses the rest of the veda.
1.15.17	Standing before the Āhāvaniya he addresses it with (the two verses) “Grow through this holy text, O Agni. Jātavedas has offered this sacrifice, the near one, having taken his seat before us, winning the gain, loosen well (this rite). Bestow riches upon us, O Jātavedas”.
1.15.18	After he has touched water he (the hotṛ) is dischaṛged.
1.16.1	The sacrifices of full- and new-moon, which have been explained (in the preceding sections), are the model for the unbloody (iṣṭis) and animal sacrifices (paśubandhas).
1.16.2	The designation “model” serves to denote “the agreeing with”, “the following after”.
1.16.3	The sacrifice which is performed between the butter-portions and the offering to Agni Sviṣṭakṛt is called “the insertion” (āvāpa). This is the chief act (in every sacrifice).
1.16.4	All the other acts are its auxiliary parts.
1.16.5	When the time of (performance of) these is uninterrupted, they help in the achievement of the object. (?)
1.16.6	This is designated “tantra” (regular and unchangeable order of rites ?).
1.16.7	The mantra which is recited together with names of different deities is used for making offerings. (?)
1.16.8	In case of change of deity, these invīting- and offering-verses are employed in which these deities are mentioned. (?)
1.16.9	And (at those places) in the prose recitations (where in the model, the prakṛti, the deity is inserted) this deity (which occurs in the change) is made manifest. (?)
1.16.10	At the summons (āvāhana I.5), the last fore-offering (prayāja 1.7.6), the formula addressed to Agni Sviṣṭakṛt (1.9.2) and the sūktavāka (1.14.21 ff.) the deities, to whom worship is offered, are inserted. Therefore (these are called) “the places of insertion” (nigama).
1.16.11	Proceeding in due order we shall explain (the other) modifications.
1.16.12	When it is said “this or that rite is the modification of the full-moon sacrifice” the two verses (to accompany the two butter-portions) contain mention of foe-slaying.
1.16.13	When it is said “this or that rite is a modification of the new-moon sacrifice”, the two verses (for the same occasion as the preceding sūtra) contain the word “growing”.
1.16.14-16	If no such indication is given, they are optional, determined either by the deity or by the havis.
1.16.17	In case of a combination (of the deity and the havis) the determining factor is havis.
1.16.18	In case of doubt the determinant is the common practice.
1.16.19-20	Likewise the number of the enkindling-verses in iṣṭis and paśubandhas is (always) seventeen, except where otherwise prescribed.
1.16.21	In the iṣṭis or paśubandhas, which are undeṛtaken to attain a particular aim, the havis is offered in whispers.
1.16.22	This we shall explain in due course.
1.17.1	In treating of the directions for (the offering of) sacrificial substances the beginning words of the invīting- and offering-verses are mentioned, if there is no other restriction.
1.17.2	If there are indicated two or more (verses), (then they are to be adhibited) in the order of the direction,
1.17.3	according to the deity,
1.17.4	according to the characteriṣṭic.
1.17.5	When the deities are provided with their eponymics and he does not find (the yājyanuvakyas that are to be adhibited), he should be satisfied by the daivata in its characteriṣṭic mark.
1.17.6	When they are provided with their eponymics, they (the deities) are revealed (in the nigamas).
1.17.7	And every time for every deity the sacrificial substance is prescribed, the invīting- and offering-verses indicated at first, should be adhibited everywhere.
1.17.8	It is not possible to enumerate all the iṣṭis separately.
1.17.9	In these, when no invīting- and offering-verses are prescribed, he should seek a gāyatrī (as the invīting-verse) and a triṣṭubh (as an offering-verse) addressed to the deity (to which the kāmyeṣṭi is addressed),
1.17.10	or (any other verses) except those in the uṣṇih and bṛhati metres.
1.17.11-12	But the offering-verse should be longer than the invīting-verse, or both should be of equal length.
1.17.13-15	If he does not find them, he may take verses in which one of the following characteriṣṭics occur: ‘I call’, ‘We call’, ‘Hear thou’, ‘Come hither thou’, ‘Take thy seat on this strew’, or the name of the deity — these are the characteriṣṭics of the invīting-verses. ‘Eat thou’, ‘Drink’, ‘Delight’, ‘Rejoice’, ‘Pour in for thyself’, ‘Accept’, ‘forth’, and the name of the deity — these are the characteriṣṭics of the offering-verses.
1.17.16-17	The invīting-verse has the characteriṣṭic mark (the name of the deity) in the fore-part, the offering-verse in the last part.
1.17.18-19	If he cannot find verses addressed to that deity (for which the sacrifice is destined), he should use the two namra (verses) as the invīting- and offering-verses: “Hear thou this my call, now that we call thee with our prayer. Be seated on this our strew”. “Approach in due order the strewn barhis. Come today here to us who implore (thee). With unhostile mind delight in this (offering). Accept our oblation which has been presented and offered”. He should adapt these verses in case the sacrifice is intended for two or more deities.
1.17.20	Or (in the case of two or more deities) he may alter the original verses (substituting the singular by the dual or the plural).
2.1.1-5	In spring the establishing of the sacred fires for a brāhmaṇa takes place, in summer for a kṣatriya, in the rainy season or the autumn for a vaiśya. The cold season is for all castes.
2.1.6	For one who is going to perform a sacrifice of Soma there is the freedom of choice as to the season.
2.1.7	He should establish them on a day of full-moon or of the new-moon,
2.1.8	or in the bright half of the month under an auspicious lunar mansion (nakṣatra).
2.1.9	And the three nakṣatras from Kṛttikā on (Kṛttikā, Rohiṇī, Mṛgāśirsa), or from Phālgunī on (Phālgunī, Hasta, Citrā).
2.2.1	Now the time for the unbloody sacrifices (which are connected with the establishment of the sacred fires).
2.2.2	(They should take place) on the day itself (i.e. the day of establishment), after a period of 12 days, after a month, after a season ( = 2 months), or after a year.
2.2.3	(There is) the sacrifice to Agni Pavamana.
2.2.4	It is a modification of the sacrifice on the day of full-moon.
2.2.5	(The invīting- and offering-verses are): “Agni clean our lives”, and “Agni clean thou”.
2.2.6	The verses “Him constantly they praise”, and “Might we be those who to Agni” and the verses for the sacrifice to Agni Sviṣṭakṛt.
2.2.7	The second sacrifice is intended for Agni Pāvaka and Agni Śuci.
2.2.8	(This rite is) a modification of the sacrifice on the day of new-moon.
2.2.9-10	(The invīting- and offering-verses are): (for Agni Pāvaka) “Bring hither, O Agni Pāvaka” and “Convey hither, O Agni Pāvaka”, (and for Agni Śuci:) “Agni of most bright (śuci) course” and “O Agni, thy bright”.
2.2.11	The verses “Agni on Agni they call with callings”, “Agni is enkindled by Agni”, are for the sacrifice to Agni Sviṣṭakṛt.
2.2.12	The third (iṣṭi) is for Aditi.
2.2.13	(The verses for) the butter-portions (of this iṣṭi) which contain (a form of the verb) “to be” are: “Thou Agni art”, and “Those that are, O Soma, your wonderful”.
2.2.14	(The invīting- and offering-verses for the third iṣṭi are): “I call for thee, O mighty Aditi”, and “We would call to our aid the great mother of them of good course, the spouse of righteousness, her of great might, the not-ageing, wide-spreading, well-sheltering, well-conducting Aditi”.
2.2.15	(The invīting- and offering-verses) for the sacrifice to Agni Sviṣṭakṛt (of this third iṣṭi to Aditi) are two virāj verses: “Being enkindled, O Agni”, and “Convey these offerings, O Agni”.
2.2.16	If they (the adhvaryus) perform four iṣṭis (they offer) the first to Agni.
2.2.17	(The invīting- and offering-verses for this iṣṭi are): “O Agni, wakeful by thy lustre”, and “May the ladles come to thee”.
2.2.18	(The verses) for Agni Sviṣṭakṛt are: “Praising we call thee” and “Wake up Agni by the laud”.
2.3.1	Or (instead of these three or four separate iṣṭis) the first two (i.e. the offerings to Agni and to Agni Pavamana) are performed in one paradigma.
2.3.2	Or the two middle ones (are performed in one paradigma).
2.3.3-7	Or of the oblations for Aditi, which has two offerings, the second is addressed to Indra and Agni or to Agni and Soma, if the sacrificer is a brāhmaṇa; to Indra if he is a kṣatriya; to the All-Gods if he is a vaiśya.
2.3.8	(The invīting- and offering-verses for the last one are): “Come hither, Ye All-Gods”, “Over the strewn grass”.
2.3.9	Or of the two the first iṣṭi is destined for Agni.
2.3.10	(As in this case the offerings to Agni Pavamana, Agni Pāvaka and Śuci fall out) he should offer oblations of sacrificial butter to the deities of Agni’s forms. He should offer, before and after the offerings of the sacrificial cake, oblations of clarified butter to the deities of the two forms (of Agni), viz. to Agni Pavamana, to Agni Pāvaka and to Agni Śuci.
2.3.11	(For the oblations to Agni Sviṣṭakṛt of this sacrifice mentioned in sūtra 9 the invīting- and offering-verses are): “With all fires together, O Agni”, “O Agni, together with all fires”.
2.3.12	The second is destined for Aditi.
2.3.13	This rite is a modification of the sacrifice on the day of new-moon.
2.3.14	Of the iṣṭis to be performed (at this occasion) by a carpenter, during a period of three days, those destined for the deities of the forms of Agni should on each subsequent day be performed for one of the forms (first day to Agni Pavamana, second day to Agni Pāvaka, third day to Agni Śuci); during a subsequent period of three days the same offerings are to be made, but now each of these is followed by an iṣṭi to Viṣṇu; during a subsequent period of three days these same to Agni and Viṣṇu but now followed by a third to Aditi. The tenth (i.e. that of the tenth day) is the unchanged iṣṭi to Agni.
2.3.15	At all these iṣṭis the offering of the sacrificial substance (the pradbana part 1.16.3) is performed whispering.
2.3.16	And the number of enkindling-verses is fifteen.
2.3.17	Seventeen for the iṣṭi for Aditi.
2.3.18-22	The sacrificial fees (i.e. the cows to be presented to the priests) are 24, or 12, or 6, a horse, a piece of gold of 100 mānas, a chariot, a garment and goats.
2.3.23-25	During a period of twelve days (after the establishment of his fires) he (the sacrificer) should himself offer the agnihotṛa (not his adhvaryu), and he should (only) speak the truth, and bestow gifts on his guests.
2.3.26	He who has established his sacred fires should, during his vrata, not paṛtake of meat, if he has not first performed an animal sacrifice; nor, if he has not (already) performed the sacrifice of new fruits, should he paṛtake of the fruits of the new herbs.
2.4.1	The anvārambhaṇīya iṣṭi (initiatory ceremony) precedes the (first) performance of the sacrifices on the days of full- and new-moon.
2.4.2	It consists of a sacrificial cake for Agni and Viṣṇu, (a mess of boiled rice) for Sarasvatī and (a sacrificial cake) for Sarasvat.
2.4.3-5	(The invīting- and offering-verses for the first havis are:) “O Agni and Viṣṇu, this is your mighty grandeur. Protect ye the secret names of ghee. In every house your praise is coming. May your tongue come forth to the ghee”; “O Agni and Viṣṇu, great is your dear abode, ye accept the ghee rejoicing in its secrets. In every house you are bringing seven treasures. May your tongue come unto the ghee”. (For the second havis:) “The bright Sarasvatī”, “Sarasvatī, accept these”. (For the third havis:) “We call Sarasvat”, “He has grown”.
2.4.6	According to some (ritualiṣṭic authorities) (it consists) of five offerings. (In this case are added, one sacrificial cake) for Agni Bhagin and (another) for Agni Vratapati.
2.4.7-8	(In this case the invīting- and offering-verses for Agni Bhagin are:) “Thou Agni, glory”, and “Come thou as fortune to us”. (For Agni Vratapati:) “Thou art the upholder of observances”, and “When we transgress your laws”.
2.4.9	(This rite is) a modification of the sacrifice (on the day) of full-moon.
2.4.10	A milch-cow is the sacrificial fee.
2.5.1	The renewed establishment of the sacred fires (is undeṛtaken), in view of a special wish (to be fulfilled), for one who has had a mishap.
2.5.2	When he is about to remove (his fires before undeṛtaking the establishment), one (sacrificial cake would be offered) to Agni and (another) to Agni Vaiśvānara.
2.5.3	(The invīting-and offering-verses for the havis destined for Agni Vaiśvānara are:) “May Agni Vaiśvānara come to our help from afar. May he come to our praises”, “Desired in the sky, desired on earth”.
2.5.4	The time for re-establishing (the fires) is the middle of the rainy season.
2.5.5	And the moon should be stationed in the Punarvasu.
2.5.6	Or it may be the new-moon day which follows the full-moon in the Aṣāḍhās.
2.5.7	The time is mid-day.
2.5.8	The sacrificial cake for Agni is prepared on five kapālas.
2.5.9	The enkindling-verses are fifteen in number.
2.5.10-11	The word agni is changed in the three fore-offerings (in the following manner:) tanunapad agnim, ido agnina, barhir agnih.
2.5.12	(The invīting-verse for) the first butter-portion contains a reference to the slaying of a foe.
2.5.13	Or (it is dedicated) to Agni Buddhimat. (The verse then is :) “Awake Agni with praise”.
2.5.14	(The invīting-verse for) the second butter-portion (is dedicated) to Agni Pavamaoa. (The verse is:) “O Agni, purify the lives”.
2.5.15	Or to Agni Indumat. (The verse is:) “Come hither, I will speak”.
2.5.16	Or to Agni Retasvat. (The verse is :) “Agni, the head”.
2.5.17	The offering-verse (of the butter-portions) is in accordance with the precept.
2.5.18	(Of the four verses which begin): “Agni, thee today as a horse” the first and the third are the invīting- and offering-verses for the sacrificial substance (the pradhana part), the second and the fourth for the sacrifice to Agni Sviṣṭakṛt.
2.5.19	(The invīting-formulas for the after-offerings are:) “The divine Barhis (may accept the offering) for Agni's obtainment of abundant gift”; “The divine Nārāśaṃsa (may accept the offering) for abundant obtainment in Agni of abundant gift”. (The third remains unchanged).
2.5.20	The word agni (in its different case-forms) in the first four fore-offerings and in the two (first) after-offerings is called vibhaktayaḥ (“case-forms” or “discriminations”).
2.5.21	These are spoken in whispers.
2.5.22	Likewise (the invīting-verse of) the second butter-portion.
2.5.23	And (the verses for) the sacrificial substance (the pradhana).
2.5.24	Or the whole together with the two first after-offerings.
2.5.25	Or (all is whispered) to the end of (the sacrifice of) the sacrificial substance
2.5.26	Or alone (the verses accompanying the sacrifice of) the sacrificial substance.
2.5.27	Sacrificial fees are an old wrapper which has been resewn; an old chariot, which has been repaired; a draught-ox or (a piece of) gold.
2.5.28	To Aditi a second (sacrifice is brought).
2.5.29	(This rite is) a modification of the (sacrifice on the day of) new-moon.
2.5.30	Or to Agni and Varuṇa.
2.5.31	(In this case the invīting- and offering-verses are): “Be, O Agni, nearest to us”, “Do thou, O Agni, appease the wrath of Varuṇa”.
2.6.1	In the evening and the morning he performs the agnihotṛa.
2.6.2-3	Before the shadows become mixed up (disappear), he takes (at evening) the Āhāvaniya fire from the Gārhapatya (he takes from the Gārhapatya a flaming piece of wood), (in the morning, at the moment) when the night is going to end (at the first daybreak).
2.6.4	One who has reached the highest state of welfare has only to set the Āhāvahiya fire ablaze.
2.6.5	Those who are considered as having reached the highest state of welfare are: a learned brāhmaṇa, a grāmaṇī and a kṣatriya.
2.6.6-7	(He takes out the fire with these two verses:) “Thou being taken out, free me from the evil deed which knowingly and unknowingly I have done. Whichever sin we have committed during this day, from all that, thou having been taken out, protect me”. “I pour out an oblation of nectar, the fire, upon the immoṛtal earth to gain freedom from premature death. By it may I gain the endless world, which Prajāpati has been the first to gain”.
2.6.8	(While taking out the fire) in the morning (he makes) the modification (in the first verse, replacing “during this day” by) “during this night”.
2.6.9-11	Having wiped round (the fires with his moistened right hand) he sprinkles, before pouring out the libations, water three times around each of the fires (with the formula:) “With the right I sprinkle round thee, the true” (this in the evening). In the morning (the formula is:) “With the true I sprinkle round thee, the right”.
2.6.12	With (the formula) “Thou art the continuity of the sacrifice; for the continuity of the sacrifice I pour thee out” (he pours) a continuous stream of water from the Gārhapatya up to the Āhāvaniya.
2.6.13	(With the verse) “Stretching the thread”, (he performs the same act) when a wild beast has passed between (the two fires).
2.7.1-2	Immediately after sunset he pours out (the evening libation), or at the moment when the first star becomes visible.
2.7.3-4	At the time of sun-rise (he pours out the morning libation), when it has dawned or (immediately) after sunrise.
2.7.5	But he should make up his mind beforehand as to the time (of libation).
2.7.6	In case of transgression of this (time), a prāyaścitta (should be performed).
2.7.7	After he has poured out (the milk into the offering-spoon) he should retain his breath as long as possible and then pour out the milk over which the sun has risen (i.e. in case he has neglected the exact time of sunrise). Thereupon he should give (to the adhvaryu) a choice object and speak over (the libation) the word bhūḥ.
2.7.8	Or, he should not make the libation (with milk), but remove the Āhāvaniya fire, and bring forward (out of the Gārhapatya) another Āhāvaniya, and therein perform the agnihotṛa.
2.7.9	The sacrificial substances for the agnihotṛa are: fresh milk, rice-gruel, sour coagulated milk (dadhi) or liquefied butter.
2.7.10	If he takes the sour coagulated milk, he does not put it on the fire.
2.7.11	If he uses the liquefied butter, he does not pour water upon it, but
2.7.12	having put two young shoots of darbha-grass on it, he pours out (parts of) the liquified butter (into the spoon for offering).
2.7.13-14	The sacrificer, standing behind the Dakṣiṇagni with his face turned to the west, reverently addresses the sun at evening with the formula: “O True One, I will bring to thee the ṛta as sacrificial fee”, at morning he addresses (turned to the east) the Āhāvaniya with the formula: “O Ṛta, I will bring thee as sacrificial fee to the True”.
2.7.15	The sacrificer goes to the north of the Dakṣiṇagni.
2.7.16	His seat is south-west of the Āhāvaniya.
2.7.17	In the same manner that of the wife of the sacrificer: (south-west) of the Gārhapatya.
2.7.18	He sips water with (the formulas): “Rain art thou, cut off my bad luck”, “knowledge art thou, destroy my bad luck”,
2.7.19	and retains his breath.
2.8.1	At the southern side (of the vihāra) they admit (the calf to its cow which gives milk) for the agnihotṛa.
2.8.2	And they should not pass between (the cow and the vihāra).
2.8.3	He should not let a śūdra milk (the cow).
2.8.4-5	At evening he mutters (during the act of milking) the (formula) “Give milk for Agni, for the Gods”; at morning “Give milk for Sūrya, for the Gods”.
2.8.6	At evening and morning he mutters (during the same act) (the formula): “0 hunger and thirst, through the female,’ forsooth, they repel the female'; through the female I repel both of you: through the agnihotṛa cow, through the calf, through the male”.
2.8.7	If the cow has a female calf, (then he changes the mantra at the end) “through the Anvāhāryapacana (the Dakṣiṇagni), the male”.
2.8.8	With (the formula): “Ye welfare-bringing ones, bring us welfare”, he separates by means of the stirring stick (some) glowing coals, in a northerly direction, out of the Gārhapatya and puts on (these) (the milk) in the (earthen) caldron (for boiling the agnihotṛa milk) with the formula of hunger and thirst; (the finishing words of the formula are now) replaced by: “through the Gārhapatya, the male”.
2.8.9	With (the formula): "I look down upon thee with the eye of Agni”, he illumines it after having enkindled a fuel stick (which he holds over the milk).
2.8.10	With (the formula): “The waters (may come) together with the pith of the herbs” he pours, by means of the sruva, water upon (the boiling milk).
2.8.11	Having heated it he again, but now without formula, holds the burning stick above (the milk).
2.8.12-13	He removes (the vessel from the coals) in a northern direction three times putting it down, without making a break, as it were.
2.8.14	With (the formula): “Homage to the Gods” he touches the coals at the southern side.
2.8.15	With (the formula): “For welfare thou”, he shoves back carefully (all the coals into the fire).
2.8.16	Having heated the dipping-spoon (sruva) and the offering-spoon (sruc) (by holding them over the fire) he pours the milk (from the vessel) by means of the sruc with the formula of hunger and thirst. (The finishing words are now) replaced by: “by means of the sruva, the male”.
2.8.17-18	This is done three or four times; at each spoon-full the mantra is repeated.
2.8.19	When (the milk) has been poured out he touches the offering-spoon.
2.8.20-21	At evening he mutters (at this moment) (the formula:) “Allied with the Gods who come at evening”; at morning “Allied with the Gods who come at morning”.
2.8.22	He now deposits the offering-spoon (filled with the milk) to the north of the Gārhapatya, seizes a kindling-stick a span in measure, of palāśa-wood and the offering-spoon (over which he holds the kindling-stick), moves both right over the Gārhapatya, puts down (the spoon) and behind the Abavaniya on kuśa-grass pointing northward, and lays the kindling-stick on the (Āhāvaniya fire), with the (formula) of hunger and thirst; (the finishing words are now) replaced by: “by the kindling-stick, the Āhāvaniya, the male”.
2.8.23	Passing over two finger-breadths of the kindling-stick he pours over it (the libation).
2.9.1-2	At evening (he pours out the libation) with (the formula): "Agni is light, light is Agni, svaḥa"; at morning; "Sun is light, light is Sun, svaḥa".
2.9.3	At libations, where no vaṣaṭ is enjoined, he bends his right knee.
2.9.4	Having put down the offering-spoon (near and behind the Āhāvaniya) he pours out without formula the second libation, without bringing it in contact (with the former); the quantity which is now poured must be greater than that of the first (libation).
2.9.5	In the offering-spoon he should retain the greater part.
2.9.6	Having touched the coals with the base of the offering-spoon, and having twice raised the spoon in a northerly direction, he puts it down near (the Āhāvaniya).
2.9.7	After the first oblation the sacrificer exhales with (the formula) "The out-breathing has gone to the world of Heaven, in the won I win; (may there be) no fear for me from want of room, from want of sons, from want of cattle".
2.9.8	After the second oblation he inhales with (the formula): "The in-breathing has come to the body; in the won I win; (may there be) no fear for me from want of room, from want of sons, from want of cattle".
2.9.9	(After both oblations he mutters): "The prayer of the sacrifice, which is fulfilled, that (prayer) may be fulfilled for me".
2.9.10-11	To the north of the place where the two oblations have been poured out, at evening he cleanses the spoon twice in a western direction; at morning, to the south, upwards.
2.9.12-13	The first cleanings he smears on kuśa grass, thinking "The herbs I delight"; the last cleaning he puts down, to the south, having stretched his right hand on the ground with the palm upwards, thinking: "The fathers I delight".
2.9.14	By means of his forefingers having twice paṛtaken (of the rest in the spoon) noisily, he turns round to north, paṛtakes of (what is left over) from the spoon, of which he holds the handle to the east; then turns round the spoon so that its handle is turned to the west, licks it out, washes it, stops watering, pours out some water to the north-east, and raises the spoon in a north-easterly direction.
2.9.15	This is the rite in case the sacrifice of agnihotṛa is performed in one fire (the Āhāvaniya).
2.9.16	If, however, he performs it in all the fires he puts down the spoon to the north of the Gārhapatya.
2.10.1	(He pours out libation) in the Gārhapatya (with the full formulas): "May the Lord of Welfare grant here welfare, may Prajāpati generate progeny. To Agni, the rich, the cattle possessor, the lord of welfare, svaḥa" (1), "To Agni, the lord of the house, svaḥa" (2), "To Agni, svaḥa" (3), and a fourth without mantra (4).
2.10.2	In the Dakṣiṇagni with (the verse and the formulas): "Of Savitṛ this glorious, Bhūḥ! Voice! More and more may fall to my share, svaḥa" (1). "Light of the God may we obtain. Bhuvaḥ! Breath! More and more may fall to my share, svaḥa" (2). "Who may inspire our prayers, Svaḥ! Name! May everything fall to my share, svaḥa" (3). And a fourth with the formula: "To Agni, the giver of food, the lord of food, svaḥa" (4).
2.10.3-4	If he is desirous of obtaining priestly lustre, then with the great utterances (bhūḥ, bhuvaḥ, svaḥ) he performs three oblations. The fourth remains unchanged.
2.10.5	The water in the offering-spoon, he divides into three parts: one third he pours out into the vessel of the agnihotṛa, one third behind the Gārhapatya, and one third into the folded hands of the wife of the sacrificer.
2.10.6	Having heated the offering-spoon he puts it down.
2.11.1	Acts peṛtaining to the sacrificer are performed on the southern side (of the vihāra).
2.11.2	He mutters (standing before the Āhāvaniya and addressing this fire) the (verses): "Entering upon the worship", "This Agni, the lord of booty", "You two, Indra and Agni", "This is thy natural womb", "This here, in accordance with this ancient splendour"; of these six verses the first and the last thrice.
2.11.3	(Thereafter the following formulas and verses): "Agni, thou art the giver of long life; give me long life". "Agni, thou art the giver of vigour; give me vigour", "Agni, thou art the protector of the body; protect my body". "O Agni, what is deficient (or defective) in my body, make up that", "Kindling, we enkindle thee, the brilliant one, for a hundred winters; we the vigorous thee the invigorating; we the strong -thee the giver of strength; we the uninjured-thee the uninjurable injurer of enemies".
2.11.4	Thrice (he mutters the formula): "O thou, rich in lights, may I safely reach thine end".
2.11.5	(Thereafter) while seated (he mutters the formula): "Thou, O Agni, hast attained to Sūrya's lustre, to the praises of the Ṛṣis, to the favourite abode. May I attain long life, vigour, offspring, the favourite abode, the increase of wealth".
2.11.6	Then he approaches the cow (which has been milked for the agnihotṛa) with (the formulas): "Ye are water, may I share your water; Ye are greatness, may I share your greatness; Ye are strength, may I have your strength; Ye are increase of wealth, may I have your increase of wealth. Ye rich ones, stay in this seat, in this place, in this fold, in this homestead, in this blessing, in the resting-place. Stay here, go not hence".
2.12.1	With (the formula) "Motley thou art, of all colours, come to me with strength (i.e. with food), with possession of cattle" he touches her (the cow's) forehead.
2.12.2	With the triṣṭich beginning: "We approach thee, Agni" and with the dvipada triṣṭich: "O Agni, be nigh unto", he addresses the Gārhapatya.
2.12.3	He (again) approaches the cow with (the formula): "O Iḍā, come hither, O Aditi, come hither: O Sūnṛtā, come hither".
2.12.4	With (the formula): "Come hither, ye much desired one. (Let there be) for me the fulfilment of wishes from you", he touches the calf's forehead.
2.12.5	With the triṣṭich (beginning): "Make sweet-voiced the Soma-presser", he addresses the Dakṣiṇagni from the north.
2.12.6	Having muttered the Māhitra hymn between the Gārhapatya and the Āhāvaniya, he addresses the Āhāvaniya (as follows:)
2.12.7	The verses: "That desirable light of Savitṛ", "At no time, O Indra, art thou barren", and "May thine unapproachable chariot enciṚcle us"; this (last verse) he repeats thrice.
2.12.8	If, however, he performs the sacrifice (of agnihotṛa) in all the (fires), he puts on each of the fires three kindling-sticks, each time with the great utterances (bhūḥ, bhuvaḥ, svaḥ), or if he sacrifices only in one fire, then in the Āhāvaniya.
2.12.9	With (the formula): "Thou art the thread of the Gods, I take hold of thee, may I not be severed from thee", he touches the (glowing) coals to the south of the Āhāvaniya.
2.12.10-11	With (the formulas): "Stretched art thou, a thread art thou, unite me with offspring, cattle, welfare, the possession of many children, of valiant sons. Thou art the thread of men, take hold of me, mayest thou not be severed from me, so and so" in place of so and so he utters the name of his eldest son or that of as many sons as he possesses, if he has no sons he utters his own name.
2.12.12	Having rinsed his mouth with (the formula): "Through the True I descend into the lustral bath, into the waters the bath vow" he sets his voice free.
2.13.1	Now (the manner of approaching the fires and paying reverence to them) in the morning.
2.13.2	He addresses the Āhāvaniya with (the formulas): bhūḥ, bhuvaḥ, svaḥ. May I be abounding in offspring. May I be prosperous. May I be rich in men. May there be safety for thee, safety for us. With the mind I approach (and revere) thee. I approach earth and heaven".
2.13.3	Standing at the same place he addresses the other two fires.
2.13.4	The Gārhapatya, with (the formulas): "May there be safety for thee, safety for us. With the voice I approach thee. I approach offspring and cattle.
2.13.5	The Dakṣiṇagni, with (the formulas): "May there be safety for thee, safety for us. With exhalation I approach thee. I approach through breathing and long life".
2.13.6	All (the fires he addresses) with (the formulas): "May there be safety for thee, safety for us. With desire I address thee. I approach wealth and welfare".
2.13.7	The rest (of the rite) starting from the putting on of the kindling-sticks up to the completion of the vow is the same (from II.12.8-12).
2.13.8	Or (instead) he may address the (fires only at morning) as at morning and evening.
2.13.9	Or the morning (agnihotṛa) is devoid of this rite of approaching (and revering the fires).
2.14.1	If (the sacrificer) is going out on a journey (for two or more days) he looks at the fires with (the formula): "May there be safety for you, safety for us".
2.14.2	(Then he looks) at the Gārhapatya with (the formulas): "O friendly one, protect my offspring. Protect me from the danger that accrues from men".
2.14.3	(He looks) at the Dakṣiṇāgni with (the formulas): "O flickering one, protect my food. Protect me from danger that accrues from the Fathers".
2.14.4	Having gone to the north of this (fire) he addresses the Āhāvaniya with (the formulas): "Thou praiseworthy one, protect my cattle, protect me from the danger that accrues from the Gods".
2.14.5	With the words "Food, Food", he takes (the first) three steps and restrains his voice as long as he is in the vicinity.
2.14.6	As long as he is away from home, he should (at evening and morning) mutter (only) that part of the agnyupasthāna, the aim of which is unfailing.
2.14.7	At a junction (a day of full-moon and new-moon), (he mutters that part of the mantras) which are incumbent on him (of which the aim is unfailing).
2.14.8	For the cause (of performing these rites) is not gone.
2.14.9	Or (instead of muttering the formulas of the upasthana), he may at both the twilights - having rinsed his mouth and constrained his speech, and then having once more rinsed his mouth - let free (his speech) by (uttering) the great utterances (bhūḥ, bhuvaḥ, svaḥ).
2.14.10	On returning from his journey, he should (restrain his speech when he has come) within sight of the fires.
2.15.1	In the same manner he looks (at the fires).
2.15.2	(He addresses) the Āhāvaniya with (the following verse and formulas): "We have approached thee, the most victorious, the most liberal dispenser of goods. (Agni, sovereign lord, bestow on us lustre and strength. Praiseworthy one, thou hast protected my cattle; still protect them for me. Thou hast protected me from danger that comes from the Gods, protect me from that still".
2.15.3	The gathering of grass (which may have fallen on or around the hearths) and the putting on of fuel (takes place) at all the fires.
2.15.4	(He addresses) the Dakṣiṇagni with (the following verse and formulas): "This fire of loose earth is full of riches, increasing welfare; O Agni of loose earth, bestow on us lustre and strength. O flickering one, thou has protected my food; still protect it for me. Thou hast protected me from danger that comes from the Fathers; protect me from that still".
2.15.5	(He addresses) the Gārhapatya with: "This fire is the lord of the house, because of its being the Gārhapatya, the most liberal dispenser of goods to our offspring. O Agni, lord of the house, bestow on us lustre and strength. O friendly one, thou hast protected my offspring; still protect it for me. Thou hast protected me from danger coming from men; protect me from that still".
2.15.6-7	Passing between the fires, he goes on his journey and in the same way he is freed (from observing rules of restraining speech, etc.)
2.16.1	An oblation to Vāstoṣpati (=Rudra) (should be performed) when they go forth (from their dwelling) for good (or) for a period of ten days at least.
2.16.2	When the right (bullock) of the cart (used at the sacrifices and containing the rice, etc.) has been harnessed and the possessions have been deposited in this cart he recites as invīting-verse to the sacrifice for Vāstoṣpati): "O Vāstoṣpati accept", and as offering-verse: "O Vāstoṣpati, may we be thy comrades".
2.16.3	And after the sacrifice he should leave behind what had not been deposited in the cart.
2.17.1	If he takes up the fires (either into the fire-drill, or mystically into his own person), he warms his hands at the Gārhapatya and touches (with them) his sense-oṛgans with (the formula): 'Come, enter my sense-oṛgans',
2.17.2	every time once with the mantras, and each time twice silently.
2.17.3	Or (instead of his hands) he warms the fire-drill with (the verse): "This is thy place of origin",
2.17.4	each time once with the mantra, each time twice silently.
2.17.5	In the same way he takes up the fire from the Āhāvaniya.
2.17.6	From an Āhāvaniya fire, which is constantly kept up, he takes it up into another (fire-drill).
2.17.7	Before sunset the churning (of the fire out of the fire drill) takes place.
2.17.8	Having made (the fire) redescend out of himself into the fire-drill (with the verse): "Redescend, O Jātavedas, carry thou again, knowingly, our offerings to the Gods. Bestow on us long life, offspring, wealth. Uninjured shine in our dwelling", he performs the churning.
2.17.9	Or (instead of into the fire-drill) he makes it descend into the ordinary fire.
3.1.1	When the sacrifice of full-moon has come to an end, a sacrifice for Indra vimṛdh (takes place).
3.1.2	This rite is a modification of the sacrifice at new-moon.
3.1.3	(The invīting- and offering-verses are): "For rule, O Indra, wast thou born", "Like a dread beast".
3.1.4	For (the oblation to) Agni Sviṣṭakṛt (they are): "An enjoyable household-guest", "Agni, be bold unto great good fortune".
3.1.5	When the sacrifice of new-moon has come to an end, a sacrifice for Aditi (takes place).
3.1.6	This rite is a modification of the sacrifice of new moon.
3.1.7	The invīting- and offering-verses for the oblation to Agni Sviṣṭakṛt at this sacrifice are the same as those for the sacrifice to Indra vimṛdh.
3.1.8	And (both these iṣṭis are to be performed) as long as he lives.
3.1.9	They are practised up to the end (of his life).
3.2.1	If (the moment) of junction has not come and the sacrifice of new-moon has commenced, the sacrifice for one on whom the moon has risen (abhyuditeṣṭi) (takes place).
3.2.2	(It consists of oblations) to Agni the giver, to Indra the bestower, to Viṣṇu Śipiviṣṭa.
3.2.3	If, at the moment when (the material for the oblation) has been taken out, he peṚceives it (viz., that the proper time for the sacrifice has not yet come), he should divide these (rice-portions destined for the deities already mentioned).
3.2.4	(The invīting- and offering-verses for the sacrifice for Agni the giver, are): "O Agni, give", "Give us of the great".
3.2.5	(The verses for the sacrifice for Indra the bestower are): "Thousands and hundreds of cows", "Bring thou hither".
3.2.6	This rite is a modification of the sacrifice of new-moon.
3.2.7	A bow with three arrows is the sacrificial fee.
3.2.8	The sacrifice on the day of new-moon (then takes place) at (its due) time.
3.2.9	There is no repetition of the piṇḍapitṛyajña.
3.3.1	If the (moment of) junction has passed and the sacrifice of new-moon has commenced, the sacrifice for one for whom the moon has become visible (abhyuddṛṣṭeṣṭi) (takes place).
3.3.2	(It consists of the following oblations): "To Agni, the pathmaker, to Indra the slayer of Vṛtra and to (Agni) Vaiśvānara.
3.3.3-5	(The invīting- and offering-verses are for the sacrifice to Agni the pathmaker): "For thou knowest the worshipper"; "We have approached the path of the Gods." (For the sacrifice to Indra, the slayer of Vṛtra): "For the slaying of Vṛtra"; "We are surrounded by the Danus". (For the sacrifice to Vaiśvānara): "The righteous Vaiśvanara, lord of right and of light, the immoṛtal splendour we seek"; "The nave of the sacrifices".
3.3.6	This rite is a modification of the sacrifice of new-moon.
3.3.7	A staff and a pair of sandals are the sacrificial fee.
3.3.8	When it has come to an end, the sacrifice of new-moon (takes place).
3.3.9	This is no repetition of the piṇḍapitṛyajña.
3.4.1	For Agni who is provided of fire (he performs a sacrifice), when to his fire another fire is brought over.
3.4.2	To Agni the pathmaker, when between the fires ready for a sacrifice (the vihāra) a carriage has passed, and when the time for the regular rites has been transgressed.
3.4.3	To (Agni) Vīti, when his fires come in contact.
3.4.4	To (Agni) the separator, if (they have come in contact) with unhallowed fire (fire of the village).
3.4.5	To (Agni) the despoiler, if (they have come in contact) with forest fire.
3.4.6	To (Agni) the pure, if (they have come in contact) with a fire for burning a corpse.
3.4.7	To Agni who resides in the waters, if (they have come in contact) with a fire occasioned by lightning.
3.4.8	If there is multitude of illness, (he should sacrifice) to Rudra.
3.4.9	If he is going to undeṛtake a journey, to Pūṣan the pathmaker.
3.4.10	A (sacrifice) which gratifies every wish is offered to Agni Kāma.
3.4.11	One to (Agni) lord of observances, if he goes from home at the time, when he is engaged in a religious observance or if he has acted against his religious observance.
3.4.12	To (Agni) the supporter of observances, if he weeps (during the time of religious observance).
3.4.13	If his house burns down, to (Agni) the patient (?).
3.4.14	To the Maruts, if his wife has given birth to twins.
3.5.1	(The invīting- and offering-verses for the sacrifices described in the preceding chapter are: For the iṣṭi to Agni provided with fire, III.4.1): "We call again and again with our callings"; "Agni is kindled by Agni".
3.5.2	(For the iṣṭi to Agni Vīti, III.4.3): "Agni come to the feast (vīti)"; "He who Agni to the feast of the Gods".
3.5.3	(For the iṣṭi to Agni the separator, III.4.4): "How hast thou, O Agni, our praise"; "Thee, O Agni, the tribes of men praise".
3.5.4	(For the iṣṭi to Agni the despoiler, III.4.5): "In our cattle fray"; "Do not as in the great contest".
3.5.5	(For the iṣṭi to Agni who resides in the waters, III.4.7): "In the waters, O Agni, in thy seat"; "The great one has increased in the wide".
3.5.6	(For the iṣṭi to Rudra, III.1.8): "What shall we say to Rudra"; "May we attain thy good-will".
3.5.7	(For the iṣṭi to Pūṣan the path maker, III.4.9): "We have, O Pūṣan, pathmaker"; "Of path on path".
3.5.8	(For the iṣṭi to Agni Kāma, III.4.10): "Agni, as Kāma, in distant domains rules, the one universal ruler, over what has been and is to be"; "May we win our wish, O Agni".
3.5.9	(For the iṣṭi to Agni the supporter of observances III.4.12): "Thou, Agni, supporter of observances, being pure, convey, O Agni, the Gods hither, unto our sacrifice and oblation"; "Supporting the observances, protecting them, undecieved, be thou our not-ageing messenger, rich in men, giving riches, gracious. O Agni, protect us that we may live; Jātavedas".
3.5.10	(For the iṣṭi to Agni Kṣāmavat, III.4.13): "The black spaces at the feet"; "In thee, O many-faced hotṛ".
3.5.11	(For the isți to the Maruts, III.4.14): "Ye Maruts of glittering aspect, come hither as two twins; radiant, wearing golden brooches"; (and as offering-verse either): "The Maruts impetuous as wind" or "For welfare".
3.6.1	Relations who are in mutual disagreement, should pour out (and offer) sacrificial material (rice, barley, etc.) for a sacrifice to a plurality of deities.
3.6.2	The invīting- and offering-verses are: "May Agni, together with the Vasus aid us in the first place, let Soma together with the Rudras protect us also; let Indra together with the Maruts act in due course; let Varuṇa together with the Ādityas confer protection on us". "May Agni together with the Vasus aid us; and Soma with his Rudraic forms; and Indra, the liberal worshipper, together with the Maruts and Varuṇa the all-knowing together with the Ādityas".
3.6.3	And they should mutter the hymn of concordance.
3.7.1-2	For the Mitravinda sacrifice, (he takes) fifteen kindling-verses.
3.7.3	The (verses for the) butter-portions (are): "Through Agni may he obtain wealth" and "An increaser of the house".
3.7.4	(The invīting- and offering-verses for the principal oblation are): "May Agni, Soma, Varuṇa, Mitra, Indra, Bṛhaspati, Savitṛ, the thousandfold-bestowing, may Pūṣan unite us with cattle, Sarasvatī with favour, may Tvaṣṭṛ unite the beautiful forms with sacrifices"; "May Tvaṣṭṛ grant me forms, and the bountiful Sarasvatī, may Pūṣan grant me good fortune, and Savitṛ, may Bṛhaspati (and) Indra give strength, Mitra power, and Varuṇa and Soma and Agni".
3.7.5	(The verses) for (the oblation to Agni) Sviṣṭakṛt are: "Grant thou unto us wealth, a thousand fold"; "and Favour thou our prayer".
3.7.6	A thousand cows are the sacrificial fee.
3.7.7	At the prose recitations (where the deity is inserted) he mentions the deities in the order in which they occur in the invīting-verse.
3.7.8	At the indication (of the deities after the formula ye yajāmahe) their names should follow the order as given in the offering-verse.
3.7.9	Or (they are indicated) as in the summons (saṃpraiṣa).
3.8.1	On full-moon day, when the moon is in conjunction with the phālgunīs, are begun the sacrifices of long duration of those who are not consecrated for a sacrifice of Soma.
3.8.2	The sacrifice of Vasiṣṭha and the sākaṃprasthāyya (are begun) on new-moon day.
3.8.3	The dākṣāyaṇa sacrifice should be performed during fifteen years.
3.8.4	Or all (the sacrifices of long duration undeṛtaken by the not-consecrated) (should be performed) each a year long.
3.8.5	For him who practises (them), the normal sacrifices of full- and new-moon do not take place.
3.8.6	(We shall explain the rules) for the dākṣāyaṇa sacrifice.
3.8.7	On the preceding day (fall) the oblations of full-moon sacrifice.
3.8.8	Or (only) the (cake) destined for Agni-Soma.
3.8.9	On the day of full-moon (itself) the cake destined for Agni and the sāṃnāyya for Indra.
3.8.10	During the latter half of the month (the half of waning moon) he keeps the observances of a dīkṣita (one who has been consecrated for a sacrifice of Soma) and gives (alms or presents) to his guests.
3.8.11	Or (instead of keeping these observances) his observance consists in (speaking only) what is true.
3.8.12	He does not (apply) unguent (to salve the body) nor clothes himself in beaten (= washed), woolen or tanned (garments).
3.8.13	He subsists only by paṛtaking the remains of the material for offering.
3.8.14	He should not reach satiety (in eating).
3.8.15	He eats, thinking in his mind: "King Soma, the Moon, I eat".
3.8.16	On the day preceding the new-moon, after the elapse of the dark half-month (fall) the oblations of the new-moon sacrifice.
3.8.17	Or (only) the cake destined for Indra-Agni.
3.8.18	On the day of new-moon (itself) the cake destined for Agni and any amikşa destined for Mitra-Varuṇa.
3.8.19	(The invīting- and offering-verses for the āmikṣā are): "The two lords of light, who by the ṛta"; "Your herb among the people".
3.8.20	Immediately before or after the pronouncing of the blessing he performs the sacrifice of the whey to the Coursers, who have not been summoned (previously).
3.8.21	They are made manifest in the last fore-offering and, casu quo, in the sūktavāka.
3.8.22	(And then with the formula): "Shall the Coursers, the Gods graciously accept the ghee, they shall grow in strength, they shall acquire greater strength”.
3.8.23	He performs the sacrifice to the Coursers with the invīting-verse: "Auspicious may be the Coursers unto us" and the offering-verse: "In race on race", without breathing out (between the half-verse) and raising the knees.
3.8.24	The second vaṣaṭ-call is: "O Agni, accept the whey".
3.8.25	The sacrificer, the brahman, the hotṛ, the adhvaryu and the agnīdhra paṛtake of the remains, after having invited each other.
3.8.26	As first and last the sacrificer.
3.8.27	The mantra for paṛtaking of it is: "The seed of me that goes forth, or that which, being poured out, is born, through king Soma that we retain in us". "Thou art the race. Thou art the whey (vajina). Bring strength into me".
3.9.1	(We shall explain the rite) of the iḍādadha.
3.9.2-3	At the day of full-moon there is the (cake) destined for Agni and a (caru) for Sarasvatī, the cake destined for Agni-Soma with the whispered offering, and the sāṃnāyya destined for Indra.
3.9.4	The observances are those of the dākṣāyaṇa sacrifice.
3.9.5-6	At the day of new-moon there is the (cake) for Agni, and a (caru) for Sarasvatī, the one for Indra-Agni, and the āmikṣā for Mitra-Varuṇa.
3.9.7	The rite of the whey is the same.
3.10.1-3	At the sārvaseni-sacrifice both the oblations (those of full-moon day, as well as those of new-moon day) are performed as a single iṣṭi: first come the oblations of full-moon day.
3.10.4	(The invīting and offering-verses) for the second (cake) destined for Agni are: "We call thee, worshipping"; and "Accept our sacrifice".
3.10.5	He does not perform the sacrifice of new-moon.
3.10.6	But the piṇḍapitṛyajña he performs.
3.10.7	At the sacrifice of Śaunaka and the Sākaṃprasthāyya, there is no difference in the rite of the hotṛ.
3.11.1	By the sacrifice of Śarvaseni the sacrifice of Vasiṣṭha is explained.
3.11.2	But (here) the oblations of new-moon day come first.
3.11.3	And he does not perform the sacrifice of full-moon day.
3.11.4	So are the rites of the sacrifices of full- and new moon day of longer duration.
3.11.5	They are performed through the desire of some special advantage,
3.11.6	and have fifteen kindling-verses.
3.11.7-10	The sacrifice called 'that of longer duration (after the pattern of the full- and new-moon rites) performed by the sages', consists of a cake destined for Agni and one destined for Agni and Viṣṇu. It is a modification of the sacrifice of full-moon. He performs it daily save at the junctions (the days of full- and new-moon).
3.11.11-15	The sacrifice called turāyaṇa consists of a cake to Agni and Indra and to the All-Gods. It is a modification of the sacrifice of new-moon. He performs it daily save at the junctions. (Though) not being a dikşita he wears the black antelope hide.
3.12.1	The oblation of (the first fruits of) millet (syamāka) is destined for Soma (as a caru).
3.12.2	Equally that of bamboo-seeds.
3.12.3	The oblation of rice and barley is destined for Indra-Agni, or for Agni-Indra, for the All-Gods and for Heaven and Earth.
3.12.4	The butter-portions of (both) these (oblations are sacrificed) with (verses) containing (a form of the verb) "to be".
3.12.5	(The invīting- and offering-verses for the oblation to Soma are): "Accepting this offer"; and "Which abodes of thee in the sky".
3.12.6	For the (oblation) to Soma a dish with sour milk and honey is the sacrificial fee.
3.12.7	(The invīting- and offering-verses for the oblation to Indra-Agni are): "This praise of you, Indra and Agni"; "Accept Indra and Agni, the pure praise".
3.12.8	(For the oblation to Agni-Indra): "They forsooth, who enkindle Agni"; "The well-doing, well-shining".
3.12.9	(For the oblation to Heaven and Earth): "The big sky"; "The broad Earth".
3.12.10	(The verses to accompany the oblations) to the All-Gods and that to Heaven and Earth are whispered.
3.12.11	(The invīting- and offering-verses for the oblation) to Agni Sviṣṭakṛt are virāj-verses.
3.12.12	The first-born male calf (of the season) is the sacrificial fee.
3.12.13	The (offering of the first fruits) may also be performed in one paradigma with the sacrifice of full- and new-moon.
3.12.14	Or he does not offer the sacrifice of first fruits, but performs the sacrifice of full- and new-moon with new grain.
3.12.15	Or he performs the agnihotṛa evening and morning with rice-gruel.
3.12.16	Or, after having given to eat to the agnihotṛa-cow first fruits, he should perform the agnihotṛa evening and morning with the milk of this cow.
3.12.17	Or he may boil on the Gārhapatya a mess of rice in an earthen pot and make an offering of it into the Āhāvaniya to the deities of the āgrayaṇa with Agni Sviṣṭakṛt as fourth and the word svāhā at the end.
3.13.1	On full-moon day in the month Phālguna are begun the four-monthly sacrifices (caturmāsyas),
3.13.2	or full-moon day in Caitra.
3.13.3	On the first day of full-moon falls the iṣṭi for Vaiśvānara and Parjanya.
3.13.4	(The invīting- and offering-verses for the oblation to Parjanya are): "Sing ye unto Parjanya"; "In whose sway".
3.13.5	On the next day of full-moon the vaiśvadeva (four-monthly sacrifice).
3.13.6-11	It consists of oblations to Agni, to Soma and Savitṛ, to Sarasvatī and Pūṣan, to the self-strong Maruts, to the All-Gods, and to Heaven and Earth.
3.13.12	The invīting- and offering-verses for the sacrifice to Savitṛ are: "The gold-handed Savitṛ I call"; "Rouse the very wise".
3.13.13	(For the sacrifice to Pūṣan): "O Pūṣan in thy sway"; "One of thee is bright".
3.13.14	(For the sacrifice to the Maruts): "Here I choose ye, O self-strong Maruts"; "They sing a beautiful song".
3.13.15	When the materials for the oblations are deposited (on the vedi), (he recites) the (verses) which accompany the churning of the fire.
3.13.16	Taking his stand behind the vedi (he recites), when he has been summoned (by the adhvaryu) with (the words): "(Recite) for the fire that is being churned".
3.13.17	The verses to accompany the churning of the fire are the following: "To thee, O God Savitṛ"; "The great sky"; "Thee, O Agni, from the lotus" and the two following verses; "Let the men say" this verse he recites for the fire when it appears; "Whom with the hand as a born child"- this verse he recites for the fire when it is held in the hand; the two following ones for the fire when it is thrown into (the Āhāvaniya); "Agni is kindled by Agni"; "For, thou, O Agni, by Agni"; "Him they cleanse".
3.13.18	There are nine fore-offerings.
3.13.19	Between the fourth and the last, four (fore-offerings are inserted):
3.13.20	"May the Doors, O Agni, accept the clarified butter" (1). "May morning and night, O Agni, accept the clarified butter" (2). "May the two divine hotṛs, O Agni, accept the clarified butter" (3). "May the three Goddesses, O Agni, accept the clarified butter" (4).
3.13.21	The (verses for the) butter-portions contain a form of the verb "to be".
3.13.22	The oblations to Savitṛ and to Heaven and Earth are whispered.
3.13.23	The invīting- and offering-(verses) for (the sacrifice to Agni) Sviṣṭakṛt are in the virāj metre.
3.13.24	The first-born male calf (of the season) is the sacrificial fee.
3.13.25	There are nine after-offerings.
3.13.26	Before the first and the second (of the usual ones) six (are inserted):
3.13.27	"The divine Doors may accept for bestowing of wealth, our good gift" (1). "The divine Morning and Night may accept for bestowing of wealth, our good gift" (2). "The two divine Cherishing Ones may accept..." (3). "The two divine Ūrja and Āhuti may..." (4). "The two Gods, the two divine hotṛs may..." (5). "The three Goddesses, the Goddesses three may accept..." (6).
3.13.28	The (rite) of the whey is the same.
3.13.29	When the sacrifice (the vaiśvadeva) has come to an end, the sacrifice of full-moon day takes place.
3.13.30	The observances during the intermediate time (between this four-monthly sacrifice and the next following) are that he does not paṛtake of meat, that he maintains chastity- or at the time after the monthly courses of his wife he may approach her sexually, that he lies down on the ground with his head directed to the east and that he speaks truth.
3.14.1-2	On full-moon day in the month Aṣāḍhā, (takes place) the varuṇapraghāsa sacrifice for him who begins the four-monthly sacrifices in Phālguna; for him who begins them in Caitra (it falls) on full-moon in the month Śrāvaṇa.
3.14.3	(There are) the oblations of the vaiśvadeva which end with the one destined for Pūṣan.
3.14.4	(Besides these there are) the (cake) destined for Indra-Agni, the āmikṣā for Varuṇa, the one for the Maruts and the (cake) for Ka.
3.14.5-7	(The invīting- and offering-verses for the sacrifice to Varuṇa are): "Hear, O Varuṇa, this call of mine"; and "This I implore of thee". (For the sacrifice to the Maruts): "What, O Maruts, is your strength"; and "Lead ye us". (For the sacrifice to Ka Prajāpati): "The golden fetus"; and "He who from all that breathes".
3.14.8	From the Āhāvaniya they bring forward the two fires (to the two vedis).
3.14.9-13	The (verses) with which the act of bringing forward the fires is accompanied (by the hotṛ are) the following the three beginning "Bring ye forward the God"-the first of these he recites whilst sitting, the second and third whilst accompanying (the procession); "We put thee down on the footprint of iḍā"-this verse he recites at the moment when the kindling-sticks are put on the two fires; "Agni with fair face, with all the Gods"; "Sit, hotṛ, in thine own place"; "The hotṛ has seated himself in the hotṛ's place"; "Thou art the messenger".
3.14.14	On the spot where he has recited in sitting position the first verse, standing there, he is dismissed.
3.14.15	The acts of the hotṛ are performed at the northern vedi.
3.14.16	The sacrifice to Ka is performed in a whispering tone.
3.14.17	A pair of cows is the sacrificial fee.
3.14.18	He strews the veda bunch, (only) of the adhvaryu.
3.14.19	With the burnt scrapings (that are left over) from the (sacrificial substance) offered to Varuṇa he betakes himself to the expiatory bath in the manner as (is done in a sacrifice of) Soma.
3.14.20	(The invīting- and offering-verses for the sacrifice which takes place at the expiatory bath are): "King Varuṇa has made a wide place"; and "A hundred medicines possessest thou, O King".
3.14.21	The rest is the same as at the vaiśvadeva-sacrifice.
3.15.1-2	On full-moon day in the month Kārttika (takes place) the sākamedha-sacrifice for one who begins the four-monthly sacrifice in the month Phālguna; for him who begins in Caitra (it falls) on full-moon day in the month Āgrahāyaṇa.
3.15.3	The sacrifice to Agni Anīkavat ("the edged") takes place on the first day of full-moon in the forenoon.
3.15.4	(The invīting- and offering-verses for this sacrifice are): "By (thy) edges (anīka) kill, O Agni, the foe, through all kinds of help. Bestow riches on us, that we may live"; and "He by this edge will worship".
3.15.5	At midday (he sacrifices) to the heating Maruts.
3.15.6	(The invīting- and offering-verses are): "O burning Maruts", "He who is fain to smite us".
3.15.7	At evening to the Maruts-Householders.
3.15.8	(The verses): "Through Agni may he attain to riches", "Enricher" are for the ājya-portions.
3.15.9	(The invīting- and offering-verses are): "Come hither ye that tend the house"; "Your greatness suṛgeth from the depth".
3.15.10	(The same for the sacrifice to Agni Sviṣṭakṛt): "Thee of most resplendent fame"; "What is carrying best".
3.15.11	He omits the prose-parts.
3.15.12	He does not recite the kindling-verses.
3.15.13	The sacrifice begins with the butter-portions and ends with the iḍā.
3.15.14	Having offered the burnt scrapings of this (mess of boiled rice for the Maruts) at the (next) morning as the oblation of the full spoon, he performs the oblation to the sporting Maruts.
3.15.15	(The invīting- and offering-verses for this oblation are): "The sporting horde"; "Even the mountain".
3.15.16-18	At the "great oblation" there are the sacrifices ending with that to Indra-Agni of the varuṇapraghāsa, (and moreover), one for Mahendra and one for Viśvakarman.
3.15.19	(The invīting- and offering-verses for the last sacrifice are): "The lord of the world, Viśvakarman"; and "What are your highest resorts".
3.15.20	The sacrifice to Viśvakarman is performed whisperingly.
3.15.21	Only one fire is brought forward.
3.15.22	A bull is the sacrificial fee.
3.15.23	There is no sacrifice of whey and no lustral bath.
3.15.24	The rest is simiḍār to the rite of varuṇapraghāsa.
3.16.1-2	At afternoon (of the same day) there is the sacrifice to the Fathers, consiṣṭing of three kinds of sacrificial material, destined for (1) either Soma accompanied by the Fathers or the Fathers accompanied by Soma, (2) the Fathers seated on the straw, and (3) the Fathers consumed by Agni.
3.16.3	Agni the bearer of the oblation to the Fathers, (replaces) Agni Sviṣṭakṛt.
3.16.4	(The invīting- and offering verses) for (the sacrifice to) Soma accompanied by the Fathers (are): "Thou, O Soma, skilled in thought"; "Soma grants the milch cow"; "Thou, O Soma, united with the Fathers".
3.16.5	(For the Fathers accompanied by Soma): "May the Fathers start"; "The Aṅgirasas, the Fathers"; "Our ancient Fathers".
3.16.6	(For the Fathers seated on the straw): "Called near are the Fathers"; "I have reached the Fathers"; "The Fathers seated on the straw".
3.16.7	(For the Fathers consumed by Agni): "Dismiss him again, O Agni"; "The Fathers who are here and who are not here"; "Come hither, ye Fathers, consumed by Agni".
3.16.8	Of these verses one is for each sacrifice the offering-verse, the first two are for each sacrifice the invīting-verses.
3.16.9	These (two invīting-verses) are not connected together (by the syllable o), and they have each the prāṇava (the syllable o) (at the end).
3.16.10	(The invīting- and offering-verses for the sacrifice to Agni, bearer of the oblation to the Fathers are): "They who thirsted among the Gods"; "Thou, Agni Jātavedas".
3.16.11	Wearing his upper garment over his right shoulder, he performs the sacrifice to these deities,
3.16.12	and inserts their names in the prose-recitations,
3.16.13	excepting (the sacrifice to Soma) accompanied by the Fathers.
3.16.14	(He performs these acts) wearing his upper garment over his left shoulder, according to Jātūkarṇya.
3.16.15	When in the summons the word svadhā is used (by the adhvaryu) the expression ye yajāmahe and the vaṣaṭ-(call) are replaced by ye svadhāmahe and by svadhā namaḥ.
3.16.16	They perform (this rite) in a (place), which has been enclosed (with mats etc.), to the south of the Dakṣiṇāgni.
3.16.17	He stands before the vedi with his face turned southward.
3.16.18	He does not tread upon the grass (of the vedi).
3.16.19	The mutterings are left aside.
3.16.20	The acts which are (otherwise) accompanied by muttered mantras, (are performed) silently.
3.16.21	(This rule prevails) also at the upasad, according to our teachers.
3.16.22	But the act is the general rule.
3.16.23	After he has repeated three times the single kindling-verse "Willingly we deposit thee", he does not speak the ṛṣi-descent (of the sacrificer).
3.16.24	After the performance of the fore-offerings, of which that to the strew is here omitted, (come) the butter-portions; the invīting- and offering-verses for these are the verses containing the word "living", viz. "Bestow on us, O Agni, that we may live"; "Thou mayest, O Soma, give that we live".
3.16.25-26	After the invoking of the iḍā they do not paṛtake of it, (but) having smelt it they throw away their portions.
3.16.27	After the (piṇḍas) have been given to the Fathers.
3.17.1	They pass the Dakṣiṇāgni at the north side muttering (the verse) "By this shape producing mighty deeds, he is a fiery, a wide way for gain, he hath come to the top, bearing the sweet, as he elevated a body to his own body".
3.17.2	Standing before the āhavanīya, they address to this fire the verses: "To thee, the splendid, we will sing praises"; "They have eaten, they have regaled themselves"; "Hear our prayers, O Bountiful".
3.17.3-4	With the triṣṭich beginning: "We call unto us the mind" they address the Dakṣiṇāgni: (but instead of the verse-quarter: "May the mind return to him", they should say): "May the mind return to me".
3.17.5	With the triṣṭich: "Agni I deem him"; and the dvipada triṣṭich "Agni, thou art our nearest" (they address) the Gārhapatya fire.
3.17.6	(Then they address) the Sun with (the verses): "May we behold that eye ordained by the Gods".
3.17.7	The after-offerings are performed without that to the strew.
3.17.8	In the pronouncing of the blessing (the sūktavāka) he does not mention the name of the sacrificer.
3.17.9	The rite closes with the saying all-hail and blessing.
3.17.10-11	After he has brought to an end (the rite of the cakes) to Tryambaka, (there follows the oblation of a) mess of boiled rice destined for Mitra, or for Aditi.
3.17.12	(The invīting- and offering-verses for the oblation to Mitra are): "Of Mitra, the preserver of men"; "Great is the Āditya".
3.17.13	When the sacrifice (the sākamedha) has come to an end, the sacrifice of full-moon (day takes place).
3.18.1-2	At the Sunāśirya (four-monthly sacrifice) there are the oblations of the Vaiśvadeva which end with the one destined for Pūṣan.
3.18.3	(Besides these there are) the cake for Sunāśirya, the āmikṣā for Vasu and the cake for Sūrya.
3.18.4-6	(The invīting- and offering-verses are for the sacrifice to Śunāśirya): "O Śuna and Śīra, accept this prayer"; "With prosperity may our ploughs plough the ground". (For Vāyu): "Of thee, O Vāyu, lord of ṛta"; "Ye adhvaryus, who have prepared the sweet". (For Sūrya): "OveṚcoming, seen by all, O Sūrya"; and "The wide-looking disc of heaven".
3.18.7	The sacrifice to Sūrya is performed whisperingly.
3.18.8	A white horse is the sacrificial fee.
3.18.9	Or a (white) bull.
3.18.10	Or a plough with twelve teams (oxen).
3.18.11	There is no (sacrifice) of whey.
3.18.12	The rest is simiḍār to the (rite of the) vaiśvadeva.
3.18.13	If, however, no churning of the fire takes place, the (rite is that of the sacrifice) of full-moon day.
3.18.14	(In this case the invīting- and offering-verses are, for the sacrifice to Sunāśirya): "Prepare ye both, O Śuna and Śīra and Indra, this sacrifice; bestow offspring on us, for hail. Accept this offering, ye Śuna and Śīra, joined by Indra, being together with the Seasons, ye, unto whom this universe has entered, unto whom joy and glory are deposited".
3.18.15	(Or, if he offers to Indra Sunāśirya): "Pour ye out with the ladle the sacrificial substance for Indra Sunāśirya. May the wise one accept it. Bring ye, united, the sacrifice with ghee provided, to the God with the bay horses, Indra Sunāśirya, increasing by the Ṛbhus and the holy word, accept this offer".
3.18.16	(Or): "We would call for growth"; "Wishing for horses".
3.18.17-18	When he has performed the sākamedha (offerings), he should immediately after these perform the sunāśirya, or on the full-moon day in Māgha.
3.18.19	The sacrifice of the four-monthly offers is discontinued by a sacrifice of Soma, by an animal-offering, or by an iṣṭi (to Agni).
3.18.20	In the (four monthly sacrifices) which are performed during a five years cycle, the sunāśirya (should fall) on the forenoon, the vaiśvadeva on the afternoon.
3.19.1	As a transgression of the rules an atonement (should take place).
3.19.2	If the object (proper) fails, a substitute (is adhibited).
3.19.3	For each (not nearer defined) transgression the following two libations for atonement are poured out bhūḥ bhuvaḥ svaḥ, svaḥa! "Thou art quick, O Agni, and free from imprecation. Verily thou art quick. Held by us in our quick mind thou who art quick, hast carried the offering (to the Gods'. Being quick, bestow medicine on us. svaḥā.
3.19.4	The Āhāvaniya is the fire for all libations,
3.19.5	and the juhū is the vessel (to pour them out).
3.19.6	At atonements (a libation is made of clarified liquid butter) which has been poured (into the juhū) in four tempi (by means of the sruva).
3.19.7	The atonement (follows immediately after the transgression, for if the fault has not been removed, the subsequent (part of the rite) may not take place.
3.19.8	At some transgressions the atonement is expressly enjoined; in this case he should perform both the general atonement, as well as the specially enjoined one.
3.19.9	If the sun were to set over the Āhāvaniya, not (yet) having been taken out, it must be taken out by a learned (brāhmaṇa), and, having fastened a piece of gold - a piece of silver if the sun were to rise over the fire - to a kuśa grass blade, they take (this) in front. A choice object (of the sacrificer) is the sacrificial fee.
3.19.10	If the Āhāvaniya gets extinguished, (a fire brand) should be taken out of the Gārhapatya and a sacrifice to Agni Jyotismat (be performed).
3.19.11	(The invīting- and offering-verses are): "Upwards go, O Agni, shine"; and "He shines by the great light".
3.19.12	If the Gārhapatya becomes extinguished, he should settle down behind the eastern fire (the Āhāvaniya) (abandoning the extinguished Gārhapatya), bring forwards (from this Āhāvaniya, which now he makes his Gārhapatya) another Āhāvaniya and sacrifice (in this fire the agnihotṛa).
3.19.13	Or, having taken up (his fires into the fire-drill or into himself) he should settle down northwards (of the old vihāra).
3.19.14	If both his fires have been extinguished, fire should be churned out of a firebrand (taken) from the Gārhapatya (as lower araṇi) by means of the upper araṇi.
3.19.15	Or, if there is no fire-brand left, he should touch the two churning-sticks with the ashes from the Gārhapatya and perform an offering to Agni Tapasvat Janadvat Pākavat.
3.19.16	(The invīting- and offering-verses for this sacrifice are): "Come thou with fervour (tapas) among the people (jana), O purifying Agni (pāvaka) (and) with flame, unto this land of mine. Come thou with fervour among our people, shining, bringing our gifts to the Gods".
3.19.17	When, however, over both the fires the sun has risen or set, or when from any other cause they have been destroyed, he should produce them by the (renewed) establishment of his fires.
3.20.1	If the agnihotṛa-cow, after the calf has been admitted to it, were to low, he should with (the verse): "Feeding in excellent pasture" give her a handful of barley.
3.20.2	If she were to sit down, he should with (the verse): "From fear of what thou dost sit down, from that give us security. Be gracious to all our young ones. Homage to Rudra the bountiful" make her rise (by pushing her) with a moist stick and then address her with (the verse): "The Goddess Aditi has risen, she hath bestowed long life upon the lord of the sacrifice, giving unto Indra his share and unto Mitra and Varuṇa".
3.20.3	Or he should give her to a personal enemy of his.
3.20.4	If the sacrificial material (e.g. the milk for the agnihotṛa) has been spilt, he should pour water thereon with (the two verses): "May this praise fetch you hither, O Maruts"; and "By whose vigour the spheres were propped up, who are in strength the strongest and mightiest; who sway with powers unresisted, to Viṣṇu and Varuṇa it has gone at the first calling". Thereupon he should speak over it (the following formulae): "It has been shed, it has been implanted, birth has ensued" and "To the sky, to the Gods, the sacrifice, a third (part of it) hath gone; thence may wealth reach me. To the intermediate region, to the Fathers, the sacrifice, a third (part of it) hath gone; thence may wealth reach me. To the earth, to men, the sacrifice, a third (part of it) hath gone; thence may wealth reach me".
3.20.5	The criterion by which to know a ceṛtain sacrificial substance as defiled is this, that a fastidious brāhmaṇa would not paṛtake of it.
3.20.6	It must be thrown into the water.
3.20.7	If a remainder of it is left over (which is not defiled) the rite may be finished with this.
3.20.8	If no undefiled part is left over, he should produce another (havis).
3.20.9	If this (same) substance is not to be got, he should substitute that which he thinks to come nearest to it.
3.20.10	This is the practice for the substitutes.
3.20.11	But (in this case) no change of the wording (is adhibited).
3.20.12	If the (sacrificial material) is defiled, which has not (yet) been given over to the deity (for whom it is destined), no performing of the hotṛ's rite takes place he (the adhvaryu) should prepare another havis and present this to the deity.
3.20.13-14	No performing takes place when the (sacrificial material) has been given over (to the deity) the sacrifice to Agni Sviṣṭakṛt and the iḍā and the paṛtaking of it fall forth; with clarified butter the remaining part of the sacrifice is brought to an end.
3.20.15	If a sacrifice has been offered to other deities (than those for whom the sacrifice was destined) or (if a sacrifice has taken place) with defiled (substance), the presentation (of the sacrificial substance to those other deities) is effected in the regular paradigma, in case there are remains (of the havis).
3.20.16	If nothing remains, the whole sacrifice (must be performed anew).
3.20.17	From a performed (act) no repetition (takes place), if a subordinate (secondary) part has been deficient, because of the superiority over the part falling together (the collision).
3.20.18	He should not afterwards repeat the mantra (which had been omitted).
3.20.19	According to Jātūkarṇya he should repeat it.
3.20.20	If for other deities (than those for whom the sacrifice is destined) (the sacrificial substance) has been taken out, or if other deities have been summoned, he should present (the havis) to the settled ones and perform the sacrifice for the erroneously summoned deities with clarified butter.
3.21.1	At iṣṭis, animal sacrifices and at a sacrifice of Soma it is the brahman priest who performs the act of atonement.
3.21.2	If a fault has been committed in the texts of the Ṛgveda, he sacrifices into the Gārhapatya with bhūḥ svāhā.
3.21.3	If in the Yajurveda, with bhuvaḥ svaḥa in the Dakṣiṇāgni.
3.21.4	But at a sacrifice of Soma is the Agnīdhriya fire.
3.21.5	If in the Sāmaveda with svaḥ svaḥā in the Āhāvaniya.
3.21.6	With bhur bhuvaḥ svaḥ svaḥa, if the fault is undefinable.
3.21.7	If he has gone forth (from home) without having performed the solemn addresses (to the fires), this address should be held whilst he turns himself (whilst being separated from his house) according to the direction (in which his house lies).
3.21.8	If he has performed the solemn addresses (because he intended to go on a journey) and does (after all) not go forth (then he should address them) as (he does) when he returns from a journey.
3.21.9	If after having taken up his fires either into the fire-drill or into himself, he does (after all) not go forth, the fire churning (should take place).
3.21.10	The solemn address to the fires may not be addressed to the fire-drill (but only to the fires themselves).
3.21.11	He must not dismiss his fires for reason of a non-oblation or a non-sacrifice.
3.21.12	But, having performed the atonement, he should substitute the omitted acts.
4.1.1-3	The sacrificer and his consort should, before the removing of the calves (from the mother-cow, to obtain the milk for the sāṃnāyya) eat the food suitable for a fast-day with the exception of meat, salt, beans and that material which he intends to take for the offerings.
4.2.1	On the preceding day he adds, at iṣṭis and animal sacrifices, fuel on the fires:
4.2.2	on the Āhāvaniya with the last of the three 'great words' (i.e. with svaḥ),
4.2.3	on the Gārhapatya with the first,
4.2.4	on the Dakṣiṇagni with the middle,
4.2.5	and on each fire two more, without any mantra.
4.2.6	On the Āhāvaniya a tenth with the three 'great words' combined.
4.2.7	The 'great words' may be replaced by the four (first) verses of the (hymn seen by the ṛṣi) Vihavya, one after another.
4.2.8	The rest (of the hymn is used for) solemnly addressing (all the fires).
4.2.9	Or (instead of the 'great words' and the hymn of Vihavya may be used) the (following) ten (verses) (beginning): "Gleaming from us the evil", (and the following): "Agni lead us along the good path"; "He who deeming himself in his heart"; "Protect us thou, O Agni".
4.2.10	And the solemn addressing (of all the fires) (takes place) with the two hymns: "Raise your voice in honour of Agni"; "This laudation in honour of Agni".
4.2.11	(Addressing the fuel takes place) without any mantra, according to Pragāhi.
4.2.12	Addressing the fuel with the 'great words' is commended by Paiṅgya.
4.2.13	That with the Vihavya-hymn is commended by Kauṣītaki.
4.2.14	The last one is that commended by Āruṇi.
4.3.1	The sacrifice of the rice-balls to the Fathers takes place at the afternoon on the day of new-moon.
4.3.2	To the east of the Dakṣiṇagni, he puts down together the winnowing basket, the earthen vessel, the wooden sword, the wooden jar, and the moṛtar and pestle.
4.3.3-6	Having deposited the wooden sword behind the Gārhapatya on southward pointed kuśa-grass-blades, and above it the rice in the wooden jar, having deposited to the east of the winnowing basket the earthen vessel, he binds his left knee and takes out with downwards turned fist the rice, fixing his thoughts on the Fathers (putting it out of the wooden jar into the earthen vessel).
4.3.7	From the rice-grains the husks whereof have been once separated by the consort (of the sacrificer), he boils over the Dakṣiṇagni a mess, so that it be slightly boiled below the aperture (of the earthen jar), pours clarified liquid butter over it, and removes it from the fire in a western direction. Thereupon turning the right side to the fire, he sweeps around (it with the moistened right hand), strews (in the same manner) grass around it and sprinkles it, and bending his right knee, wearing his upper garment over his left shoulder, makes with the stirring-ladle the (following) oblations whilst he is seated with his face turned to the east.
4.4.1	"To Agni, the bearer of food for the Fathers, svaḥa! To Soma, who is accompanied by the Fathers, svaḥa! To Yama, who is accompanied by Aṅgirasas and the Fathers, svaḥa!"
4.4.2	The pot-ladle he throws after (the oblations) into the fire. Then, having by means of the wooden sword cut up (a spot) to the south of the Dakṣiṇagni with (the formula): "Driven away are the Asuras (and) the Rakṣasas who sit on the vedi", and having sprinkled water on it, he puts down on the southern half of the cut up (spot), a firebrand with the verse: "Whatsoever Asuras roam at will, assuming various shapes, be they laṛge-bodied or small-bodied, may Agni expel them from this place". On the cut up (spot) he lays down some kuśa grass blades, which are severed (and cut off) at the root by one single stroke and pours with his hand, (with palm) directed downwards, water on this grass with (the formula): "So and so, and those who are there near to thee, wash (the hands)" pronouncing (instead of so and so) the name of his Father (of the sacrificer).
4.4.3-4	In the same manner to the south, for the grand-father and the great-grandfather.
4.4.5	With (the formula): "So and so, this is for thee and for those who are there near to thee", he lays down, after the manner of the water for washing the hands, (three) balls of rice.
4.4.6	In case of duality of fathers, both the balls on one (spot).
4.4.7	For one whose father is living, there is no (giving of the riceballs),
4.4.8	Neither to one who is separated by a living (person).
4.4.9	Or the son may give the balls to those to whom his father gives them.
4.4.10	Or (he performs the rite) up to the oblations.
4.4.11-13	Repeating (the formula): "Here, O Fathers, regale yourselves. Like bulls, O Fathers, come ye each to your share", he turns round to the north and sits down, three times retaining his breath as long as he can.
4.4.14	Then (with the formula): "The Fathers have regaled themselves, like bulls, they have each come to his share", he turns again round (to the south).
4.4.15	And (in the same manner), pours out water for their washing the hands.
4.5.1	(He now pays homage to the Fathers with formula): "Homage to you, O Fathers, for life. Homage to you, O Fathers, for dryness. Homage to you, O Fathers, for the terrible. Homage to you, O Fathers, for sap. Homage to you, O Fathers, for strength. Homage to you, O Fathers, for death. Homage to you, O Fathers, for ardour. Homage to you, O Fathers, for well-being. Homage to you, O Fathers. O Fathers, homage to you. May ye, O Fathers, who are there Fathers, be the chief one of those, may we, O Fathers, be the chief ones of the men who are here. The well-being (svadhā), O Fathers, which is there, that be yours; the prosperity that is here, O Fathers, that be ours. Grant us a house."
4.5.2	With (the formula): "Here is garment for ye. Be clothed, O Fathers", he lays down near (the rice-balls) three threads.
4.5.3	The remains of the water he pours out with (the verse): "Conveying juice, nectar, ghee, milk, sweet beverage, intoxicating liquor, ye are svadhā, satiate our Fathers".
4.5.4-7	Having smelt at the rice-balls and having put them (in the dish) he should eat them; or he should give them to a brāhmaṇa; or he should throw them into the water.
4.5.8	The middle rice-ball should be eaten by the consort of the sacrificer if she desires to get a son, with the verse: "Lay ye embryo unto me, O Fathers, a boy wreathed with lotuses, that a male may be here".
4.5.9-10	The firebrand he puts (back) on the fire and throws the grass which has been severed by one single stroke after it.
4.5.11-12	The agnihotṛa he performs evening and morning with rice-gruel and he himself (the sacrificer) performs it at a joint-day.
4.5.13	The same rite of the rice-ball sacrifice to the Fathers, should prevail for one who has not established his sacred fires.
4.6.1	Acts (which fall to the share) of the brahman are performed at the southern part (of the vihāra).
4.6.2	To the west, however, at the sacrifice to the Fathers.
4.6.3	The change of place has to conform to that of the sacrificer.
4.6.4	His seat is before (to the east of) the sacrificer.
4.6.5	The rite of throwing away the grass blade (before he sets himself down) is simiḍār to that of the hotṛ.
4.6.6	Likewise that of sitting down.
4.6.7	It (i.e. this manner of sitting down prevails) at the beginning of a (set of religious) act(s) and in case of separation of locality.
4.6.8	The modification (in regard to the rite of the hotṛ is) that the tip (of the grass-stalk) is directed to the east.
4.6.9	He sits down (after having repeated the formula): "Bṛhaspati is the brahman, may he protect the sacrifice, the lord of the sacrifice and myself. Bṛhaspati is the brahman of the Gods. I am the brahman of men, bhūḥ bhuvaḥ svaḥ o3m".
4.6.10	He is the eye-witness of all the acts.
4.6.11	At acts which are accompanied by a mantra he restrains his voice.
4.6.12	Wherever they move about, they return by a different path from that which they had taken when beginning to go.
4.6.13	When the fire is being carried forward, he accompanies at the south side (the adhvaryu and others).
4.6.14	At the moment when the fuel-stick is put on (the newly established Āhāvaniya) he sits down.
4.6.15	The horse (is destined) for the brahman at the establishment of the fires.
4.6.16	Or for all (the priests).
4.6.17	When summoned to give his solemn instigation he first speaks the word om and joins to this his instigation according to the act.
4.7.1-2	At the moment when the water is carried forwards, he restrains his voice, and lets it free together with (the call for) the Haviskṛt.
4.7.3	And when the sacrifice to (Agni) Sviṣṭakṛt has been performed (he restrains his voice and) lets it free with the uttering of the instigation for the after-offerings.
4.7.4	On the prāśitra (fore-portion) he gazes with (the formula): "I gaze on thee with the eye of Mitra".
4.7.5	He accepts it with (the formula): "On God Savitṛ's instigation I accept thee with the arms of the Aśvins and the hands of Pūṣan".
4.7.6	He puts down the vessel with the handle directed to the east, on the bare ground (of the vedi from which he shoves asunder the grass with which it is covered) with (the formula): "On the navel of the earth I place thee, in the lap of Aditi".
4.7.7-8	He then seizes the prāśitra with his ring-finger and thumb and eats it, without chewing, with (the formula): "I eat thee with Agni's mouth".
4.7.9-14	Having rinsed his mouth with (the formula): "Thou art extinction", he touches (the openings of) his vital oṛgans: nose and mouth with (the formula): "Thou art the protector of breath; protect my breath"; his eyes with: "Thou art the protector of eye, protect my eye"; his ears with: "Thou art the protector of the ear, protect my ear"; his navel with: "I place thee in Indra's belly".
4.7.15	With (the formula): "Who hath given? To whom has he given? Kāma hath given. To Kāma hath he given. Kāma is the giver, Kāma the receiver. O Kāma, this to thee" he receives the anvāhārya (mess of rice, boiled as sacrificial fee for all the priests).
4.7.16-17	Thereupon, when he has been addressed (by the adhvaryu) with (the words): "Brahman, I shall step forward", he mutters the (formula): "O God Savitṛ, this sacrifice these announce to Bṛhaspati, the Brahman; by him prosper the sacrifice; by him prosper the lord of the sacrifice; by him prosper me, impelled by God Savitṛ", he utters his instigation "Om, step forwards".
4.7.18	When praṇītā water has been 'unyoked', the brahman is dischaṛged.
4.7.19	The eating of the brahman's portion (takes place).
4.8.1	With (the formulas): "With an unimpaired eye I gaze on thee for welfare, for good offspring, for good men. Thou art Agni's tongue, a good caller of the Gods, be thou for me at every site, at every formula" the wife of the sacrificer gazes at the clarified butter.
4.8.2	When it has been deposited on the vedi the sacrificer gazes at it with (the formulas): "Lustrous art thou, resplendent art thou, nectar art thou peṛtaining to the All-Gods."
4.8.3	When all the sacrificial substances have been deposited (on the vedi) he touches them (with the formulas): "Safely they have sat down in the lap of divine truth, in the world of good-deed. Protect these, O Viṣṇu. Protect the sacrifice, protect the lord of the sacrifice", and with (the formula): "Protect me the leader of the sacrifice" (he touches) himself. Having sipped water with (the formula): "Thou art the lightening (vidyut), drive (vidya) away my bad lot", he puts a fuel-stick on the Āhāvaniya with (the formula): "O Agni, lord of observances, I am going to undeṛtake the observances. May I be equal to it. May it be successful. Here I enter from untruth into truth", and then restrains his voice.
4.8.4-6	With (the formula): "O Agni, O Vāyu, O Lightening, O Moon, may I reach the residence in your places!" he should fix his thoughts (on this wish), or (he should express) in them what is his wish. Or he should fix with (the formula): "May I reach inexhaustible food", on the ether or the ocean.
4.9.1	When iḍā is being invoked (he mutters the verse): "May Indra now bestow power on me! May abundant riches accrue to us! May there be blessings for us. May our wishes come true".
4.9.2	The sacrificial cake, when it is laid down on the strew, he touches with (the formula): "Ruddy one, swell! Protect my breath. Protect my progeny. Protect my cattle. Give over to me (as the cow does give the milk) the priestly caste, give over to me the warrior-caste, give over to me the peasant-caste, give over to me the regions. Thou art the fixing of the regions. Let the regions be fixed for me. Fixed for me be the regions. In these, being fixed, may I prosper. Here, ye Fathers, regale yourselves. Like bulls come hither each to his own share".
4.9.3	With the formula: "The Fathers have regaled themselves. Like bulls they have come each to his share" he puts the cake again (in the vessel).
4.9.4	He touches the anvāhārya (mess of boiled rice) with (the formula): "Thou art the portion of Prajāpati, full of strength and milk. Thou art imperishable. Mayest thou not perish for me yonder, in yonder world, and here."
4.9.5	When the after-offerings have been performed, he shoves asunder the two (sacrificial) ladles: with the right hand of which the palm is turned downwards the juhū eastwards with (the formula): "May I be victorious after the victory of Agni, (of) Agni and Soma. Through the instigation of vigour I shove myself on"; with the left hand of which the palm is turned upwards the upabhṛt westwards with (the formula): "May Agni, (may) Agni and Soma push him away who hates us and whom we hate. Through the instigation of vigour I shove him away".
4.9.6	Elsewhere according to the deities (for which the principal sacrificial fire is intended).
4.9.7	When (the oblation to Agni) Gṛhapati has not (yet) been offered, he performs by means of the sruva oblation of clarified butter into the Gārhapatya with (the following formulas):
4.10.1-4	(first): "The portion of food, which, O ye Gods of hundredfold power, was arranged for you, thereby do I propitiate you. Become satiated, O Ahāha and Ahuhū! Svaḥa!" (second): "To the two Gandharvas, the Nāriṣṭhas: Ahāha and Ahuhū!" (third): "O Agni, ruler over the Earth! O Vāyu, ruler over the intermediate regions! O Savitṛ, ruler over the instigations! O Sūrya, ruler over the stars! O Soma, ruler over the herbs! O Tvaṣṭṛ, ruler over the fuel-sticks, over the forms! O Mitra, ruler over the true ones! O Varuṇa, ruler over the laws! O Indra, ruler over the eldest! O Prajāpati, ruler over the creatures! -Ye Gods, advance amongst the Gods: the first ones of you amongst the second, etc. increasing each time one by one, unto 'the eleventh'. - Ye All Gods thirty-three in number, consiṣṭing of thrice eleven! Of ever higher track, of ever higher followers! Ye all Vaiśvānaras! Ye all of all greatness! Do ye favour me here in this brahmanical caste, this kingly caste, in this undeṛtaking, in this wish, in this resting-place, in this invocation of the Gods. May this wish of mine be fulfilled, Svaḥa"-- and here he inserts whatever is his special wish. As fourth, (comes an oblation) with (the verse): "O Prajāpati, no other than thou".
4.11.1	The dhruvā he 'makes swell' (i.e. fills her anew) with (the verse) "Let the dhruvā swell with the sacrificial substance: the clarified butter, at sacrifice on sacrifice for the God-worshippers, in the udder of the Sun-maiden, in the lap of Aditi, broad-streamed be the earth at this sacrifice".
4.11.2	When the śamīṣṭayajus oblation is performed he lays hold from behind (on the adhvaryu).
4.11.3-4	Having touched the vessel full of water with (the formula): "The good thou art; may good come to me. All thou art, may all come to me. Full art thou, may the full come to me. Imperishable art thou, mayest thou not perish for me, in yonder world and here", he sprinkles from it in the direction of the quarters with (the formula): "Together with the eastern quarter may the Gods (and) the priests cleanse themselves. Together with the southern quarter may the months (and) the Fathers cleanse themselves. Together with the western quarter may the horses (and) the cows cleanse themselves. Together with the northern quarter may the waters (and) the herbs cleanse themselves. Together with the zenith quarter may the sacrifice and the year and the lord of sacrifice cleanse themselves".
4.11.5	Once each time with the mantras, (thereupon) twice each time silently.
4.11.6	Having touched (the remains of the water) with the three verses beginning: "Ye waters are wonderful" and having poured (it) out eastwards or northwards with the (two verses): "May this praise fetch you" and "By whose vigour the spheres were propped up" he addresses it with (the verse): "I send you off to the ocean, go ye to your own place of origin. Our men (may be) unhurt. May our possession not be spilled". He then touches his breast with the four verses: "Hail to us the Goddesses", and (the openings of) his vital breaths with (the two): "With thought lead us to meet, O Indra", and "We have united with lustre, with sap, with bodies, and with happy thought. May Tvaṣṭṛ, the dispenser of boons, grant us riches", and with (the last verse-quarter of the lastly cited verse): "And may he make even what was injured in our body", he wipes his mouth.
4.12.1	Thereupon he makes the Viṣṇu-strides, from the southern hip-part of the vedi up to the Āhāvaniya.
4.12.2	With (the formula): "In the sky Viṣṇu hath stridden with the jagatī metre, after him have I stridden. Excluded therefrom is he who hates us and whom we hate" he brings to his right foot (which he has put forward) his left, leaving it somewhat behind (the right one).
4.12.3	For the second (time) with (the formula): "In the intermediate region Viṣṇu hath stridden with the triṣṭubh metre".
4.12.4	For the third (time) with (the formula): "On the earth Viṣṇu hath stridden with the gāyatrī metre".
4.12.5	With (the formula): "In the quarters Viṣṇu hath stridden with the anuṣṭubh metre" he puts down his feet obliquely.
4.12.6	The end (of each mantra) is simiḍār.
4.12.7	Then he looks towards the east with (the formula): "We have gone to the realm of light".
4.12.8	To the Āhāvaniya with (the formula): "We have united with light".
4.12.9	Again towards the east with (the formula): "(May) I (unite) with progeny, (and) progeny with me. (May) I (unite) with welfare; (and) welfare with me. Good is the sacrifice. Better may I be".
4.12.10	Turning to the sun he addresses it reverentially with (the formulas): "Self-existent art thou, the best ray of light! Life-bestowing art thou, give me (long) life. Splendour-bestowing art thou. Give me splendour. Body-protecting art thou, protect my body! Here I expel my spiteful enemy from these quarters, from this sky, from this intermediate region, from this food, from this standing-place. Expelled is the spiteful enemy". With (the formulas): "I make the turn of Indra", "I turn myself with Āditya's turning", he turns himself along his right arm (as axle). He then goes turning himself against the course of the sun (and addresses) the Gārhapatya with (the formulas): "O householder Agni, may I become a good householder through thee O Agni, the householder. Mayest thou, O Agni, become a good householder through me, O Agni, the householder. May our household-matters be unlike a cart drawn by only one bullock for a hundred winters for me from the side of so and so" and here he pronounces (instead of so and so) the names of his son(s). With (the formula: "bhūḥ bhuvaḥ svaḥ! Unite me with my desire" he touches the embers (of this fire). Then having muttered (the verse): "The sacrifice came to be, it came into existence, it was propagated and it increased again. It became the overlord of the Gods Let it make us overlords" he sips water in the same manner (as described), with (the formula): "O Agni, lord of observances, I have undeṛtaken the observance. I have been equal to it. I have been successful in it. I now am he that I am" puts a stick of fuel into the Āhāvaniya and thereby lets his voice free.
4.13.1	With (the verse): "Who, (being) far away or near, hates us equal, foreign, or distant, may nothing of him be left over as from the fuel that is burnt down" he throws all the dead coals of the Āhāvaniya into (this fire). Then he mutters the triṣṭich (beginning): "Possessing cows, O Agni". Thereupon he addresses, standing, the Sun with (the verses): "From the darkness we have come to the light"; "This eye made by the Gods"; (and the formula): "May I not be cut off from seeing thee; what heat is thine, may I not be separated from that (heat) of thine". Then he makes a turn in the same manner (as described), turns from right to left, sits down and (paṛtakes) (of some) fresh milk—in case he is desirous of getting offspring—with (the verses): "May this sacrificial substance be productive for me, possessed of ten men, possessed of all the troops, for hail, self-winning, progeny-winning, safety-winning, cattle-winning, place-winning"; "May Agni raise for me abundant offspring. Bestow ye upon us food, milk and seed".
4.13.2	Or with the verse: "Of Dadhikravas I have sung", if he is desirous of getting prosperity, (he paṛtakes of) sour coagulated milk.
4.13.3	With the formula: "Let the lord of the sacrifice (be united) with his prayer" he eats the sacrificer's portion.
4.13.4	If he is away from home on a journey, he (the adhvaryu) offers it together with the śamīşṭayajus (oblation).
4.14.1	The ritual acts appeṛtain to the living.
4.14.2	If, the rite being unfinished, he (the sacrificer) dies, it ends at his death at (soma-sacrifices) which last one day; there is no finishing of it.
4.14.3	They throw all the sacrificial substances into the Āhāvaniya.
4.14.4	They cut the hair on the body and the nails of him who has passed away.
4.14.5	They bathe and adorn him.
4.14.6-9	In the southern quarter (i.e. to the south of the place where he has died during the sacrifice), on a spot sloping to the south or the south-east, he erects, after having swept it with a branch of palāśa with (the verse): "Go away, disperse" and having by means of the wooden-sword cut it up and sprinkled it (with water), a pyre in the south-eastern direction.
4.14.10	In front (of it) he deposits the Āhāvaniya (of the man who has passed away); behind the Gārhapatya; on the right side the Dakşinagni.
4.14.11-12	After they have brought up (the dead) between the Gārhapatya and the Dakṣiṇagni, they lay him down on the pyre, on his back.
4.14.13	On the right side (of the pyre) or behind (it) they bind the real anustaraṇī-cow or she-goat with its face turned to the south.
4.14.14-15	Thereupon he takes from the anustaraṇī victim from behind either whilst it is still living, or after it has been slaughtered the two kidneys, warms them slightly (by holding them) over the Dakṣiṇāgni and puts them into the hands (of the deceased) with the two (verses): "Run by two dogs of Saramā".
4.14.16	On the seats of his vital principles he puts chips of gold.
4.14.17	He now covers his face with the omentum (of the victim) with the verse: "Wrap thyself up with the cow(s) as a protection against Agni".
4.14.18-20	In his right hand (he deposits) his juhū, in his left his upabhṛt, the dhruva on his breast.
4.14.21	The ladle for the agnihotṛa on his throat.
4.14.22	The two dipping spoons (sruvau) on his nostrils.
4.14.23	The vessel for containing the prāśitra (the fore-portion) on his right ear.
4.14.24	The vessel which has served for the pranita water on his left ear.
4.14.25	The kapālas on his head.
4.14.26	The pressing stones on his teeth.
4.14.27	The samavattadhānī (the vessel for the iḍā) on his abdomen.
4.14.28	The two wooden vessels on his ribs.
4.14.29	The wooden sword at his right side.
4.14.30	The black antelope hide at his right side.
4.14.31	The two araṇis on his pudenda.
4.14.32	The moṛtar and pestle on his thighs and knees.
4.14.33	The winnowing-basket and the śakaṭa on his feet.
4.14.34	At his feet the vessels for the agnihotṛa.
4.14.35	(All) these (vessels as far as it is possible) he fills with ghee mixed with coagulated sour milk.
4.14.36	Thereupon they bring the fires in contact with (the body), after having recited (the formulas): "Thou here (art born) from him, of him thou. He is thy womb, thou art his womb. O Jātavedas convey him (thither) where the place of the righteous ones is. This one has engendered thee, may this one (called) so and so, be born out of thee, svāhā!"
4.15.1	After he has muttered, when (the corpse) is set to flames, the ten (verses beginning): "Do not burn him, O Agni", they strive forth making a turn with the skins, to the north, without looking on (without looking backwards).
4.15.2	With the two (verses): "Effacing the foot-trace of Death" he bespeaks them.
4.15.3	They (betake themselves to a stream and) touch the water (= bathe) with the two hymns: "Ye waters, are wonderful" and "Gain thou, O Soma, and conquer", plunging into (the water) without bending (their head beneath the surface) and not rubbing themselves (their hands for cleansing).
4.15.4	Having presented (to the deceased with the formula): "So and so this for thee" a gift of water poured out of the two open hands held together, they step out of the water repeating (the verse) "May the waters, the brothers, purify us", put on a new garment, revere the Sun with (the verse): "May we behold that eye ordained by the Gods" and return to their home, the youngest ones preceding.
4.15.5	Thereupon in a vessel filled with water having thrown dūrvā grass, barley and mustard-seed, he deposits this vessel on fresh cow-dung and touches with (the verse): "Here floweth the stony-one" a stone which has been anointed, the fire and a vessel filled with water.
4.15.6	The observances, which they should observe during one day, during three days, or during nine days, or up to the gathering (of the bones), are that they lie (at night) on the bare ground, that they take as food only those kinds of substances which are used for sacrifices and that they interrupt the religious acts except that are performed with the help of the three sacred fires.
4.15.7	"They should not increase the days of evil" thus Kauṣitaki used to say.
4.15.8	On the uneven days of the second half of the month (under waning-moon) he allays with the two (verses): "Whom thou, O Agni, hast burnt" the bones with a mixture of water and milk, throws the bones into an old pitcher, covers (this pitcher) with (the verse): "I prop for thee the earth" with a lump of earth, buries it with (the verse): "Gape, O Earth" into a ditch, and puts it with (the verse): "Let the gaping earth stand firm" on a spot surrounded by wooden posts. They bury it in the wood.
4.15.9	If the bones are not found, (they take) three hundred and sixty stalks of palāśa.
4.15.10	These are distributed (in the following manner):
4.15.11-20	Forty on the (place of the) head; ten on the (place of the) neck; a hundred on the (place of the) arms: the shoulder and the shoulder blade; thirty on the (place of the) breast; twenty on the (place of the) belly; six on the (place of the) testicles; four on the (place of the) member; a hundred on the (place of the) thighs; thirty on the (place of the knees and the knee-holes of the legs; twenty on the (place of the) feet and the toes.
4.15.21	In this manner there are three hundred and sixty stalks.
4.15.22	He makes them into the semblance of a man, surrounds them (fixes them together) with the woolen threads, smears them with powdered barley, anoints them with liquified butter, whereupon they consecrate (= cremate) him by his fires.
4.15.23	If he wishes he may consecrate his wife, if she has died before him, with his fires or with fires which he gets indirectly from his sacred fires, then he should take another wife and establish his sacred fires anew.
4.16.1	At the end of the (period of the) observances (takes place) the act of (applying) 'the fence'.
4.16.2	Having spread to the west of the fire the hide of a red bull with its neck part northwards or eastwards and with the hairy side turned upwards, or (instead of the hide) kuśa grass with the tips directed to the same quarter, they sit down thereon.
4.16.3	Having laid down between the fire and them (i.e. those who take part in the ceremony) an anointed stone, and having taken for enclosing sticks (to lay around the fire) the pins of a yoke and a fuel-stick of śamī wood or of palāśa wood, he pours libation by means of a dipping spoon made of varana wood or of brass.
4.16.4	The performer sits during this act with legs bent (making a lap) whilst the participants hold on to him from behind.
4.16.5	He pours out libation with (the verse): "This fence I put down for the living"; "May death go along, may not-dying (before the fatal time) reach me. May the son of Vivasvat grant us safety. May wealth fall down on us as (if it were) the leaf of a tree. May the lord of Saci be associated with us" and with the ten verses which are used at the establishment of the fires after the rite attributed to Āruṇi.
4.16.6	Having poured out (these) twelve libations, he looks over his right shoulder (turning his head) at all (the others) with the two verses: "Just as the days follow one after another" mixes salve with liquified butter and anoints by means of kuśa-grass stalks the eyes of the women with the verse: "These females" each once with the mantra, twice silently.
4.16.7-8	The two (verses): "Rise, O lord of the brahman" he speaks over them (all the participants), whilst they stand up (from the ox-hide) laying hold from behind either on the right arm (shoulder) of a brāhmaṇa, or on the tail of a draught-ox.
4.16.9	The sacrificial fee consists of the draught-ox, a new (unwashed) garment, and the (dipping-spoon) of brass.
4.16.10	At the south side (of the fire) the heir (of the deceased) goes thrice around the property (which he inherits) having his right side to it with the hymn beginning "Turn ye back".
4.16.11	The act of applying 'the fence' rests on the heir.
4.17.1-2	He sacrifices to Rudra an ox, for bringing good fortune. They call it the 'spit-ox (sulagava)'.
4.17.3-4	(It is performed) in the light half of the month having fasted, under a propitious lunar mansion in the north-eastern direction (from his dwelling) after he has churned the fire and conveyed it eastwards (to the Āhāvaniya).
4.17.5	To the east (of this fire) he buries a branch of palāśa with its leaves (so that only the nether part is buried in the ground).
4.17.6	To the north of and near it he places the victim.
4.17.7	With (the formula): "Agreeably to Rudra I bring thee near" he brings it near the branch which here replaces the sacrificial post.
4.17.8	With (the formula): "Agreeably to Rudra I sprinkle thee" (he sprinkles the victim).
4.17.9	With (the formula): "Agreeably to Rudra I fasten thee" he fastens the victim to the branch of palāśa.
4.17.10	After the rite of going around the victim with a fire-brand has been performed they lead it in a northern direction.
4.17.11	They slaughter it, while it lies with the head directed to the east and the feet to the north, or with the head directed to the west and the feet to the north, so that it does not bellow.
4.17.12	If it bellows, he offers a libation (of clarified butter) with (the verse): "If the victim has uttered a cry or strikes its breast with its feet, may Agni Jātavedas release me from that sin", svāhā!
4.17.13	He draws out the omentum, washes it, roasts it over the eastern fire, pours clarified butter over it, removes it (from the spit), sprinkles thrice around (the fire) with (the words): "Auspicious! Auspicious!" and performs libations (with the following mantras):
4.18.1	"She who lies athwart, thinking: 'it is I who keep (all things) asunder', to her who brings prosperity, I offer this stream of butter, svaḥa".
4.18.2	"Him we call unto us, whose is all what is here. He, the lord of wishes, may grant me (the fulfilment of) my wishes, svaḥa" for the second libation.
4.18.3	"O Agni, ruler over the Earth" (is for) the third.
4.18.4	"O Prajāpati, no other than thou" (is for) the fourth.
4.18.5-6	Having fastened together three middle-leaves of palāśa and having made in them an underlayer of liquified butter, he puts thereon the omentum, he pours again liquified butter on it and offers the omentum with the following (verse and formulas): "Over how many I command, how many are the inmates of my house, on behalf of these I praise thee. Be meṚciful to us all, O God. I know thy father, I know thy mother. Heaven is thy father, Earth is thy mother. To thee, O God, to Bhava, to Śarva, to Pasupati, to Ugra, to the Great God, to Rudra, to Iśāna, to Asani, svaḥa" whereupon he throws the palāśa-leaves and the two pronged foṛks, which have served for roasting the omentum.
4.18.7	Having performed a subsequent libation of liquified butter with (the formula): "To thy appearing, to (thy) counter-appearing svaḥa" he sprinkles water all around (the fire) in the same manner.
4.18.8	Over the western fire he cooks a mess of rice in a wooden jar.
4.18.9	To the north of the fire he cooks the portions (of the victim which must be offered).
4.18.10	Having poured together the mess of boiled rice, the broth, the meat and liquified butter, he offers this mixture after having thrice sprinkled the fire all around with (the words): śaṃyoḥ! śaṃyoḥ! (with the following mantras):
4.19.1	"To Bhava svaḥa! To Śarva svaḥa! To Rudra svaḥa! To Iśāna svaḥa! To Agni Svisṭakṛt svaḥa!"
4.19.2-5	Having sprinkled all around the fire in the same manner and having poured together (another part of) the same (substance) he sacrifices in the western fire: "To Bhavānī svaḥa! To Śarvani svaḥa! To Rudrani svaḥa! To Isanānī svaḥa! To Agneyi svaḥa!
4.19.6	The sprinkling all around the fire is the same.
4.19.7-8	He now deposits six palāsa leaves (in a row) directed to the north east, (beginning at the western fire and) ending at the place of cutting asunder. On these he places the excrementa mixed with the blood and assigns (this mixture) to Rudra's army with (the formulas): "Ye noisy ones, ye noise-making ones, ye roaring ones, ye dispeṛṣing ones, ye hissing ones, ye carrion-devouring ones, this is your part, accept it graciously! svaḥa!"
4.19.9	And the sacrificer reveres the God (with the following formulas and verses):
4.20.1-2	"O lord of the earth, O lord of the intermediate region, O lord of the world, O lord of the spirits, O lord of the great spirit, spare our two-footed and our four-footed cattle! Treat kindly our two-footed ones and our four-footed cattle. He who hates us and whom we hate (for him) art thou difficult to satisfy with thy shadow, because of thy insidiousness. The heart is thy bow, the mind is thy arrow, the shooting is thy eye. As such we know thee. Homage to thee! May Soma refresh thee. Do not hurt me. The two who like wolves with jaws wide opened, roam in the forest. Bhava and Śarva, the sons of the Great God, (may) homage (be paid) and with the (four) hymns (beginning): "What might we say to Rudra"; "These prayers we offer to Rudra"; "Let, O Father of the Maruts"; "These praises bring to Rudra of strong bow".
4.20.3	The sacrificial fee (consists of) a choice object (from the possession of the sacrificer).
4.20.4	The manner of proceeding at the bringing up of the victim to (the sacrificial branch), the sprinkling and the enciṚcling with a burning fuel-stick is the same as that of the animal sacrifice.
4.20.5	(The word) "a palāśa-branch" (to be used instead of the sacrificial post) indicates that also for other animal sacrifices (than the spit-ox) the omentum should be offered to the deity (for which the animal is destined), to the deity the sacrificial substance and to Agni Sviṣṭakṛt.
4.20.6	Of messes of boiled rice the butter-portions are destined for Agni and for Soma, the omentum for the deity, the sacrificial substance for the deity and for Agni Sviṣṭakṛt, and the libation of liquified butter for Anumati.
4.21.1	Six (kinds of) persons are worthy of a respectful reception as a guest: the spiritual teacher, the officiating-priest, the father-in-law, the king, the Veda-student who has taken his absolving bath, the friend.
4.21.2	Turning his face to the north or to the east, he either sits down or steps on the bundle of grass with (the verse): "I am the highest of my people, as the sun is the highest of the lightning flashes. Here I tread on him, who infects us".
4.21.3	The water for washing the feet he accepts with (the formula): "Thou art the milk of the virāj. May I obtain the milk of the virāj. In me (may dwell) the milk of the verse-quarter virāj".
4.21.4	It is when he is addressed by the host with the word: "The aṛghya-water (I present to thee)", he accepts the water.
4.21.5	When he is addressed: "The (water) for sipping", he sips with the three verses: "Ye waters are wonderful" with each verse once.
4.21.6	When he is addressed: "The honey mixture", he gazes on it as (is done) on the fore-portion.
4.21.7	He accepts it in the same manner, the only difference is (that he adds at the end of the formula) the words: "For fame, for brahman-lustre".
4.21.8	Having accepted it he puts it in his left hand, takes with the thumb and ring-finger (a small quantity) out of it at the fore-part of the brass vessel and smears this on its fore-part with the formula: "May the Vasus, whose king is Agni, paṛtake of thee".
4.21.9	With (the formula): "May the Fathers, whose king is Yama, paṛtake of thee" (he takes a small quantity) from the southern part (and smears it) on the southern part (of the vessel).
4.21.10	With (the formula): "May the Ādityas, whose king is Varuṇa, paṛtake of thee", (he takes a small quantity) from the western part (and smears it) on the western part.
4.21.11	With (the formula): "May the Rudras, whose king is Indra, paṛtake of thee" (he takes) from the northern part (and smears it) on the northern part.
4.21.12	With (the formula): "May the All-Gods, whose king is Prajāpati, paṛtake of thee" (he takes) from the middle (and throws it) upwards.
4.21.13	Each time once with the mantras, twice without a mantra.
4.21.14-15	Having paṛtaken of it with each of the three great utterances (bhūḥ, bhuvaḥ, svaḥ), he then paṛtakes for the fourth time (with the three vyāhṛtis combined).
4.21.16-18	The remains should be given to a brāhmaṇa, or the whole of it should be drunk, or the remains should be thrown into the water.
4.21.19	He then touches his breast with the three verses: "Hail to us the Goddesses".
4.21.20-21	Simiḍār are the touching of the (openings of his) vital breaths and the wiping of the mouth.
4.21.22	(Thereupon he is) silent unto the giving of the cow.
4.21.23-24	When he has been addressed (by the host) with (the word): "The cow" he either (answers): "Om, slay (her)", or he first mutters the verse: "The mother of the Rudras" and then says loudly "Set her free, let her eat grass".
4.21.25	He should announce to the guest successively: "The bundle", "The foot-water", "The aṛghya-water", "The water for sipping", "The honey-mixture", "The cow".
5.1.1	When he is going to undeṛtake a soma-sacrifice, he chooses as his officiating priests (brāhmaṇas) who derive their descent from a ṛṣi, who are young, and well-versed in the Vedas.
5.1.2	(He chooses solemnly) (only) the four (principal priests) or all of them.
5.1.3	“The moon is my divine brahman" whisperingly, “Thou art my human (brahman)" loudly.
5.1.4	In this manner he chooses them all.
5.1.5	“The Sun is my divine udgātṛ, thou art the human”.
5.1.6	“The Fire is my divine hotṛ, thou art the human”.
5.1.7	“The Wind is my divine adhvaryu, thou art the human”.
5.1.8	“The Prajāpati is my divine sadasya, thou art the human”.
5.1.9	“The seasons are my divine hotṛasamsins, ye are the human”.
5.1.10	(Each of them, who is thus solemnly) chosen mutters (the formula): “Splendour thou hast announced to me. Good thou hast announced to me. Prosperity thou hast announced to me. Fortune thou hast announced to me. Glory thou hast announced to me. In me (may be) splendour, in me good, in me prosperity, in me fortune, in me glory”. Then he asks: "I surmise that it is not an ahīna, nor a subsequently appointed one, nor one where the priestship has been abandoned, nor one of blameable sacrificial fees”?, and (according to the answer) he accepts or refuses.
5.2.1	The place of worship (must be one that) slopes to the east.
5.2.2	For one who is desirous of sacrifices to the north-east.
5.2.3	For one who is desirous of priestly lustre (it must be a place), where the hotṛ, whilst reciting (his verses) can see the Āhāvaniya, the Sun and waters (a river, or a pond).
5.2.4	The consecration (dīkṣā) (should take place) during the bright half (of the month) under a favourable lunar mansion, likewise the conclusion.
5.3.1	At afternoon (takes place) the sacrifice connected with the consecration, and intended for Agni and Viṣṇu.
5.3.2	It is a modification of the sacrifice of full-moon.
5.3.3	It has fifteen kindling-verses.
5.3.4	The (offering of the) sacrificial substance is (performed) whisperingly.
5.3.5	Virāj (verses are the invīting- and offering-verses) for (the sacrifice to Agni) Sviṣṭakṛt.
5.3.6	Or the standing ones.
5.3.7	Up to the iḍā ceremony of the cake which is offered at the third pressing the wishes at the iḍā ceremony and at the sūktavāka are replaced by the words: “Called is this sacrificer: he hopes to reach the end of the sacrifice’s approval" (at the iḍā ceremony); and: “This sacrificer hopes: May I reach the end of the sacrifice’s approval” (at the sūktavāka).
5.3.8	Up to the (sacrifice) of the (he-goat) on the pressing day, he should at the sūktavāka (of each iṣṭi) not mention the name of the sacrificer.
5.3.9	It closes with the patnīsaṃyājas.
5.4.1	Having taken hold of the adhvaryu from behind, when he offers the elevatory libations, it falls to the share of the sacrificer (to mutter over these libations the formulas): “ May my mind be consecrated by the mind. May my voice be consecrated by the voice. May my breath be consecrated by the breath. May my eye be consecrated by the eye. May my ear be consecrated by the ear”.
5.4.2	Or he (the sacrificer) may offer (himself) these libations.
5.4.3	At a soma-sacrifice which is preceded by one (day of) dīkṣā, the solemn addressing (of the fires falls to the share of the sacrificer).
5.4.4-6	of the Āhāvaniya with (the formula): "I approach the mind as dīkṣā"; of the Gārhapatya with (the formula ): "I approach the word as dlksa"; of the Dakṣiṇagni with (the formula): "I approach the breath as dīkṣā".
5.4.7	The days of consecration are unlimited. At their completion the introductory sacrifice (is performed).
5.5.1	To Pathyā svasti, to Agni, to Soma and to Savitṛ with liquified butter, to Aditi with a mess of boiled rice.
5.5.2	The invīting- and offering-verses (for Pathyā svasti) are: "Hail to us on the ways"; "Hail on the long journey"; for (Agni): "O Agni, lead us"; "O Agni, bring us over"; (for Soma): "Thou, O Soma, skilled in thought"; "Which favourite resorts of thee with havis"; (for Savitṛ): "This desirable glory of thee, O Savitṛ"; "Savitṛ, who all these beings"; (for Aditi): "The well-protecting Earth"; "We would call to our aid".
5.5.3	It (this rite) has fifteen kindling verse.
5.5.4	The offering of the sacrificial substance is performed whisperingly.
5.5.5	There are no butter-portions.
5.5.6	(The invīting- and offering-verses) for (the sacrifice to Agni) Sviṣṭakṛt are: "Thee of most resplendent fame"; "What is carrying best".
5.5.7	The rite closes with the (muttering of) the śaṃyu (formula).
5.6.1-2	When the Soma has been bought and deposited into the cart and he (the hotṛ) has been addressed (by the adhvaryu) with (the words): "For Soma which is being conveyed around (recite)" he (first) recites standing between the two wheel-tracks (the verse): "From good to better, do thou advance forward. May Bṛhaspati be thy leader. Then settle down on this best (spot) of the earth. Drive, accompanied by heroes, the foes far away".
5.6.3	Accompanying the others and moving forwards between the two tracks (he recites) the (verses): "This prayer, O God, of the befriending"; "Over the woods he hath extended the intermediate region", and the four (beginning): "O Soma, thy wondrous help".
5.6.4	Having caused to stop the cart before the shed they introduce the Soma.
5.6.5	The hotṛ should accompany them, along the way they enter into the shed.
5.6.6	With (the verse): "Which favourite resorts with havis" he enters after (them).
5.6.7	The closing (verse): "The God hath come" he recites standing before the Āhāvanlya with bis face turned to the south.
5.6.8	Having touched (water), he is dismissed.
5.6.9	From this moment on until the bringing forward of Agni and Soma, they use boiling water, wherever water is wanted (for sipping or touching).
5.7.1	The guest-offering (is) destined for Viṣṇu.
5.7.2	It is a modification of the sacrifice on full-moon day.
5.7.3	(The invīting- and offering-verses are): " Of Viṣṇu I will proclaim " Therefore Viṣṇu is lauded’’.
5.7.4	(The invīting- and offering-verses for the sacrifice) to (Agni) Sviṣṭakṛt (are): " Him, the hotṛ of bright chariot"; "He who provided with good horses’’.
5.7.5	(At the moment) when the sacrificial substance has been deposited (on the vedi) he recites the verses to accompany the churning of the fire.
5.7.6	The offering of the sacrificial substance is performed whisperingly.
5.7.7	It closes with the iḍā ceremony.
5.8.1-2	All (the officiating priests and the sacrificer) having touched (water) touch simultaneously with (the formula): “Thou art the strength of the Gods, unassailed, unassaiḍāble, uncursed, curse-averting, uncursable. May I straightway go to the truth. Establish me in welfare’’ the liquified butter dedicated to Tanūnaptṛ in the dhruva spoon, in which (a piece) of gold has been deposited, which has been put in a vessel on the strew (of the vedi).
5.8.3	Having touched (the lustral boiling water) they pass before the Āhāvanlya and whilst touching the stalks of the Soma they make him swell by reciting (the following verses): “May stalk on stalk of thee, O God Soma, swell for Indra, the winner of a part of the riches. May Indra swell for thee, do thou swell for Indra. Make to swell us, the friends; through gain and wisdom. May I attain prosperously, O God Soma, the conclusion, the pressing of thee’’.
5.8.4	Thereupon they touch their breast with (the verse): "The stalk which the Ādityas make swell, the imperishable, which the imperishable drink, through that may king Varuṇa, may Bṛhaspati, may the guardians of the world make us swell ’’.
5.8.5	Having (again) touched (the water) they lay their hand on the prastara-(bunch) so that the palm of the right one is turned upwards; at afternoon so that the palm of the left hand is turned upwards. Holding their hands in this position they make amends reciting (the formula): "Desired are riches, exceedingly (desired) for food, for good fortune, the right for the rightsaying ones. Homage to Heaven and Earth".
5.8.6	(The rites) from the causing to swell the Soma on (take place) at the completion of each upasad.
5.9.1	The first sacrifice (of Soma one undeṛtakes, is performed) without pravaṛgya.
5.9.2	For a learned brāhmaṇa there is option.
5.9.3-4	When the utensils required for the pravaṛgya ceremony are being put together, he (the hotṛ) enters the shed through the eastern door, passes along the north side of the Āhāvanlya, the two mounds and the utensils, sits down near and behind (them) and, when he has been addressed (by the adhvaryu) with (the words): "Perform the praise on (the pravaṛgya) he recites, without taking breath, each verse connecting them with the prāṇava.
5.9.5	"The Brahman, first born, hath of old been unclosed by Vena from the shining edge. He unclosed its fundamental highest shapes: the womb of the existent and of the non-existent."
5.9.6	"This queen goeth first to the father for the first birth standing in the creation; to it (him?) have I sent this wellshining sinuous one; they mix the hot drink for the first one of the milk”(?).
5.9.7	"Onto that God Savitṛ, the sage within the two bowls, I sing, unto him of true impulses, the bestower of treasures, unto the wise friend, he at whose impulse the resplendent light shone high, the golden-handed sage hath measured the heaven with beauty".
5.9.8	(The verse): "Whom they annoint" (he recites at the moment) when the aperture (of the pravaṛgya vessel) is being annointed (by the adhvaryu).
5.9.9	(The verse): "Sit thee down” when it is being set down (on the mound).
5.9.10	(The verses): "Be thou well-disposed to us, O Agni"; "Burn thou well, O Agni; " The (foe) who lies in ambush, O Agni” he recites while the coals are being brought near (the vessel).
5.9.11	(Then follow) the five (verses): "Take on brilliancy".
5.9.12	(The two verses): "Around thee, the singer” and "In the two ”.
5.9.13	(The two verses): "Pure is one of them"; "Worthily dost thou bear".
5.9.14	(Then) the two hymns: "The bird annointed" and "At the rim of the drop".
5.9.15	(Then) the two (verses): "Thy strainer hath been spread out for thee".
5.9.16	(Then the verse): "The dhiṣaṇā’s spread out the strainer, holding the cauldron, which glowed at the (titterings of the) syllable om. In the midst of the ocean the living creatures meditated three times a day on the bright name of the Sun".
5.9.17	(Then) the hymn: "This Vena," without the verse "In the sky the eagle".
5.9.18	(Then) the hymn: "Thee, the lord of the troops".
5.9.19	For (a woman) who is desirous of obtaining a male child he should, at (the words): "May we, having good sons, speak loudly in the assembly" think of a son.
5.9.20	(Then) the nine (verses beginning): "What will win your favour".
5.9.21	(Then) the three (verses): “Come to us with all help, 0 Aśvins”.
5.9.22-23	(Then) at morning the hymn: “The two who come at morning"; at afternoon the hymn: “'Agni shineth”.
5.9.24-26	Then the whole (hymn): “I praise Heaven and Earth" Letting free his voice, he recites over (the cauldron) omitting the last verse (of the last-mentioned hymn, at the moment) when (by the adhvaryu) has been said “Glowing is the cauldron” (the verse): “He hath made aglow”, and then closes this part of his recitation with the last verse.
5.9.27	Having touched (the lustral water) he rises, pays reverence to the mahāvīra with the chapter of verses ‘destined for gazing at ' touches (the water) and sits down.
5.10.1	(The verse): “I call unto me”, (he recites) at the moment when the cow is called near.
5.10.2	(The verse): ‘‘Making him'" when she comes near.
5.10.3	(The verse): “Towards thee, O God Savitṛ”, when the rope is put round her (horns).
5.10.4	(The two verses): “Like a calf with the mother-(cow)” and "With the mother-(cow) like a calf'’, when the calf is admitted to the cow.
5.10.5	With (the verse): “Thy teat”, when the calf catches the udder of the mother-cow.
5.10.6	The verse: “The cow hath bellowed" when the calf is being removed (from the mother).
5.10.7	(The two verses): “Sit ye down near, with homage” and “Agreeing together they sit down”, when he (the milker) sits down near (the cow).
5.10.8	Whilst the cow is milked (he recites the verses): “As at the milking the cow”; “Seven milk”; “By the ten”; “The living cloud” - “Enkindled is the fire, O Aśvins; heated for ye is the cauldron, come hither! The cows, the milch-cows, O ye two bulls, are being milked here; ye two wondrous ones, the singers are reveling”. “Enkindled is the fire, O ye two bulls, the charioteer of heaven; heated is the cauldron, sweet (milk) is milked for your food. For we, singers many in number, call on you, O Aśvins, in the joint revelings”; and “This is his most evident deed”.
5.10.9	(The verses): “He hath milked”, and “Rise up, O Brāhmaṇaspati", when he (the milker) arises.
5.10.10	(The verse): “Come up swiftly with the milk, 0 milker of the cow; pour into the cauldron the milk of the ruddy (cow). Savitṛ, the friend of the house, has irradiated the firmament; (and) after (that) Heaven and Earth of safe guiḍānce," (he recites) when both kinds of milk are brought near.
5.10.11	(The two verses): “Pour out the admixture into the pressed (Soma)," and “Now the seer hath for the Aśvins" when these two (kinds of milk) are poured into (the mahāvīra-pot).
5.10.12	(The verse): “This God Savitṛ has lifted up with the golden” when it (the mahāvīra-pot) is being lifted up.
5.10.13	In case these acts are reversed (he recites his verse) according to the act.
5.10.14	(The verse): “Let Brāhmaṇaspati, move forward" as they move forward (to the Āhāvaniya).
5.10.15	(The verse): “The eagle flying in the vault", he recites whilst accompanying them.
5.10.16-18	Then he sits down upon the hotṛ’s seat and, when he has been addressed (by the adhvaryu) with (the words): “Recite the offering-verse for the heated milk", (he recites as offering-verse) the two verses joined: “Both drink, O Aśvins”; and: “The heated gharma having its own hotṛ, attains to you: your adhvaryu moves forward offering libation. Of the sweet milk, O Aśvins, for the sake of offering (?) accept ye; drink ye of the milk of the ruddy (cow)'’, whereupon he pronounces the vaṣaṭ-call.
5.10.19	The second vaṣaṭ-call is: "O Aśvins, accept the hot milk". This is the rite for the pravaṛgya at morning.
5.10.20	Now the rite at the afternoon.
5.10.21	(Here he recites as offering-verse) the two combined: "Drink ye both, O Aśvins, of this" and "The offered butter, the milk that is in the ruddy (cows) that is your right portion here, O Aśvins, come! Ye sweet ones, maintainers of the council, good lords, drink ye the heated gharma in the shining space of the sky", whereupon he makes the vaṣaṭ-call.
5.10.22	The second vaṣaṭ-call is the same.
5.10.23	He (continues) his recitation in honour (of the gharma): "The pure cauldron over which the svaḥa-call has been uttered among the Gods, the Aśvins’ bowl that is for the Gods to drink of, that all the immoṛtals, enjoying, lick by the Gandharva’s mouth".
5.10.24	"O friend, do thou turn towards the friend"' (he recites) as he (the adhvaryu?) returns.
5.10.25	"The Gandharva here guardeth this abode", as if the cauldron is placed (on the mound).
5.10.26	The verse belonging to a pragātha: "Him, indeed do his worshippers” as he (the adhvaryu) is going to turn the cauldron upside down.
5.10.27	The verse: "Havis, full of havis”, he recites before the libation.
5.10.28-29	To the hotṛ falls the paṛtaking (of the remains) by smelling at it, to the sacrifiner the direct paṛtaking.
5.10.30	The same (rule prevails) at the dadhigharma.
5.10.31	The mantra for paṛtaking (runs): "The havis is offered, the sweet (drink) is offered in the fire that is most full of Indra. May we eat of thee, O divine cauldron, that art full of sweetness, full of vigour, full of nourishment”.
5.10.32	When the vessels of the mahāvīra are being put together,' he recites on (them the verse): "He to whom ascend the seven Vasavas; of first ascent, the seer of farthest hearing, (is) gharma, the guest of Indra”.
5.10.33	He closes his recital with the verse : “Feeding in good pasture’’.
5.10.34	After having touched (the hot water) he is dismissed.
5.10.35	Or (instead of on the days proceeding the sacrifice of Soma) the pravaṛgya ceremony may be performed on the day of soma-pressing (itself) in the agnīdhriya-shed (and at the following moments: for the first time) after the performance of the out-ofdoors laud (and for the second time) after the performance of the midday-pavamāna laud.
5.10.36	Having made the ‘amends’ over the prastara, they go on with the upasad; if the soma-sacrifice is combined with the pravaṛgya, then after the completion of the pravaṛgya.
5.11.1	At forenoon he recites as kindling-(verses) the three (beginning) : “Offer ye havis to the generous one who must be adored’’; he recites each verse three times, without inhaling, connecting them with the prāṇava.
5.11.2	At afternoon the three (verses): “This kindling-stick of mine, O Agni, this homage (upasad) do thou accept".
5.11.3	With the thrice repeated recitation of the first (verse) he connects the last (verse) and then makes a pause.
5.11.4	With the (last) prāṇava he connects (immediately : the summons to the deities to come near) : “Bring Agni hither'’, “Bring Soma hither”, “Bring Viṣṇu hither”.
5.11.5-6	Having uṛged (the adhvaryu) by uttering the appropriate formula to take up the two offering-spoons, he recites the verses for the sacrifice whimperingly.
5.11.7	(The invīting- and offering-verses for the oblation to Agni are): “May Agni slay the foes”; “He who is dread as it were”. (For the oblation to Soma) : “Thou with insight, O Soma”;
5.11.8	He should perform only as much as has been enjoined.
5.11.9	At afternoon the invīting- and offering-verses are reversed.
5.11.10	(The verses) : “This kindling-stick of mine, O Agni” are the three kindling-verses on the second day at forenoon.
5.11.11	(The verses): “Offer ye havis to the generous one” at afternoon (of the second day).
5.11.12	Those of the first day are applied at the third day.
5.11.13	But they (the upasads and their days) may be lengthened, having their proper time.
5.11.14	Or inveṛṣion may take place day after day.
5.12.1	Having, on the day which immediately precedes the day of the sacrifice of Soma itself, finished at forenoon both performances (of the upasad of forenoon and of that of afternoon), the bringing forward of the fire takes place, in case the soma-sacrifice has not been combined with the pravaṛgya.
5.12.2	If it has been combined with the pravaṛgya, the removal of the mahāvīra vessels (takes place).
5.12.3	At this occasion the prastotṛ sings a saman.
5.12.4	Here the hotṛ performs the finale.
5.12.5	The bringing forward of the fire has been explained.
5.13.1-3	When summoned (by the adhvaryu) for the moving forward of the two soma-carts, he takes his stand between the northern track of the southern cart and the southern track of the northern cart and when he has been addressed (by the adhvaryu) with (the words): “Recite for the soma-carts that are being moved forward” he throws with the forepart of his right foot a lump of earth in the western direction with (the verse): “Hence (drive forth) the danger which comes from foreign (people) and from others than men, O slayer of Vṛtra. The wheels of (the foes) have wended away.”
5.13.4	He then recites standing (as first verse of his anuvācana): “Let the two go forward with zeal for the sacrifice.”
5.13.5	Thereupon, following along, resorting to the left track of the southern cart (the three verses): “May Heaven and Earth grant us this”; “The milk rich in ghee of these both”; “As you came like two twins striving.” 
5.13.6	(The verse): “In the two hast thou placed” as the cover is put over (the two carts).
5.13.7	(The verse): “All forms the sage doth assume” as the two carts are being enclosed (with mats etc.).
5.13.8	(The verse): “In your lap may sit the Gods” as the carts are made to repose on the nave-boards.
5.13.9	In case these acts are reversed, he recites his verses according to the act.
5.13.10	He closes his recitation (with the verse): “Around thee, O Singer.”
5.13.11	On the spot where he has recited the first verse, (to this having returned) there standing he is dismissed.
5.14.1	When the localities for the sacrifice have been meted out (and erected) they lead forward Agni and Soma (the fire and the soma) forward.
5.14.2	From this moment on, until the end of the sacrifice of the barren cow, the way of coming and going is between the catvala and the utkara.
5.14.3-6	Having stepped forward along this way, he passes at the northern side the agnīdhriya-shed and the sadas, enters, to the north of the two adhvaryus and the vessels for the sacrifice, through the eastern door into the śālā, and sits down to the west of the Śālāmukhīya fire.
5.14.7-8	When he has been addressed (by the adhvaryu) with (the words): “(Recite) for Agni and Soma being conveyed forward” he recites, sitting, (the verse): “For thou hast impelled, O God, for the first father: height for him, width for him; and now unto us, O Savitṛ, entirely do thou day after day impel abundance of cattle”.
5.14.9-11	(Then he recites the verses): “Rise, O lord of the brahman”; “Let the lord of the brahman move forward”; the two triṣṭichs “The hotṛ, the God”, “To thee, O Agni”.
5.14.12	At the words: “The embryo of beings I bring in” he should fix his thoughts on the unborn child of his (wife), if she desires a child, whilst he accompanies the cortege to the north of the sadas.
5.14.13	They deposit the fire in the agnldhriya-shed (on the hearth).
5.14.14	(The verse): “O Agni, accept gracefully” he then recites (at the moment) when the libation is being performed by the adhvaryu.
5.14.15	Accompanying the cortege on the north side of the fire in the agnīdhriya-shed (on its way to the Āhāvaniya) (he recites) the triṣṭich: “Soma goeth, who knoweth the way”.
5.14.16	(The verse): “Unto the dear one” (he recites at the moment) when the oblation is being offered (in the Āhāvaniya).
5.14.17	(The verse): “This of him, O king Varuṇa”, whilst he (the Soma) is brought (through the eastern door into the havirdhaua-shed).
5.14.18	(Reciting the verse): “Within thou hast come forward”, he enters (into the shed) after (the others).
5.14.19	As the Soma has been deposited in the southern havirdhāna cart (he recites) standing to the north with his face directed southwards the verses: “Like an eagle his host”; “Thee, the lord of hosts”; “He has fixed the sky”.
5.14.20	He concludes (his anuvācana) with (the verse): “Do thou welcome Varuṇa”.
5.14.21	Turning himself round on his left shoulder as axle, he takes his seat at the eastern door of the havirdhāna shed (outside).
5.14.22	In case the Soma is brought (into the shed) through the western door, the hotṛ follows (and enters through the same door).
5.14.23-24	The recitation is the same, but now he turns round his right shoulder, leaves the shed by the western door, turns round his left shoulder, passes now at the north side the havirdhāna shed and takes his seat on the same place (at the eastern door of the shed).
5.15.1	On the day which precedes the sacrifice of Soma, the-sacrifice of a he goat to Agni and Soma takes place.
5.15.2	When he has been addressed (by the adhvaryu) (with the words) "(Recite) to the sacrificial post being anointed", he recites (the verse): "They anoint thee".
5.15.3	When he has been addressed (with the words): "(Recite) to the (post) being erected" he proceeds with the verses: "Be erected, O lord of the forest"; "Rising before the kindled"; "Born is he born"; "Aloft to our aid"; "Aloft us".
5.15.4	When addressed (by the words): "Recite to the post being girded" he concludes (his recitation) (with the verse): "The youth, well-clad". Standing he recites the verses to accompany the churning of the fire.
5.15.5	He concludes them with (the verse): "By the sacrifice the sacrifice". Then he recites the kindling-verses.
5.15.6	Immediately after he has summoned the deity for whom the animal is destined, he summons Vanaspati.
5.15.7	Having touched simultaneously the two adhvaryus, he remains standing.
5.15.8	(Now) the sacrificer delivers the maitrāvaruṇa-staff to the maitrāvaruṇa with (the formula): "I deliver thee by the direction of Mitra and Varuṇa, the prasastrs, for the security of the sacrifice".
5.15.9	With the same mantra, (changing it) according to the aim he (the maitrāvaruṇa) accepts it and enters (the sadas), before (the hotṛ), making a turn to the right to the south of the hotṛ.
5.15.10	Having passed to the north of the havirdhāna-shed and to the south of the agnīdhriya-shed he (the maitrāvaruṇa) enters the sadas by the eastern door, sits down behind his own dhisnya and performs the rite for the eleven fore-offerings.
5.16.1	The promptings fall to the share of the maitrāvaruṇa.
5.16.2	Likewise the invīting-verses at an (act) combined with prompting.
5.16.3	Equally the recitation (anuvācana).
5.16.4	Standing and bending forward, leaning on his staff (he utters these texts). When addressed (by the adhvaryu) with the words: "Prompt the (hotṛ to recite to the) kindling-sticks" he (the maitrāvaruṇa) prompts him (to recite the offering-verse for the first fore-offering) with (the formula): "Let the hotṛ worship (also ‘pronounce his offering verse to’) Agni by the kindling-stick".
5.16.5	The āprī (verses) are the offering-verses for the fore-offerings, (to be taken) in accordance with the ṛṣi-descent of the sacrificer.
5.16.6	Or the (āprī hymn) beginning: "Enkindled now is the human God" may be taken for all (descendants of different ṛṣis).
5.16.7	But his own Nārāśaṃsa verse is to be taken for one who performs this fore-offering.
5.16.8	When he has performed (his part of) ten (of the eleven fore-offerings) he recites, as soon as he has been addressed (by the adhvaryu) with (the words): "Recite to the fire being carried around" the three verses: "Agni, the hotṛ is being carried around at our sacrifice".
5.16.9	When he (the maitrāvaruṇa) has been addressed (by the adhvaryu) with the words: "Do by-prompt the hotṛ, he recites his by-prompting": "Agni has vanquished".
5.16.10	When the by-prompting has been uttered, the hotṛ (recites) the adhrigu (formula).
5.17.1	"Ye divine quieters (slaughterers) as well as ye that are human, commence! Lead ye the victim to the doors of the sacrifice, commending (it) to the two lords of the sacrifice.
5.17.2	"Lead ye the fire forwards for it. Spread the strew. Let its mother, let its father, let its brother from the same womb, let its comrade from the same flock assent.
5.17.3	"Direct its feet to the north. Make its eye go to the sun, let loose its breath to the wind, its life to the intermediate region, its hearing to the quarters, its bones to the earth.
5.17.4	"Flay off its skin in one piece; before ripping up the navel, extract the omentum, keep its breath within.
5.17.5	"Make his breast as a falcon as it were, his upper forelegs as hatchets, his lower forelegs as spikes, his shoulder-blades as tortoises, his loins make (leave) unbroken, his thighs door-leaves, his knees oleander-leaves.
5.17.6	"Twenty-six are its ribs, these loosen one after another. Each limb make (leave) entire.
5.17.7	"Dig in the earth a hole for the undigested food in the stomach and bowels.
5.17.8	"Unite the ogress with the blood.
5.17.9	"Do not cut its rectum, deeming it an uruka, lest in your family and offspring a howler may howl, O quieters (O slaughterers)," and (after this passage comes) in the adhrigu (formula) the ninth (time for) taking breath.
5.17.10	He concludes with the thrice repeated: "O Adhrigu, do ye quiet (slay), do ye quiet well, do ye quiet, do ye quiet, O Adhrigu!" and thereupon mutters whisperingly (the designation of both: (Adhrigu) and apāpa).
5.17.11	He may not look on the victim whilst it is being slaughtered.
5.17.12	The gazing on the curdled butter (prsadājya) is the ‘good making’ (prāyaścitta).
5.17.13	Or he mutters a verse addressed to Viṣṇu.
5.18.1	When he (the maitrāvaruṇa) has been addressed (by the adhvaryu) with the words: "To the drops (recite)", he recites (the verse): "Accept graciously our most extending" and the hymn beginning: "Bring this our sacrifice".
5.18.2	When he (always the maitrāvaruṇa) has been addressed (by the adhvaryu) with the words: "For the svaḥa-calls (prompt the hotṛ to recite his offering-verses)", he prompts (the hotṛ) with (the formula): "Let the hotṛ worship Agni, svaḥa of the butter".
5.18.3	The offering-verse is the last of the āprī verses.
5.18.4	Between the last fore-offering and the (offering of the) omentum the voice must be restrained.
5.18.5	He does not perform the butter-portions (at the sacrifice of the omentum).
5.18.6	Or (they may be performed and then) the verses to be used are those containing the word ‘growing’.
5.18.7	The insertings are those of the sacrifices at full- and new-moon day. At these the two (i.e. butter-portions and the two deities to whom these are offered) enter (or, ‘are inserted’).
5.18.8	Not in the promptings.
5.18.9	The invīting-(verse) for the (sacrifice of the) omentum is: "O Agni and Soma hear this my call".
5.18.10	The prompting is: “Let the hotṛ worship Agni and Soma”.
5.18.11	The offering-verse is: “You both have brought these lights”.
5.18.12	Having left (the sadas) as they had entered it, they (the hotṛ and maitrāvaruṇa) wash over the catvala (the pit) (their hands) with the triṣṭich: “Here, O Waters, carry ye off” and are (temporarily) dischaṛged.
5.19.1	When summoned (by the adhvaryu) for the oblation of the victimal cake, they (the hotṛ and maitrāvaruṇa) pass at the north side of the agnīdhriya shed and the hotṛ’s dhisnya and sit down according to their dhisnya (each behind his own dhisnya).
5.19.2	The aims of the (sacrifice of the) victim bring about, on account of their foṚce, the aim (of the cake).
5.19.3	Even if there is collision of cake and Sviṣṭakṛt.
5.19.4	Of (sacrificial substances) of unequal quality the practice (is brought about) by not-adapting.
5.19.5	There are no insertings of the (deities of those rites) that are enjoined in the connected performance of the animal sacrifice.
5.19.6	The invīting-(verse) for the cake is: "O Agni and Soma, he who today".
5.19.7	The prompting is: "Let the hotṛ worship Agni and Soma. (Let them graciously accept the sacrificial substance of the cake. Hotr, recite the offering-verse)".
5.19.8	The offering-verse is: "O Agni and Soma, save our coursers".
5.19.9	The invīting-(verse) for (the sacrifice to) Agni Sviṣṭakṛt is: "Potent nourishment, O Agni".
5.19.10	The prompting is: "Hotr, worship Agni".
5.19.11	The offering-verse is: "Praising the flaming fire".
5.19.12	Having invoked the iḍā (at the end of the oblation of the cake) they proceed with (the offering of the parts of) the animal (victim itself).
5.19.13	When he has been addressed (by the adhvaryu) with the words: "(Recite the invīting-verse) for the sacrificial substance (being cut in portions) for manotā", he recites the manotā-hymn (beginning): "For thou art the first thinker".
5.19.14	The invīting-verse for the oblation of (the parts of) the victim is: "He who granted you the oblation, O Agni and Soma".
5.19.15	The prompting is: "Let the hotṛ worship Agni and Soma".
5.19.16	In the middle of the offering-verse: "O Agni and Soma, paṛtake ye of the sacrificial substance" he pauses (and waits) until the oblation of the gravy.
5.19.17	After it has been poured into the fire, he (recites the second half of the verse and) utters the vaṣaṭ call.
5.19.18	The invīting-verse for (the oblation to) the lord of the forest is: "Convey ever to the Gods, O gold-leafed lord of the forest, the sacrificial substances, thy aim (?) girding thyself sunwise with the rope, along the right paths of the ṛta".
5.19.19	The prompting is: "Let the hotṛ worship the lord of the forest".
5.19.20	The offering-verse is: "O lord of the forest, by the rope".
5.19.21	The invīting-verse for (the oblation to Agni) Sviṣṭakṛt is: "Delight the Gods".
5.19.22	The prompting is: "Let the hotṛ worship Agni Sviṣṭakṛt".
5.19.23	The offering-(verse) is (the same as that which is used ordinarily in this sacrifice), without the prose insertion.
5.19.24	When he has invoked the iḍā, he performs the rite of the eleven after-offerings.
5.20.1	He (the maitrāvaruṇa) prompts (the hotṛ to recite his offering-verse) without taking breath (with the praiṣas, the first of which runs): "The divine barhis (the strew) may be connected with the Gods".
5.20.2	The offering-verses are the same as at the caturmāsyas.
5.20.3-4	Between the eighth and the ninth come the two incidental ones, viz.: "Let the God Vanaspati, for bestowing wealth, accept our good gift"; "Let the divine barhis, of the water (herbs), for bestowing wealth, accept our good gift".
5.20.5	When (the maitrāvaruṇa) has been addressed (by the adhvaryu with the words): "Prompt (the hotṛ to recite) the good words" he utters the prompting for the sūktavāka with the formula: "This sacrificer hath today Agni as his hotṛ".
5.20.6	At the (sacrifice of the buck) which is immolated on the day of soma-sacrifice (itself) the (formula expressly) destined for this occasion (takes the place of the formerly mentioned one).
5.20.7	When (at the close of the good words) the all-hail and the blessing have been said (by the hotṛ) the maitrāvaruṇa steps out of the sadas and is (temporarily) dischaṛged.
5.20.8	The hotṛ betakes himself (with the others) to the shed (the prācīnavaṃśa śālā) and ends the night by performing the rites ending with the patnīsaṃyājas.
6.1.1	The (victim) offered to Agni and Soma, explained (in the preceding chapter) is the model for (all the other) animal sacrifices.
6.1.2	The tradition of the mantras which derives from the ṛṣis (is given) in the model.
6.1.3	They call ‘adāptation’, the change of a word, according to the aim (the subject), in the subsequent rite (i.e. in the modification), if the change of aim is not expressed in the form of the model.
6.1.4	In the verses of the Ṛksamhita no change is produced.
6.1.5	On the ground of difference of aim (subject) the following change of words must be made: (‘for the sacrifice’ is replaced by) ‘for the two sacrificers, or for the sacrificers' (in case the sacrifices are two or more). (For ‘the two lords of the sacrifice’ is replaced by): ‘To the lord of the sacrifice, or to the lords (pl.) of the sacrifice’ (in case the victim is destined not for two deities together but for one or for more than two). (The word ‘the victim’ is replaced by): ‘the two victims, or the victims’ (in the same case). (The words: ‘they two have eaten’ are replaced by): ‘he has eaten, or they (pl.) have eaten’ (in the same case). (The words: ‘let them consume’ are replaced by) ‘let him consume, or let them (pl.) consume’. (The words: ‘they both have consumed’ are replaced by): ‘He hath consumed, or they have consumed, or he hath eaten, or they have eaten’. (The words: ‘making himself very strong’ are replaced by): ‘making themselves (dual) very strong, or making themselves (pl.) very strong’. (The words: ‘They two have accepted the cooked parts’ are replaced by): ‘He has accepted (the cooked parts), and they (pl.) have accepted (the cooked parts)’. (The words: ‘Two have taken delight in the cake’ are replaced by): ‘He hath taken delight in the cake, and they (pl.) have taken delight in the cake’. (The words in the sūktavāka: ‘May he obtain that’ are replaced by): ‘May they obtain that’ (if there is a plural of sacrificers). (The words: ‘May he prosper’ are replaced by): ‘May they prosper’. (The words: ‘He hath wished’ are replaced by): ‘They two have wished, they (pl.) have wished’.
6.1.6	The words (in the adhrigu formula): ‘Strew’, ‘eye’, ‘hearing’, ‘breath’, ‘life’, ‘skin’, ‘navel’, ‘breath’, the names of the relations, the words: ‘falcon’, ‘hatchets’, ‘shoulder-blades’, ‘tortoises’, ‘oleander-leaves’, ‘hole for the undigested food’, ‘blood’ are (even in case there are more victims than one) left unchanged.
6.1.7	Nor (must any change be made) in case there is doubt about the applying(?).
6.1.8	Nor (must be replaced) the remains (not expressed parts of a mantra), which have no precedent (in any former mantra).
6.1.9	Nor the āya-nigadas.
6.1.10-11	The rule for numbers is that (in the adhrigu formula) the words: ‘in one piece’ are said twice and that equally the words: ‘twenty-six ribs’ are either repeated twice or this number is expressed by adding together.
6.1.12	When the victim is destined for a single deity or for a pair of deities, (the words of the mantras are adhibited) as for a plurality.
6.1.13-14	If the victims are pairs (a male and a female) they are designated as a masculine, if (the female is) of the same kind, and even if the female belongs to another kind.
6.1.15	The vowel a of the word eva is combined by sandhi with the (immediately following) name of the deity, designating a pair of deities, and having a vowel at the beginning.
6.1.16-17	If there is a plurality of victims, the words: ‘fettering’ and ‘making a good resting-place’ are said once.
6.1.18	At the beginning and at the end of the half year from winter to summer solstice must be performed the ‘separate’ animal-sacrifice destined for Indra and Agni.
6.1.19	Or (it may be) annual.
6.1.20	Many are the animal-sacrifices undeṛtaken in view of a special wish.
6.1.21	With the exception of the victim dedicated to Agni and Soma and the one which is slaughtered at the day of the soma-sacrifice itself the animal sacrifices begin with the leading forward of the fire and end with the rite of the heart-spit.
6.1.22	And for him who is going to undeṛtake such a sacrifice firstly is performed an iṣṭi to Agni and Viṣṇu.
6.1.23-24	Except at the sacrifice of a victim for Agni and Soma, the pronouncing of the wishes, and the mentioning in the sūktavāka of the names (of the sacrificer) take place.
6.1.25-26	From the recitation of the morning-litany on, whenever (in this book) the beginning words (of a hymn) for a śastra or a recitation are cited, the (whole) hymns are meant, otherwise one (single verse) is meant.
6.2.1	Being called when the night is far advanced (by the adhvaryu) for the recitation of the morning-litany he mutters, standing before the dhisnya of the agnīdhrlya, the formulas of resort.
6.2.2	"To bhūḥ I resort. To bhuvaḥ I resort. To svaḥ I resort. To bhur bhuvaḥ svaḥ I resort. To om I resort. To the word, the verse I resort. To the mind, the formula I resort. To the chant, the breath I resort. To the eye, the ear I resort. Homage to the Gods. Homage to the deities. Homage to the Great God. Homage to the gandharvas and the nymphs. Homage to the divine hosts of Serpents. Homage to the past. Homage to the future. Homage to the Fathers. Homage also to ye all who are entitled to homage".
6.2.3	He then addresses reverently, while standing, the quarters according to the indication in the formula.
6.3.1	"In this eastern quarter sun and moon are my regents. May sun and moon protect me against that quarter. May he go, of the deities, to sun and moon, who at that side attacks us": (with this formula he addresses) the east.
6.3.2	"In this southern quarter Yama and Death are my regents. May Yama and Death protect me against that quarter. May he go, of the deities, to Yama and Death, who at that side attacks us": (with this formula he addresses) the south.
6.3.3	"In this western quarter Mitra and Varuṇa are my regents. May Mitra and Varuṇa protect me against that quarter. May he go, of the deities, to Mitra and Varuṇa, who at that side attacks us": (with this formula he addresses) the west.
6.3.4	"In this northern quarter Soma and Rudra are my regents. May Soma and Rudra protect me against that quarter. May he go, of the deities, to Soma and Rudra, who at that side attacks us": (with this formula he addresses) the north, making a turn to the left.
6.3.5	"In this upper quarter Bṛhaspati and Indra are my regents. May Bṛhaspati and Indra protect me against that quarter. May he go, of the deities, to Bṛhaspati and Indra, who at that side attacks us": (with this mantra he addresses) the zenith turning himself to the east.
6.3.6	"In this intermediate region Vāyu and Rain are my regents. May Vāyu and Rain protect me against that quarter. May he, of the deities, go to Vāyu and Rain, who at that side attacks us": (with this formula he addresses) the intermediate region.
6.3.7	"In this earth Agni and Food are my regents. May Agni and Food protect me against that quarter. May he go, of the deities, to Agni and Food, who at that side attacks us": (with this formula he addresses) the Earth.
6.3.8	Then he mutters (the formulas): "The rathantara and the bṛhat are my thighs, the vāmadevya is my trunk, the yajñāyajñīya my support, I (am) bhūḥ. I (am) bhuvaḥ. I (am) svaḥ. I am the stone. I (am) the stones-butt" and the verse beginning: "The well-protecting Earth". Then he turns from left to right, pours by means of the sruva into the agnīdhriya-fire (six) libations with (the formulas): "Bhūḥ bhuvaḥ svaḥ, svaḥa. To Agni, svaḥa. To Uṣas, svaḥa. To the Aśvins, svaḥa. To Sarasvatī, svaḥa. May their greatness delighting in the pressings, paṛtake of the clarified butter, svaḥa!" Thereupon he turns to the left (around his left shoulder) and sits down at the eastern door of the havirdhāna-shed.
6.3.9	When he has been addressed (by the adhvaryu) with the words: "Recite to the Gods the early coming", he recites after having uttered the sound him with middle (pitch of the) voice the morning-litany.
6.3.10	Of paṅkti-verses (verses of five verse-quarters) he joins the (first) three padas together, then makes the pause, and after the two last verse-quarters he joins the prāṇava.
6.3.11	Having recited (before the litany proper) the "O Rich waters" verse, (he recites of the morning-litany) the ‘agni-section’ (kratu) containing (firstly) gāyatrī verses.
6.4.1	(The hymns beginning): “Entering upon the worship” (I. 74:9 verses); “Agni, I praise the house-chaplain” (1.7: 9 verses); “Agni, we choose as our messenger” (1.12 : 12 verses); the first ten verses of the hymn : “As a horse thee” (1.27 : 10 verses); “Rejoice in the most extending” (1.75 : 5 verses); “We, the do tarn as unto thee” (1.78 : 5 verses); “Agni, the hotṛ, the purohita” (III. 11: 9 verses); “The all-knowing messenger” (IV.8 : 8 verses); “O Agni, be gracious” (IV.9 : 8 verses); “Praising thee, we call” (V. 13:6 verses); “We awaken Agni with praise” (14 :6 verses); “To him who must be adored” (VII. 15 : 15 verses); “These praises of the wise” (VIII.43 : 33 verses); “Honour ye Agni with fuel” (VIII.44 : 30 verses); “Let our prayers impel Agni” (X. 156 : 5 verses); “Raise the voice in honour of Agni” (X.187 : 5 verses); and the first twenty-six verses of the hymn: “Thou Agni art the hotṛ of the sacrifices” (VI.16.1-26).
6.4.2-3	Now the anuṣṭubh-part : the single (verse) : “These, loved by thee, O Agni” (VI. 16.27); the hymn : “The hotṛ has been born” (II.5:8 verses); the first nine verses of the hymn : “For thou princely glory” (VI.2.1-9); the five verses : “O Agni, when uninterrupted for thee” (IV.7.2-6).
6.4.4-5	Now the triṣṭubh-part : the five (verses): “What of the sleeper (?)” (IV.7.7-11); the three (hymns) : “He who immoṛtal among the moṛtals” (IV.2-4 : 51 verses); the five hymns: “Incite the God” (VII.7-11 : 30 verses); the seven (hymns): “At the beginning the great one” (X.1-7 : 49 verses); “Mentally we have gone” (VII. 12 : 3 verses).
6.4.6-7	Now the bṛhati-part : “With this homage" (VII.16 : 12 verses); the hymn : “We come to the swift” (I.36 : 20 verses); first twelve verses of the hymn : “O Agni, convey the matutinal” (I.44 : 12 verses); the first eight of the hymn : “We as friends choose thee” (III.9.1-8); the four (verses) : “Has shown himself” (VIII.103.1-4); the three (verses) : “He being enkindled” (IX.150.1-3); the hymn : “This Agni possesses” (III.16:6 verses).
6.4.8-9	Now the uṣṇih-part : the hymn : “Thee, O Agni, the wise” (III.10 : 9 verses); the hymn : “Praise the accepting one” (VIII.23 : 80 verses); “Bestowing much I call thee” (X.150 : 3 verses).
6.4.10-11	Then the jagatī-part : the first seven verses of the hymn : “To Agni who is seated on the vedi” (I.140.1-7); the hymn : “The hotṛ goes forwards” (I.144:7 verses); the hymn: “By the sacrifice make ye grow” (II.2 : 3 verses); the hymn: “The chief of the people has been born” (IV.11 : 6 verses).
6.4.12-13	Then the paṅkti-part: “Agni I deem him” (V.6 : 10 verses).
6.6.1-2	Then the Asvin section: The gāyatrī-part: the three (verses): "Ye, Aśvins, the sacrificial libations” (II.3.1-3); the four (verses): "Awaken the two yoking early” (I.22.1-4); the three (verses): "Come hither, ye Aśvins” (I.30.17-19); (the hymn): "There shine forth the dawn” (I.46: 15 verses); the two (verses): "Rich in cows” (II.41.7,8); the first thirty-six (verses) of the hymn: "From far here” (VIII.5.1-36); (the hymn): "Fetch out, O Aśvins, your chariot” (VIII.73: 18 verses); the (hymn): "Come hither, ye Aśvins, on my call” (VIII.85: 9 verses).
6.6.3-4	Then the anuṣṭubh part: (the hymn): "Come, O Aśvins, to us with all help” (VIII.8: 23 verses); the two (hymns): "When ye, O Aśvins, stand today far off” (V.73,74: 10 + 10 verses).
6.6.5-6	Then the triṣṭubh-part: the two (hymns): "Agni illumines” (V.76 and 77: 5 + 5 verses); the three (hymns): "To the two Nasatyas” (I.116-118: 25 + 25 + 11 verses); the three (verses): "The Maruts, the Rudras” (I.158.1-3); the two hymns: "When your horses through the skies” (I.180, 181: 10 + 9); the two hymns: "Yoke ye him” (I.183, 184: 6 + 6 verses); the hymn: "As two pressing-stones” (II.39: 8 verses); the hymn: "The milch-cow of the ancient” (II.58: 9 verses); the two hymns: "Who will hear” (IV.43, 44: 7 + 7 verses); the two hymns: "He praises the two heroes”, without the verse of 5 padas (V.62, 63: 11 + 9 verses); the five hymns: "Your chariot knocking against earth and sky” (VII.69-73: 8 + 7 + 6 + 5 + 5 verses).
6.6.7-8	Then the bṛhati-part: (the hymn): "These prayers call you, O Aśvins” (VII.74: 6 verses); of the hymn beginning: "This very sweet Soma” the first, third and fifth verse (I.47.1,3,5).
6.6.9-10	Then the uṣṇih-part: the (first) five (verses of the hymn): "I call your chariot” (VIII.26.1-5).
6.6.11-12	Then the jagatī-part: the hymn: “Thrice today” (I.34: 12 verses); the hymn: “I praise Heaven and Earth” (I.112: 25 verses); and Ghoṣā and her son (the hymns attributed to Ghoṣā and Ghauṣeya: X.39,40,41: 14 + 14 + 3 verses).
6.6.13-14	Then the paṅkti-part: “To the very dear chariot” (V.70: 9 verses).
6.6.15	With the last (verse) he closes his recitation, after having set free his voice. (Thereupon) he mutters (the verse): “Thereby may we win the vigour”.
6.6.16	So the morning-litany consists of a thousand (verses).
6.6.17	Or he recites (only) three hundred and sixty (verses) of this compiḍātion (of the RV.), not neglecting the metres and the beginning- and closing-verses (of each metrical section).
6.6.18	Or if he likes, he may recite more than a hundred (verses).
6.6.19	The paṅkti-parts he should not omit.
6.6.20	The moment for concluding the morning-litany (is indicated by the fact) that they (the adhvaryu and his assistants) are going to offer the upaṃśu (draught of Soma) before sunrise.
6.6.21	Until the antaryāma (draught of Soma) the voice must be restrained (by the hotṛ).
6.7.1	When he (the hotṛ) has been addressed (by the adhvaryu) with (the words): “Hotr summon the waters” (he recites the hymn beginning): “Let, for the holy act, the song go forth to the Gods” omitting the twelfth (verse), (he recites it in the following manner):
6.7.2	Having recited nine (verses of it), he recites the eleventh (verse) whilst the oblation is being poured out on the water.
6.7.3	When they are returned, he recites the tenth verse.
6.7.4	(The verse): “When the waters are seen coming forward” when they are (come so near to the hotṛ that they are) discerned (by him).
6.7.5	(The verse): “Soma come together”, whilst they come together.
6.7.6	(The verse): “Like the divine waters”, when the water is poured out into the bowl of the hotṛ.
6.7.7	The verse: “Let the milch-cows come to us” he recites up to the end when the water is brought (into the havirdhāna-shed), and then he makes pause with the prāṇava.
6.7.8	He then asks the adhvaryu: “Adhvaryu, hast thou got the water?”
6.7.9	He (the adhvaryu) answers: “Yea, they have yielded themselves”.
6.7.10	As soon as he has received this answer (he pronounces) the prose formula (nigada): “Wash, O adhvaryu, the vigorous, succulent, sweet, rain-obtaining Soma for Indra, who is joined by the Vasus, the Rudras, the Ādityas, who is joined by the Ṛbhus, the Vibhus, the Vajis, Bṛhaspati and the All-Gods”. “Which having drunk the intoxicating fluid Indra may slay his foes, and may oveṚcome the dangers threatening from strangers”. Then he recites the following one and a half verse: “The mothers go along the paths”, rises, comes on after the adhvaryu and recites the last half (of the cited) verse and the one but last of the (aponaptriya) hymn, with the last verse (of the same hymn) he closes his recitation, turns himself round and sits down (in the same place, whence he had risen).
6.8.1	With (the formula): “Protect my exhalation. Quicken my exhalation. Svaḥa thee! O well-born one, for the Sūrya!” he breathes out immediately after the upaṃśu draught of Soma has been offered into the fire.
6.8.2	With (the formula): “Protect my inhalation. Quicken my inhalation. Svaḥa thee! O well-born one, for the Sūrya!” he breathes in after the antaryāma draught (has been offered).
6.8.3	To the north of the Āhāvaniya they hold the out-of-doors laud.
6.8.4-7	To the south (of the āstāva) the brahman and the maitrāvaruṇa sit down and, when they have been addressed (by the prastotṛ with the words): "O brahman, we shall hold the laud, O prasastr!” they both mutter (the formula): “Do ye not deviate from the life-granting verse, from the body-protecting chant! At the impulse of the God Savitṛ, laud ye!” (Then they both say loudly) “Om laud ye”.
6.8.8	This impulse (to hold a laud) prevails for all the lauds.
6.8.9	The sacrificer, when being about to approach the pavamāna lauds (mutters the formula): “From not-being lead me to being, from darkness lead me to light, from the end lead me to the endless, from death lead me to immoṛtality”.
6.8.10	After the out-of-doors laud is finished, the sacrificer mutters (the formula): “A falcon art thou, whose metre is the gāyatrī. I hold on to thee. Convey me happily over to the farther side, to the goal of the sacrifice”.
6.8.11	After the midday-pavamāna laud: “Thou art the flying eagle whose metre is the triṣṭubh”.
6.8.12	After the ārbhava-pavamāna laud: “Thou art the flying friend, whose metre is the jagatī”.
6.8.13	The finishing words (of the mantras in 11 and 12) are the same (as those of the first mantra).
6.8.14	After the out-of-doors laud is finished, the hotṛ mutters: “Invited are the Gods to paṛtake of this purified, bright Soma. May the Gods invite me to paṛtake of this purified, bright Soma. I paṛtake of thee with the mind, I paṛtake of thee with the voice, I paṛtake of thee with the eye, I paṛtake of thee with the ear”.
6.9.1-3	The victim which must be offered on the day of the soma-feast itself (the savaniya pasu) is dedicated to Agni, or to Indra-Agni or it is the set of eleven.
6.9.4	At a set of eleven (victims) (to be fastened) at one single stake, the (verse) for girding (the stake) recurs, on account of there being separate ropes, three times at each (victim).
6.9.5-6	If they are fastened each at a separate stake, he repeats the (verse) for girding (the stake) only over that stake which stands opposite the fire and then speaks the seven verses over each of the nine (stakes).
6.9.7	Over the eleventh (stake) he recites between the (verse) for girding and the pragātha the remaining part of the hymn, (beginning): “Whom pious men have fixed”.
6.9.8	With the last verse (of this hymn) he addresses the stake which lies aside.
6.9.9	In case the stakes being not girded, are erected on the preceding day, he should close (the recitation) with the former (verse).
6.9.10	Or he should, for the sake of connecting, await with the half verse.
6.9.11	(In this case) he should go through the verses of the same kind, one after another.
6.9.12	As at the last stake, so with adāptation.
6.9.13	Having summoned the deity for which the victim is destined, to come near and having summoned Vanaspati, he summons the deities of the (three) services (with the words): “Summon Indra who is joined by the Vasus, summon Indra who is joined by the Rudras, summon Indra who is joined by the Ādityas, by the Ṛbhus, the Vibhus, the Vājas, by Bṛhaspati, by the All-Gods”.
6.9.14	They (these deities of the savanas) do not enter (i.e. are not inserted) at the other places in the prose recitation (where in the prakṛti the deity is to be inserted).
6.9.15	In the sūktavāka they may be inserted.
6.9.16	Having touched the two adhvaryus, they offer the two libations for the choosing according to the order of their libation.
6.9.17	The first with (the formula): "May I be agreeable to Vāc, agreeable to Vācaspati. Divine word, place us in what of thy word today is sweetest. Hail to Sarasvatī”.
6.9.18	The second silently.
7.1.1	When they have glided (into the sadas) they proceed with the cakes to be offered at the (morning) service.
7.1.2	The invīting-verse is: “Accept at morning, O Indra our gift of fried barley".
7.1.3	The prompting (of the maitrāvaruṇa directed to the hotṛ) is: “Let the hotṛ worship Indra, he with his bay horses”, at each service as it is handed down in the sacred texts.
7.1.4	According to the service he varies them.
7.1.5	The same (formula) is taken (by the hotṛ) as offering-verse, with the omission of the (beginning words): “Let the hotṛ worship” and of the (closing) words: “Hotr, recite the offering-verse”.
7.1.6	The invīting-verse for the sacrifice to Agni Sviṣṭakṛt is: ‘‘O Agni graciously accept our oblation at the morning-service".
7.1.7	The formula for prompting for the same sacrifice is at each service: "Let the hotṛ worship Agni. (Let him graciously accept the oblation of) the cakes. Hotr, recite the offering-verse’’.
7.1.8	And the offering-verse is: "O Agni, paṛtake of the oblation’’.
7.2.1	The (draughts of Soma) destined for pairs of deities are the one for Indra and Vāyu, the one for Mitra and Varuṇa, the one for the two Aśvins.
7.2.2	The two invītitlg-verses for the sacrifice of Soma destined for Indra and Vāyu are: "Come hither, O beautiful Vāyu’’; and “"O Indra and Vāyu these soma-draughts''.
7.2.3	The formulas for the two promptings are: "Let the hotṛ worship Vāyu"; "Let the hotṛ worship Indra and Vāyu".
7.2.4	The offering-verses are: "Drink, O Vāyu, the premises of the sweet’’ arid: "With a hundred come to us".
7.2.5	The invīting-verse for the draught for Mitra and Varuṇa is: "Here, O Mitra and Varuṇa is Soma pressed for ye”.
7.2.6	The formula for prompting is: "Let the hotṛ worship Mitra and Varuṇa, the powerful, the enemy-destroyers (?), who even shutting the eyes vigiḍānt, observe, finding the way, with unimpaired looking, better than the eye; thinking perpetually of the holy order. Let them do thus! Let Mitra and Varuṇa graciously accept, be delighted, drink the Soma. Hotr, recite the offering-verse’’.
7.2.7	The offering-verse is: "Lauded by Jamadagni”.
7.2.8	The invīting-verse for the draught for the Aśvins is: "Awake the two who at morning yoke’’.
7.2.9	The (formula for) prompting is: "Let the hotṛ worship the Aśvins”.
7.2.10	The offering-verse is: "They two increasing”.
7.2.11	He speaks the invīting-verses and the formulas for prompting for the draughts destined for a pair of deities, without taking in breath.
7.2.12	And in the same manner the offering-verses.
7.2.13	The invīting-verse of the draught for Indra and Vāyu has separate prāṇavas.
7.2.14	The two offering-verses have separate vaṣaṭ.
7.2.15	The words to be muttered before an offering-verse,' the ye yajāmahe and the words spoken after the verse are (although here are two yājyas) uttered once.
7.3.1	Having accepted (from the adhvaryu) the Indra-Vāyu-cup (containing the Soma of which a part has been poured into the fire) with (the formula): "May the good one, possessing many goods, come hither" he puts it down on his right (uncovered) thigh. He may neither cover the cups destined for the pairs of deities nor gaze on them until the remains have been poured into it.
7.3.2	With (the formula): "May the good one come hither who acquires goods" he accepts the maitrāvaruṇa-cup, brings it round to the south of the Indra-Vāyu-cup and puts down (on his thigh) to the south-west (of that cup).
7.3.3	With (the formula): "May the good one come hither, who possesses continuous goods” he accepts the Asvin-cup, brings round to the south of the two former ones, and puts it down (on his thigh) to the north-west (of the Indra-Vāyu-cup).
7.3.4	The secondary vaṣaṭ consiṣṭing of (the formula): "O Agni, enjoy the strew” is adhibited at all the offering-verses of a Soma libation, with the exception of those destined for the pairs of deities, the rtuyajas, the aditya-draught, and the savitr-draught, and the one for Agni with the wives (of the Gods).
7.3.5	Or for the oblation to Agni with the wives of the Gods it is spoken mutteringly.
7.4.1	When he (the maitrāvaruṇa) has been addressed (by the adhvaryu) with the words: “Recite to the (bowls) being filled’’, (be recites) the hymn for filling: “May the bay (steeds) carry thee hither’’.
7.4.2	The (formula for) prompting (the hotṛ to recite his offeringverse for the libation for the filled bowls, which have been advanced) is: “Let the hotṛ worship Indra at morning from morning-service’’.
7.4.3	He (the hotṛ) recites as offering-verse: “This sweet somadrink for thee".
7.4.4	With (the formula): “To thee, who beholdest the men, I who behold the men, look forward” having looked it, he (the hotṛ) receives his bowl with (the formula): “The vigorous one, I being vigorous, receive’’, whereupon he touches with it his breast and the (three) bowls containing the Soma destined for the pair of deities.
7.4.5	Of the bowls, which again have been filled, the hotṛakas sacrifice (i.e., recite each the yājya for the sacrifice performed by the adhvaryu).
7.4.6	The maitrāvaruṇa (recites the offering-verse): "Mitra do we call and Varuṇa".
7.4.7	The brāhmaṇacchamsin: "O Indra, thou, the bull".
7.4.8	The potṛ: "0 Maruts, in whose abode".
7.4.9	The neṣṭṛ: "0 Agni, convey hither the wives".
7.4.10	The agnīdhra: "To Agni, whose food is the ox".
7.4.11	When it has been said (by the hotṛ): "Has the agnīdhra offered (i.e. recited his offering-verse)?" the agnīdhra (answers): "The agnīdh has offered (i.e. said his verse)".
7.4.12	Then the hotṛ (says): "He has done a good thing, he who will cause us to drink the Soma".
7.4.13	When they are going to paṛtake of the Soma, the performers (of this act) ask for each others’ invitation with the (words): "So and so" - and (instead of "so and so" they speak) the sacrificial designation - "invite me".
7.4.14	He who has spoken the vaṣaṭ paṛtakes first.
7.4.15	He pours the rest of the draughts destined for the pairs of deities, after the other has paṛtaken also from these into the bowl of the hotṛ with (the formula): "Thee, of whom has been paṛtaken, I pour out into the sacrificed, thee vigour-giving to the Gods, life-giving to me". The same must take place with the nārāśaṃsa-draughts.
7.4.16	Twice is poured out from the remains of the draught destined for Indra and Vāyu and here the mantra returns (is also said the second time).
7.4.17	Until the moment that (this) pouring out into the hotṛcamasa of the remains of the draught for the couple of deities has taken place, they do not let them go (out of their hand).
7.5.1	Having stretched out the bowl, with the remains of the Soma offered to Indra and Vāyu, to the adhvaryu, with (the formula): "Here is the goods one, possessing many goods", he paṛtakes of it with (the formula): "Invited are Vāyu and Indra-Vāyu together with breath, together with eneṛgy. By these two I (am) invited together with breath, together with eneṛgy”; thereupon he again with the mantra of stretching, stretches it out to (the adhvaryu) and paṛtakes for the second time.
7.5.2-3	Having stretched out the bowl of Mitra and Varuṇa (to the adhvaryu) with (the formula): "Here is the goods one who acquires goods" he paṛtakes of it with (the formula): "Invited are Mitra and Varuṇa together with the eye, together with vigour. By these I am invited together with the eye, together with vigour”.
7.5.4-6	Having moved the Aśvins-bowl sunwise around his head, he gazes upon it, then moves it around his head in the opposite direction, and again gazes at it. With (the formula): "Here is the good one, who possesses continuous goods" he stretches it out (to the adhvaryu) and paṛtakes of it with (a formula): "Invited are the Gods, the Aśvins together with the ear, together with vigour. By those I am invited together with the ear, together with vigour".
7.5.7	Having touched water he invokes the iḍā.
7.5.8	They (the camasadhvaryus) lift up their bowls and deposit them near (the iḍā on the dhisnya of the hotṛ).
7.5.9	They touch the bowl of the hotṛ.
7.5.10	Everywhere the bringing into contact of Soma with the grease of clarified butter must be avoided.
7.5.11	After the invocation (of iḍā) they paṛtake of the (remains of Soma in the bowls) which have advanced.
7.5.12-14	The formula for paṛtaking is, at the morning-service: "For splendour, for priestly lustre I paṛtake of thee"; at tne midday-service: "For strength, for valour I paṛtake of thee"; at the afternoon-service: "For progenitors, for welfare I paṛtake of thee".
7.5.15	The verse for touching the breast after the paṛtaking is: "Be auspicious to our heart, 0 Soma, thou that art drunk."
7.5.16	Taking the bowls in the left hand they make them swell by (putting) their right hand (over it).
7.5.17-18	The verse for making them ‘swell’ is at the morningservice: "Swell may come on"; at the two other services: "May your fluids come together".'
7.5.19	They make swell (perform the act of apyayana) the bowls which have advanced.
7.5.20	At the ājya- and at the marutvatīya-(śastra).
7.5.21	At the ājya- and praüga-(śastras) they are nārāśaṃsa (dedicated to Nārāśaṃsa) and at the niṣkevalya- and marutvatīya- (śastras), and at the vaiśvadeva(-śastra).
7.5.22	The formula for paṛtaking of the nārāśaṃsa bowls is at the morning-service: "Thou art the God Nārāśaṃsa. What sacrifice, heaven, light belong to thee, from that, which has been enjoyed and called near by the Uma fathers, I, being invited, paṛtake".
7.5.23-24	At the midday-service with the same formula (replacing Uma fathers) by Ūrva fathers, and of the afternoon-service by Kavya fathers.
7.6.1	The acchāvāka being addressed (by the adhvaryu) with (the words): "Be seated"”, sits down before the sadas, to the north of the ‘way’, receives the cake and on the words (of the adhvaryu): “Acchāvāka, say (what thou hast to say)” recites the three verses: “Go to fetch the God Agni for your help”.
7.6.2-3	(Immediately) after the (last) prāṇava (of the thrice repeated verse he recites) the prose-part: “ Sacrificer, hotṛ, adhvaryu, agnīdh, brahman, potṛ, neṣṭṛ, and thou upavaktr, be ye powerful ! be ye strong ! May your kinsfolk, may your non-kinsfolk, may your rivals stoop, repelled on this maṚch (against you). Vanquish the attacking (army), vanquish (it) by (your) attacking (army). May Indra hear you. May Agni hearken you. Having advanced announce ye the Soma to Indra and Agni and invite ye, who are brāhmaṇas, us who are brāhmaṇas”.
7.6.4	The adhvaryu says: “This brāhmaṇa (or he may say: this acchāvāka) wishes an invitation. Invite him, O hotṛ”
7.6.5	The hotṛ invites him.
7.6.6	When he (the hotṛ) is going to invite him (he does this) with (the following formula): “The sacrificer, who presses the Soma (i.e., who has oṛganised a sacrifice of Soma) hath accepted these beautiful hymns; thou, also, upavaktr advance. The cows also have been invited, and invited (thou art)”.
7.6.7	If he (the hotṛ) is mot going to invite him he says only up to the words: “The cows also have been invited".
7.6.8	If the acchāvāka has not been invited (in that the words: “and invited art thou’’ have been left aside) he should recite (until the prompting) one after another as many verses as he can of (the hymn beginning): "Turn ye back".
7.6.9	Or the hotṛ (should recite these verses) after having partially invited the acchāvāka if this priest does not please him (to recite them).
7.7.1	The acchāvāka, as soon as he is addressed (by the adhvaryu) with (the words): “(Recite) to the (bowl) being filled” recites the hymn: “Bring unto him, the thirsty one”.
7.7.2	He recites as offering-(verse): “Come hither ye both with the Gods that come at morning”.
7.7.3	The bowl from which has been paṛtaken and which has been made to 'swell’ he hands over to the adhvaryu, enters after having turned himself to the right, through the western door, the sadas, sits down after his own dhisnya and eats (the portion of) the cake.
7.7.4	In case one who has before (the acchāvāka’s presence entrance) glided into the sadas, should perform the rites belonging to the acchāvāka, he leaves (the sadas) along the way destined for them as long as the service is not finished, performs the acts of the acchāvāka which the priest has to perform outside the sadas, and then (entering again) the acts which fall to his own share.
7.7.5	But (if it be) the hotṛ (who performs the part of the acchāvāka he should do so seated) at his own dhisnya.
7.7.6	For the offering-verses of the hotṛakas there is option.
7.7.7	During the morning-service they recite the offering-verses either without taking breath (between them) or by half verses.
7.7.8-9	At this moment they paṛtake of the fast-food (during the first two services) and (during the third service) after the (parts of the cakes) have been added to (the bowl of each performer).
7.8.1	Now, they proceed with the rtuyajas.
7.8.2	He (the maitrāvaruṇa) prompts without taking breath with the formulas for prompting for the rtus: "Let the hotṛ worship Indra; on account of this hotṛship”.
7.8.3-4	In the same formula is taken as offering-verse for each of the libations with the omission of the beginning words: “Let the hotṛ worship” and of (the closing words): “So and so recite the offering-verse”.
7.8.5	Or (instead of the formulas of the praisadhyaya) the verses of Medhātithi are adhibited: “Indra drink the Soma at the right time”.'
7.8.6	The offering-verse is spoken for each oblation by that person who is mentioned at the end of each formula for prompting.
7.8.7-8	The adhvaryu says: “Hotr, do thou here recite the offering-verse” and equally does the sacrificer.
7.8.9	For these two it is the hotṛ who recites the offering-verse.
7.8.10	They paṛtake of the remains in accordance with the vaṣaṭ-making.
7.8.11	At the end, the hotṛ paṛtakes twice.
7.8.12	Instead of (drinking of the remains) at this occasion, as also at the cups for the pairs of deities, he (the person who should paṛtake) should either only smear (some quantity of the remains) on (his lips) (or) he should smell (at them).
7.9.1	When he is going to recite the ājya-śastra, he (first) mutters (the formula): "(May) father Matarisvan (make) the verses flawless. May Uśij thereupon create the asiya’s. May Soma, the knower of the modes, lead the modes. May Bṛhaspati recite the hymns and acclamations’’, then follows the call which during the morning-service runs at the beginning of this and any other śastra: somsavom. Thereby having called, he (mutters) the silent praise (as follows):
7.9.2	"Light is Agni: Agni (is) light”; after these words he makes a pause, and then continues: "Light (is) Indra; Indra (is) light”; after these words he makes a pause and then continues: "Light (is) Sūrya; Sūrya (is) light”. Here having made a pause he recites, making a pause at the divisions, ‘the fore-light’ (puroruc) as follows:
7.9.3	"Agni kindled by the Gods. Agni kindled by men. Agni of good-kindling. The hotṛ chosen by the Gods. The hotṛ chosen by men. The leader of the sacrifices. The charioteer of the offerings. The hotṛ unhurt. The expedious carrier of oblations. May the God convey hither the Gods. May God Agni worship the Gods. He, Jātavedas, may perform the sacrifices!” (Immediately follows the hymn of) the ājya(-śastra): "To God Agni chant loudly”.
7.9.4	Its first half-verse (of each verse he recites) by divisions, without taking breath.
7.9.5	The same rule prevails for the marutvatīya- and the vaiśvadeva-(śastras).
7.9.6	When he has recited the remaining part (of the hymn) and uttered the call (somsasvom), he closes the recitation with the last verse and immediately afterwards he mutters ‘the strength of the śastra’ (ukthavirya): “Splendour! Lustre! Dawn! Heaven! Light! For glory thee! The uktha ( = śastra) has been uttered’’.
7.9.7	“O thou, reciter of the śastra’’, says the adhvaryu at all the offering-verses at a śastra.
7.9.8	As offering-verse he applies: “O Agni and Indra”.
7.10.1	When the ājya śastra is finished they (the chanters) perform the laud.
7.10.2	'After the last pratihara of all śastras which are combined with a stotra, at the word (of the chanter): “This (is the last verse)”, he (the hotṛ) utters his call (somsavom3 etc.) and thereupon they hold the śastra.
7.10.3	At the praüga-(śastra) between the triṣṭichs seen) by Madhūchandas (other) verses come between; these they call (here) ‘puroruc-verses’.
7.10.4	At these (puroruc) verses the call (comes) first.
7.10.5	And of the closing-verse.
7.10.6	The (puroruc-verse) which is addressed to the All-Gods is of six verse-quarters.
7.10.7	In this verse he makes a pause with each two verse-halves and the prāṇava for two.
7.10.8	About the verse addressed to Sarasvatī there is option: he may recite it or omit it. But the call is constant (does not fall forth).
7.10.9	Having recited once: "May Vāyu, who goes in front, who delights in the sacrifice, come together with the mind, he, the benevolent one with his benevolent team", he recites the three verses — thrice the first —: "O beautiful Vāyu come hither".
7.10.10	( Then follows the second puroruc-verse): "The two heroes of golden path, the Gods, the masters (may come) to (our) assistance, the vigorous Vāyu and Indra”; then follow the three verses: “Indra and Vāyu”.
7.10.11	(Now the third puroruc): “The two wise, the kings (are) through the intelligence of mental power, in (our) dwelling, the two foe-destroyers in the abode"’, (and then) the three (verses of the praüga-śastra): “Mitra I call”.
7.10.12	(The fourth puroruc): “Come hither ye divine adhvaryus, with your gold-clad chariot. Ye two salve this sacrifice with sweetness”, (and then) the three (verses): “Ye Aśvins, accept the sacrificial food”.
7.10.13	(Then the fifth puroruc): “Indra is most gracious through lauds and the lord of booty, the (God) with the bay (steeds), the friend of the pressed Soma”; (and then) the three (verses of the śastra proper): “Come hither O Indra, light shining”.
7.10.14	(Then the sixth puroruc): “We call at this sacrifice all the Gods united together; may they come all to this sacrifice, the Gods with the Goddess Prayer, for drinking the Soma, they who are the manifestation of the sacrifice”, (and then) the three (verses of the śastra proper): “O protecting, and people-supporting”.
7.10.15	(Then the seventh puroruc): “By the voice we call the mighty Goddess Voice, Sarasvatī, the well-adorned, to this sacrifice”, (and then) the three (verses): “The pure Sarasvatī”; with the last (of these thrice repeated) he closes (the śastra). Then he mutters (the formula), the ‘strength of the śastra’: “Quicken my word. Satiate my breath. Protect my eye. Favour my ear. Bestow on me the colour (of healthiness). Protect my body. Give me glory. For nose thee! The śastra has been uttered”.
7.10.16	As offering-verse he applies: “With all drink the sweetness of Soma”.
7.11.1	The ‘(verses) of the laud’ (stotriya) and the (verses) of the antistrophe are (always), excepting the pragāthas, triplets.
7.11.2	For the (śastra of the) maitrāvaruṇa the laud-triplet and the antistrophe-triplet are (the verses): "Hither, O Mitra and Varuṇa to our", and "Hither to us, O Mitra and Varuṇa".
7.11.3	The entrance of the śastra (the uktha-mukhā) is (the hymn): "Chant ye unto Mitra and Varuṇa".
7.11.4	The nine verses: "Let the praise of Mitra and Varuṇa" (are the conclusion, pāryasa). With the last verse (the ninth) he closes (the śastra). As offering-verse he applies: "Come, O Mitra and Varuṇa to our Soma".
7.12.1	For the (śastra of the) brāhmaṇacchamsin the laud-triplet and the antistrophe-triplet are (the verses): “Hither come, we have pressed’’ and " Hither come”.
7.12.2	The remaining part of the (same) hymn, without the last two verses are the entrance of the śastra.
7.12.3-4	(The hymn): "O Indra thee the bull we call”, and the three: "Thou risest towards” (are the conclusion), with the last verse of these he closes the śastra. As offering-verse he applies: "O Indra, accept the Soma”.
7.13.1	For the (śastra of the) acchāvāka the laud-verse triplet and the antistrophe-triplet are: "O Indra and Agni, come thou hither to the Soma”.
7.13.2	The rest of (this) hymn’ is the entrance of the śastra.
7.13.3-4	The five verses: "Thou, I call Indra and Agni” and the nine: "Here for you both, O Indra and Agni” are the conclusion, with the last verse he closes (the śastra). As offering-verse he applies: "Come ye both hither to the pressed Soma”.
7.14.1	For an (agniṣṭoma), at which the (first) pṛṣṭha-(laud) is (chanted not on the rathantara melody but) on the bṛhat (melody) the laud-verse (triplets are successively for these three śastras): "Mitra do we call’’; "Indra have the singers”; and "In Indra, in Agni”.
7.14.2-3	The acchāvāka (in this case) takes as his antistrophe-triplet the stotriya-triplet belonging to the rathantara-rite (the rite at which the pṛṣṭha-laud is chanted on the rathantara) and the antistrophe as entrance of the śastra (instead of that of the rathantara-rite).
7.14.4-5	The hotṛakas have (in their śastra) (each) four calls and the hotṛ in the extra-śastras (which run parallel to the extra-lauds).
7.14.6	(They are inserted) for the stotriya and the anurūpa triplets, for the part which immediately follows after the anurūpa and for the closing verse.
7.14.7	After the antistrophe-triplet follows the pragātha; after (this make) at the mid day-service a fifth call.
7.14.8	After the entrance of the śastra, for all (the hotṛakas and the hotṛ) there is the call at the night-(rounds).
7.14.9	When the adhvaryu says: "Praśāstṛ, command” the prasastr ( = maitrāvaruṇa) says: “Om, glide ye out of the sadas".
7.14.10	Turning themselves around their right shoulder they glide out (of the sadas) through the western door, passing the post of fig-wood at its north side, whilst the brahman passes at its south side.
7.14.11	They betake themselves before the (prācīnavaṃśa) shed in a northern direction.
7.14.12	For the midday-service they glide forwards (into the sadas) along the way they had left (it) and sit down each on his seat.
7.15.1	At the beginning of the midday-service they press out the soma-juice.
7.15.2	The grāvastut enters the havirdhāna (shed) by the eastern door, stands before the southern wheel of the northern havirdhāna-cart, (with his face turned) southward, wraps his face up with the (turban) which has served to tie the bundle of Soma and, as soon as he hears the noise of the pressing-stones, holds, without being summoned, his recitation in praise of (the pressing-stones) not connecting either by half-verses or not taking breath (between them).
7.15.3	(He recites the verses): “We come unto thee, O God Savitṛ”; “They yoke the mind and yoke the prayers”; “Now, Indra, seize our nourishing”; “Bring to us with your eight (hands)”; “Approach, bring”.
7.15.4	After reciting the first of the three verses which contain the verb of swelling the beginning: “Swell, may come to us” he recites the (first) two (verses) of the hymn of Arbuda.
7.15.5	After reciting the second (of the ‘swelling verses’ he repeats) two verses of the Arbuda-hymn.
7.15.6	After reciting the third (swelling verse) he recites one verse of the Arbuda-hymn.
7.15.7	(Then he recites the verses) of cleansing: “The ten fingers wipe thee”; “Him the ten fingers wipe”; “Him they wipe, who must be cleansed”.
7.15.8	Then he recites the (verses) with the word ‘jar’: “The jars have sounded”; “He runs in the jars”; “Thy juice, O Soma, has been dischaṛged into the jar”.
7.15.9	In the same manner, beginning with the verse for swelling, the (series of verses to accompany the) second pressing is disposed. Here the verses of the Arbuda-hymn are the five, beginning with the sixth.
7.15.10	In the same manner, the third is disposed, the verses of the Arbuda-hymn are here the three, beginning with the eleventh.
7.15.11	At the pressing at which they pronounce the word ‘mightily’ he recites: “They sound mightily’’.
7.15.12	The sixth (verse) at the first (round of pressing).
7.15.13	At the moment when the straining-cloth is spread out (over the kalasa) (he recites) the two (verses): “The strainer has been spread” and the single verse: “The dhiṣaṇās spread out the strainer”.
7.15.14	At the moment when the streaming Soma oozes through (the cloth)' the three verses: “His streams have oozed forth”; “The streams of this rushing one have oozed forth”; “Forth go thy streams”.
7.15.15	When the soma draughts are being taken out, he recites the verses addressed to Soma Pavamana he likes.
7.15.16	The three (verses): “Become purified, O Soma, for Indra accompanied by the Maruts”', at the moment when he (the adhvaryu) holds downwards.
7.15.17	When the last graha has been drawn he closes his recitation with the last (verse) of the Arbuda (hymn), takes away (from his head) the turban, and is dischaṛged.
7.15.18	But this (taking away and giving away of the turban) takes place on the last day of ahīnas and sattras.
7.15.19	He may also recite over (the pressing stones) the Arbuda-hymn pure.
7.16.1	When the midday-pavamāna-(laud) has been performed, they proceed with the cauldron of curds and whey (the dadhigharma) in case (the sacrifice of Soma) is performed with the pravaṛgya.
7.16.2	When he has been addressed (by the adhvaryu) with the words: "Hotr speak what thou hast to speak", he recites over (the dadhigharma) the first (verse): "Arise ye, look down on”.
7.16.3	When it has been said (by the pratiprasthātṛ): "Cooked is the sacrificial substance”, he recites over it the second verse of the hymn.
7.16.4	When he has been addressed (by the pratiprasthātṛ) with the words: "Recite the offering-verse for the dadhigharma” he recites as offering-verse the third verse of the hymn.
7.16.5	He recites each verse over (the dadhigharma) without taking breath (at the end of a half-verse) and with the prāṇava (o3) (making a pause at the end of the prāṇava).
7.16.6	In the same manner he speaks the offering-verse.
7.16.7	The secondary vaṣaṭ is: "Of the dadhigharma, O Agni, enjoy”.
7.16.8	The mantra for paṛtaking is: "(May there be) in me that great foṚce, in me the fitness, in me the intelligence. The gharma of triple fires shineth, together with the wish: the mind, together with the virāj: the light. May we obtain the milking thereof".
7.16.9	Having performed the rite of the victimal cake, they thereupon proceed with the cakes to be offered at the (midday-)service.
7.17.1	The invīting-verse is: "Of the midday-service".
7.17.2	(The invīting-verse) for (the oblation to Agni) Sviṣṭakṛt is the verse: "At the midday-service, O Jātavedas, accept the cake".
7.17.3	The hymn for filling the bowls is the one beginning: "The divine herb has been pressed".
7.17.4	The (formula for) prompting (the hotṛ to recite his offering-verse for the libation for the filled bowls which have advanced) is: "Let the hotṛ worship Indra from the midday-service".
7.17.5	The offering-verse (for the hotṛ) is: “Drink the Soma, towards which, O terrible one".
7.17.6	The second verse is the offering-verse for the maitrāvaruṇa.
7.17.7	The third for the brāhmaṇācchaṃsin.
7.17.8	The verse: “Come hitherwards’” for the potṛ.
7.17.9	The verse: “Thine is this Soma” for the neṣṭṛ.
7.17.10	The verse: “For Indra the Soma-draughts found aforetime” for the acchāvāka.
7.17.11	The verse: “Filled is his cup” for the agnīdhra.
7.17.12	At the last two services there are no cups for the pairs of deities nor the ṛta-offerings.
7.17.13	The acchāvāka performs no act outside (the sadas).
7.17.14	All the rest is as at the morning-service.
7.17.15-16	When they have invoked the iḍā and paṛtaken of (the Soma in the cups) that have advanced, the moment is come for giving the sacrificial fees.
7.17.17	He should give as fee one hundred and twelve cows.
7.17.18	Or, from twenty-one on, just as it may occur.
7.18.1	Gold he receives with the (formula): “Let Varuṇa give thee to Agni, to me, and may I obtain immoṛtality. Be thou long life to the giver, joy to me the receiver”.
7.18.2	Cows (he receives) with (the formula): “Let Varuṇa give thee to Rudra, to me, and may I obtain immoṛtality. Be there a cow to the giver, joy to me the receiver”.
7.18.3	A cloth (he receives) with (the formula): "Let Varuṇa give thee to Bṛhaspati, to me, and may I obtain immoṛtality. Be thou a skin to the giver, joy to me the receiver”.
7.18.4	A one-hoofed (animal) with (the formula): "Let Varuṇa give thee to Varuṇa, to me, and may I obtain immoṛtality. Be thou a steed to the giver, joy to me the receiver”.
7.18.5	Any other gift (he receives with the formula ): "Let Varuṇa give thee to Prajāpati, to me, and may I obtain immoṛtality. Be thou breath to the giver, joy to me the receiver”.
7.18.6	Or he may receive all with the syllable Om.
7.18.7-8	The (formula): "Who hath given, to whom hath he given” he speaks after (accepting), over a living creature or one of the different kinds he (only) touches.
7.18.9	After having given (the sacrificial fees) he (the sacrificer) mutters: "Given by us go ye full of sweetness to the Gods; enter the giver”.
7.19.1-2	When he (the hotṛ) has been addressed (by the adhvaryu) with the words: “(Recite the invīting-verse) to Indra who is accompanied by the Maruts,” then the invīting-verse is: “Drink here, O Indra, who art accompanied by the Maruts, the Soma.” 
7.19.3	The formula for prompting the hotṛ to recite his offering-verse is: “Let the hotṛ worship Indra who is accompanied by the Maruts.” 
7.19.4	As the offering-verse, he recites: “United with Maruts, O Indra, drink the Soma.” 
7.19.5	Having paṛtaken of this soma-draught, he recites the marutvatīya-śastra. 
7.19.6	The call at the beginning of a śastra during the midday-service is “adhvaryo śoṃsāvo3” (“adhvaryu, let us both praise”). 
7.19.7	At the interior of a śastra, the call of the morning-service is applied. 
7.19.8	Having recited the beginning-triplet: “We make thee hither like a chariot, for aid,” he utters the call. 
7.19.9	Having recited the antistrophe-triplet: “Drink this pressed herb, O Vasu,” he utters the call. 
7.19.10	Having recited the pragātha to invite Indra: “O Indra, come nearer,” he utters the call. 
7.19.11	Having recited the pragātha addressed to Brāhmaṇaspati: “Now speaks Brāhmaṇaspati,” he utters the call. 
7.19.12	Having recited the single verse: “Agni is the leader,” he utters the call. 
7.19.13	Having recited the single verse: “Then, O Soma, with insight,” he utters the call. 
7.19.14	Having recited the single verse: “The Maruts swell the water,” he utters the call. 
7.19.15	Having recited six verses (of the principal hymn beginning): “Thou, the terrible one, hast been born,” he utters the call and recites the nivid. 
7.19.16	At this hymn, the first responsive call (of the adhvaryu) contains a form of the word mad. 
7.19.17	At hymns of an odd number of verses, he inserts the nivid after having recited the greater half.
7.19.18	In the middle (he inserts it) at (hymns) of an even number of verses. 
7.19.19	At triplets, after having recited one verse. 
7.19.20	If the number of hymns is increased, (he inserts the nivid) in the last (hymn). 
7.19.21	But the call is uttered (at the beginning of the) first. 
7.19.22	At the afternoon-service, (he inserts the nivid) leaving over the last verses. 
7.19.23	The nivids he recites separatingly, by verse-quarters. 
7.19.24	At the last verse-quarter, the prāṇava (is inserted). 
7.19.25	Having recited the remaining part of the hymn and having uttered the call, he closes the śastra with the last verse, mutters the “foṚce of the śastra,” and applies as the offering-verse: “Those who at the slaying of the dragon.” 
7.20.1	The rathantara is the pṛṣṭha-(stotra) which belongs to the niṣkevalya-(śastra).
7.20.2	Or the bṛhat.
7.20.3	For the (niṣkevalya, if it runs parallel to the) rathantara, the stotra-triplets and anti strophe-triplets are the two pragāthas: “Towards thee, O hero, we utter praise’’ and “Towards thee, for drinking first”.
7.20.4	If it runs parallel to the bṛhat (as pṛṣṭha-saman) they are: “Thee we call” and: “Come thou then to the worshipper”.
7.20.5	“As he has conquered from times immemorial” is the inteṚcalatory verse.
7.20.6	The pragātha for (the śastra if it runs parallel to the) rathantara- pṛṣṭha-(stotra) is: “Drink of the juiceful Soma”.
7.20.7	(If it runs parallel) to the bṛhat (pṛṣṭha-stotra): “Let him hear both”.
7.20.8	(The hymn is) at the (śastra parallel with) the rathantara- pṛṣṭha-(stotra): “Of Indra now will I proclaim the mighty deeds”.
7.20.9	At a (śastra which runs parallel to the) bṛhat-pṛṣṭha(stotra) it is: “Praise him”.
7.20.10	In a lower pitch of voice he should recite the closing-verse.
7.20.11	Having muttered ‘the strength of the śastra’ he applies as offering-verse: “Drink the Soma, O Indra, let it gladden thee”.
7.22.1	The vāmadevya (is the pṛṣṭha-strotra which belongs to the niṣkevalya-śastra) of the maitrāvaruṇa.
7.22.2	The stotra-triplets and the antistropbe-triplets are: “With what hast thou come to us the brilliant one’’ and “With what art thou to us”.
7.22.3	The sama-pragātha is: “Which moṛtal him, O Indra’’.
7.22.6	As offering-verse he applies: “Willingly to us".
7.23.1	The naudhasa (is the pṛṣṭha-stotra which belongs to the niṣkevalya-śastra) of the brāhmaṇacchamsin, when the first pṛṣṭha-stotra has been the rathantara.
7.23.2	The śyaita, when it has been the bṛhat.
7.23.3	The stotra-and antistrophe-pragāthas are: “Him, who woṛks wonders", and “This I appeal to thee".
7.23.4	For the śyaita: “Towards him, of good gifts", and “I will worship the well renowned".
7.23.5	The samapragātha is: “These very sweet songs".
7.23.6	The hymn (uktha-mukhā) is: “Indra the destroyer of strongholds" for the naudhasa.
7.23.7	For the śyaita: “The Soma hath been pressed".
7.23.8	(The pāryasa) for both cases is: “Prayers have arisen".
7.23.9	As offering-verse he applies: “He who loves the residue of the Soma, who is provided with the thunderbolt".
7.24.1	The kāleya (is the pṛṣṭha-stotra which belongs to the niṣkevalya-śastra) of the acchāvāka.
7.24.2	The stotra- and the antistrophe-pragāthas are: “With strength him who finds treasures’’ and “The swift one wished to gain victory”.
7.24.3	The sama-pragātha is: “His part, surely, exceeds all”.'
7.24.4	(The uktha-mukhā is the hymn): “He has strongly grown”.
7.24.5	(The concluding part is): “This offering”.
7.24.6	As offering-verse he applies: “Drink and grow”.
7.25.1-2	What in (about) the śastras has, as a rule, not been specified (in the sacred texts) (of that now we shall treat).
7.25.3	A pair of verses, the first of which is either a bṛhati or kakubh and the second a satobṛhati is called ‘a pragātha’.
7.25.4	A barhata pragātha has a bṛhati as first verse.
7.25.6	A kākubha pragātha has a kakubh as first verse.
7.25.6	Having recited the bṛhati, he repeats (its) last verse-quarter, makes a pause at the first verse-quarter of the following verse, utters the prāṇava at the second verse-quarter, repeats this same verse-quarter, makes a pause at the third verse quarter and utters the prāṇava at the last.
7.25.7	In this manner three verses are got: one bṛhati, and two kakubhs.
7.25.8	This manner of reciting prevails for the rathantara and the bṛhat.
7.25.9	And for the hotṛakas where these two pṛṣṭha stotra-verses are given as pragāthas.
7.25.10	Everywhere (it prevails) for the yajñāyajñīya-(stotra) (and the corresponding stotra verses for the hotṛ in the āgnimāruta-śastra).
7.25.11	And for the pragāthas to invite Indra and the pragāthas addressed to Brāhmaṇaspati.
7.25.12	For the barhata (pragātha)s at other occasions than the aforesaid (the following rule prevails.
7.25.13	Having recited the bṛhati he repeats (its) last verse-quarter twice, makes a pause, utters the prāṇava of the half-verse of the following verse, repeats the second verse-quarter twice, makes pause, and with the last half-verse utters the prāṇava.
7.25.14	This makes three bṛhati verses.
7.25.15-16	Of the kakubh he repeats the last verse-quarter and the second of the satobṛhati. That makes three kakubhs.
7.25.17	The pragāthas follow this rule on account of being a stotriya or an anurūpa.
7.26.1	(Subject to the same rule) although not being a stotriya is the invocation of Indra.
7.26.2	And the (pragāthas) addressed to Brāhmaṇaspati.
7.26.3	In pahkti verses he makes pause after each two verse-quarters and with the fifth makes the prāṇava.
7.26.4	In triṣṭubhs, jagatīs, akṣarapaṅktis and verses of two quarters (the mode of reciting) is verse-quarter by verse-quarter.
7.26.5	The fourth and the fifth verse-quarters receive the prāṇava.
7.26.6	But in verses of five quarters, which mainly are triṣṭubhs or jagatīs (which are extended triṣṭubhs or jagatīs), there he should, where a repeated verse-quarter with a refrain is found, join these two (the fourth ard the fifth): the verse-quarter cannot be separated from the repeated quarter.
7.26.7	In a (verse) where no repeated quarter with a refrain is found, he should join the last two quarters.
7.26.8	In verses of six verse-quarters with repeated quarter with refrain, he should pause after every pair of verse-quarters and utter the prāṇava (at the end of the last two).
7.26.9	In verses of six quarters without such a verse-quarter he should make pause after two quarters, utter the prāṇava at one and (again) pause after two quarters and utter the prāṇavas at one (the last).
7.26.10	But a verse-quarter of eight syllables (in verses of six quarters) must receive the prāṇava.
7.26.11	The verses of seven verse-quarters, he makes the pause with one quarter and the prāṇava with two, the pause with two and with two (the prāṇava).
7.26.12-14	At the first rounds of the night-service, they repeat of the stotriya and anurūpa verses in gāyatrī the first verse-quarters, at the middle rounds the middle, at the last rounds the last.
7.26.15	Or by half-verses the morning-service,
7.26.16	except the stotriya verses, the anurūpa verses and pragāthas.
7.27.1-5	Of three verse-quarters are the gāyatrī, the uṣṇih, the para-uṣṇih, the kakubh, and the former virāj.
7.27.6-11	Of four verse-quarters are the latter virāj, the bṛhati, the satobṛhati, the jagatī, the anuṣṭubh and the triṣṭubh.
7.27.12	The paṅkti has five (quarters).
7.27.13	The aticchandas metres have six (or) seven.
7.27.14	The verse: "For this Marut-troop’’ has eight.
7.27.15	The verse of the two quarters has two.
7.27.16	These are as a rule eight-syllablic.
7.27.17	The jagatī as a rule is twelve-syllabic,
7.27.18	and the third quarter of the uṣṇih and bṛhati.
7.27.19	The satobṛhati has the first and the third quarter of twelve syllables.
7.27.20	Of the kakubh the middle quarter is of twelve syllables,
7.27.21	of the para-uṣṇih the first quarter.
7.27.22	The triṣṭubh and virāj are of eleven syllables a quarter.
7.27.23	The latter virāj has ten syllables a quarter.
7.27.24	The virāj they call the akṣarapaṅkti.
7.27.25	The padapaṅkti consists of five quarters each of five syllables.
7.27.26	The jagatī consists also of six eight-syllabic (quarters).
7.27.27	28. The nicṛt is by one or two too less, the bhurij by (one or two) excessive.
7.27.29	The verses of a (metre) to be brought about are got at by dividing (them) by the (number of) verse-quarters of the (metre) to be produced: they are produced by dividing by (the number of) verse-quarters of the (metre) which is to be brought about.
7.27.30	Gāyatrī and uṣṇih, anuṣṭubh and bṛhati, paṅkti, triṣṭubh and jagatī: this is the order of the metres, which beginning with the twenty-four (syllables), increase by four (syllables).
8.1.1	They glide forward after the completion of the midday-service in the same manner as they have done for the midday-service.
8.1.2	At the beginning of the afternoon-service, they proceed with the soma-draught destined for the Ādityas.
8.1.3-4	When he (the maitrāvaruṇa) has been addressed (by the adhvaryu) with (the words): "(Recite the invīting-verse) for the Ādityas’’, the invīting-verse is: "Through the favour of the Ādityas”.
8.1.5	The (formula for) prompting (the hotṛ to recite the offering-verse) is: "Let the hotṛ worship the Ādityas”.
8.1.6	As offering-verse he applies: "Let the Ādityas, let Aditi be delighted”.
8.1.7	They do not gaze at the pouring out of the oblation, nor do they paṛtake of it.
8.1.8	These two prescriptions prevail also for the draught for Savitṛ.
8.1.9	When the ārbhava-pavamāna-laud has been performed, they perform the victimal sacrifice from the manotā on up to the iḍā and thereupon proceed with the cakes which belong to the (afternoon) pressing.
8.2.1	The invīting-verse is: “At the third service the fried barley”.
8.2.2	(The invīting-verse) for (the oblation to Agni) Sviṣṭakṛt is: "O Agni, at the third service”.
8.2.3	The hymn for filling (the bowls) is (the one beginning): “Come here, ye sons of strength”.
8.2.4	The (formula for) prompting (the hotṛ to recite his offering-verse for the libation for the filled bowls which have advanced) is: “Let the hotṛ worship Indra from the afternoon-service”.
8.2.5	The offering-verse for the hotṛ is: “O Indra, with the Ṛbhus rich in booty”.
8.2.6	For the maitrāvaruṇa: "Ye soma-drinking Mitra and Varuṇa'’.
8.2.7	For the brāhmaṇacchamsin: "Indra and Bṛhaspati drink the Soma’’.
8.2.8	For the potṛ: "May they convey ye hither, O Maruts”.
8.2.9	For the neṣṭṛ: "As at home come ye to us”.'
8.2.10	For the acchāvāka: "Drink ye, O Indra and Viṣṇu”.
8.2.11	For the agnīdhra: "This praise”.
8.2.12	All the rest is as at the morning-service.
8.2.13	When they have invoked the iḍā and paṛtaken of the (Soma in the cups) that have advanced, they put down to the south of the nārāśaṃsa-cups which have been deposited (in the havirdhāna-shed), near to each of their cups three baits of the cake mixed with (some of the) fried rice-corns, with the formula over each ball: "Here, ye Fathers, regale yourselves, each according to your share; O Fathers, pour in for yourselves”.
8.3.1-2	When he (the maitrāvaruṇa) has been addressed (by the adhvaryu) with the words: "(Recite the invīting-verse) for Savitṛ”, the invīting-verse is: "The God Savitṛ has become, to be praised".
8.3.3	The (formula for) prompting (the hotṛ to recite the offering-verse) is: "Let the hotṛ worship the God Savitṛ”.
8.3.4	As offering-verse he applies: “May the household God, the delectable Savitṛ, assign treasures to the sons of wisdom, during their whole life. Let him drink the Soma, the oblations have exhilerated him, even the wanderer takes delight in his ordinance".
8.3.5	The call at the beginning of a śastra during the afternoon-service and the uktha-śastras runs: “O adhvaryu, sosomsavo3".
8.3.6	In the middle of a śastra it is the same as at the morning-service.
8.3.7	And also the ṣoḍaśin and the following sacrifices of Soma.
8.3.8	For the vaiśvadeva-(śastra) the opening- and sequel-triplets are: “This of Savitṛ we choose”; and: “Today for us, O God Savitṛ”.
8.3.9	The (hymn) addressed to Savitṛ is: “The God hath become”.
8.3.10	(Then a verse addressed to Vāyu): “With one and ten for thine own sake, with two and twenty for worshipping, with three and thirty for conveying (the sacrifice to the Gods): with thy teams, O Vāyu do thou here unloose them”.
8.3.11	(Then the hymn addressed to sky and earth): “Forwards sky and earth with sacrifices”.
8.3.12	The responsive call (of the adhvaryu) contains an expression with the word mad ("to rejoice").
8.3.13	(The one verse): "The maker of fair forms".
8.3.14	Then the (hymn) to the Ṛbhus: "They have wrought the car”.
8.3.15	(Then come) the (three) isolated (verses): "This Vena”; "In whom the mother”; and "To the father”.
8.3.16	(Then) the (hymn) addressed to the All-Gods: "May to us come favourable” leaving over the last two (verses) he recites the nivid.
8.3.17	The last (verse of this hymn) is the closing one.
8.3.18	The third, he recites twice by verse-halves.
8.3.19	Having muttered the formula designated as 'the strength of the śastra’, he applies as offering-verse: "Ye All-Gods, hearken to this my call”.
8.4.1	When he has been addressed (by the adhvaryu) with (the words): "Recite the offering-verse (for the libation) of liquified butter” he recites whisperingly as offering-verse: "The butter rests firmly”.
8.4.2	When he has been addressed: "Recite the offering-verse for the (oblation of the) mess of rice destined for Soma,’’ he recites as offering-verse: “Thou, O Soma, together with the Fathers".
8.4.3	When he has been addressed: “Recite the offering-verse (for the libation) of the butter”, he mutters whisperingly: “Stride thou widely, O Viṣṇu, make wide room for our abode. Drink the butter, thou born of butter, and speed the lord of the sacrifice ever onwards”.
8.4.4	The offering (of liquified butter) at both sides (of the oblation of the mess for Soma) is optional.
8.4.5	The hotṛ having gazed on the mess of rice for Soma, touches with his two fingers the butter (which has been poured into a hole made in the middle of the earn).
8.4.6	With the formula: “Thou art the guardian of eye-(sight), guard my eye-(sight)” he rubs his eyes (with the fat on his fingers).
8.5.1	When he (the agnīdhra) has been addressed (by the adhvaryu) with (the words): “Agnīdh, recite the offering-verse (for the oblation of the soma-draught) destined for (Agni) with the wives (of the Gods)” he (the agnīdhra) recites whisperingly the offering-verse: “With these, O Agni, on the same chariot come hither”.
8.5.2-7	Having taken the draught from which nothing has yet been paṛtaken, he enters the sadas through the eastern door, sits down to the north or the neṣṭṛ near him or in his lap; having said: “Neṣṭṛ, invite me" he paṛtakes of the remains of the Soma, touches water and returns along the way by which he had come.
8.6.1	The yajñāyajñīya-stotra belongs to the āgnimāruta-(śastra). (It consists of the following hymns and verses).
8.6.2	The (hymn) addressed to Vaiśvānara: "O Vaisvana a of broad radiance".
8.6.3	(The single) verse: “Let come hither, O Father of the Maruts'’
8.6.4	The (hymn) addressed to the Maruts: “The eneṛgetic".
8.6.5	As stotra and antistrophe (triplets) the two pragāthas of the yajñāyajñīya-(laud): “By sacrifice on sacrifice to Agni'';' and “The God who gives treasures".
8.6.6	(The hymn) addressed to (Agni) Jātavedas: “Bring a strong prayer to Agni”.
8.6.7	The three verses: “Ye waters are wonderful”.
8.6.8	The single (verse): “And may Ahi of the depths hearken unto us”.
8.6.9	The two verses: “May the consorts of the Gods favour us”.
8.6.10	The two verses: “Rākā I call”.
8.6.11	The three akṣarapaṅkti (verses): “The new friend has gained".
8.6.12	The three (verses) addressed to the Fathers: "May the Fathers arise".
8.6.13	The (verses) addressed to Yama: "Sit down on this strew O Yama”; "Mātalī with the Kavyas”; "Come with the Aṅgiras, O Yama”.
8.6.14	The three verses: "Sweet, forsooth, is this”.
8.6.15	At these verses the responsive call of the adhvaryu contains a word derived from the verb ‘to be drunk’.
8.6.16	The isolated verses: "By whose vigour”; "Of Viṣṇu now will I proclaim”; "Stretching the thread”.
8.6.17	Having closed (the śastra) with the verse: "May the bountiful Indra for us” he mutters the formula called ‘strength of the śastra’ and applies as offering-verse: "May Agni with the Maruts”.
8.7.1	The first nivid (belongs) to the marutvatīya-(śastra).
8.7.2	The second to the niṣkevalya-(śastra)
8.7.3	The third and following ones (belong) to the vaiśvadeva- and the āgnimāruta-(śastra).
8.7.4	The last belongs to the ṣoḍaśin.
8.7.5	As many hymns there are, so many are the nivids.
8.7.6	The call is (inserted) before each hymn (in a śastra).
8.7.7	And before each nivid.
8.7.8	And before each isolated verse.
8.7.9	And before the closing-verse.
8.7.10	At the vaiśvadeva-śastra before the opening and the sequel-triplets.
8.7.11-18	At the āgnimāruta before the strophe- and the antistrophe-triplets, before the verses: “Ye waters are wonderful", before the verses to the Consorts of the Gods, one to Rākā, the akṣarapaṅkti verses, the verses to the Fathers, to Yama, and the svāduṣkilīya-verses.
8.7.19	Not hastingly is the (mode of) recitation of the vaiśvadeva-(śastra).
8.7.20	Quickly is the mode of recitation of the āgnimāruta-(śastra) with the exception of the verses: “Ye waters are wonderful”.
8.7.21	Having deposited ‘the soma-draughts-in-waters', and having performed of the victimal sacrifice the acts which begin with the after-offerings and which end with the śaṃyu, they proceed with the hāriyojana-(draught).
8.8.1	The invīting-verse is: “Stand still, O bounteous God”.
8.8.2	The (formula for) prompting is: “Of the Soma mixed with fried barley, O Indra"’.
8.8.3	The offering-verse is: “I yoke through holy power thy bay (steeds)’’.
8.8.4-5	The secondary vaṣaṭ is: either “Of the Soma mixed with grains Agni paṛtake’’, or simply: “Of the Soma, O Agni, paṛtake”.
8.8.6	With (the formula): “Of thou that art washed in water, O God Soma, who knowest the mind (of men), who art by men lauded with lauds and praised with praise (śastra) and offered with sacrificial formulas, who art the horse-winning, cow-winning beverage, of thou who hast been called near I, being called near, paṛtake’’, they paṛtake only by smelling at it and thereupon distribute the grains.
8.8.7	The hotṛ should try to get the greater part of them.
8.8.8	They leave the sadas along the same way by which they enter it at the morning-service.
8.8.9	With (the verse): “Even as ye did set free the buffalo-cow” having gazed on all the dhiṣṇyas they betake themselves to the Āhāvaniya, passing to the north of the agnīdhriya (shed).
8.8.10	In the fire of the agnīdhriya-shed they perform the libation for atonement with (the following mantras and verses): “bhūḥ bhuvaḥ svaḥ!” "Be, O Agni, nearest to us”; "Do thou, O Agni, appease the wrath of Varuṇa”; and "May this, O Mitra and Varuṇa”.’
8.8.11	Then they throw the grains (at which they have smelled) at the border of the ashes of the Āhāvaniya with (the formula): "Be ye fillers! fill me with children and cattle”. Thereupon they put each of the five chips into (the Āhāvaniya fire).
8.9.1	With (the formulas): "Thou art the expiation of the fault committed by myself. Thou art the expiation of the fault committed by men. Thou art the expiation of the fault committed by the Fathers. Thou art the expiation of the fault committed by the Gods, and of what fault I have committed willingly and unwillingly; of all that art thou the expiation”.
8.9.2	Turning themselves around their left arm as axle, they sit down to the north of the Āhāvaniya each behind his bowl of 'soma-draughts-in-waters', put strainers into them and shuffle them (the bowls) with (the verses): "The waters have united with the waters, the herbs with juice. Let the rich ones be mixed with the moving ones, let the sweet ones be mixed with the sweet".
8.9.3-4	(When they have said): "We are invited all of us" they paṛtake of these draughts by smelling at them with the (formula): "Of thou that hast been washed in water, O God Soma, who knowest the mind (of men), who art the horse-winning, cow-winning beverage, of thou who hast been called near, I, being called near paṛtake".
8.9.5	With (the two verses): "Let this praise fetch you, O Maruts" and "By whose vigour the spheres were propped up" they pour (the contents of the bowls) out in an eastern or a northern direction.
8.9.6	They address (the contents when they have been poured out) with (the verse): "I send you off to the ocean".
8.9.7	They thereupon touch their breast with the four verses: "Hail to us the Goddesses".
8.9.8	The touching of the vital breaths and the wiping of the mouth is the same.
8.9.9	Having turned themselves around to the right they paṛtake, in the agnīdhriya-shed, of sour coagulated milk, (in the same manner) as the paṛtaking of the sour coagulated milk.
8.9.10	Having brought to an end the patnīsaṃyājas, he descends, when the śamīstayajus-oblations are performed, unto the avabhṛtha.
8.10.1	With (the verse): “May the strength again come to me, again the soul, the property and the sacred lore. May the dhisnya-fires again each on its own spot here be maintained” the sacrificer should fix his looks on all the dhiṣṇyas, and either at this moment or after the slaughtering of the anubandhyā-cow gaze on all the officiating priests with the verse: “The two wise youths bestow according to the law, the truth. Ye lords of the law, of the truth, let us dissolve our alliance".
8.10.2	Whilst he (the sacrificer) goes along (with the others to the water-side, he mutters the verse) : “A broad path has king Varuṇa made”.
8.10.3	All of them join in the finale of the saman.
8.10.4	With (the formula) : “Homage to Varuṇa, trodden upon is Varuṇa’s rope” he puts his foot in the water.
8.11.1	(Then takes place) the sacrifice to Varuṇa.
8.11.2	It is a modification of the sacrifice on full-moon day.
8.11.3	Or the (verses with which the butter-portions are offered) are those containing the words 'in the water’: “In the water, O Agni”; “In the water my Soma”.
8.11.4	He performs the sacrifice standing.
8.11.5	(The invīting- and offering-verses for the principal oblation are): “Loose the uppermost rope’’; “Thy wrath, O Varuṇa”.
8.11.6	(By the two verses): “Be, O Agni, nearest to us”, “Do thou Agni appease the wrath of Varuṇa” he assigns Agni and Varuṇa.
8.11.7-8	The formula (addressed to Sviṣṭakṛt) he may either speak or not speak.
8.11.9	Of the fore-offerings and the after-offerings the one to the sacrificial strew is left out.
8.11.10-11	The sacrifice begins with the fore-offerings and ends with the after-offerings or with the oblation to Agni Sviṣṭakṛt.
8.11.12	Or the two butter-portions and the two after-offerings may fall out.
8.11.13	With (the verse): “By which glory the two made the two women, by which they touched the sura, by which they sprinkled the earth: this wide terrestrial world, which glory there is yours, O Aśvins, thereby sprinkle me" the hotṛ sprinkles himself (when coming out of the water of the lustral bath).
8.11.14	The sacrificer, whilst coming (out of the water and returning mutters) the (verse): "I, a human being, come to my dwelling with auspicious look”.
8.11.15	With (the verse) : "Nay Pūṣan, possessor of a thousand cows sit down here'' he sits down (on his usual sitting-place) and lays two fuel-sticks on the Āhāvaniya, the first with : "Thou art the fuel-stick of the Gods", the second without mantra.
8.11.16	The same does bis wife in the Gārhapatya without any mantra.
8.12.1	By the introductory sacrifice the concluding sacrifice is explained.
8.12.2	There is inverting of the invīting- and offering-verses.
8.12.3-4	He sacrifices to Pathyā svasti on the fourth, to Savitṛ on the third place.
8.12.5	A barren cow must subsequently be fettered (and immolated) to Mitra and Varuṇa.
8.12.6	Or (it may be replaced by) an āmikṣā.
8.12.7	The invīting-verses are : "Might I bring you, O Mitra and Varuṇa” (for the sacrifice of the omentum); "This your greatness, O Mitra and Varuṇa” (for the victimal cake); "Sprinkle, O Mitra and Varuṇa, by our delightful oblation" (for the sacrifice of the parts of the victim).
8.12.8	The offering verses (for the same occasion are successively): “Ye both are clad in garments of fat"; “What is most abundant"; and “Stretch out your arms".
8.12.9	From the sacrifice connected with the consecration on up to the end of the sacrifice of the barren cow, he does not cause the mistress of the house to speak (the verse), nor does he strew the grass-blades.
8.12.10	At the end of the sacrifice of the barren cow he causes her to speak the verse and strews the grass-blades down before (to the east of) the dhisnya of the agnīdhra.
8.12.11	The heart-spit he addresses with (the following formulas and the verse) : “Do not hurt the waters nor the herbs. Thou art pain (heat). To him whom we hate may go thy pain". “From every abode of thine, O king Varuṇa, therefrom set us free. From the oath we swear by the waters, by the kine, by Varuṇa from that set us free". Then they touch water with (the formula): “May the waters and the herbs be friendly disposed to us", and sprinkle it to the south with the formula : “May they be unfriendly disposed to him who hates us and whom we hate".
8.12.12	Or the āmikṣā (if this replaces the barren cow) begins with the butter-portions.
8.12.13	It is a modification of the rite of new-moon.
8.12.14	It is without the prose formula of the Sviṣṭakṛt and ends with the iḍā ceremony.
8.13.1	Having settled down to the north, he pours out with a verse addressed to Viṣṇu on this new fire a full-spoon and performs the sacrifice on the newly chosen spot.
8.13.2	It is an iṣṭi to Agni.
8.13.3	It is a modification of the rite of full-moon day.
8.13.4	The (invīting- and offering-verses) which (are used) at the renewed establishment of the sacred fires, (are used) for the (principal) oblation and the one for (Agni) Sviṣṭakṛt.
8.13.5	If (the principal oblation) is a cake on five kapālas, the iṣṭi conforms to that of the renewed establishment.
8.13.6	When the iṣṭi has been brought to an end, he (the sacrificer) performs the agnihotṛa of the evening.
8.14.1	The (acts of the) morning-service (are performed) with a low (pitch of) voice.
8.14.2	Somewhat louder than the ājya(śastra) is the praüga (śastra).
8.14.3	With the middle (strength of) voice the midday-service.
8.14.4	Somewhat louder than the marutvatīya (is) the niṣkevalya.
8.14.5	With the loudest voice the afternoon-service.
8.14.6	Somewhat louder than the vaiśvadeva is the āgnimāruta.
8.14.7	Or the midday service is with the loudest.
8.14.8-9	The afternoon-service with the lowest or middle one.
8.15.1	Until the end of an act for which he utters (his formula of) prompting, he restrains his voice.
8.15.2	Likewise from the call on unto the secondary vaṣaṭ.
8.15.3	During the morning-litany the brahman (restrains his voice).
8.15.4	After he has paṛtaken (of the soma-draught) (he restrains his voice) until the impulse.
8.15.5	From the impulse on, unto the secondary vaṣaṭ.
8.15.6	After he has heard the end of the atipraiṣa, up to the act of bringing the overnight-water around (the vihāra).
8.15.7	Before the pavamāna-(laud)s the oblation to the drops (must be performed by him) with (the two verses): "What drop of thine leaps away" and "The drop leapeth away".
8.15.8	And thereupon he glides along the (others) who glide (towards the place where the pavamāna laud is chanted).
8.15.9	Likewise does the maitrāvaruṇa.
8.15.10	At a ceremony which is connected with a high-altar built of bricks, he (the brahman) mutters, whilst the fire is being brought forward, the apratiratha-hymn.
8.15.11	(The verse): "All regions, at the south, all Gods hath he worshipped. Of the sweet gharma, consecrated by ‘hail’, drink ye, O Aśvins" he mutters whilst accompanying the mahāvīra.
8.15.12	At the moment when the vaṣaṭ has been said (over the offered gharma) (he mutters): "Ye Aśvins, drink the gharma, the hearty one with daily favours. Homage to the Web-weaver, to Heaven and Earth."
8.15.13	After the secondary vaṣaṭ (he mutters): "The Aśvins have drunk the gharma, Heaven and Earth have consented. May gifts be present here."
8.15.14	What has not been stated (above) is simiḍār
8.15.15	This is the brahman’s (part of the) acts for the (sacrifice of) Soma.
8.16.1	"May Indra accompanied by the Maruts drink the Soma— who is praised by the Maruts, who is accompanied by the troop of the Maruts—whose inspirers are the Maruts, whose friends are the Maruts—the Gods who applauded him—at his conquest of the waters, at his victory over Vṛtra—at his slaying of Sambara, at his seeking of the cows—as he praised (?) the traces that were to be kept concealed—in the farthest distance—He slew Vṛtra, he freed the waters—together with the strength of the Maruts—And the prayers strengthened him—irresiṣṭible by their might—Paying reverence to the Gods—together with his allies the Maruts—may Indra accompanied by the Maruts here hearken, here drink of the Soma. May the God favour this God-invocation with divine thought. May he favour this priesthood, this reigning order— May he favour this soma-pressing sacrificer—he the wonderful with wonderful help—May he hear the prayer, may he come with help".
8.16.2-3	Now the (formula called) the strength of the śastra: "Form conformable, corresponding beautiful form here....blessing  For the hearing thee. The uktha-(śastra) has been uttered for Indra".
8.17.1	“May the God Indra drink the Soma— he who is the most manly amongst the single ones— the most courageous amongst born in great numbers— the driver of the bay steeds— the lover of Prsni— the wielder of the thunderbolt— the destroyer of the citadels— the demolisher of the citadels— the leader of the waters— the leader of the warriors— the overpowering, far renowned— the wealth-granting, the one of wonderful skill— the God who willingly has come here — May the God Indra hearken here, may he here drink the Soma — May the God favour the God-invocation”’ etc. as above.
8.17.2-3	Now the formula ‘strength of the śastra’: “Thou art the sovereign, thou art the self-ruler, thou art the ruler far and wide, thou art the king, thou art the over-powerer, may we overpower whom we hate. —For the listening thee ! The śastra has been uttered for Indra”’.
8.18.1	“May God Savitṛ enjoy the Soma—- the golden-handed, beautiful-tongued— of beautiful arms, of beautiful fingers—- of efficacious instigation thrice a day— who has incited the two wealth-possessing ones— both delighting in his incitation—procuring the excellent (gift) of Savitṛ— the milk-giving cow—the draught-ox— the swift courser— the victorious charioteer— the prolific wife— the youth fit for the assembly. —May God Savitṛ drive away by bis incitation the grief, away the wicked— may he hearken here, may he enjoy the Soma— May the God favour the God-invocation’’ etc. as above.
8.19.1	“May Heaven and Earth enjoy the Soma— the father and the mother— the milch-cow and the bull— the fortune-procuring and the dliisana— the one of good semen and the one of good milk— the beneficient and the wonderful— the one rich in food and the one rich in sap— May Heaven and Earth hearken here— May the two Goddesses favour this God-invocation with divine thought— May they favour this priesthood, this reigning order— May they favour this soma-pressing sacrificer— they the wonderful with wonderful help— May they hear the prayers, may they come with help”.
8.20.1	"May the Ṛbhus, the Gods, enjoy the Soma— the skilful by their activity— by their work deft-handed, by their riches most rich— by activity most active, by power most powerful— who fashioned the milch-cow, the all-impelling, omniform—they fashioned the milch-cow, she became omniform— they awakened, the young ones, enjoying— they yoked the two bay steeds, they went up to the Gods— after the lapse of a year, skilful, they came to a part of the sacrifice. —May the Ṛbhus, the Gods, hearken here, may they enjoy here the Soma. May they favour this God-invocation with divine thought. —May they favour this priesthood, this reigning order. —May they favour this soma-pressing sacrificer— they the wonderful, with wonderful help. May they hear the progress, may they come with help”.
8.21.1	"May the All-Gods enjoy the Soma—They all, worshipped everywhere —the exceedingly great—having dressed food, having half... —jointly conveying the cooked food—they who stand in heaven and on earth—on the waters and the sky—on the sacrificial strew and the altar—on the sacrifice and in the intermediate region —they whose soul is the mind, whose messenger Agni. —ye who are three and eleven—and three and thirty—and three and three hundreds—and three and three thousands—so many at the rising—so many at the setting (of the sun) —so many are their consorts—so many their wives—so many followers—so many attached to giving—or, ye Gods, ye are more numerous than that-—May I not be separated, O ye Gods, fiom yoir—nor from your—May the All-Gods hearken here, may they enjoy the Soma—May they favour this God-invocation’’ etc. as above.
8.22.1	"May Agni Vaiśvānara enjoy the Soma— the fuel-stick of all the Gods—the imperishable divine light—who hath shone for the clans of men—who hath shone on the days of old—imperishable on the foremost rank of the dawns—who illumines the sky and the earth—and the wide intermediate region—by his light may he bestow protection on him who is worthy of sacrifice— May Agni Vaiśvānara hearken here, may he enjoy the Soina. May he favour this God-invocation’’ etc. as above.
8.23.1	"May the Maruts, the Gods, enjoy the Soma—who possess good praise, good laud—who chant hymns, who are very vigorous—the foggy ones, clothed with rain—the impetuous, the sons of Prsni—the radiant, wearing golden brooches —the strong whose coming brings happiness—the heroes with invincible chariots—May the Maruts, the Gods, hearken here, may they enjoy Soma. May the Gods favour this God-invocation’’ etc, as above.
8.24.1	“May Agni Jātavedas enjoy the Soma-- he of beautiful front, of splendid light— the houselord who is never from home— who is visible through the darkness— to whom belongs the oblation of butter, the adorable— of thick covering, whose sacrifice!’ is never laid low— the invincible victor as he assails the enemies— O Agni Jātavedas, procure power and victory, stusa stusah —Protect from anguish him who enkindleth (thee)— May Agni Jātavedas hearken here, may he enjoy the Soma. May the God favour the God-invocation ' etc. as above.
8.24.2-3	Then the (formula called) ‘the strength of the śastra’ : “Splendour then art. Boldness thou art. Violation thou art. Subjugation thou art. Separation thou art. Basis thou art. Support thou art. The one who must be supported thou art. For hearing thee. The śastra has been uttered for Indra, for the Gods".
8.25.1	“Under inspiration of this, O singer, may Indra enjoy the Soma— under inspiration of this, O singer, Indra slew the dragon —under inspiration of this, O singer, Indra slew Vṛtra —under inspiration of this, O singer, Indra propped the sky and spread out the earth —under the inspiration of this, O singer, Indra traversed the intermediate region and raised the sun on the sky —under the inspiration of this, O singer, Indra elevated the Aryan race and threw down the barbarian race —under the inspiration of this, O singer, Indra made swell the not-swelling ones, and incited the not quick —under the inspiration of this, O singer, Indra brought to standstill the mountains which moved about like leaping antelopes —under the inspiration of this, O singer, Indra raised lhe stream of the waters —under the inspiration of this, O singer, may Indra hearken here who resides in the mountains.' Under the inspiration of this, O singer, may Indra hearken here. May he enjoy the Soma. May he favour this God-invocation" etc. as before.
8.25.2-3	Then ‘the strength of the śastra’ : “By the heights the height, the summits of the ruddy one. The body of svaṛga, on the firmament".
9.1.1	The agniṣṭoma (explained in the preceding chapters) is the model for the sacrifice of twelve days and the (other) one-day soma-sacrifices.
9.1.2	We shall (now) explain its modification.
9.1.3	An appellation occurring in the model, when mentioned at (the occasion of) a different substance, annuls the (rule of) the model.
9.1.4	(Likewise does) a prohibition.
9.1.5	(Likewise does) the aim.
9.1.6	(Likewise does) the number (?).
9.1.7	Or an addition.
9.1.8	By the addition of three śastras after the āgnimāruta-śastra the ukthya comes about.
9.1.9	By the addition of one after the ukthya-śastras the ṣoḍaśin.
9.1.10	By the addition of thirteen after the ṣoḍaśin the overnight rite.
9.1.11	The place (of insertion) is below the āgnimāruta-śastra and the after-offerings of the victimal sacrifice.
9.2.1	The sākamaśva-(stotra) belongs to the maitrāvaruṇa.
9.2.2	It consists of the following verses and hymns: "Come hither, I will gladly sing to thee" are the stotra- and antistrophe-triplets.
9.2.3	The two triplets: "The upholder of the people", "He propped the sky".
9.2.4	The hymn: "Give, O Indra and Varuṇa, to our sacrifice".
9.2.5	The hymn: "May I turn ye, O kings, to the sacrifice".
9.2.6	As offering-verse he applies: "O Indra and Varuṇa of the most sweet Soma".
9.3.1	The saubhara-(stotra) belongs to the brāhmaṇacchamsin.
9.3.2	It consists of the following verses and hymns: "We, O incomparable one, thee"; and "He who all this before" are the stotra- and antistrophe-pragāthas.
9.3.3	The two triplets: "To the most liberal" and "He who splitting the mountain".
9.3.4	The hymn: "As a shooter" without the last (verse) and the hymn: "As bird swimming in the water". Having recited these he closes the śastra with the verse which had been omitted and applies as offering-verse: "Ye two, Bṛhaspati and Indra".
9.4.1	The nārmedha-stotra belongs to the acchāvāka.
9.4.2	(It consists of the following parts). The triplets “For, O Indra who invest the chants" are the stotra- and antistrophe-triplets.
9.4.3	(The hymn): “The season, the mother".
9.4.4	(The hymn): “Of Viṣṇu now".
9.4.5	(The hymn): “Him who drinks of the Soma".
9.4.6	(The hymn): “With the rite".
9.4.7	As offering-verse he applies: “O Indra and Viṣṇu, ye lovers of the soma juice".
9.5.1	At the moment when they are going to hold the laud for the ṣoḍaśin, the sacrificer should revere the ṣoḍaśin draught (of Soma) with (the verse): “Than whom no other is born higher, he who encompasseth all beings; Prajāpati, being united with creatures, is associated with the three lights, he the ṣoḍaśin".
9.5.2	As stotra-triplet he recites (the two verses): “Indra, enjoy thou—drive on—come, O Hero, with the bays here—drink of the Soma—like a wise one (?)—loving the sweet (draught)—fair one for intoxication”. (1) "O Indra, thy belly—like one to be praised—fill thou with the sweet (draught)—like the heavens—with this Soma—like the sky—unto thee have advanced the well-recommended intoxications”. (2) "Indra, the swiftly overpowering—like a friend—has slain Vṛtra, as a yati—He split the cave—as Bhṛgu—he overpowered his foes, for the intoxication of the Soma”. (3)
9.5.3	(Immediately afterwards) the single (verse is recited): "Of such one as thou, O lightful one".
9.5.4	He then intertwines a triplet in gāyatrī and a triplet in paṅkti metre: "May the bay steeds convey thee hither” and "Let drink of the sweet”.
9.5.5-7	Connecting with the first verse-quarter of the gāyatrī verse the first verse-quarter of the paṅkti verse, he makes a pause; connecting with the second the third, he makes the prāṇava; with the third he makes a pause.
9.5.8	Two verse-quarters of the paṅkti remain. With these he makes the prāṇava.
9.5.9	He (thereupon) intertwines an uṣṇih-triplet and a bṛhati-triplet: “Sing ye unto Indra a song"; “Come hither, O Indra, with charming bay steeds".
9.5.10-13	Connecting the first uṣṇih verse-quarter with a first verse-quarter of the bṛhati he makes a pause; connecting the second with the second he makes the prāṇava. (Then he takes) an eight-syllabic part of the uṣṇih verse-quarter and an eight-syllabic of the bṛhati-verse together and after these two makes the pause. Two four-syllabic parts remain (of each), these he joins, connects the last verse-quarter of the bṛhati-verse and makes the prāṇava.
9.6.1	Then he intertwines the twenty-syllabic two-quarter verse and the triṣṭubh (verse): “Put the horses for him under the yoke”; “Lead us along the wide room”.
9.6.2-5	Having connected with the first unit of five syllables of the two-quarter verse, the first verse-quarter of the triṣṭubh-verse, he makes the pause. Having connected with them the (following) unit of five syllables the second quarter he makes the prāṇava. Having connected with the third unit of five syllables the third verse-quarter of the triṣṭubh he makes the pause. Having connected with the fourth unit of five syllables the fourth verse-quarter (of the triṣṭubh) he makes the prāṇava.
9.6.6	Thereupon he intertwines the following triplet of two-quarter verses: "This one as the proper Brahman, Indra by name, the renowned, is praised. From thee come, as the ways from a path, O Indra, the favours. To thee, forsooth, O lord of prowess go our uninterrupted prayers” and the jagatī triplet: "I shall laud thy bay steeds”.
9.6.7-10	Having connected the first set of four syllables of the two-quarter triplet with the first quarter of the jagatī, he makes the pause. Having connected the second set of four syllables with the second quarter of the jagatī, he makes the prāṇava. Having connected the third set of four syllables with the third quarter of the jagatī he pauses. Having connected the fourth set of four syllables with the fourth quarter of the jagatī, he pronounces the prāṇavas.
9.6.11-13	Then he recites the three gāyatrī verses: "Indra with the bones of Dadhyanc” making a pause after each quarter verse and adding the prāṇava, and pausing after two quarters. Having connected with the last quarter of the gāyatrī verses the (first) verse-quarter of the verse: “Forward for him” and makes pause with two quarters he makes the prāṇava, with two each time he pauses.
9.6.14	Then the triplet: “Forward for you the triṣṭubh”.
9.6.15	The single verse: “When the antelopes run hither”.
9.6.16	Of the three verses: “He who has made to bound the steeds” he leaves over the last and joins in the nivid.
9.6.17	The call (is made) at the stotra-triplet, for the nivid and for the closing verse.
9.6.18	He closes the śastra with the verse: “When up to the place of the bright one”, mutters the ‘strength of the śastra’ and applies as offering-verse: “Thou had drunk of the ancients”.
9.6.19	At this stotra-triplet (i.e. if the stotra-triplet of IX.5.2 is used) the (ṣoḍaśin) consists all in all of forty anuṣṭubhs.
9.6.20	When the stotra-triplet is changed (replaced by another) the śastra is as handed down (without transferring the verses into anuṣṭubhs).
9.6.21	Of the soma-draught he paṛtakes with (the verse): "Indra the sovereign and Varuṇa the king these two have at the beginning made this beverage for thee. After their paṛtaking do I paṛtake of the beverage. May the Goddess Speech taking delight, be satisfied with Soma".
9.7.1	At the first night-rounds the stotra- and antistrophe-triplets for the (śastra of the) hotṛ are the verses: "Him who drinks of the Soma".
9.7.2	Of the first night-round he does not repeat the first verse-quarter.
9.7.3	The entrance of the śastra is the remaining part of the (same) hymn.
9.7.4	The hymn in jagatī metre is: "Unto that ram".
9.7.5	The verse: "O adhvaryus, bring ye to Indra" he applies as offering-verse.
9.8.1	The stotra- and antistrophe-triplets for (the śastra of) the maitrāvaruṇa (at the first round) are: "Unto Indra an intoxicating" and "The deeds of the impetuous one".
9.8.2	The entrance of the śastra is: "The maker of fair forms".
9.8.3	Of the (sukta) in jagatī metre: "This ram" he omits the ninth and the last (verse), recites the fourteenth verse before (the thirteenth), closes with the thirteenth verse and applies as offering-verse: "May Indra be a drinker of Soma, a slayer of Vṛtra".
9.9.1	The stotra- and antistrophe-triplets for the (śastra of the) brāhmaṇacchamsin are: "We herein intend thee" and "We call thee at day".
9.9.2	The entrance of the śastra is: "We call Indra, the bull".
9.9.3	Or the hymn: "For the Vṛtra slaying", without the last verse.
9.9.4	The hymn in jagatī verses is: "We offer our prayer to Indra".
9.9.5	As offering-verse he applies: "Strong in Indra is the intoxication".
9.10.1	(The stotra- and antistrophe-triplets) for the (śastra of the) acchāvāka at the first round are: "To Indra, who is given to joy" and "Indra the singers".
9.10.2	The remaining part of the sukta is the entrance of the śastra.
9.10.3	The hymn in jagatī metre is: "Not us, O bountiful".
9.10.4	As offering-verse he applies: "This bowl here".
9.11.1	At the middle night-rounds the stotra- and antistrophe-triplets for the (śastra of the) hotṛ are: “This Soma for thee, O Indra” and “This Soma among men”.
9.11.2	The entrance of the śastra is the hymn: “Thou risest, O Sun, over” without the last verse.
9.11.3	The hymn in jagatī metre is: “I have become”.
9.11.4	As offering-verse he applies: “From this Soma has been drunk”.
9.12.1	(The stotra- and antistrophe-triplets at the middle round) for the (śastra of the) maitrāvaruṇa are: “For us, O Indra, rich in food” and “Come thou thither to us, O Indra”.
9.12.2	The entrance of the śastra is the hymn: “Bring hither wealth”.
9.12.3	The hymn in jagatī metre is: "To the mightiest one”.
9.12.4	As offering-verse he applies: "In the intoxication of this many devices”.
9.13.1	(The laud- and antistrophe-triplets at the middle round) for the (śastra of the) brāhmaṇacchamsin are: "Unto this Soma thee, O bull” and "Unto the lord of the cows”.
9.13.2	The entrance of the śastra is the hymn: "Come hither to me, O Indra”.
9.13.3	The hymn in jagatī metre is: "Sing ye this new hymn to him”.
9.13.4	As offering-verse he applies: "The chariot swifter than thought”.
9.14.1	The laud- and antistrophe-triplets (at the middle round) for the (śastra of the) acchāvāka are: "Here, O good one, is the pressed herb” and “Come, Indra and be intoxicated”.
9.14.2	The remaining part of the hymn is the entrance of the śastra.
9.14.3	Of the hymn in jagatī metre: "Him who has no rival” he omits the last verse, closes the śastra with: "Which victory was born of victory” and applies as offering-verse: "Here is thy bowl long since exiṣṭing”.
10.1.1	On the eighth day of the bright half of the moon they consecrate (undeṛtake the dīkṣā) for the twelve-day sacrifice of Soma.
10.1.2-4	There are twelve dīkṣā days, twelve upasads, twelve days on which the Soma is offered.
10.1.5	Of the days on which the Soma is offered the first and the last are an atirātra.
10.1.6-9	In the middle is the ten-day-period: a prsthya six-day-period, three chandoma days and the tenth day.
10.1.10	The offering-verse for the hāriyojana (draught) is (on each day): "This sacrifice".
10.1.11	The secondary vaṣaṭ-call being not (yet) uttered (for the oblation of the hāriyojana draught) the maitrā varuna who is not summoned (by the adhvaryu) (to say his prompting), having recited as invīting-verse either the verse: "Go forth, O bounteous one" or the verse: "The wife is the home" utters the 'over-prompting formula): "Here is intoxicating drink, O bounteous one". (This is the manner of proceeding) on the second day and the following ones."
10.1.12	Or, at the proceeding day, as is handed down.
10.1.13	The agnīdhra sitting down behind his own dhiṣṇya (utters the summons): "A soma-feast for you both tomorrow, O Indra and Agni; that I announce to you, to all the Gods, to the soma-deserving soma-drinking brāhmaṇas. Brahman, restrain thy voice".
10.1.14-17	This manner of proceeding is constant up to the last day (equally) the closing with the patnīsaṃyājas, the not-pronouncing of the wishes and the mentioning of the names (of the sacrificer).
10.1.18	At the proceeding and the concluding days the (triṣṭich) addressed to Sarasvatī (is adhibited in the praüga-śastra).
10.1.19	Or the two (hymns) seen by Madhucchandas.
10.1.20	At combinations of somafeast days from two days on, the maitrāvaruṇa should recite the morning-litany, when the hotṛ recites the āśvina-śastra.
10.2.1	The first day of the ten-day-period is a nine-versed agni-stoma with the rathantara as (first) pṛṣṭhastotra.
10.2.2	The hymn for the ājya-śastra is, at a (twelve-day-period) with transposed metres, the one beginning: "Entering upon the worship", at a (twelve-day-period) with settled metres, the hymn beginning: "To the God Agui chant loudly".
10.2.3	The (hymn for the) praüga-śastra is that of Madhucchandas.
10.2.4	The (hymn for the) marutvatīya-śastra is: "May Indra come to help us".
10.2.5	The (hymn for the) niṣkevalya-śastra is: "Hither to us Indra from afar".
10.2.6	Of the extra-draught he paṛtakes with the (formulas): "O lustrous Agni, lustrous art thou among the Gods. May I be lustrous among men".
10.2.7	The difference (from the prakṛti) in the vaiśvadeva-śastra is that the hymns are here the ones beginning: "They yoke their mind" (savitra sūkta); "Here, have in mind" (ārbhava sūkta); "Like a skilled steed" (vaiśvadeva sūkta). He may omit the last two verses (of the last hymn).
10.2.8	Everywhere (at all the days of the ten-day-period) the concluding verse of the vaiśvadeva-śastra is the 'five-folks-verse'.
10.2.9	(The difference from the prakṛti) at the āgnimāruta-śastra (is that the hymn to the Maruts is here the one beginning) "Forward to the horde of the Maruts".
10.2.10-11	Seven days of the following are ukthyas, the fourth day ends on a ṣoḍaśin.
10.3.1	The second day is fifteen-versed stoma, with the bṛhat as (first) pṛṣṭha-(stotra).
10.3.2-3	The (hymn beginning): "Agni we choose as our messenger" is (the hymn for) the ājya-śastra at a (twelve-day-rite) with transposed metres; the hymn beginning: "For thou a princely glory" at a sacrifice with settled metres, every where without the last (verse).
10.3.4	The praüga-śastra is that of Gṛtsamada.
10.3.5	The triplets for the praüga-śastra are: (to Vāyu) the two (verses): "O Vāyu, which thousandfold chariots thou possessest", and the one: "The sharp soma-draughts are pressed, come hither". (For Indra-Vāyu): "Drink now of the clear milk-mixed Soma" and the two: "Both the sky-touching Gods". (To Mitra and Varuṇa, to the Aśvins, to Indra and to the All-Gods) the four triplets beginning: "This Soma, O Mitra and Varuṇa". (To Sarasvatī) "And this terrible Sarasvatī".
10.3.6	For the marutvatīya-śastra the beginning triplet and the antistrophe triplet are: "Lord of all men" and "Indra is the soma-drinker alone".
10.3.7	The pragātha addressed to Brāhmaṇaspati is: "Arise, O Brāhmaṇaspati".
10.3.8	The (hymn for the) marutvatīya-śastra is: "O Indra, lord of the Soma, drink this Soma".
10.3.9	The (hymn for the) niṣkevalya-(śastra) is: "Thy help".
10.3.10	He paṛtakes of the extra-draught with the formula: "O mighty Indra, mighty art thou among the Gods. May I be mighty amongst men".
10.3.11-12	The beginning-triplet of the vaiśvadeva-śastra is: "Every one of the God that leadeth" and its two last verses are: "For of this Savitṛ the glorious".
10.3.13	The antistrophe-triplet is: "We choose the lord of the good, who belongs to all Gods".
10.3.14	The points of difference (are that the hymn to Savitṛ here is): "That desirable greatness of Savitṛ"; (the hymn to Heaven and Earth): "For they two, Heaven and Earth"; (and the hymn to the All Gods): "The charioteer of the sacrifice".
10.3.15	(The points of difference) in the āgnimāruta-śastra (are that the hymn addressed to Vaiśvanara here is): "Of the swift, strong one"; (the hymn addressed to the Maruts): "To the strong host"; (and the hymn addressed to Jata vedas): "The immoṛtal born of strength".
10.4.1	The third day is of seventeen-versed stoma with the vairūpa (saman) as first pṛṣṭha-(stotra).
10.4.2-3	The (hymn of the) ājya-śastra is: "Yoke thy horses called by the Gods" in a (twelve-day-rite) with transposed metres; "Worship thou, O Agni, the Vasus" in a (rite with) settled metres, everywhere without the last verse.
10.4.4	The praüga-śastra is that of Atri, in uṣṇih verses.
10.4.5	The triplets for the praüga-śastra are: (to Vāyu) the single verse: "O Vāyu come to the feast" and the two: "Come, O beneficent Vāyu". (To Indra-Vāyu): the two "O Indra and Vāyu, of these soma-draughts" and the single (verse): "This Soma has been pressed for Vāyu and Indra". (To Mitra and Varuṇa): "We sacrifice to Mitra and Varuṇa". (To the Aśvins): "Come ye thither, O Aśvins". (To Indra): "Come to the Soma pressed with the stones". (To the All-Gods): "In unison with the All-Gods". (To Sarasvatī): "Dear to us among the dear".
10.4.6	For the marutvatīya-śastra the opening-triplet and the antistrophe-triplet are: "Him forsooth" and "May three soma-draughts for Indra".
10.4.7	The pragātha addressed to Brāhmaṇaspati is: "May Brāhmaṇaspati go forward".
10.4.8	The hymn for the marutvatīya-śastra is: "Having three friendships".
10.4.9	The pragāthas which form the stotra-verses and the antistrophe of the vairūpa chant are: "If thou hadst, O Indra, a hundred heavens" and: "When I, O Indra, over as may as thou".
10.4.10	The samapragātha is: "O Indra, threefold".
10.4.11	The (hymns for the niṣkevalya-śastra are): "I have become"; and "He who is born the first".
10.4.12	He paṛtakes of the extra-soma-draught with (the formula): "O glittering sun, thou art glittering among the Gods. May I be glittering among men".
10.4.13-14	The differences (from the prakṛti) in the vaiśvadeva-śastra (are that here) the antistrophe-triplet is: "Towards thee, O God Savitṛ"; the two triplets (for Savitṛ) are "Up that God with the golden"; (for Heaven and Earth): "Rich in butter, encompassing the worlds"; (for the Ṛbhus): "Born without steeds"; (for the All-Gods): "From afar".
10.4.15	The differences in the agnimiruta-śastra are (that here the hymn addressed to Agni Vaiśvānara is): "To Vaiśvānara who increases by the holy order"; (the hymn to the Maruts): "Rich in showers"; (the hymn to Jātavedas): "O Agni, the first Aṅgiras the seer".
10.5.1	The fourth day is of twenty one-versed stoma and with the vairāja saman as first pṛṣṭha-(stotra).
10.5.2	The (hymn for the) ājya-śastra is at a sacrifice with transposed metres: "We choose by our beautiful verses Agni as our hotṛ"; at a (sacrifice) with settled metres: "Agni, the man".
10.5.3	The praüga-(śastra) is in anuṣṭubh metre.
10.5.4	The triplets of the praüga śastra are the single (verse) "O Vāyu, the bright Soma has been offered to thee"; and the two "Enjoy the not yet enjoyed offerings" (for Vāyu); "O Indra and Vāyu, of these soma-draughts" (for Indra and Vāyu); "He who knows" (for Mitra and Varuṇa); "Come ye to us, O Aśvins, with all kinds of help" (for the Aśvins); "Thee the songs, O Indra" (for Indra); the single verse "Away that wicked foe" and the two "For ye are" (for the All-Gods); "She gave" (for Sarasvatī).
10.5.5	In (sacrifice) with settled metres (the triplet addressed to Sarasvatī is): "May the Goddess Sarasvatī aid us".
10.5.6	The introductory (triplet) for the marutvatīya-śastra is: "Thee we with sacrifice invoke".
10.5.7	The antistrophe-triplets and the brāhmaṇaspatya pragāthas of the first set of three days are also affixed (successively) at the second set of three days.
10.5.8	The marutvatīya-śastra (consists of the hymn): "Hear our call, O Indra"; of the triplet: "O Indra with the Maruts, here drink the Soma"; and of the triplet: "Here I invoke the crafty Indra".
10.5.9	The (six verses beginning): "Drink, O Indra the Soma, let it gladden thee" are the stotra-triplet and the antistrophe-triplet for the vairāja saman; the nyūṅkha is applied.
10.5.10	The nyūṅkha as connected with the anuṣṭubh (must be applied) at the second and seventh syllables of the middle verse-quarter twice the first (time), twice the last time.
10.5.11	(The anuṣṭubh-nyūṅkha is for instance): yam to3o3 susava haryo3o3 svādriḥ.
10.5.12	The nyūṅkha as connected with the vairāja consists therein that at the second syllable (of the middle verse-quarter) it must be applied twelve times: each time a long between three short ones.
10.5.13	(For instance): yam to ooo3, oooo3, oooo3, susava hāryaśvā-drih (twelve times o).
10.5.14	At the second and fourth syllables of the responsive call of the adhvaryu (the pratigara) a corresponding nyūṅkha connected with the anuṣṭubh (must be applied).
10.5.15	At the second syllable (only) the corresponding nyūṅkha connected with the vairāja is applied.
10.5.16	(An example of the first is): otho3 o3 modo3 o3 eveti.
10.5.17	(An example of the second is) otho ooo3 oooo3 oooo3 modaiva.
10.5.18	The samapragātha is: "Indra to the divine service".
10.5.19	At the first two of the three verses: "For thee, O Hero, I prepare these pressings" the nyūṅkha is applied.
10.5.20	The (verses for the) niṣkevalya-śastra are: (the hymns): "Where is Indra famed"; and "Of thee, the warrior"; (and) the three (verses): "Him of you, ever-enduring".
10.5.21	The introductory (triplet for the vaiśvadeva-śastra) is the same as that of the second day.
10.5.22	The antistrophe-triplet is: "The golden-handed".
10.5.23	The (points of) difference at the vaiśvadeva-śastra (are further that the hymn addressed to Savitṛ is): "May the God Savitṛ with fair jewels come hither"; (the hymn addressed to Heaven and Earth is): "Forward the Heaven and Earth with sacrifices, with homages"; (the hymn addressed to the Ṛbhus): "Forward to the Ṛbhus"; (the hymn to the All-Gods): "Forwards may go the bright Goddess".
10.5.24	The (differences) at the āgnimāruta-śastra (are that the hymn to Vaiśvānara here is): "Forwards the praise to the all ruling" (the hymn to the Maruts: "Who are the men revealed"; (the hymn to Jātavedas): "I call the effulgent".
10.6.1	The fifth day is of twenty seven-versed stoma with the śākvara (saman) as first pṛṣṭha-(stotra).
10.6.2	The ājya-śastra consists of the first nine verses of the hymn: "This guest" if the sacrifice is one with transposed metres; of the hymn: "Him I deem Agni" at a sacrifice with settled metres.
10.6.3	Of the first verse of this (lastly mentioned hymn) he separates (by the pause) each time two verse-quarters, then separates two and makes the praṇava with one verse-quarter.
10.6.4	The other verses of this hymn he recites paṅkti-wise.
10.6.5	The praüga-śastra is in bṛhatī metre.
10.6.6	The triplets of this śastra are (for Vāyu) the two (verses): "Hither to us the sacrifice, touching the sky" and the single (verse): "Come hither, O Vāyu"; (for Indra and Vāyu): "Hither the thousand"; (for Mitra and Varuṇa) the two: "separately thus" and the single (verse): "Sing ye to Mitra and Aryaman"; (for the Aśvins): "These prayers call ye, O Aśvins"; (for Indra): "May Indra, who must be invoked, in all battles"; (for the All-Gods): "May we call to our help God and God"; (for Sarasvatī): "She gave".
10.6.7	In case the sacrifice is one with settled metres the triplet for Sarasvatī is: "And this Sarasvatī to us".
10.6.8	The introductory triplet of the marutvatīya-śastra is: "Why with the following of the five peoples".
10.6.9	The śastra (itself consists of the following three hymns): "For thus in the Soma"; "Thou art a helper"; "O Indra, with the Maruts, the bull"; and the three verses: "Him by whom".
10.6.10	The stotra (triplet) are the mahānāmnī (verses).
10.6.11	Each verse (of the nine) is to be transformed into three anuṣṭubhs.
10.6.12	Of the last verse the paṅkti is the last.
10.6.13	At the half of the last (of these three verses) (he applies) the five verse-parts, quarter by quarter which are called the purīṣa. This part must be recited as the nivids.
10.6.14	The antistrophe consists of the three sets of three verses: "Being unto him who is athirst"; "He who, O wealthy one, is most wealthy" and "Him who doth not injure" and as tenth (verse): "Bring to him, to him", or "Yea, thou art powerful".
10.6.15	The samapragātha is: "That Indra among the tribes of Nahus".
10.6.16	The niṣkevalya-śastra comprises the hymns: "Indra has waxed for intoxication"; "Thou hast furthered our prayer"; "Thou hast become the only"; and the three verses: "Him, Indra, we strengthen".
10.6.17-18	The (points of) difference in the vaiśvadeva-śastra (are) that the anucara triplet (here) is: "This desirable gift of Savitṛ"; (that the hymn to Savitṛ) are the three (verses): "Up the God Savitṛ of the home"; (that the hymn to Heaven and Earth) are the four (verses): "The great Heaven and Earth"; (the hymn to the Ṛbhus): "Ṛbhu, Vibhvan"; (the hymn for the All-Gods): "Who now, O Mitra and Varuṇa" or (the hymn) "May the most beneficiant".
10.6.19	The (points of) difference in the āgnimāruta-śastra (are here, when the sacrifice is one with transposed metres, that the hymn to Vaiśvānara is): "The havis, the beverage"; (the hymn to the Maruts): "A wonder is this"; (the hymn to Jātavedas are) the three (verses): "Agni is the hotṛ, the master of the house".
10.6.20	At a (sacrifice) with settled metres (the part of the Saṃhitā used at the same occasion are): "The head of the sky"; "Hither the Rudras"; the nine verses "This guest".
10.7.1	The sixth day is of thirtythree-versed stoma and has the raivata saman as its first pṛṣṭha-laud.
10.7.2	They (the hotṛ and the hotṛakas) apply as offering-verses the normal ones, to which they join the verses 'seen' by Parucchepa.
10.7.3	The two invīting-verses for the libation from the draught for Indra and Vāyu are: "Hither may convey thee the fast" and "Hither may bring ye both to the sacrifices".
10.7.4	The two offering-(verses for the same end are): "Come to the grass strewn by us"; "May the chariot convey ye hither".
10.7.5	The invīting-verse for the libation for the draught for Mitra and Varuṇa is: "We have pressed", the following verse is the offering-verse.
10.7.6	The invīting-verse for the libation for the draught for the Aśvins is: "Ye the pious with their lauds"; the following verse is the offering-verse.
10.7.7	They (the hotṛ and the hotṛaka) apply as offering-verses preceded by the normal ones for the libations of the cups that are advanced at the morning-service (the following verses: the hotṛ): "O bull, O Indra"; the maiträvaruna: "This milch-cow"; (the brāhmaṇācchamsin): "For at all the pressings"; (the potṛ): "Let not these away from us"; the Neṣṭṛ, the two-quarter verse: "When to us the wives come" and the triṣṭubh: "May they grant to us"; (the agnīdhra): "Agni I deem our hotṛ"; (the acchāvāka): "Dadhyañc knows my birth".
10.7.8	Of the two hymns: "On behalf of thee impelled", each verse one after another (is inserted) after the promptings for the ṛtuyājas.
10.7.9-10	The adhvaryu and the gṛhapati recite themselves the offering-verse, the adhvaryu being seated behind the fire-altar built of bricks, the gṛhapati behind the śālāmukhīya fire.
10.7.11	The difference at the midday-service (as regarding the parucchepa-verses applied at the libations for the cups advanced) is (that the hotṛ applies the verses): "Drink the Soma, O Indra, that is pressed out"; (the maitrāvaruṇa): "For on behalf of Indra the sky"; (the brāhmaṇacchamsin): "Through thee we, O bounteous one"; (the potṛ): "Protect us, O Indra"; (he neṣṭṛ) "Now and formerly"; (the agnīdhra): "Throw down the great ones, O Indra"; (the acchāvāka) "For the soma-presser gains".
10.7.12	(The offering-verse for the advanced cup) of the neṣṭṛ is at the third pressing: "And may the mother belonging to the lofty sky".
10.7.13	They recite the offering-verses without taking breath.
10.7.14	They may apply (instead of the verses cited above) the verses that are used at the one-day-rite of the sacrifice of Soma.
10.8.1	The hymn for the ājya-śastra is the one beginning: "He has been born".
10.8.2	The praüga-śastra is in aticchandas metre.
10.8.3	The triplets of the praüga-śastra are: (for Vāyu): "Come to the grass strewn by us"; (for Indra-Vāyu): "May the chariot"; (for Mitra-Varuṇa): "This Soma for Mitra for Varuṇa"; (for the Aśvins): "You both the pious with their chants"; (for Indra) the single verse: "O Bull, O Indra" and the two: "Throw down the great ones, O Indra"; (for the All-Gods): "Hearken thou well to us, O Agni"; (to Sarasvatī): "She gave".
10.8.4	At a sacrifice with settled metres the last triplet is: "And the dear among the dear ones".
10.8.5	The introductory (triplet) for the marutvatīya-(śastra) is: "Here, the first of the great".
10.8.6	The marutvatīya-śastra comprises the two hymns: "The chariot which thou, O Indra"; "He who, a bull"; and the three (verses): "O Indra, generous, with the Maruts".
10.8.7	The stotra-strophe and the corresponding triplet of the raivata saman are: "May they be rich at the carouse" and "May the praiser of the rich one be rich".
10.8.8	The samapragātha is: "Nought else".
10.8.9	The niṣkevalya(-śastra is the hymns): "Come hither to us, O Indra"; "The greatnesses of this great one"; and the three verses "With the bay steeds to our".
10.8.10	The first verse of the introductory (triplet) of the vaiśvadeva(-śastra is): "Unto that God Savitṛ".
10.8.11	Separating this verse after sixteen syllables, he makes the prāṇava with eighteen syllables, and makes pause with fifteen and with fifteen (the prāṇava).
10.8.12	The two last (verses of the triplet are): "For of this Savitṛ the glorious".
10.8.13	The corresponding triplet is that of the third day.
10.8.14	The (points of) difference at the vais vadeva(-śastra further are that the hymn addressed to Savitṛ is): "Upwards that God Savitṛ"; (the hymn addressed to Heaven and Earth): "Which of the two is the first"; (the hymn to the Ṛbhus): "Why hath the best"; (the hymn to the All-Gods): "This in this manner", leaving over its last two (verses) he recites (the hymn): "They who with the sacrifice", and thereupon recites the two verses which he has left over (of the preceding hymn).
10.8.15	(The points of difference) in the āgnimāruta-śastra are (that the hymn to Vaiśvānara is: "The dark day and the bright day"; (the hymn to the Maruts): "The devoted Maruts"; (the hymn to Jātavedas): "This praise".
10.8.16	At a twelve-day-sacrifice with settled metres he omits, from the rite of the middle three-day-period, the last triplets of the niṣkevalya and the marutvatīya-śastras.
10.8.17	At the end of the vaiśvadeva-śastras (of these days) be applies the three verses: "May the Aśvins grant us hail".
10.8.18	The hymn to the Ṛbhus of the fourth (in the same śastra) day is: "Stretched is the work".
10.8.19	The three verses: "May the swift ones go forward" are added at the end of the hymn to the Maruts.
10.8.20	The hymn: "The good one who grants wonderful gifts" is the hymn to Jata vedas.
10.8.21	For a six-day-period with invisible (first) pṛṣṭha-lauds, for such a period at which the rathantara and bṛhat (alternately) are the (first) pṛṣṭha-lauds, for such a period with pṛṣṭha lauds that are to be marked, for such a period of which the (first) pṛṣṭha-lauds are to be mixed, for such a period with the tanūs as (first) pṛṣṭha-lauds, and for such a period at which the stomas rise with the metres, (he should take) the stotra- and antistrophe-triplets and the sama pragāthas in accordance with the (rite of the) chanters.
10.8.22	All the rest is simiḍār to the sacrifice with settled metres.
10.8.23	The same prevails at the viśvajit.
10.9.1	The seventh day is of twentyfour-versed lauds, has the bṛhat (saman) as (first) prṣṭha-(laud) and contains both the sāmans.
10.9.2	The (hymn of the) ājya-śastra is: "Forwards for the pure radiance".
10.9.3	The praüga-śastra consists of verses in triṣṭubh.
10.9.4	The triplets of the praüga-śastra are: (for Vāyu): "Forward boldly"; (for Indra and Vāyu): "They by true thoughts"; (for Mitra and Varuṇa): "Up the eye of you two"; (for the Asvine): "Hither with a chariot rich in cows"; (for Indra): "Hither to us"; for the All-Gods): "Forward in the sacrifices"; (for Sarasvatī): "Forward with fostering current".
10.9.5-8	The introductory and corresponding triplets of the first set of three days as also the brāhmaṇaspatya pragāthas, are applied on the chandoma days and on the svarasāman days and at the abhiplava six-day-period: those of the first day of this set of three days (are applied) at the first chandoma day, of the second at the second, of the third at the third.
10.9.9-10	In the same manner they are taken for the set of three days for the first (half) of the abhiplava six-day-period and for the second (half).
10.9.11	In the same manner for the svarasāman days.
10.9.12	The hymns for the marutvatīya-śastra (are): "With what array" and "That ram".
10.9.13	The (hymns for the) niṣkevalya-śastra are: "Him praise thou"; "Towards this ram".
10.9.14	He should not recite after the kaṇva rathantara the ṛg-verse on which this chant is based.
10.9.15	At the vaiśvadeva-śastra of the chandoma days and the abhiplava six-day-period the introductory and corresponding triplets are the same as those which are applied at the first two days (of the prsthya six-day-period).
10.9.16	The (points of) difference at the vaiśvadeva-śastra (are further that the triplet addressed to Savitṛ is): "That desirable gift of Savitṛ"; (the hymn to Heaven and Earth): "Let the two come forth"; (the hymn to the Ṛbhus): "This to the divine" - all of them triplets -; (the hymn to the All-Gods) the five verses: "With straight leading"; (the hymn): "Come hither with thy beauty"; (and the three verses): "Dread, supporting the peoples".
10.9.17	The (points of) difference at the āgnimāruta śastra (are that the hymn to Vaiśvānara consists of the three verses): "May Agni Vaiśvānara for our help" (1); "May Agni Vaiśvānara our ally, come unto this our offering: by (our) praise, by (our) invocation"(2); "May Vaiśvānara engender the praise and sacrifice of the Aṅgirasas; may he extend to them brightness (and) heaven"(3). (The hymn to the Maruts is) "Forward to you the triṣṭubh", either fifteen or nine verses; (the hymn to Jātavedas): Singing we honour thee".
10.10.1	The eighth day is of forty-four-versed stomas, and has the rathantara saman (as the first pṛṣṭha stotra).  
10.10.2	The hymn of the ājya-śastra is: "Agni the God".  
10.10.3	The praüga-śastra is in triṣṭubh metre.  
10.10.4	The triplets of the praüga-śastra are: (for Vāyu): the first and third (verses) of (the hymn): "Were not they" and the single (verse): "O Vāyu, come to us"; (for Indra and Vāyu): "So far as the power"; (for Mitra and Varuṇa): "To you two at the sun's rising"; (for the Aśvins): "From her sister"; (for Indra): "This Soma"; (for the All-Gods): "Let the Brahmans"; (for Sarasvatī): "May this Sarasvatī for us rejoicing".  
10.10.5	The Marutvatīya (is composed of the hymns): "Great is Indra, hero-like"; "These thee of many"; "Where is this hero"—this hymn everywhere without the last four verses—; "Even the great ones"; and "Him Heaven and Earth".  
10.10.6	The niṣkevalya (is composed of the hymns): "Thou art great, O Indra, to thee"; "Thou art great, O Indra, thou who"; "Many not of old to him"; "This fame for thee"; "This prayer to thee".  
10.10.7	The (points of difference in the vaiśvadeva-śastra are that the hymn to Savitṛ comprises) the four verses: "The golden-handed for help"; (the hymn to Heaven and Earth): the triplet: "The great sky"; (the hymn to the Ṛbhus): the triplet: "Youthful the parents"; (the hymns to the All-Gods): "Of the Gods the great"; "These worlds"; and the three verses: "The All-Gods, increasing the holy order".  
10.10.8	The (points of difference in the āgnimāruta-śastra are that the hymn to Vaiśvānara comprises the three verses): "Agni Vaiśvānara has engendered this new prayer of ours, waxing great with might on earth" (1); "O Agni Vaiśvānara, purifying one, shine as a bull brilliantly; revered with sacrifices by the Junadagnis" (2); "Vaiśvānara, keeping the fixed order" (3); (the hymn to the Maruts): "What now, when as a dear one"; (the hymn to Jātavedas): "The messenger of all knowledge".  
10.11.1	The ninth day is of forty-eight-versed stoma, and has the bṛhat (as first prṣṭha-laud).  
10.11.2	The ājya-śastra (comprises the two hymns): "We have gone with great" and "Me the strong".  
10.11.3	Or (only) the first mentioned one.  
10.11.4	The praüga-śastra is in triṣṭubh metre.  
10.11.5	The triplets of the praüga-śastra are: (for Vāyu) of (the hymn): "O Vāyu come to us" the first, third, and last verse; (to Indra-Vāyu): the second and fourth verses (of the same hymn) and (the verse): "As coursers"; (for Mitra and Varuṇa): "Dwelling in the sky"; (for the Aśvin): "Hither with all boons"; (to Indra): "Indra the men"; (to the All-Gods): "Agni, erect"; (to Sarasvatī): "Forward with fostering".  
10.11.6	The marutvatīya-śastra (comprises the five hymns): "Three friendships"; "Indra for the chariot"; "Stand on the bay steeds"; "Let him sing the chant"; "To the glad one".  
10.11.7	The niṣkevalya-śastra (consists of the hymns): "May the true one come hither"; "To him, the strong"; "As the sky, O Indra"; "That highest power"; "I was"; and "To the all-conquering".  
10.11.8	The (points of) difference in the vaiśvadeva-śastra are (that the hymn to Savitṛ consists of) the triplet: "Towards thee, O God Savitṛ"; (that to Heaven and Earth the triplet: "Forwards to you, Earth and Heaven"; (the hymn to the Ṛbhus) the single verse: "May Indra for food" and the two (verses): "Give ye jewels"; (the hymn to the All-Gods): the five hymns beginning with "Agni is the purohita at the śastra" omitting of the hymn: "The thirty-three Gods" the last but one verse; the single verse: "Of you none is small"; the four verses: "We choose the protection of the mountains" or the hymn called 'Manu's riddle' beginning "One is brown", and the triplet seen by Bharadvaji: "Ye All-Gods come hither".  
10.11.9	The points of difference at the āgnimāruta-śastra (are that the hymn to Vaiśvānara comprises the following verses): "Clinging to the sky the mighty Agni Vaiśvānara shined, by his light he repels the darkness"(1); "He shaped himself into all; he, the controlling one, sends out the seasons lengthening the vigour of the sacrifice"(2); "Agni in distant domains"(3); (the hymn to the Maruts is): "O Maruts, in whose dwelling"; (the hymn to Jātavedas): "Agni is the hotṛ, the purohita".  
10.11.10	At a twelve-day-rite with settled metres the chandoma days have at the morning and afternoon services the same rites as those of the first three-day-period (the three chandoma days).  
10.11.11	But at the marutvatīya- and the niṣkevalya-śastras (which belong to the midday service) he omits the hymns in jagatī metres.  
10.11.12	After the 'With-what-array' hymn, he inserts the hymn: "He who, a bull".  
10.11.13	And after the 'Him-praise-thou' hymn the fifteen verses: "He who, born".  
10.11.14	At a (ten-day-period) at which the rathantara and the bṛhat (alternately?) are the first pṛṣṭha-lauds, all (the midday services of the chandoma days) contain the double hymn.  
10.12.1	The tenth day, at which no revealing is to be made, is of twentyfour-versed stoma.  
10.12.2	(Only) the agniṣṭoma-saman is thirtythree-versed.  
10.12.3	The metil (stotra and śastra) is three-versed.  
10.12.4	On the verses on which the vāmadevya saman is composed the rathantara is chanted as first pṛṣṭha-(stotra).  
10.12.5	If there is disapprovement, another (should recite) the text.  
10.12.6	Leaving out the anuṣṭubh metre (i.e. all the verses in this metre) he brings about, by transforming the other metres (i.e. the verses in metres other than the anuṣṭubh) one thousand and fifty verses, at one pressing (day).  
10.12.7	In the morning litany there are thirtytwo gāyatrīs.
10.12.8	Instead of the anuṣṭubhs (in the morning litany, he takes) the triplets: "Agni, the man"; "This glad"; "Come hither ye beautiful Aśvins".  
10.12.9	(And) twenty-four triṣṭubhs.
10.12.10	Equally (many) jagatīs.  
10.12.11	Fifteen pragāthas.  
10.12.12	Fifteen triplets in uṣṇih metre,  
10.12.13	and the normal verses in paṅkti metre.  
10.12.14	(In this manner) the morning litany comprises (in a cryptic manner) two hundred and fifteen anuṣṭubhs.  
10.12.15	From the verses which are recited over the drops (of the omentum) he leaves out the third and fourth one and replaces them by the two: "They hasten near".  
10.12.16	The three verses: "Go to fetch the God Agni for your help" are replaced by the three: "May our prayers fetch the sharp-rayed".  
10.12.17	The verses: "Bring unto him, the thirtyone" are replaced by the three: "For the famous".  
10.13.1	The (hymn of the) ājya-śastra is: "O Agni, thee today as a horse".
10.13.2	At the first (verse of this (hymn), separating after five syllables, making pause after two five-syllabic (parts), he makes the prāṇava after two.
10.13.3	The praüga-śastra is that of Madhucchandas.
10.13.4	(He applies) the twentytwo gāyatrī (verses).
10.13.5	The (three verses): "The pavamāna Soma being purified in the undecaying sieve" may be inserted optionally by the grāvastut.
10.13.6	Instead of the verse: "Arise ye, look down on" the single verse: "Arising with strength" (is used).
10.13.7	The introductory verse of the marutvatīya-śastra is the one which begins with the word: trikadruka.
10.13.8	Of this verse, separating it after sixteen syllables, he makes the prāṇava with (after) the (second) set of sixteen syllables, makes the pause after the (third) set of sixteen syllables (and the prāṇava) after the last) set of sixteen syllables.
10.13.9	The last two verses (of the introductory triplet are): "O thou high-spirited".
10.13.10	Before the (usual) hymn, he recites, together with the 'swell-the-water' verse the two pragāthas: "Aloud to Indra". Thus is the marutvatīya-śastra.
10.13.11	Having recited the stotra-strophe and the corresponding one, of the vāmadevya saman, he recites immediately after the inteṚcalary verse the pragātha of the rathantara and its stotra- and corresponding-strophe.
10.13.12	(Then follow) the nine (verses): "O Friends, we would supplicate".
10.13.13	Then the two verses of two verse-quarters: "Bring ye under the yokes"; and "One wears the thunderbolt".
10.13.14	And the hymn of Hiraṇyastūpa.
10.13.15	Before the hymn of Hiraṇyastūpa he connects in reciting the pragātha.
10.13.16	This is the niṣkevalya-śastra.
10.13.17	The introductory and corresponding triplets for the vaiśvadeva śastra are taken from the sixth day.
10.13.18	The (further points of) difference in the vaiśvadeva-śastra are that before the 'May-to-us-come-favourable' hymn (is inserted) the 'Forwards-may-go-the bright-Goddess' hymn.
10.13.19	He applies as offering-verse (for the soma-caru) instead of (the verse): "Stride thou widely, O Viṣṇu" (the verse) "Be a friend to us".
10.13.20	The stotra and corresponding-triplets of the agniṣṭoma-saman are: "Agni the men".
10.13.21	The stotra- and corresponding antistrophe-triplets are: "This dappled bull hath come"; and "The big sky and the Earth".
10.13.22	Then (he recites) the thirteen verses: "Him of old".
10.13.22	He closes the recitation with the verse: "The sacrifice came to be".
10.13.23	As offering-verse (for the mentally drawn soma-draught) (he applies): "O Prajāpati none other than thou".
10.13.24	The call at this śastra is explained (is the same as) by the śastras.
10.13.25	Thus (is the manner of performing the extra-śastra) at a (twelve day-sacrifice) with settled metres.
10.13.26	Before the patnīsaṃyājas or after their completion, having poured out the libations into the gārhapatya, they enter through the eastern door into the sadas and sit down each behind his own dhisnya. After the mental laud has been finished, he (the hotṛ) (recites) the verses of Sirparajni: "This dappled bull hath come", without repetition, whisperingly and not making the prāṇava.
10.13.27	The (adhvaryu) being addressed (by the hotṛ) with the words: "O adhvaryu susumsavom3," answers everywhere: "Hayi O hotṛ".
10.13.28	During the recitation by the hotṛ of these formulas he (the adhvaryu) answers: "Yea (om) hotṛ", and "So (it is), O hotṛ" (at each pause).
10.14.1	With: "O adhvaryu" the hotṛ (addresses him) at the ten-hotṛ formula, when he is going to speak (it).
10.14.2	"Prajāpati wished: 'May I be multiplied, may I propagate offspring. May all, whatever is here, conform with the Veda'. He saw this sacrifice the ten-hotṛ formula, the agnihotṛa".
10.14.3	Thus much having spoken, he now (continues) whisperingly:
10.14.4	"The offering-spoon is thought. The sacrificial butter is intelligence. The vedi is the word. The sacrificial grass is the study (of the sacred texts). The fire is intention. The agnīdh is knowledge. The hotṛ is lord of the word. The maitrāvaruṇa is mind. The sacrificial substance is the breath. The adhvaryu is the saman" - this is the hotṛ formula.
10.14.5	Now the (formula of) seizing.
10.14.6	"O lord of the word, O thou that art hrdvidhe by name! The lord of the word hath drunk the Soma. Bring thou power in to us".
10.14.7	Thus much whisperingly.
10.14.8	"Thereby Prajāpati engendered the trias: Gods, men, asuras. They who have as hotṛ one who knows this, that hotṛ gets offspring in children and cattle and those sacrificers who have as hotṛ one who knows this, are propagated in offspring and cattle".
10.15.1	With: "O adhvaryu!" (he addresses the adhvaryu) at the four-hotṛ formula, when he is going to speak (it).
10.15.2	"Him two (of them), Gods and men, followed, but the asuras were turned away from him. He wished: 'May a hero be born unto me, by whom I might oveṚcome these asuras'. He saw that four-hotṛ formula: the sacrifice, the rites of full- and new-moon".
10.15.3	Having said thus much, (he) now (continues) whisperingly.
10.15.4	"The hotṛ is the earth, the adhvaryu is the sky, the agnīdh is Tvaṣṭṛ, the upavaktr Mitra" this is the hotṛ formula.
10.15.5	Now the (formula of) seizing.
10.15.6	"O lord of the word, through the word's most concentrated power mayest thou procure gains, bring unto the lord of the sacrifice the precious good: the Heaven. May the lord of the word drink the Soma. He has engendered Indra for (obtaining) strength, svaḥa!"
10.15.7	This much whisperingly.
10.15.8	"Thereby Prajāpati engendered Indra as a hero and therefrom he oveṚcame those Asuras. They who have as hotṛ one who knoweth this, that hotṛ gets as son a hero, and these sacrificers get heroes as sons. That hotṛ oveṚcomes his hateful adversary. Those sacrificers oveṚcome their hateful adversaries, who have as hotṛ one who knows this"...
10.16.1	With the word: "O adhvaryu!" he addresses the adhvaryu at the five-hotṛ formula when he is going to speak (it).
10.16.2	"The deities did not yield to Indra the precedence (and) the preeminence. He saw that five-hotṛ formula: the sacrifice, the seasonal offerings."
10.16.3	Having said thus much (he) now (continues) whisperingly:
10.16.4	"The hotṛ is Agni, the two adhvaryus are the Aśvins, the agnīdh is Rudra, the upavaktr is Bṛhaspati". This is the hotṛ formula.
10.16.5	Now the (formula of) seizing.
10.16.6	"O, lord of the word, thy flawless word, thy flawless offering spoon, do thou bring near the god gladdening hotṛ-function".
10.16.7	This much whisperingly.
10.16.8	"Thereupon the deities yielded to Indra's precedence (and) preeminence."
10.16.9	"He who has as hotṛ one who knows this, to this hotṛ's preeminence his own people acquiesce, their own people yield to these sacrificers' the preeminence, who have as hotṛ one who knows this".
10.17.1	With the word: "O adhvaryu" (he addresses the adhvaryu) at the six hotṛ formula, when he is going to speak it.
10.17.2	"He (Indra) wished: 'May I be an eater of food, a lord of the food'. He saw that six-hotṛ formula: the sacrifice, the victimal offering".
10.17.3	Having said thus much, (he) now (continues) whisperingly.
10.17.4	"Thy eye is the sun. Thy breath is the wind. Thy body is the intermediate region, thy limbs the sacrifice, thy back the sky. Thy bones are the earth". This is the hotṛ formula."
10.17.5	Now the (formula of) seizing.
10.17.6	"May Soma drink of the Soma, may the bright drink of the bright. Mixed are for thee, O Indra, the soma-(draught)s of Vātāpi, who hears the call".
10.17.7	Thus much whisperingly.
10.17.8	"Thereupon he become an eater of food, a lord of food. Those who have a hotṛ who knows this, that hotṛ becomes an eater of food, a lord of food, and those sacrificers, who have as hotṛ one who knows this, become eaters of food, lords of food".
10.18.1	With the word: "O adhvaryu" (he addresses the adhvaryu) at the seven-hotṛ formula, when he is going to speak it.
10.18.2	"Those Gods wished: 'May we be all right in the worlds that are all right'. They saw that seven-hotṛ formula: the sacrifice, the rite of Soma".
10.18.3	Thus much having said he now (continues) whisperingly:
10.18.4	"The hotṛ is Mahāhavis, the adhvaryu Satyahavis, the agnīdh Acittapājas, the upavaktr Acittamanas, the two abhigaras Anādhṛṣṭa and Apratidhṛṣṭa, the udgātṛ Ayāsya". This is the hotṛ formula.
10.18.5	Now the (formula of) seizing.
10.18.6	"O lord of the word, O thou vidhe by name, may we honour thy name. Mayest thou honour our name. May not the continuity of Gods, nor the continuity of men be cut off. Being invited along with sky and earth drink thou of the Soma, svaḥa!".
10.18.7	Thus much whisperingly.
10.18.8	"Thereupon it became all right for them: Those Gods were all right in the worlds that were all right. Even now they are all right in the worlds that are all right. They who have a hotṛ who knoweth this, for that hotṛ welfare becomes all right and for those sacrificers welfare becomes all right. That hotṛ reaches the worlds of heaven and gains a firm support on earth. Those sacrificers reach the world of heaven and gain a firm support on earth who have as hotṛ one who knows this".
10.19.1	He thereupon recites the (formulas called Prajāpati's) forms:
10.19.2	(1) "O adhvaryu, they who have as hotṛ one who knoweth the food-eating form of Prajāpati, that hotṛ becomes an eater of food and those sacrificers become eaters of food". (2) "O adhvaryu, they who have as hotṛ one who knoweth the lord of food form of Prajāpati, that hotṛ becomes a lord of food and those sacrificers become lords of food". (3) "O adhvaryu, they who have as hotṛ one who knoweth the fair form of Prajāpati, that hotṛ gets the fair thing and those sacrificers get the fair things". (4) "O adhvaryu, they who... beautiful form of Prajāpati... the beautiful..." (5) "O adhvaryu, they who....unresting form of Prajāpati..." (6) "O adhvaryu, they who... fearless form of Prajāpati... fearlessness gets..." (7) "O adhvaryu, they who... unattained..." (8) "O adhvaryu, they who... unattainable..." (9) "O adhvaryu, they who....unattacked...." (10) "O adhvaryu, they who...unattackable...." (11) "O adhvaryu, they who have as hotṛ one who knoweth the form of Prajāpati that has no prius, no other one comes prior to that adhvaryu, no other ones come prior to those sacrificers". (12) "O adhvaryu, they who have as their hotṛ one who knoweth the form of Prajāpati who has no rival, that hotṛ has no rival, no rivals have those sacrificers who have as hotṛ one who knows this".
10.20.1	Thereupon the householder holds the householder's recitation.
10.20.2	"O adhvaryu, they who have as householder a householder who knows the householder, that householder prospers, those sacrificers prosper. O adhvaryu, they who have as householder one who knows the God who has smitten away evil, that householder smites away evil, those sacrificers smite away evil, who have a householder who knoweth this".
10.21.1	The offering-verse is: "Prajāpati no other than thou".
10.21.2-3	Mentally he makes the vaṣaṭ and the second vaṣaṭ.
10.21.4	Mentally takes place the paṛtaking (of the remains of the draught).
10.21.5	Mentally the touching of the breast.
10.21.6	They take hold of the (pillar) of udumbara, sitting before their dhiṣṇyas.
10.21.7	Those who do not step beyond touch it with palāśa-branches.
10.21.8-9	The hotṛ should put his hands the highest, thinking: "May I be the highest".
10.21.10	Having covered up the doors of the sadas and the (easterly directed) hut, the adhvaryu drives near their voice. Silently they sit closing their eyes until the appearance of the stars.
10.21.11	When the stars become visible, they release at the spot of the Maitravaruna, with the verse: "This eye" their eyes (and look) on the stars.
10.21.12-13	When all of them have joined in the chant of the coda of the saman, they move slowly forwards beneath the axle of the northern havirdhāna cart or to the north of the northern cart.
10.21.14	Having muttered, (when they are) on the place of the axle, the verse: "Ye both, O Indra and Parvata", they sit down all before the havirdhāna shed and fix their thoughts on the wish they foster, each on his own wish.
10.21.15	Those who foster more than one wish, should mutter the vyāhṛtis: "bhūḥ bhuvaḥ svaḥ."
10.21.16	They step out in a north-eastern direction and call the voice to themselves with the formula: "The voices, may the voice come, may the voice come near! May the voice come unto me".
10.21.17	Having pronounced whisperingly three times the beginning word(s) of the subrahmanya (formula) they release their voice.
10.21.18	Here the (description of the) twelve-day-periods is completed.
10.21.19	Or the indication of the time (to finish the period prevails).
11.1.1	The twelve-day-period (as explained in the preceding chapter) is the model for the ahīnas and the sattras.
11.1.2	The (points of) difference (are) expressly indicated in the (following) express statements.
11.1.3	The ahīnas are those sacrifices of Soma which comprise at least a two-day-sacrifice and at most a twelve-day one.
11.1.4	The sattras are from the twelve-day-period on.
11.1.5	At the ahīnas the introductory day falls forth and the (special) rites which prevail for the sattras.
11.2.1	The day of twenty-four-versed stotras, which has the bṛhat as (first) pṛṣṭha-stotra, and which contains both (the rathantara and the bṛhat) sāmans, which is an agniṣṭoma or an ukthya that day is called the caturviṃśa (day).
11.2.2	The (hymn of the) ājya-śastra is: "The hotṛ has been born".
11.2.3	The praüga-śastra is that of Madhucchandas.
11.2.4	The 'with-what-array' (hymn) is the (hymn for the) marutvatīya-śastra.
11.2.5	The verse (of the 'with-what-array' hymn): "Thou canst not be overthrown, O bounteous one", he takes as closing verse after having recited before (this verse, the next following verses, where in this (hymn) the nivid is inserted.
11.2.6	The 'that-who-the-highest' hymn is (the hymn) for the niṣkevalya-śastra.
11.2.7	For the second day (of the ten-day-period) are taken the hymns to Savitṛ and to Heaven and Earth for the vaiśvadeva-śastra.
11.2.8	And the hymn to the All-Gods and the Maruts (for the vaiśvadeva and the āgnimāruta).
11.2.9-10	From the sixth day the hymn to the Ṛbhus (of the vaiśvadeva-śastra), and from the third to Vaiśvānara.
11.2.11	The hymn to Jātavedas (for the āgnimāruta) is: "Make ye grow Jātavedas".
11.2.12	It may be a (rite) at which the ukthas, as far as concerns the sāmans, are taken up into the (agniṣṭoma-saman of the caturviṃśa day).
11.2.13	(In this case) he recites immediately after the stotra-verse of the yajñāyajñīya the stotra-verses of the uktha-stotras and after the corresponding triplet of the yajñāyajñīya the corresponding triplets of the ukthas. Having recited: "O Agni, drink with the jubiḍānt Maruts; enjoy the Soma together with Indra and Varuṇa, with Indra and Bṛhaspati, with Indra and Viṣṇu" he closes the recitation (of the āgnimāruta-śastra).
11.2.14	In case the ukthas, as far as concerns the soma-draughts, are taken up into the caturviṃśa day rite, he should take the same verse, after he has recited it (as formerly), as offering-verse.
11.3.1	At an ekatrika the śastra is arranged in triplets.
11.3.2	Having recited in accordance with the laud, the stotra-verses or triplets, and in accordance with the stotra-verses the corresponding triplet and the samapragāthas, the hotṛakas recite the last three triplets of the conclusion (pāryasa).
11.3.3	Of the (hymns) into which the nivids are inserted, the hotṛ (recites only the last three verses).
11.3.4	All the rest is simiḍār to the normal rites.
11.4.1	The abhiplava six-day-period is a modification of the prsthya six-day-period.
11.4.2	The ājya-śastras of the first three-day-period in the form with settled metres prevail for the first three days of the abhiplava period.
11.4.3	The rathantara and the bṛhat are alternatively the (first) pṛṣṭha-(stotra)s.
11.4.4	The first and the last days of this six-day-period are an agniṣṭoma jyotiṣṭoma.
11.4.5	Between these are four ukthya days.
11.4.6	The second and fourth are go days.
11.4.7	The third and fifth are āyus-days.
11.4.8	The (hymn) of the marutvatīya-śastra (for the first abhiplava day is): "Indra for the chariot".
11.4.9	The (hymn) of the niṣkevalya-śastra (is): "Come hither".
11.4.10-11	The (hymn) of the vaiśvadeva-śastra (is): "How of the Gods", the same hymn at the fifth day.
11.4.12	The hymn to the Maruts (in the āgnimāruta-śastra) is that of the one-day soma rite.
11.4.13	The (hymn) to Jātavedas (at the same śastra is): "The hotṛ goeth forwards".
11.4.14	The rest is simiḍār to the first day (of the prsthya six-day-period).
11.5.1	Of the second day (the hymn) for the marutvatīya(-śastra is): "These oblations call thee".
11.5.2	The (hymn) for the niṣkevalya-śastra is: "Thou art devoted to the pressed Soma".
11.5.3	The hymn to Savitṛ (of the vaiśvadeva-śastra) is that of the one-day-sacrifice.
11.5.4	The hymn to the Ṛbhus (of the same śastra) is: "Stretched is the work".
11.5.5	The same is applied at the fifth day.
11.5.6	The (hymn for the) All-Gods (of the same śastra is): "I call the Gods".
11.5.7	The hymn to Jātavedas of the āgnimāruta-śastra is the same as that of the caturviṃśa day.
11.5.8	The rest is simiḍār to the second day (of the prsthya six-day-period).
11.6.1	Of the third day the praüga śastra is that of Viśvamanas in uṣṇih verses (as follows):
11.6.2	The triplets for the praüga are: (to Vāyu): "Come hither, O kind Vāyu"; (to Indra-Vāyu): "May the thousand convey both of you hither"; (to Mitra and Varuṇa): "Ye both the chiefs of all"; (to the Aśvins): "May your conveying chariot come"; (to Indra): "O friends, we would supplicate"; (to the All-Gods: "May the Goddess Aditi for us"; (to Sarasvatī): "And Sarasvatī has become dear to us".
11.6.3	The (hymn for the marutvatīya-śastra is): "Mount the two bay steeds".
11.6.4	The (hymn for the) niṣkevalya agrees with that of the one-day soma rite.
11.6.5	The (hymn to the Heaven and Earth of the vaiśvadeva-śastra is the) triplet: "In melted butter are Heaven and Earth envelopped".
11.6.6	The same triplet at the sixth day.
11.6.7	The hymns to the Ṛbhus and the All-Gods (of the same śastra) are those of the one-day-sacrifice.
11.6.8	The (hymn to the Maruts at the) āgnimāruta-(śastra) is: "Come hither, ye Rudras" (and the hymn to Jātavedas at the same śastra): "Thee, O Agni, the righteous".
11.7.1	Of the fourth day the (hymn of the) ājya-(śastra) is: "The hotṛ is born".
11.7.2	The praüga-(śastra) is that of Medhātithi (with the following peculiarity):
11.7.3	The triplets addressed to Vāyu and Indra-Vāyu are those of the praüga of Gṛtsamada, but the verses seen by Medhātithi come first.
11.7.4	The (other) triplets are: (for Mitra-Varuṇa): "Mitra we call"; (for the Aśvins): "Awaken the two who at morning yoke"; (for Indra): "Let the bay steeds convey thee hither"; (for the All-Gods) "Hither, O Agni, with all these Gods".
11.7.5	The triplets addressed to Sarasvatī, which are used at the conjunct (form of sacrifice) during the last three-day-period (of the prsthya six-day-period), are applied at the last three abhiplava days.
11.7.6	The (hymn of the) marutvatīya-(śastra) is the same as at the one-day-sacrifice.
11.7.7	The (hymn of the) niṣkevalya-(śastra) is: "The terrible one is born".
11.7.8	The (hymns) to Savitṛ and Heaven and Earth of the vaiśvadeva-śastra are the same as at the second day (of the prsthya ṣaḍaha).
11.7.9	The (hymn) to the Ṛbhus (at the same śastra) is that of the third day.
11.7.10	The (hymn) to the All-Gods (at the same śastra) is: "Agni, Indra".
11.7.11	The (hymns) to Vaiśvānara of the first three days are applied at the last three days, at the (āgnimāruta-śastra).
11.7.12	The āgnimāruta(-śastra further comprises as hymn to the Maruts): "Those who shine forth" (and as hymn to Jātavedas: "The guardian of men".
11.8.1	Of the fifth day the (hymn for the) ājya-(śastra) is: "O Agni, the mightiest", of which, whenever this hymn is prescribed, the last verse be left out.
11.8.2	The praüga-(śastra) is one 'to be collected'.
11.8.3	The triplets are: (for Vāyu): "Drink the foremost part"; "Of thee, O Vāyu"; "Thou for us, O God"; (for Indra and Vāyu) "By hundred kinds of help"; (for Mitra and Varuṇa): "Sprinkle ye with ghṛta"; (for the Aśvins): "Convey to us, O Aśvins, riches in cows"; (for Indra): "And then, O Indra, come to us"; (for the All-Gods): "All ye Gods, fostering truth".
11.8.4	The (hymn for the) marutvatīya-(śastra) is: "Where is that hero".
11.8.5	The (hymn for the) niṣkevalya-(śastra) is: "Come, let us approach".
11.8.6	The (hymns) to Savitṛ and to Heaven and Earth (of the vaiśvadeva-śastra) are the same as at the third day (of the prsthya ṣaḍaha).
11.8.7	The (hymns of the) āgnimāruta (are, to the Maruts): "Your spy hath called loudly"; (to Jātavedas): "Wondrous is of the tender young one".
11.9.1	Of the sixth (day the hymn for) the ājya-(śastra) is: "O friends, together the seemly", everywhere the last verse of this hymn is omitted.
11.9.2	The praüga-(śastra) is one 'to be collected'.
11.9.3	The triplets are: (for Vāyu): "Come, O beautiful Vāyu"; (for Indra-Vāyu): "With the resplendent chariot"; (for Mitra-Varuṇa): "What today after sunrise", or: "Mitra and Varuṇa after sunrise"; (to the Aśvins): "Ye two dear to many"; (to Indra): "Come with thy bay steeds to our Soma"; (to the All-Gods) the triplet seen by Bharadvāja: "Ye All-Gods come hither".
11.9.4	The (hymn of the) marutvatīya-(śastra) is: "Great is Indra, hero-like".
11.9.5	The (hymn of the) niṣkevalya-(śastra) is: "He who, born".
11.9.6	The (hymn) to Savitṛ (of the vaiśvadeva-śastra) is the same as that of the second day (of the prsthya six-day-period).
11.9.7	The hymn to the All-Gods (of the same śastra) is: "These fires have awakened".
11.9.8	The (hymn to the Maruts of the) āgnimāruta-śastra is: "Rich in showers"; (and to Jātavedas): "Thou, Agni, with the days".
11.9.9	The hymn to the All-Gods at the sixth day of the second abhiplava period is: "O Indra, be strong".
11.9.10	Of the (sixth day of the) third (abhiplava): "Dawn and night".
11.9.11	Of the (third sixth day of the) fourth (abhiplava): "Agni, Indra".
11.9.12	Or "Hail to us Indra and Agni".
11.9.13	Or the first in the first section, the second in the second section.
11.9.14	At (the sixth day of the) fifth abhiplava: "From the distance".
11.10.1	The abhijit is an agniṣṭoma which contains all the stomas, both the sāmans, and has either the rathantara or the bṛhat as (first) pṛṣṭha-(stotra).
11.10.2	The ājya-śastra consists of (the hymn): "Forwards to the God" and (the triplet): "What is carrying best".
11.10.3	The praiga-śastra is that of Madhucchandas and that of Gṛtsamada.
11.10.4	First come the triplets of that of Madhucchandas, afterwards that of Gṛtsamada.
11.10.5	Or (only) the triplet addressed to the All-Gods in the praüga of Gṛtsamada, must be inserted after the triplet to the All-Gods (in the praüga of Madhucchandas).
11.10.6	Or the (whole) morning-service should be that of the one-day-sacrifice of Soma.
11.10.7	(At the midday-service), he (inserts after the hymn of the) marutvatīya-śastra of the one-day-rite (the hymn): "O Indra, drink, for thy delight the Soma is pressed".
11.10.8	After the (hymn of the) niṣkevalya-śastra (of the one-day-rite) (he inserts the hymn): "Which help is yours".
11.10.9	But in case (the abhijit) has the bṛhat as first pṛṣṭha-stotra these two hymns come first,
11.10.10	Or the two (the marutvatīya- and niṣkevalya-śastra) consist of one (hymn only), (viz. the marutvatīya of the hymn beginning): "Drink the Soma towards which" (and the niṣkevalya of the hymn beginning): "Him do thou praise" of the first hymn he omits the last verse.
11.10.11	The third service follows the one-day-rite.
11.11.1	The svarasāman days are seventeen-versed.
11.11.2	The rathantara is the (first) pṛṣṭha-stotra of the first, and the bṛhat of the second, the third has both the sāmans but the rathantara as first pṛṣṭha-stotra.
11.11.3	According to Kauṣitaki they have the (sāmans called) 'svara' as (first) pṛṣṭha(-stotra on each day).
11.11.4	In this case the rathantara and the bṛhat (are chanted) at the pavamāna-lauds.
11.11.5	According to Paiṅgya they are agniṣṭomas.
11.11.6	According to Kauṣitaki they are ukthyas.
11.11.7	The (hymns for the) ājya (śastras) are (for the first day): "O God with sacrifices the moṛtal"; (for the second day): "Great strength"; (for the third): "O Agni, bring hither the most mighty"; everywhere with omission of the last verse.
11.11.8	The praüga-śastras are those of the first three day set (of the prsthya six-day-period).
11.11.9	The (hymn of the) marutvatīya-(śastra) is for the first svarasāman day: "Where is that hero"; for the second the 'with-what array' hymn; for the third: "Let him sing the saman".
11.11.10-11	After the (usual) samapragāthas he recites the (following) pragāthas which contain the word 'what' (ka) in (the marutvatīya of) the first (svarasāman day): "what (kad) newest"; (of the second): "What is not performed by him"; (of the third): "These prayers thee". (Then follows) the yoni of the (bṛhat).
11.11.12	(The hymns for the niṣkevalya-śastra are): at the first (svarasāman day): "What is thy most effectual" and without the last verse, (and) "May the bay steeds convey thy chariot hither"; at the second (day): "The singers sing thee", and "He hath drunk hence"; at the third (day): "Indra all have caused to grow", and "In thee have come together the songs".
11.11.13	In this manner if the svarasāman days have the rathantara and the bṛhat (as first pṛṣṭha-stotras).
11.11.14	(But) if the svarasāmans are used (for the first pṛṣṭha-stotras) the triplet: "When thou wast born, O unequalled one" is the stotra-triplet (for all the three days).
11.11.15	For the anurūpa triplet (are used) the two (verses): "What, O wonderful Indra, abundantly", and as third: "Which profits thou hast brought, O Indra" (so for the first svarasāman day).
11.11.16	Or (the stotra-triplet) for the second (svarasāman day) is (the triṣṭich): "Be glad, thou hast drunk the Soma", of which he takes the first as third verse.
11.11.17	For the anurūpa (triplet at the second svarasāman day) (are used) the two (verses: "Be glad for our welfare"; and as third: "We are in thee, O Indra".
11.11.18	Or (the stotra-triplet) for the third (svarasāman day is the triṣṭich): "Bring unto him, the thirsty one", of which he takes the fourth as third.
11.11.19	For the anurūpa (triplet at the third svarasāman day) (are used) the two verses: "Drink, O Indra, this Soma"; and as third: "Who knows him together with the Soma".
11.12.1	Whenever the stotra-triplet has the bṛhati (verses) at that (corresponding place the bṛhatīs must be applied in the anurūpa triplet.
11.12.2	Having recited the inteṚcalatory verse and the (pragāthas) containing the word 'who', he recites at the first day the yoni of the rathantaras, at the second day that of the bṛhat, at the third day those of both.
11.12.3	Everywhere (when both are mentioned) at the first place that of the rathantara (and at the second place that of the bṛhat).
11.12.4	(Immediately after that yoni-verse he recites) at the first (svarasāman day) the two verses: "Which horse thou dost support, O Indra"; at the second day the two (verses: "The men call thee at the Soma"; and at the third the two (verses): "As a wild elephant".
11.12.5	Then he recites of the nine verses: "O bountiful Indra, to thee" on each (svarasāman) day three verses and the first hymns.
11.12.6	Or he leaves aside the triplets and recites both hymns.
11.12.7	(The same should be done) in case they (the rathantara and the bṛhat) are adapted to the yonis of the svara (saman).
11.12.8	In reciting he connects the pragātha before the anuṣṭubh part or before the triplet.
11.12.9	That the third services (of the svarasāman days) follow the rite of the first three days (of the prsthya six-day-period) prevails for these days, in case they have the rathantara and bṛhat (as first pṛṣṭha-stotra).
11.12.10	And the beginning triplets (pratipads) of these same days (prevail) also for the svarasāman days if they have the svara saman (as first pṛṣṭha-stctras).
11.12.11	And for the yonis of the svara (saman)s.
11.12.12	From the anucara triplets on, they follow (the rite of) the middle three-day-period in the connected form (samudha).
11.12.13	But he leaves out the last hymn of the vaiśvadeva-śastra of each day and the triplet, and replaces them by (the hymns): "Bring your soma-draught, O ye eager ones" (first svarasāman day); "Him of old" (second day); "What vessel bere" (third day).
11.12.14	Or at the first (day) by the hymn: "Agni, Indra".
11.12.15	And (in this case) the hymn to the Maruts is: "Those who shine forth".
11.12.16	The hymn: "I call the Gods" at the second day.
11.12.17	The hymn: "Dawn and night" at the third.
11.13.1	The viṣuvat day is an agniṣṭoma, of which each laud consists of twentyone verses, and which has either the bṛhat or the mahādivākīrtyas as (first) pṛṣṭha-(laud).
11.13.2	It must be brought to an end before sun-set.
11.13.3	The morning-litany (takes place immediately) when the sun has risen.
11.13.4	Or as in the normal rite.
11.13.5	The beginning verse of the morning-litany (when it is begun) after sunrise is: "Agni I deem father".
11.13.6	He should recite (at the morning-litany) a hundred or a hundred and ten or a hundred and twenty (verses).
11.13.7	The āprī hymn is the one seen by Vasiṣṭha.
11.13.8	A (he-goat) destined for Sūrya must be immolated in addition to the usual one of the pressing day.
11.13.9	For the victim to Sūrya the invīting-verses are the three beginning: "The bright face of the Gods has risen" and the three following ones are the offering-verses.
11.13.10	(The rite of this victimal sacrifice is performed) whisperingly.
11.13.11	The (hymn for the) ājya-(śastra) is: "Out of the ocean the wave".
11.13.12	The praüga-śastra is in triṣṭubh metre (composed as follows).
11.13.13	From the middle chandoma day (are taken) three triplets: the first two and the last.
11.13.14	Three are taken from the first chandoma day.
11.13.15	But the third verse is the one containing the word 'blaze'.
11.13.16	That for the All-Gods is: "Let the holy word go forward from the abode".
11.13.17	Or the morning service (may be) that of the one-day-rite.
11.13.18	Its ājya(-śastra consists of the two hymns): "Forward to the God"; and "For thou princely glory".
11.13.19	And the praüga-śastra is that of Madhucchandas.
11.13.20	The hymns for the marutvatīya-(śastra) are: "With what array"; and "That ram"; "Thou, the terrible, hast been born".
11.13.21	The stotra-triplet is: "Leaning, as it were, on Sūrya" in case the bṛhat is not chanted on its own yoni.
11.13.22	The corresponding triplet is: "It thou hadst a hundred skys".
11.13.23	Or (the stotra-triplet is that of the mahādivākīrtya.
11.13.24	The stotra-triplet of the mahādivākīrtya is: "The bright face of the Gods".
11.13.25-26	The two next following verses and as third the verse: "The sun has brightly her rays" are the corresponding triplet.
11.13.27	Or the pragāthas to serve as stotra- and corresponding-triplets are: "Assuredly thou art great, O Sun" and "Upwards that beautiful".
11.13.28	Or the stotra-triplet is: "May the radiant drink the great" and the corresponding triplet is: "The sun has loosened in the middle".
11.13.29	Or (the corresponding triplet is): "May we always, well-disposed, see thee".
11.13.30	The sama-pragātha is: "Assuredly thou art great, O sun".
11.13.31	Or: "Who ever slayeth, most active".
11.13.32	(Then he recites) the yoni of the rathantara, in case the bṛhat is performed on its own yoni.
11.13.33	Of both (he recites the yonis of both: rathantara and bṛhat), if it (the bṛhat) is performed on another verse than its yoni.
11.13.34	Likewise at the mahādivākīrtya, if the chanters apply them (rathantara and bṛhat) at the pavamāna-laud.
11.14.2	He should not recite their yoni, if they (rathantara and bṛhat) are not performed (by the chanters).
11.14.3	The (verse) destined for the entrance (of the śastra proper) is: "Indra forsooth".
11.14.4	(In case the first pṛṣṭha is) on the divākīrtya the verse for entrance is: "Be favourable to us with thine eye".
11.14.5	The hymn (for the niṣkevalya-śastra) is: "As the sky, O Indra" in case the bṛhat is performed on its own yoni.
11.14.6	(The hymn is): "He who alone is to be invoked", (if the bṛhat) is performed on a verse other than its yoni.
11.14.7	The same if the mahādivākīrtya is the first pṛṣṭha-stotra.
11.14.8	In case the rathantara and bṛhat are not applied, (the hymn is): "Praise him".
11.14.9	The second hymn is (for all cases): "Unto that ram".
11.14.10	Having recited either of the 'the-season-the-mother' hymn or of the hymn seen by Śarvahari nine verses (he inserts) the nivid.
11.14.11	(Then he recites the hymn): "May the true one come hither".
11.14.12	Thereupon the hymn: "To the all-conquering", omitting its last (verse).
11.14.13	Having uttered the call he performs the 'difficult ascent'.
11.14.14	(He recites the verse beginning): "The swan who dwells in the pure" by quarter-verses, then by half-verses, then by three-quarter verses, then without breathing in, then by three-quarter verses, then by half-verses, then by quarter-verses.
11.14.15	Then he adjoins in his recitation the last verse.
11.14.16	Then he recites the hymn: "This for the full".
11.14.17	(The hymn): "The bird anointed".
11.14.18	(And the concluding verse): "To wide space lead us".
11.14.19	Thus (is the rite) according to Paiṅgya.
11.14.20	Now the rite according to Kauṣitaki.
11.14.21	It is simiḍār (to that of Paiṅgya) up to the verse of entrance of the śastra.
11.14.22	(He recites the whole) 'the-season-the-mother' (hymn) in case the rathantara and the bṛhat are not applied.
11.14.23	Eleven (verses) of it, in case the (bṛhat) is applied on its own yoni.
11.14.24	Otherwise nine (verses).
11.14.25	Then the fifteen verses: "O Indra, come hither with thy bay steeds", leaving aside the hymn seen by Savya.
11.14.26	Having recited eleven verses of the (hymn seen by) Baru (he inserts) the nivid.
11.14.27	The hymn of Savya is replaced by (the one beginning): "Thou wert alone".
11.14.28	The (hymn of) Tārkṣya is inserted before the 'bird' (hymn).
11.14.29	The niṣkevalya-(śastra) (consists) of one hundred and one verses
11.14.30	The hymn to Savitṛ of the vaiśvadeva-śastra is taken from the first (day of the prsthya six-day-period).
11.14.31	That to the sky and earth is taken from the second day (of that period).
11.14.32	That to the Ṛbhus (of the same śastra) and that to the Maruts (of the āgnimāruta-śastra) from the sixth day (of that period).
11.14.33	The hymn to the All-Gods (in the vaiśvadeva-śastra) is: "The Gods I call 'hail'".
11.14.34	The hymn to Vaiśvānara (in the āgnimāruta-śastra) is taken from the third (day of the pṛṣṭhya six-day-period).
11.14.35	The stotra-triplet and the anucara-triplet for the agniṣṭoma saman are: "The crest of the sky, the messenger of the earth"; and "Agni is the crest of the sky".
11.14.36	The hymn to Jātavedas (of the āgnimāruta-śastra) is: "To him who sits on the vedi".
11.14.37	Then come the three svarasāman days, but in reversed order.
11.15.1	The viśvajit is an agniṣṭoma containing all the stomas, and all the pṛṣṭhas, or it has the bṛhat as (first) pṛṣṭha (stotra).
11.15.2	The hymn of the ājya-(śastra) is: "Agni the men".
11.15.3	If the bṛhat is taken for its (first) pṛṣṭha-(laud), the hymn: "For thou princely glory".
11.15.4	The praüga-śastra is that of Madhucchandas.
11.15.5	The midday-service is that of the twentyfour-stoma day (with the following restrictions):
11.15.6	After having recited (at the niṣkevalya) in case the rite comprises all the pṛṣṭhas, the stotra-triplet and the corresponding triplet of the vairaj, and the pragātha and the yoni of the rathantara and of the bṛhat.
11.15.7	From the anucara-triplet on the afternoon service is that of the sixth day (of the prsthya six-day-period).
11.15.8	For a (viśvajit), which forms part of a sattra and which has the bṛhat in the first pṛṣṭha-stotra the vaiśvadeva-(śastra) is the hymn: "How of the Gods".
11.15.9	For a viśvajit performed as a one-day-rite this hymn is the 'may-to-us-come-favourable' one.
11.15.10	At a viśvajit where all the pṛṣṭha-sāmans are performed the hotṛ recites before the hymn to the Maruts (in the āgnimāruta-śastra) the evayāmarut hymn.
11.15.11-13	Reciting it either jagatī by jagatī without nyūṅkha or paṅkti by paṅkti with nyūṅkha, or (paṅkti by paṅkti) without nyūṅkha.
11.15.14	The stotra- and the corresponding-triplets of the agniṣṭoma-saman are: "Thou, O Agni, at the sacrifices".
12.1.1-2	The rite for the hotṛakas at the morning-services (on those days of which the rite of the hotṛ has now been treated, is as follows).
12.1.3	The stotra-(triplets) for the maitrāvaruṇa (at the ten-day-rite are the following): "Hither, O Mitra and Varuṇa to our" (first day); "Mitra we call" (second day); "Mitra I call" (third day); "Here for you both, O Mitra and Varuṇa" (fourth day); "For wide-extending is now" (fifth day); "Towards ye, the sun having risen" (sixth day); "Chant ye unto Mitra" (seventh day); "That now, the sun having risen" (eighth day); "Let the praise of Mitra and Varuṇa" (ninth day); "Do ye two aid us" (tenth day).
12.1.4	For the brāhmaṇacchamsin (the stotra-triplets at the ten-day-rite are): "Come hither, we have pressed" (first day); "Indra the chanters" (second day); "For together with Indra thou art seen" (third day); "Indra with the bones of Dadhyañc" (fourth day); "Rising with might" (fifth day); "Destroy all" (sixth day); "The sovereign of the peoples" (seventh day); "This Indra we incite" (eighth day); "Great is Indra, who by his might" (ninth day); "They yoke the tawny one" (tenth day).
12.1.5	For the acchāvāka (the stotra-triplets at the ten-day-rite are): "Indra and Agni, come to the pressed Soma" (first day); "On Indra, on Agni, a loud praise" (second day); "For both of you, from this prayer" (third day); "These two I call for, whose" (fourth day); "You both, O Indra and Agni, these" (fifth day); "For ye both are the priests of the sacrifice" (sixth day); "For ye both, from this prayer" (seventh day); "These two I call for, whose" (eighth day); "On Indra, on Agni, a loud praise" (ninth day); "Praise him" or "Them they ever praise" (tenth day).
12.2.1	At series of days, from the two-day-period on, the corresponding triplets are the stotra-triplets of the next day, even if they have the same stotra-triplet.
12.2.2	Or (they should take the stotra-triplet) (which is applied) on a subsequent day (with different stotra-triplet).
12.2.3	The regular triplets which come at the end of the recitations of the hotṛakas) are called 'concluding parts' (pāryasa).
12.2.4	The one for the maitrāvaruṇa is: "Forwards ye, the sun having risen".
12.2.5-6	Or the triplet: "By the high power, ye two that are not to be injured", in case it (the triplet mentioned in sūtra 4) has already been applied as stotra-triplet or (is applied as stotra-triplet) of the next day.
12.2.7	The one for the brāhmaṇacchamsin is: "Thou risest towards".
12.2.8	The one for the acchāvāka is: "Indra and Agni, come hither with help".
12.2.9	Between the corresponding-triplet (anurūpa) and the concluding part is the place for the insertion.
12.2.10	With one or two verses they exceed, in reciting, the stoma.
12.2.11	With more at a nine-versed (stoma).
12.2.12	And at a viśvajit which contains all the pṛṣṭha-(stotras).
12.2.13	With one at the tenth day.
12.2.14	The isolated (verses) are: "Ye both possess able"; "May they come to our barhis"; "Whom guard the wise"; "How shall we accomplish"; "May Varuṇa guide us by right guiḍānce"; "May we not, O ye of wonderful power"; "May Mitra lead us over distress"; "The mighty help of ye, the mighty ones"; "Of the Soma, O Mitra and Varuṇa"; "May they be ever our companions"; "He who as your messenger, O Mitra and Varuṇa"; "The mighty help of the three".
12.2.15	(To the same end serve) the triplets: "By the high powers, ye two that are not to be injured"; "Come to us, ye destroyers of enemies".
12.2.16	There are forty-seven gāyatrī verses addressed to Mitra and Varuṇa in the collection of ṛks, of these the maitrāvaruṇa (takes his verses for over-reciting).
12.2.17	There are forty-four hymns in gāyatrī metre addressed to Indra in the collection of ṛks, of these the brāhmaṇachamsin (takes his verses for the same end).
12.2.18	The two complexes of six verses (he applies): "Here I call Indra and Agni"; "I call the two granting foe-killers".
12.2.19	The two (verses): "When the men at the pressed Soma".
12.2.20	The (single verse): "In the mouth of the chewing".
12.2.21	The seven (verses): "Enjoy ye the sacrifice".
12.2.22	There are forty-six gāyatrī verses addressed to Indra and Agni in the collection of ṛks; of these the acchāvāka (takes his verses for the same end).
12.2.23	At the viśvajit with all the pṛṣṭhas the hotṛa triplets are the same as those of the tenth day.
12.2.24	Having taken as anurūpa-triplets (at the viśvajit) the stotra-triplets of the sixth day, they recite (as insertion) the stotra-triplets of the other five days.
12.2.25	(They recite) (stomas) returning on the returning stomas.
12.2.26	Of the (viśvajit) when performed as a one-day-sacrifice (they recite) the stomas right-on (even if the stomas are returning).
12.2.27	They close this (recitation of the ājya-stotras) with the concluding parts.
12.3.1	The (points of) difference at the midday-(lauds) (and the corresponding śastras of the twelve-day-rite are the following):
12.3.2	The last hymn(s) of both the services (midday and third service) are (here) designated as 'concluding parts'.
12.3.3	The (śastras of the hotṛakas at the) midday-services comprise two hymns.
12.3.4	The uktha-(śastra)s (comprise) three hymns.
12.3.5	The (verse) destined for the entrance (of the śastra proper) for the maitrāvaruṇa is everywhere: "Drive away".
12.3.6	At the second day (the two hymns for the maitrāvaruṇa are): "I will praise the great Indra" and: "What of us Indra".
12.3.7	At the third day (the two hymns are): "Of thee, the warrior" and: "How the great one".
12.3.8	The two triplets are: "Bring ye unto the great of great prosperity" and "We worship Indra".
12.3.9	At the fourth day (the two hymns are): "Immediately after being born"; and "Hither to us from afar from near".
12.3.10	The two triplets are: "Bring ye the land unto him"; and "Thou, Indra both".
12.3.11	At the fifth day (the two hymns are): "Being still in the womb"; "Which good praise".
12.3.12	The triplet is: "To Indra the sky".
12.3.13	At the sixth day (the two hymns are): "To us come, praised, with thy gains and help"; "The true one may come hither".
12.3.14	This (last) is the ahīna-hymn.
12.3.15	The triplets on the middle three-day-period are called the embellishments (śilpa).
12.3.16	All besides the stotra- and corresponding-triplets and the (śilpa) triplets may be recognized in the (following) indication.
12.3.17	The śastra of the first two days (taken together) prevails for all (the three hotṛakas) at the first chandoma day.
12.3.18	That of the third and fifth at the middle (chandoma).
12.3.19	That of the fourth and sixth at the last (chandoma).
12.3.20	"Thou art great, O Indra, to thee" (is the ahīna-sukta for the maitrāvaruṇa) in case the hotṛ should recite the ahīna hymn.
12.3.21	The twenty-one verses: "What the Fathers, O Indra, at thee" (are inserted) at the (three) chandoma days before the concluding part.
12.3.22	The laud-pragātha and the corresponding one on the tenth day are for him (for the maitrāvaruṇa): "Do ye not praise anything different" and "Let us not fear, let us not be troubled".
12.3.23	And his two-footed (verse) is: "Bring ye the horses for him under the yokes".
12.4.1	For the brāhmaṇacchamsin (at each day) is the pragātha containing the word: 'what': "What newest", to be inserted instead of that of the one-day-rite immediately after the corresponding-triplet.
12.4.2	And the (verse) destined for the entrance (of the śastra) is: "By the holy word these".
12.4.3	The concluding part is everywhere: "Prayers have risen".
12.4.4	At the third day the stotra-triplet and the corresponding-triplet are: "We with the Soma thee"; and "Who now, knows".
12.4.5-6	The same at the first two chandoma days, but in reversed order at the middle.
12.4.7	Or the stotra- and corresponding pragāthas (at the middle chandoma day) are: "When, Indra, east, west, north".
12.4.8	At the third day (of the twelve-day period he recites) the eleven (verses): "O adhvaryus, bring Soma unto Indra".
12.4.9	At the fourth day the stotra-triplet is: "All battles". The corresponding triplet (consists of the three verses): "Hi, Indra I call"; "Be glad, thou hast drunk the Soma"; "Bring to him, to him."
12.4.10	The two triplets (śilpas) are: "When, O kind God"; and: "He who by his voice the voiceless ones".
12.4.11	The hymn (is): "He who alone is to be invoked".
12.4.12	On the fifth day the stotra-triplet and the corresponding triplet are: "Indra for the carouse"; and "For every carouse".
12.4.13	The (śilpa) triplets are: "Come hither, let us prepare for thee"; and "The man who, O Indra, threatens us".
12.4.14	(The hymn is): "The bull with sharp horns".
12.4.15	At the sixth day the stotra-triplet and the corresponding triplet are "The doer of fair deeds".
12.4.16	The (śilpa) triplet is: "Through thee we, O bounteous one".
12.4.17	(The hymn is): "To him, the strong".
12.4.18	This is the ahīna-hymn.
12.4.19	At the last chandoma day the stotra-pragātha and the corresponding pragātha are: "Leaning, as it were, on Sūrya"; and: "Aid thou, O Lord of Aid".
12.4.20	Instead of the ahīna-hymn (is applied): "Thou art great, O Indra, thou who".
12.4.21	At the chandoma days (the hymn): "Praise Indra" is inserted before the concluding part.
12.4.22	At the tenth day the stotra-pragātha and the corresponding pragātha are: "Up, these very sweet" and "His part, surely exceeds all".
12.4.23	Or the stotra-pragātha is: "On the trikadruka's the bull" (one verse) and its last: "Him, Indra, I call", whilst the corresponding pragātha is: "All battles".
12.4.24	And the two-footed verse is: "Wishing for wealth".
12.5.1	For the acchāvāka the pragātha containing the word 'what' after the corresponding triplet, instead of the pragātha of the one-day-rite, is "What is not performed by him".
12.5.2	And the (verse) destined for the entrance (of the śastra) is: "To wide space lead us".
12.5.3	The concluding part is everywhere (at each day): "Like a carpenter".
12.5.4	At the second day the stotra-pragātha and the corresponding pragātha are: "Thee the men but yesterday"; "Him today and tomorrow".
12.5.5	The hymn is: "Very many, incomparables".
12.5.6	At the third day the stotra-pragātha and the corresponding pragātha are: "The swift one"; and "By strength".
12.5.7	The (hymn) is: "He who, the mightiest".
12.5.8	At the fourth day the stotra-pragātha and the corresponding pragātha are: "He, who, the king of men"; and "Nobody by his deed".
12.5.9	The two (śilpa) triplets are: "Indra is lauded together with"; "Indra drink this Soma".
12.5.10	(The hymn is): "In thee have come together".
12.5.11	At the fifth day the stotra- and corresponding-triplets are: "Of the sweet, thus"; and "Thus, then, the Soma".
12.5.12	The two (śilpa) triplets are: "Whatever, thus, O True one"; "What thou, O Indra of a hundred capacities".
12.5.13	(The hymn is): "Who shall dwell in the chariot".
12.5.14	At the sixth day the stotra-triplet and the corresponding triplet are: "That both, O Indra".
12.5.15	The three (śilpa) verses are: "The Pūrus know of this power of thine".
12.5.16	(The hymn is): "Ordering the bearer".
12.5.17	This is the ahīna-hymn.
12.5.18	At the first chandoma day the stotra-triplet and the corresponding triplet are: "No one him"; and "Not thee the mighty mountains".
12.5.19	At the middle: "Both let him hear".
12.5.20	At the last: "For what we fear, O Indra".
12.5.21	All are pragāthas.
12.5.22	Before the concluding part (he inserts) at the chandomas (the hymn): "Thee seek".
12.5.23	At the tenth day the two-footed verse is: "Thereby may we win the vigour".
12.5.24	And the (first hymn) of the one-day-rite.
12.6.1	Between the proceeding and the concluding (days) (he should recite) the two verses containing the word 'what', the verses which serve as entrance to the (śastra) and the 'like-a-carpenter' (triplet) transformed whilst transforming (them) into bṛhatī verses at those days which have the bṛhat as first pṛṣṭha-totra).
12.6.2	Between the verse which serves as entrance (to the śastra) and the two hymns in the place for inserting.
12.6.3	In the abhiplava (six-day-period) the hymns (for the midday-service) are the same as those of the prsthya (six-day-period).
12.6.4	Instead of the ahīna-hymns (of the sixth day of the prsthya six-day-period) come those of the second day.
12.6.5	The last is that of the maitrāvaruṇa.
12.6.6	From the first three-day-periods (of the prsthya-saḍaha) are taken the hymns for the (three) svarasāman days.
12.6.7	From the sixth (day) those at the caturviṃśa day, at the abhijit, at the viṣuvat with the bṛhat as first pṛṣṭha-stotra, at the viśvajit and at the mahāvrata.
12.6.8-9	At the viśvajit with all the pṛṣṭha-sāmans the maitrāvaruṇa (recites) the stotra-verses and corresponding ones, with the pragātha, which belong to the mahānāmnī (verses).
12.6.10	The brāhmaṇacchamsin (recites at the same occasion the stotra- and corresponding-verses) of the vairūpa (and) the pragātha, which contains the word 'what'.
12.6.11	Of the revatī verses the acchāvāka.
12.6.12	The maitrāvaruṇa (recites thereupon, at the same occasion) the Valakhilya verses, six hymns (of them), not intertwined, omitting the pragātha to invite Indra and the pragātha "May all the Gods come to us one in mind".
12.6.13	The brahmaṇacchamsin (thereupon recites) the Vṛṣākapi hymn without the kuntāpa, not making nyūṅkha.
12.6.14	The acchāvāka (thereupon recites) instead of the evayāmarut the viṣṇunyaṅga: "As the sky, O Indra".
12.6.15	The hymn: "Thou hast become the only" is the saman-hymn of the maitrāvaruṇa.
12.6.16	"He who when born" of the brahmaṇacchamsin.
12.6.17	"Now I shall of this great one" of the acchāvāka.
12.6.18	Having recited the sama-hymns (and) having recited the ahīna-hymns, they close the śastra with the (verses) which serve for closing the one-day-rite.
12.6.19	After the ahīna-hymns (they insert) for a (viśvajit), if it is performed as a one-day-rite, the concluding parts of the one-day-rite.
12.7.1	In case the uktha (stotras and the corresponding uktha-śastra)s are performed (at the viśvajit), they omit the vālakhilya (verses), the vṛṣākapi and the viṣṇunyaṅga and recite at midday the remaining parts (the usual parts of the śastra without the ones as indicated above).
12.7.2	The uktha-(śastra)s are taken over from the sixth day (of the prsthya six-day-period).
12.7.3	Now, if at a day, on which are not applied all the pṛṣṭha-sāmans for the third service is enjoined the rite of the sixth day (of the prsthya ṣaḍaha), then the uktha (stotras and śastra)s are taken over from the second day.
12.7.4	At a (viśvajit) with invisible pṛṣṭha-stotras the 'counter-embellishments' are applied.
12.7.5	The maitrāvaruṇa replaces in his recitation the vālakhilya verses by pragāthas addressed to Indra: "Drink of the juiceful Soma" (etc.).
12.7.6	The brāhmaṇacchamsin replaces the vṛṣākapi hymn by paṅkti verses addressed to Indra: "Indra for the carousal".
12.7.7	The acchāvāka recites only the viṣṇunyaṅga.
12.7.8	So is the rite at the viśvajit with invisible pṛṣṭha-stotras.
12.8.1-2	Now, at the viśvajicchilpa (they recite) after the pragāthas of the one day (viśvajit rite) the vālakhilya verses (so the maitrāvaruṇa), the vṛṣākapi hymn (so the brāhmaṇacchamsin), the viṣṇunyaṅga (so the acchāvāka), and the nābhānediṣṭha hymn (so the hotṛ), either entirely or triplets (of these hymns).
12.8.3	Of the vālakhilya verses a quadruplet.
12.8.4	The hotṛakas recite each three triplets of the sama-hymns, of the ahīna-hymns and the concluding parts.
12.8.5	This is the modification at the viśvajicchilpa.
12.8.6	If triplets are adhibited (the hotṛ recites) the triplets (not the whole hymn) into which the nivid is inserted.
12.8.7	(Of the nābhānediṣṭha hymn he takes) the triplet: "If for the friendship of you both".
12.8.8	And the whole hymn: "They who by sacrifice".
12.8.9	The triplet into which the nivid is inserted is: "May the Aśvins grant us safety".
12.8.10	And the (first) triplet of the evayāmarut hymn.
12.8.11	The morning-service (of the viśvajicchilpa?) is in accordance with the stoma.
12.9.1	The nine-versed śastra of the ten-day-period is arranged in triplets (in the following manner).
12.9.2	Of the ājya-śastra(s) (they) recite the first three triplets.
12.9.3	Of the (suktas) in which the nivid is inserted (the hotṛ recites) the last (three triplets).
12.9.4	Of each of the other suktas only one (the last) verse (and) of the śilpa-triplet's.
12.9.5-7	Of the sixth day, however, the recitation of the śilpa-(triplet)s and of the nābhānediṣṭha hymn and of the evayāmarut hymn is identical with that of the viśvajicchilpa.
12.9.8	If at the gavāmayana they (the chanters) apply throughout before the viṣuvat day for the brāhmaṇacchamsin the abhīvaṛta (saman) on pragāthas addressed to Indra, the triplet on which they (the chanters) hold the stotra is the stotra-triplet (for the brāhmaṇacchamsin) and the corresponding-triplet is taken as stotra-triplet of the next day.
12.9.9	Or if (they use) a complex of six pragāthas -
12.9.10	Only (instead of a pragātha there are) bṛhati verses on the third day.
12.9.11	(Then the following pragāthas with the corresponding verses are applied): "Him who woṛks wonders"; "For this I appeal to thee" (stotriya and anurūpa for the first abhiplava day); "Forwards to him of good gifts"; "I will worship the well-renowned" (for the second abhiplava day); "May thee a thousand, may a hundred"; "Come hither, O Indra, with thy charming bay steeds" (for the third abhiplava day); "He, who, the king of men"; "Nobody by his deed" (for the fourth abhiplava day); "Not thee the mighty mountains"; "Thou art glorious, O Indra" (for the fifth abhiplava day); "Thou, O Indra, at rapid motions"; "Drink thou of the juiceful Soma" or: "O adhvaryus, make flow" (for the sixth day).
12.9.12	At the viṣuvat day (the brahman's pṛṣṭha-saman) is the ādityavrata.
12.9.13	Its stotra-triplet and corresponding triplet is: "The beautiful face of the Gods".
12.9.14	Or the vikarṇa.
12.9.15	For the vikarṇa the stotra- and corresponding-pragāthas are: "Assuredly thou art great, O Sun"; and "Upwards thou beautiful".
12.9.16	Or the stotra-pragātha is: "O Indra bring insight unto us"; and the corresponding pragātha: "Indra, bringing to us the greatest".
12.9.17	After the viṣuvat day (are applied) instead of the abhīvaṛta, on (the pragātha): "O Indra, bring insight unto us" (at the reversed abhiplava six-day-periods) the sāmans: paurumīḍha, mānava, janitra, bharadvāja, śyaita and naudhasa.
12.10.1	The (points of difference at the uktha-(stotra)s (and the corresponding śastras of the twelve-day rite are the following):
12.10.2	After the corresponding triplet (the anurūpa tṚca) hymns in jagatī metre, addressed to Indra (are inserted), different ones or the usual ones: except at the sixth day the usual ones.
12.10.3	At the second day (of the prsthya six-day-period) the stotra-triplet for the maitrāvaruṇa is: "Forth go your gains"; and the corresponding triplet is: "Forwards, O friends".
12.10.4	(The hymns are): "Chant a loud prayer to the king"; and "O Indra and Varuṇa, who has reached of you".
12.10.5	At the third and fifth day and at the middle chandoma day the concluding part is the hymn: "May I for ye both, O kings".
12.10.6	At the other days (the hymn): "I compose for you both".
12.10.7	At the third day the stotra-pragātha and the corresponding pragātha are: "Sing ye unto the very great one"; and "He by thy help, O Agni".
12.10.8	(The hymns) are: "Firm are his"; and "O Indra and Varuṇa grant ye to the sacrifice".
12.10.9	At the fourth day the stotra- and corresponding-triplets are: "The thriving Agni"; and "Awaken Agni by the praise".
12.10.10	(The hymns are): "Varuṇa opened the roads"; and "Willingly your sacrifice, O Indra and Varuṇa".
12.10.11	At the fifth day the stotra-triplet is: "Hither, for thee, Agni, may we light"; "He is Agni who, the good one"; "Him I deem Agni". The corresponding triplet is: "To thee O Agni, with a verse"
12.10.12	(The hymns are): "Bring unto Varuṇa a bright"; and "O Indra and Varuṇa bestow on our sacrifice".
12.11.1	On the sixth day for all (the three hotṛakas) two-quarter verses (are required as stotra-triplets and corresponding triplets).
12.11.2	The stotra-triplet is: "O Agni (be ever) nigh unto us".
12.11.3	He takes the fourth verse as third.
12.11.4	The corresponding triplet is: "Agni, be enkindled".
12.11.5	Immediately after the corresponding triplet he recites the verses (of the) vālakhilya (hymns) intertwined.
12.11.6	The first pair of hymns he intermingles foot-wise.
12.11.7	The second pair of hymns he intermingles halfverse-wise.
12.11.8	The third pair of hymns verse-wise.
12.11.9	The last pair he inverts.
12.11.10	At the intermingled verses he makes the responses: otha modaiva made and modā modaivo tho3.
12.11.11	The first response at the pause, the last at the prāṇava (o).
12.11.12	Leaving over the last verse of the tārkṣya hymn and having uttered the call, (he performs) the 'difficult ascent', as in the (rite of the) viṣuvat day.
12.11.13	Then he adjoins in his recitation the last verse and recites the two triplets of the one-day-rite.
12.11.14	(Thereupon he recites) the three verses: "They were then our Fathers".
12.11.15	(And still) at the sixth (day) the hymn: "Indra and Varuṇa grant ye to the sacrifice".
12.11.16	At the first chandoma day the stotra-triplet and the corresponding triplet are: "Let the calf draw hither thy mind"; and "Agni hath come hither".
12.11.17	Between the concluding part and the first three (hymns) of the one-day-rite (are inserted the) five verses (of hymns): "These shares for you" or "Ye both, O heroes, being looked upon".
12.11.18	At the middle chandoma day the stotra-triplet and the corresponding triplet are: "The guest most beloved to you"; and "May the lord of the house be beloved to us".
12.11.19	At the last chandoma day the two pragāthas (for stotriya and anurūpa) are "Auspicious for us"; "When with ghee-oblations offered into".
12.11.20	Or: "They who enkindle Agni"; and "These we praise highly".
12.11.21	At both (the middle and the last chandoma days) the remaining part of the hymn is: "Neither thy might".
12.11.22	At the middle one (the hymn): "Which praise has of you, O Indra and Varuṇa".
12.11.23	At the last (the hymn): "Willingly by your sacrifice, O Indra and Varuṇa".
12.11.24	At both the three (verses). "These activīties of you both".
12.12.1	For the brahmaṇacchamsin are on the second day (of the prṣṭhya six day period) the stotra-triplet and the corresponding triplet: "For thus art thou a hero"; and "For thus of him a joyful"
12.12.2	(Then follow) the six hymns: "He who propped".
12.12.3	These same also at the two last chandoma days in the middle of the (other) hymns.
12.12.4	Every where the concluding part is preceded by the triplet: "He who, splitting the rock".
12.12.5	At the third and fifth day and at the middle chandoma day the concluding part is: "As a shooter, well-crossing".
12.12.6	At the other days: "To fetch Indra, my songs".
12.12.7	At the third day the stotra-triplet and the corresponding triplet are: "This intoxicating draught to thee"; and "Unto him do yo chant".
12.12.8	(The hymn on this day is): "The irresiṣṭible bull".
12.12.9	At the fourth day the hymn is: "As birds swimming in the water".
12.12.10	And at the first and last of the chandoma days.
12.12.11	And at the sixth day after the triplets.
12.12.12	At the fifth day the stotra-triplet and the corresponding triplet are: "For Indra chant ye a song"; and "Unto him do ye chant".
12.12.13	The hymn at this day and at the middle chandoma day is: "Where at the sacrifice in the assemblage of men".
12.12.14	(At the sixth day) the stotra-triplet is: "These worlds" and for the corresponding triplet (serve) the last two verses (of the same hymn) and as third: "Thereby may we win the vigour".
12.13.1	(Thereupon) having recited the sukīrti hymn beginning: "Drive away", (he recites) the vṛṣākapi (hymn) paṅkti-wise, applying the nyūṅkha on the second and last syllable of (each) middle pada.
12.13.2	On the prior (i.e on the second syllable of each middle paṅkti) the vairūpa nyūnkha (is applied), on the latter (i.e. on the last syllable of each middle paṅkti) (it is applied e.g. in this manner) madad vṛsakapo303 āryah pustesu matsakhā.
12.13.3	When he (the hotṛ) has stopped, he (the adhvaryu?) makes the counter-nyūṅkha (in the following manner).
12.13.4	Having applied the vairāja nyūṅkha he (the adhvaryu) makes the respond: madetha madaivo303 otha modaiva.
12.13.5	So where at the beginning of a pada on which nyūṅkha must be applied, the upadruta sandhi, or the abhinihita sandhi, the praśliṣṭa sandhi or the kṣipra sandhi (occurs), he must pass over this (syllable) and apply the nyūṅkha on the second syllable, as svā nv03 and kva syo3.
12.13.6	But where the vivṛtti called pañcālapada-vivṛtti (occurs), there he should add the nyūṅkha to the pratyaya (subsequent sound or syllable?), for example no3o3.
12.13.7	When he has recited this hymn, he recites the kuntāpa hymn.
12.14.1	"Hearken to this, ye peoples! Nārāśaṃsa is going to be praised. Sixty thousand and ninety (cows) we accept at Kaurama among the Rusamas".
12.14.2	"Whose twice ten drawing-camels, with their females, down the summits of the chariot, flying for the touch of the sky".
12.14.3	"He has granted to Isa a hundred niṣkas with ten wreaths, three hundred coursers, ten thousand cows".
12.14.4	"The Rebhas start forth with wisdom at free will, as cows, their boys are at home, and at home they await the cows".
12.14.5	"Bring forward, O Rebha, thy prayer which procures cows, which procures goods. Mingle this word among the Gods, as an arrow... the shooter".
12.15.1	"Fly upwards O Rebhas, fly as a bird unto a ripe tree (a tree with ripe fruits). Thy tongue comes repeatedly out (of the mouth) as a razor on the two (parts of the) whetting apparatus".
12.15.2	"Indra awakened (the singer) with the words 'Arise, move along, (always) singing, praise me, the mighty one, so that every rich man may grant (presents) to thee'"
12.15.3	"Here, ye cows, bring forth young ones, here, ye horses, here, ye men! And may Pūṣan also, with a thousand sacrificial gifts, sit down here".
12.15.4	"May, O Indra, these cows here be unhurt, and may their master be unhurt. May, O Indra, neither the hostile people nor the thief be master of them".
12.15.5	"As thou formerly, O Indra, enterest, during the (battle) of the ten kings, in Manusa, wast thou for all (in the eyes of all) misshapen. sa ha yakṣmaya (yakṣāya) patyate (kalpate)".
12.16.1	"Thou, O bountiful one, hast even made Visakṣa bent, ye people! Thou didst scatter Rauhiṇa, thou cuttest off the head of Vṛtra".
12.16.2	"The horse, which runs as the side-horse of the two bay steeds they called Uccaiśśravasa. Convey thou happily, O sted, the beautifully wreathed Indra to victory".
12.16.3	"The araṃgara sounds loudly, threefold bound by the strap. It praises the comfort, it drives away uncomfort".
12.16.4	"Thou gavest shelter, O Indra, and (sacrificial) food to those who come from afar, to the lauding priest, the far-renowned, thou conveyest riches".
12.16.5	"Thou, O Indra, gavest to the pigeon with broken wing, as it staggered (went crookedly) cooked millet and pilu fruits and water in abundance".
12.16.6	Thereupon (he recites) the four verses of Parikṣit; on the first and fourth syllables of the third verse-quarter of these, vaisvārya (is applied).
12.17.1	"To the king, who rules all peoples, who (as) a God surpasses the moṛtals, for Parikşit, who belongs to all men (vaisvānara), sing ye, whilst pressing the Soma a beautiful hymn" (1). "Parikşit has made peace for us, reaching the highest seat (uttamam āsanan acaran), he the descendant of Kuru, making a home, speaks as husband with his wife" (2). "'What shall I bring to thee: sour milk, mixed beverage (mantha), arak?' (thus) asks the wife her husband during the reign of king Parikşit" (3). "abhīva svaḥ prajihite, ripe barley, patho biḍām. That people prospers well during the reign of king Parikṣit" (4).
12.17.2	At the vaisvārya he (the adhvaryu) makes the response otha modaiva.
12.17.3	Thereupon (follows) the prattle of Etaśa, which consists of twenty padas, and is recited in the manner of the nivids.
12.18.1	"These mares jump into the water-Against the stream, against the sutvan-One of them is the little fallow one-Little fallow one, what dost thou wish?--A noble son, a golden one--Where, then, hast thou cast him aside?-Where around yonder three dalbeṛgia trees-The three nattirs (sic)-Sit, blowing the horn-The fruit of the bottle-gourd, dug in a little-The karkarika (lute), dug in a little-This the wind roots up-May he make a (dwelling)-A strong giving most vanisa-na vanisadanātanam-Who of them will beat the drum-When he beats it, how shall he beat it-Again and again paryākly āram-By the hoof the fat is noted--By the spoon the blood" (twenty padas).
12.19.1-5	(Thereupon) the verses of the Ādityas and Aṅgirasas (the devanitha):
12.19.6-7	The responses (of the adhvaryu) to these verses are: eraha jaritar otha modaiva and tathaha jaritar otha modaiva the first at a pause, the last at a prāṇava.
12.20.1	Then follow the five verses called 'arrangement of the quarters'.
12.20.2	"The man who is fit for the council and the community, who performs soma-sacrifices and iṣṭis and yonder sun, that the enemy-destroying Gods arranged as the east" (1). "When a good man has a courageous son, that called the wise gandharva the north, an agreeable word" (2). "yo jamya aprathayad, who offends his friend, when the eldest is unmindful, that they call the lower (the southern region)" (3). "The miser who is stingy and the rich who makes no offerings, of the steady, continuous, of that we hear as the west" (4). "The Gods who made sacrifices and who gave away, going as the sun to the sky, those bountiful ones have abundance" (5).
12.21.1	Thereupon the janakalpas ('man-orderings').
12.21.2	"He whose eyes are unanointed, whose body is unanointed, who wears no jewels, who wears no gold (ornament), a non-brāhmaṇa, son of a non-brāhmaṇa, tota kalpesu sammita" (1). "He whose eyes are anointed, whose body is anointed, who wears jewels, who wears a gold ornament, a true brāhmaṇa, son of a brāhmaṇa, to tā kalpesu sammitā" (2). "A pond without water-supply, and a not-rich (man) who is not liberal, a beautiful maiden who forbids cohabitation, to tā kalpesu sammitā" (3). "A pond with good water-supply, and a rich man who is liberal, a beautiful maiden who permits cohabitation, to tā kalpesu sammita" (4). "A royal consort who is rejected, a fighting man without missiles (?), a not-swift mare not running (?), to tā kalpesu sammitā" (5). "A royal consort who is favourite, and a fighting-man well-provided with missiles (?), a swift mare running, to tā kalpeṣu sammità" (6).
12.21.3	Thereupon the four pravalhikās (riddles) and the three pratīrādhas, reciting them in the manner of the nivids.
12.22.1	"Spread out are the two reins; these the male rubs against. This is not O maiden, as thou meanest" (1). "The two reins of thy mother go asunder, without the male. This is not......" (2). "Seizing the two forked branches he inserts (the atiriktam) in the middle (of them). This is not......" (3). "Standing he conceals (it) in the ('two reins') of her who lies down on the back. This is not......" (4). "He conceals the slippery one (masc.) into the slippery (fem.), the little slippery one (fem.). This is not......" (5). "The slippery one has slipped down into the hairy pond. This is not......" (6). "What is minus and what is plus, that all he conceals. This is not......." (7).
12.23.1	"Here, then, in the east, the west, the north, the south, the arala udabhartsata". "Here, then, in the east, the west, the north, the south, the calves sit sprinkling". "Here, then, in the east, the west, the north, the south, the mess of boiled rice becomes dissolved". "Here, then, in the east, the west, the north, the south, sliliput sliliyate".
12.23.2	"bhug (he is) come near. Sad (he is) gone away. Phat (he is) when stood upon".
12.23.3	Having uttered as response: "Alabūni, O singer. Pṛṣatakāni, O singer. Pipiḍākāvato, O singer. Asvattha leaf, O singer. The dog, O singer. Parṇasado, O singer. The cows hoof, O singer" each one of these, (the adhvaryu connects after each) the usual response (otha modaiva).
12.23.4	(Then the ativada verse): "These Gods have moved asunder, O adhvaryu, perform quickly. Thou art a........for the cows, ati pra khudasi mahat".
12.23.5	At this verse the responses are: "The wife who wishes for coitus, O singer, otha modaiva"; "The hotṛ vistvime, O singer, othā modaiva".
12.23.6	At the pause the first, at the prāṇava the latter.
12.24.1	Thereupon the ten āhanasya verses.
12.24.2	"When the Gods favoured the moistening lalamagu, the woman approves herself by her thigh, as of a manifest truth" (1). "When he brings his small thick(p.) into (ablative!) her narrow slit, her two muskas (stir), as the spurlike projections at a cows hoof" (2). "When he has with the thick p. stricken her two small muşkas, these two of her move asunder, as two asses on the gravel" (3). "The harlot runs after the paramour, who runs away: 'Guard these cows of this one futue me, eat the porridge'" (4). "The harlot runs with a samya around the cock: 'We do not know which animal carries a dhānika (= cunnus) on the head'" (5). "The harlot entreats the p. which has been caused to enter successfully 'May we enjoy fan after fan of the tree with such fruits'" (6). "The harlot, stepping over the moṛtar, said: 'Just as on thee, O tree (O wooden moṛtar), they strike (with the pestle) so may they strike on me'" (7). "Great, forsooth, is the good bilva, great is the good fig-tree, the great one presses on the knees (in positione coitus, a good thing is the amorous sport of the great one" (8). And the two verses: "The p., O men"; "When ye came forward" (9,10).
12.24.3	On the second verse-quarter of these verses the nyūṅkha (must be applied) as on the vṛṣākapi hymn.
12.24.4	At the verse: "The p., O men" on the second and tenth syllables.
12.24.5	Making the pause of the other verses with the nyūnkha, (he recites), for the sake of connecting, the last verse-quarter.
12.24.6	He (the adhvaryu) makes the response: vi.i.i.i3 kim ayam iḍām āho 303 othā modaiva.
12.25.1	(Then follows) one verse: "Dadhikrāvan I have celebrated".
12.25.2	The triplets, (still) at the sixth day, are: "Pressed out are the most sweet"; "To the most liberal"; "He who splitting the mountain"; "The drop hath mounted".
12.25.3	At the first chandoma day the stotra-triplet and the corresponding one (for the uktha-śastra of the brāhmaṇacchamsin) are "Bring thou hither, O Indra, on our behalf"; and "Bring thou, hither, O Indra, the favour"
12.25.4	And the whole (hymn): "To the most liberal" (is recited).
12.25.5	And the single verse: "He who splitting the mountain".
12.25.6	At the middle (chandoma day) they are: "Come unto us, O Indra"; and "Pour out the intoxicating draught of the sweet herb".
12.25.7	At the last (chandoma day) they are: "Come ye hither, we will praise Indra"; and "Ye friends".
12.26.1	The stotra-triplet (of the second day) for the acchāvāka is: "All have caused Indra to grow"; the corresponding triplet is: "Indra who is mighty by his strength", the two verses which precede are the last two.
12.26.2	At the second and fourth day and at the first and last chandoma days is inserted after the hymn to Indra (the hymn): "Now, the moṛtal".
12.26.3	At the other days, the hymn: "Of Viṣṇu now".
12.26.4	Everywhere before the concluding part is inserted the triplet: "Spacious room have they made".
12.26.5	The concluding part is always: "I send on with rite".
12.26.6	At the third day the stotra-triplet and the corresponding one are: "Hear thou the summons of Tiraści"; and "Having listening ears".
12.26.7	At the fourth day they are: "Drink thou this pressed out (Soma"; and "Drink the Soma for intoxication".
12.26.8	At the fifth day they are: "The Soma has been pressed for thee, O Indra"; and "Drink this pressed out Soma".
12.26.9	At the sixth day they are: "Sing ye unto Indra the mighty slayer of Vṛtra"; and "Thou, granting from all sides".
12.26.10	Then he recites the evayāmarut hymn in the same manner as the vṛṣākapi hymn.
12.26.11	Having said with the vairāja nyūṅkha the words iha mado3 he (the adhvaryu) makes the response: made madhor madasya madirasya madaivo3 03 otha modaiva.
12.26.12	After the evayāmarut hymn the 'the-season-the-mother" (hymn).
12.26.13	Then (the hymn): "May sky and earth favour him".
12.26.14	(The hymn): "Of Viṣṇu now".
12.26.15	(The hymn): "Him who drinks of the Soma".
12.26.16	(This hymn is) equally (recited) at the chandoma days.
12.26.17	But (only) the (first) three (verses of it) at the first ones.
12.26.18	And before the triplet, at the last two chandoma days the hymn: "Be thou, O Mitra, to us".
12.26.19	(Still) on the sixth day (the two hymns): "Now the moṛtal"; "Beyond the measure", the last without the last verse.
12.26.20	At the first chandoma day the stotra-triplet and the corresponding triplet are: "What, O wonderful Indra"; and "When, Indra, there are four".
12.26.21	At the middle: "The destroyer of the strongholds"; the triplet which precedes is the corresponding one, but the third verse is to be taken as its first.
12.26.22	At the last chandoma day the stotra- and corresponding-triplets are: "They sing unto thee".
12.27.1	For all (the three hotṛakas) the recitation (of the uktha-śastra) at the twentyone-versed day is taken from the first chandoma day (is the same as at the first chandoma day).
12.27.2	The recitation of the four days (of the prsthya six-day-period) from the second on, is the same for the four days of the abhiplava (six-day)-period (from the second on).
12.27.3	At the svarasāman days, if they are performed as ukthyas, they (the uktha-śastras) are taken from the third and following days (of the prsthya six-day-period).
12.27.4	Now, should they perform the abhijit, the vișuvat, the viśvajit with all the pṛṣṭhas, and the mahāvrata day as ukthya rites, the uktha-śastras are those of the twentyone-versed day.
12.27.5	Now, should they perform the first two days of prsthya and abhiplava (six-day-periods) and the tenth day as ukthya rites, the uktha-śastras are those of the one-day-rite.
12.27.6	Should they perform the last day of the abhiplava six-day-period as an ukthya rite, they should take the third service (of the corresponding day of the prsthya six-day-period) as the third service (of this abhiplava day).
13.1.1	The chanters (and) the adhvaryus go before in their acts (and the hotṛ and hotṛakas must act in conformity with their acts).
13.1.2-3	If these (the chanters or the adhvaryus) should perform any act which is not taught (in this sūtra), he (the hotṛ or hotṛaka) should, only so far as regards the iṣṭis, act conformably to the adhvaryu in the sequence of the sacrificial substances, the deity (for which these are destined) and the loud or whispering manner of speaking.
13.1.4	He should conform himself to the chanter, as regards the laud triplet, the application of days (e.g. in the sattra), the difference of stoma, the pṛṣṭha and the kind of soma-sacrifice.
13.1.5	If these (the chanters) should change, place a verse-quarter of a half-verse or apply less or more, he should take no notice of this.
13.1.6	Only to the transposition of (whole) verses he should conform his recitation.
13.1.7	When a verse-quarter, on which the nyūṅkha must be applied, is made complete by parting asunder (the syllables which are united by sandhi), the nyūṅkha must be applied numbering the second syllable of that (dissolved part).
13.1.8	But after the vowel (with nyūṅkha) the consonants which have the same syllables must be elided.
13.2.1	If the he-goat victim being brought near dies before bringing up (to the sacrificial post), he should take for immolating another and have that (dead victim) slaughtered for the priests.
13.2.2	When the victim after being brought up (to the sacrificial post) shivers, he performs a libation (of clarified butter in the Āhāvaniya) with (the verse): “From fear of what thou hast shivered, from that give us security; guard all our cattle. Homage to Rudra the bountiful”.
13.2.3	When it cries, then with the verse: “From fear of what thou hast cried” etc.
13.2.4	When it runs away: “From fear of what thou hast run away”.
13.2.5	When it sits down: “From fear of what thou hast sat down”.
13.2.6	When it dies: “From fear of what thou hast passed away”.
13.2.7	When it has gone lost, has died or run away, he should immolate another victim of the same colour, dedicated to the same deity.
13.2.8	Of the dead victim he should offer the omentum, the victimal cake and the cuttings (of the animal itself; at the vaṣaṭ calls of the other victim, (each time) (immediately) after them).
13.3.1	When the victim dies at the moment when the fore-offerings have begun, the victimal sacrifice must be brought to an end with the same victim.
13.3.2	When a cutting (a part of the victim which must be offered) has gone lost or has got spoilt or rent asunder, he should substitute clarified butter.
13.3.3	If the heart has been lost, he should immolate another victim.
13.3.4	And when he should wish that they who rend asunder (the parts of the victim) may come to grief, he should offer into the agnīdhria fire a libation of clarified butter with the verse: “Ye even as the owners of barley”.
13.3.5	If the anubandhyā barren cow is eight-footed (i.e. pregnant), he should cook on the slaughtering fire: (i) from the hide of the embryo (a part) shaped into the form of an omentum, (ii) from the rice-husks (cakes) of husks, and (iii) the embryo itself and offer these at the vaṣaṭ calls of the other victim again into the slaughtering fire.
13.4.1	If the sacrificial stake takes leave whilst (the rite) is not (yet) finished, he should immolate to Tvaṣṭṛ a multicolour (victim).
13.4.2	The invīting-verses are: “He of brilliant hue, the strong, full of vigour” (for the omentum); “That procreant strength for us” (for the victimal cake); “God Tvaṣṭṛ, Savitṛ the all-forms-possessing”.
13.4.3	The offering-verses are: “To the very great one I bring”; “Let the hotṛ revere him to whom the first part is due”; “O God Tvaṣṭṛ which endearingness thou hast got”.
13.5.1	The coinciding within the range of cognisance of two Soma feast days of two (sacrificers) who hate one another is called ‘samsava’ (simultaneous Soma feast).
13.5.2	After having made first (i.e. before the rival) the summons for the morning-litany, they should finish (the whole ceremony) before (the rival).
13.5.3-6	On the well-flaming fire they should pour out libations: at the morning service with the formula: “For lying down, for sitting down! For the conquest of the gāyatrī metre svaḥa”; “...for the conquest of the triṣṭubh metre svaḥa” at the midday service; “...for the conquest of the jagatī metre svaḥa” at the afternoon service.
13.5.7-12	If the adhvaryu should wish the death of the adhvaryu (of the rival party) he should at the morning service pour out libations (of clarified butter) with the three verses addressed to Prajāpati; if the hotṛ should wish the death of the (other) hotṛ he should do the same at the midday service; if the udgātṛ should wish the death of the (other) udgātṛ, he should do the same at the third service; if the brahman should wish the death of the (other) brahman, he should do the same at each service; if the sacrificer should wish the death of the (other) sacrificer, he should do the same at each service; if they wish the death of all, all should do the same at each service.
13.5.13	They should apply the bṛhat and the rathantara.
13.5.14	And the abhīka, the abhiṣava, the abhinidhāna and the abhīvaṛta sāmans.
13.5.15	The ‘with-what-array’ hymn is the marutvatīya-śastra.
13.5.16	The "He, O people" hymn is the niṣkevalya-śastra.
13.5.17	The vihavya hymn is the vaiśvadeva-śastra.
13.5.18	If they who are in front finish their rite, he should perform a subsequent form of soma-sacrifice.
13.5.19	If they (the other party) perform an overnight-rite he should perform a two-day-rite.
13.5.20	If they perform a two-day-rite then he should perform a three-day-rite.
13.5.21	Or at the same form of soma-sacrifice he should give a greater number of dakṣiṇa-(cows).
13.5.22	Or streaming water, wind and open space separate (the two rival parties).
13.6.1	If the Soma, after it has been brought, is carried off, he should without delay, bring near other Soma and press out this Soma.
13.6.2	To the person who brings the Soma near or to the somabuyer give some (fee).
13.6.3	When the Soma is not found, he should press out pūtika plants, white-leafed arjuna or kuśa-grass stalks and mix (the pressed out juice) with fresh milk at the morning-service, with boiled milk at the midday-service, with coagulated milk at the third service.
13.6.4	Having given as sacrificial fee one cow, he should when he comes out of the lustral bath undeṛtake the consecration anew.
13.6.5	At this occasion (as the new sacrifice begins with the dīkṣā) he should give to the priests the sacrificial fees of the soma-sacrifice.
13.6.6	The same manner of proceeding (prevails) if the Soma has been burnt.
13.6.7	He should (in this case) give five cows as sacrificial fee.
13.7.1-2	If Soma has been left over from the morning-service, the laud-triplet and corresponding triplet for the hotṛ are: “This Soma has been pressed out”.
13.7.3	On verses addressed to Indra and Viṣṇu he should recite an extra-śastra.
13.7.4	The offering-verse is one addressed to Indra and Viṣṇu.
13.7.5	(The hymn of this śastra is): "To Indra the singer a laud"; (and) (the six) (verses): "The Gods may assist us".
13.7.6	Having closed the śastra with the last verse, he takes as offering-verse: "See ye the deeds of Viṣṇu".
13.8.1-2	If there is left over from the midday-service, the laud- and corresponding-pragāthas are: "Verily, thou art great"; "Upwards this beautiful".
13.8.3	On verses addressed to Indra and Viṣṇu he should perform the extra-śastra.
13.8.4	A verse addressed to Indra and Viṣṇu is the offering-verse.
13.9.1-2	If Soma is left over from the third service, the laud-triplet and the corresponding triplet for the extra-śastra are: "This I praise today for thee, O Śipiviṣṭa"; and "Herefore Viṣṇu is being praised".
13.9.3	He should apply for the extra-śastra verses addressed to Indra and Viṣṇu.
13.9.4	A verse addressed to Indra and Viṣṇu is the offering-verse.
13.10.1-2	If Soma is left over from the aśvin-stotra and śastra (after the sandhi stotra and śastra) he should perform an extra-śastra on verses addressed to the Aśvins.
13.10.3	A verse addressed to the Aśvins is the offering-verse.
13.10.4	If day-break falls in at the moment when the laud of the rounds has not been wholly performed, the chanters hold lauds for the hotṛakas on five stomas.
13.10.5	They, having recited the laud-triplets and the corresponding triplets, should (then) recite of the extra parts of the śastras and of the jagatīs each two verses.
13.10.6	The concluding verses are the usual ones.
13.10.7	Or (they should chant and recite) the first rounds wholly.
13.10.8	Or they should chant (as laud corresponding) to (the śastra of) the hotṛ the first rounds wholly.
13.10.9	To the maitrāvaruṇa and brahman of the middle rounds.
13.10.10	To the acchāvāka of the last rounds.
13.10.11	The āśvina śastra comprises in this case three hundred and sixty (verses).
13.11.1	If a consecrated (participant of a sattra) should come to die, they should cremate him, tie up his bones, consecrate his son or brother and perform the sacrifice with them.
13.11.2	Or, after having pressed out the Soma but not (yet) having taken the draughts, they put down the urn with the bones at the south-western corner of the vedi and on this spot perform a laud on the verses of sarparājñī which they chant right off (without returning = without repeating them).
13.11.3	Or on the spot of the mārjalīya (shed).
13.11.4	Three times they walk around the mārjalīya, turning their left side to it, beating on their left thigh.
13.11.5	The hotṛ recites the verses of sarparājñī.
13.11.6	The laud is unlimited.
13.11.7	The draughts are so drawn that for Indra and Vāyu comes first.
13.11.8	After a year they should perform a sacrifice for the bones (of the deceased).
13.11.9	At each laud (and recitation) they put the urn near.
13.11.10	At the mārjalīya they pour out the (remains of the) draughts.
13.12.1	If the soma-trough bursts they (the chanters) hold a laud for the brāhmaṇacchamsin with the vaṣaṭkaraṇidhana saman (on) the verses: “Wandering alone”.
13.12.2	The preceding triplet is the corresponding one.
13.12.3	If a pressing stone bursts they hold a laud for the brāhmaṇacchamsin with the saman of Dyutāna Māruta (on) the verses: "Fearing the roaring of Vṛtra".
13.12.4	The next following triplet is the corresponding one.
13.12.5	For the extra śastra are applied verses addressed to Indra and Viṣṇu.
13.12.6	A verse addressed to Indra and Viṣṇu is the offering-verse.
13.12.7	A nārāśaṃsa cup, to which (after it has been deposited) Soma has been added, he should pour out inside the paridhi-pegs on the ashes (which he shoves out of the fire) with the verse: "O Indra and Agni, of this Soma which is offered and not offered, which is offered and not-offered, which is not-offered and offered, satiate yourselves, svaḥa".
13.12.8	If a nārāśaṃsa cup has been dried up, he should pour into it a small quantity of that graha which the adhvaryu has drawn as the last, and from which he has libated with the formula: "To Prajāpati svaḥa".
13.12.9	Soma which has been spoiled the adhvaryu should pour out into the north-eastern resounding hole with the four verses addressed to Prajāpati.
13.12.10	Whilst thinking: ‘I have come here, forsooth, to all immoṛtal food' he should paṛtake of Soma on which rain has fallen with the mantra: "The drop hath gone to Indra; of thee, O drop, that hast been drunk by Indra, that hast been invited, I invited, paṛtake".
13.12.11	With the verse: “The golden germ” he should make a libation (of clarified butter in the agnīdhra), if the summons have been made over a cup.
13.12.12	And he should take it out (of the sadas) after having covered it up.
13.12.13	Over the mahāvīra pot when it has been broken, he should speak the three verses: “He who even without" and then pour out two libations (of clarified butter in the Āhāvaniya) with the verses: “The three and thirty threads that are stretched out, that obtain in security the sacrifice, this broken one of these I restore, Hail! Let the cauldron go to the Gods" “The milking of the sacrifice is stretched in many directions, this hath eightfold overspread the sky. Thou, sacrifice, milk for my oilspring a great (thing): may I reach welfare and the whole term of life, svaḥa”.
13.13.1	If one has undeṛgone the consecration for a sacrificial session and then rises in the middle (leaves off the sattra before its end) he should take apart his part of the Soma and (therewith) perform a viśvajit overnight-rite, which contains all the stomas, all the pṛṣṭha-chants, and at which he gives all his possessions as sacrificial fee.
13.13.2	Or (he should do so when he does not take part in the sattra) after he has assented (to take part in it).
13.14.1	A sattra may be performed by sixteen persons, with the grhapati as seventeenth, who all have established their sacred fires, who have performed the first sacrifice, and who have undeṛgone the consecration, viz., hotṛ, maitrāvaruṇa, acchāvāka and grāvastut; brahman, brāhmaṇacchamsin, potṛ and agnīdhra; udgātṛ, prastotṛ, pratihartṛ and subrahmanya; and adhvaryu, pratiprastatr, neṣṭṛ and unnetṛ.
13.14.2-3	All must perform the acts belonging to the sacrificer in the sequence of their consecration, if through not-confliction of the priestly acts, it is impossible to perform them simultaneously.
13.14.4	It is the chief only who performs the acts (of the yajamāna) which relate to others.
13.14.5	If there is conflict in the rite, they should conform them to the majority.
13.14.6	When the libations to accompany the giving of the sacrificial fees are performed, they should day after day, shuttling their black antelope-hides, pass over (to the north) along the path of the cows which are the fees (muttering): "Here I will bring myself as sacrificial fee, in order to obtain fair fame, the world of heaven, immoṛtality".
13.14.7	After they have arisen (from the sacrificial session; after they have finished the sacrifice) an agniṣṭoma with a thousand cows as sacrificial fee, to appease the pṛṣṭhas (pṛṣṭha-śamanīya) (is performed).
13.14.8	Some (declare) the pṛṣṭha-śamanīya as applicable to all.
13.14.9	It is obligatory at sattras from the twelve day sattra on, up to that of forty days, which increase by one (day).
13.14.10	By which days the twelve-day (sattra) increases, these we shall now explain.
13.15.1-3	For the sake of (adding) one day they apply the mahāvrata or between the prsthya six-day-period and the chandoma days an overnight-rite with all the stomas.
13.15.4	For the sake of two days, the go- and āyus days.
13.15.5	Wherever this precept is given, he should understand the second and third day of the abhiplava (six-day-period).
13.15.6	For the sake of three days, the first three days of the abhiplava six-day-period.
13.15.7	For the sake of four days, these same three days with the mahāvrata as fourth.
13.15.8	For the sake of five days, the five (days of the abhiplava).
13.15.9	For the sake of six days, the six (days of the abhiplava).
13.15.10	For the sake of seven days, these same with the mahāvrata as seventh.
13.15.11	In this manner they fill up the number of days that are for each fall required.
13.15.12	Their place of insertion is between the preceding day and the prsthya six-day-period.
13.15.13	But the place of insertion of the mahāvrata day is immediately after the tenth day.
13.16.1	Now they except the following (arrangements).
13.16.2	At the twenty-day-sattra the added days are: the abhiplava six-day-period, and the abhijit and viśvajit.
13.16.3	The first twentyone-day-sattra is composed of an abhiplava six-day-period, an overnight-rite, two abhiplava six-day-periods.
13.16.4	The second twenty-day-sattra comprises: the six-day prsthya-period, the (three) svarasāman days, the viṣuvat day, the (three) svarasāman days (but now) in reversed order and the prsthya six-day-period begins with the thirty three-versed day.
13.16.5	The twentyfour-day-sattra, which is called ‘the course of the united ones’ comprises: a six-day-period with the pṛṣṭha-sāmans; an unexpressed thirty three-versed day; at its midday service the kāṇva rathantara saman must be applied; a thirty-three-versed day, expressed; a twentyseven-versed day; two twentyone-versed days; a twentyseven-versed day; a thirtythree-versed day, expressed; a thirty three-versed day, unexpressed; a six-day pṛṣṭha period begun with the thirty three-versed day; a nine-versed day, unexpressed; a jyotiṣṭoma as agniṣṭoma.
13.17.1	The thirtythree-day-sattra comprises: the (first) five days of the abhiplava six-day-period, thrice performed; an overnight-rite; that same five-day-period; the ten-day-period.
13.17.2	The thirtyseven-day-sattra comprises: the twentyfour-versed day, an abhiplava six day-period, the pṛṣṭha six-day-period, a nine-day-period, the go- and ay us days, the ten-day-period and the mahāvrata.
13.17.3	The fortynine-day-sattra, which is commensurable with the year, comprises: the twenty four-versed day, three abhiplava six-day-periods (3-20); the nine-day-period (21-29) beginning with abhijit and consiṣṭing of: abhijit, (three) svarasāman days, viṣuvat day, (three) svarasāman days in reversed order and viśvajit, the abhiplava six-day-period (30-35), the go- and ay us days (36,37), the ten-day-period (38-47), the mahāvrata day (48).
13.18.1	Now the two sixtyone-day-sattras.
13.18.2	The first has two prsthya six-day-periods before and after the nine-day-period.
13.18.3	The second has the two prsthya six-day-periods in reversed order.
13.18.4	The hundred-day-sattra is arranged according to the rule.
13.18.5	It comprises fourteen and a half abhiplava six-day-periods; of which the first half is the three-day-period; a ten-day-period and the mahāvrata day.
13.19.1-2	The gavāmayana (has) seventeen dīkṣā days, or twelve.
13.19.3	They should undeṛgo the consecration (dīkṣā) one day after new-moon day in the month of Taiṣa or Māgha.
13.19.4	For then the upavaṣaṭha day falls on new-moon-day of Māgha or Phālguna.
13.19.5	Those who practice twelve dīkṣā (days) should undeṛgo the consecration four days before the day of full-moon.
13.19.6	For them the (first) pressing day falls on the fifth day of the bright half of the moon.
13.19.7-16	Having undeṛtaken the proceeding overnight rite, and the twenty-versed day, they undeṛtake four abhiplava six-day-periods with a prsthya six-day-period as fifth. This is a month. Having undeṛtaken five months arranged in this manner, they undeṛtake three abhiplava six-day-periods with a prsthya six-day-period as fourth and the nine-day-period; after the viśvajit day they undeṛtake the (same) months (as prescribed for the first half of the year) but now the prsthya six-day-period must precede (the abhiplava): the prsthya and abhiplava periods are reversed day after day, as also the vaiśvadeva hymns of the last abhiplava days. Having undeṛtaken the prsthya six-day-period (he undeṛtakes) three abhiplava six-day-periods; this is a month. Having undeṛtaken the prsthya six-day-period they undeṛtake four abhiplava six-day-periods. Having undeṛtaken four months arranged in this manner, they undeṛtake three abhiplava six-day-periods, the āyus day, the go-day, the ten-day-period, the mahāvrata and an overnight rite.
13.19.17	This is the application of the days for the gavāmayana.
13.19.18	The sattras of a year's duration follow this norm.
13.19.19	The difference in these does not affect the ten-day-period.
13.19.20	Instead of the pṛṣṭha six-day-period comes the abhiplava. This is the ‘sattra of abhiplava-periods’.
13.20.1-2	At the year’s rite with dismissed-day-rites, they should dismiss (omit) the soma-pressing days which fall on the days of full-moon.
13.20.3	Or those which fall on both: the full-moon and the new-moon days.
13.20.4	Or they should apply on these days a ‘one- and three-stoma’.
13.20.5-7	Or they should leave out (on these days) of the laud-verses, of the recitations and of the sacrificial formulas (on) each (day) one.
13.20.8	They who leave out (the rites of a day) should on this day sacrifice a he-goat to Prajāpati.
13.20.9	Or (instead to Prajāpati) to that deity to which the savana he-goat is immolated.
13.20.10	In this case they insert (different kinds of) havis, in the rites of the victimal offering.
13.20.11	For these havis-(substance)s the same rules prevail which prevail for the rites that are enjoined in the connected performance of the animal sacrifice.
13.20.12	They take as laud-triplets the corresponding ones of the next day.
13.20.13	The (formula for)‘over-prompting’ is according to the aim.
13.20.14	After they have arisen (finished the sacrificial session) they should perform the twelve-day-sattra.
13.20.15	Those who dismiss both days (full- and new-moon rites) should perform the session of the ‘course of the united ones’.
13.21.1-4	In the ‘course of the Ādityas’ the stomas of the abhiplava six day-periods are alternately nine- and fifteen-versed in the first part of the year, fifteen- and nine-versed in the second part. The months have the prsthya six day-periods in the middle.
13.21.5-13	In the sixth month having performed three abhiplava six day-periods they undeṛtake the prsthya six-day-period and the nine-day period. Instead of the abhijit comes the brhaspati-sava, instead of the viśvajit the indra-stoma. After the prsthya and abhiplava six-day-period they perform the ten-day-period with transposed metres, a nine-versed agniṣṭoma, the (two) udbhid and valabhid days. Having gone on with four months, in which the prsthya six-day-period is in the middle they undeṛtake two abhiplava six-day-periods with a prsthya six-day-period in the middle; then the go- and the āyus days and the chandoma ten-day-period (at the end the mahāvrata and the overnight rite).
13.22.1-6	At the ‘course of the Aṅgiras’ the stoma of the abhiplava six-day-period is nine-versed. In the first section of the year they perform the months so that the prsthya six-day-periods come first, in the latter section so that they come at the end. An āyus day, a go-day. The remaining is identical with the ‘course of the Ādityas’.
13.23.1-5	At the ‘course of Dṛti and Vātavat’ they perform the month with each of the pṛṣṭha-stomas; as viṣuvat the mahāvrata is taken; (in the second section of the year) they perform the month with each of the pṛṣṭha-stomas, but now in reversed order.
13.23.6-8	At the sattra of the serpents an overnight rite is at the beginning and at the end, agniṣṭomas are in the middle, the year consists throughout of tens and tens, the viṣuvat is twelve-versed.
13.24.1	For the ‘course of the Kuṇḍapāyins’ the consecration period lasts one month.
13.24.2	Having bought the Soma and having tied it up (to guard it for later), they perform the upasads and then perform during a month the agnihotṛa, day after day.
13.24.3	During a month the sacrifices of full- and new-moon.
13.24.4	During a month each of the section of the caturmāsyas.
13.24.5	During a month sacrifices of Soma with the pṛṣṭha-sāmans each with the five beginning with the nine-versed.
13.24.6	During eighteen days with a thirtythree-versed sacrifice of Soma. Then the ten-day-period, the mahāvrata and an overnight rite.
13.24.7-13	He who is hotṛ (at the same time) is adhvaryu and potṛ, he who is maitrāvaruṇa (at the same time) is brahman and pratihartṛ, he who is udgātṛ is acchāvāka and neṣṭṛ, he who is prastotṛ is brāhmaṇacchamsin and grāvastut, he who is pratiprasthātṛ is agnīdh and unnetṛ, the subrahmanya is (only) subrahmanya, the grhapati only grhapati.
13.24.14	At close contact of place and time he should transmit (his own act) to (one of the others) who is not a chief and not separated by place.
13.24.15	The other acts he should perform, going each time to the place appointed for him.
13.24.16	A one-day-rite, getting into an aggregate (of more days such as a ṣaḍaha), should take ‘the peculiarities that are performed’.
13.24.17	They should disappear (fall forth) from a (day) belonging to an aggregate which becomes a one-day-rite.
13.24.18	The ‘peculiarities that are performed’ are the verse: “This sacrifice” (as offering-verse for the hāriyojana draught), ‘the overprompting’ with the invīting-verse; the laud-triplets of the next day; the verse containing ka of the hotṛakas and the verses destined for the entrance of the śastra and the “Like a carpenter” triplet.
13.24.19	The kauṇḍapāyinām-ayana has the same arrangement of days as the gavāmayana.
13.25.1	During four months they undeṛtake the consecration (live as consecrated).
13.25.2	During four months they perform the upasads.
13.25.3	During (the) four (remaining months of the year) they press the Soma (perform sacrifice of Soma).
13.25.4	(They undeṛtake) the first two months and the last two of the gavāmayana,
13.25.5	and the two months of twenty-eight days and the viṣuvat day.
13.25.6	This sattra is called ‘the small (course) of the Tapaścits’.
13.26.1	A year they are consecrated.
13.26.2	A year they perform upasads.
13.26.3	A year they press out the Soma.
13.26.4	This is called ‘the course of the Tapaścits’.
13.27.1	Three years they are consecrated.
13.27.2	Three years they perform the upasads.
13.27.3	Three years they press out the Soma.
13.27.4	This is called ‘the big course of the Tapaścits’.
13.27.5	The multiplying of the gavāmayana prevails for the sattra of more than one year.
13.27.6	Or (they are performed) with omission of the composed months.
13.27.7	An overnight rite, a thousand days (of sacrifice of Soma) and an overnight is ‘the thousand-pressing-rite of Agni’.
13.28.1-4	The three-years-sattra to be performed by those who desire progeny comprises during the first year the gavāmayana, during the second year the ayana of the Ādityas, during the third year the ayana of the Aṅgirasas.
13.28.5	For the twelve-years-rite of Prajāpati they perform each three years with one of the four prsthya-stomas, beginning with the nine-versed one.
13.28.6	For the thirtythree-years-rite of the Śāktyas they perform with each of these same nine years.
13.28.7	For the hundred-years-rite of the Sādhyas they perform with each of these same, each twenty five years.
13.28.8	For the thousand-years-rite of the Viśvasṛjs they perform with each of these each five times fifty years.
13.29.1	For the sacrificial rites performed along the Sarasvatī river, the consecration takes place at the spot where (the river) is lost (in the sand of the desert).
13.29.2	Having bought the Soma and having tied it up, they perform the upasads. Then they undeṛtake the proceeding overnight rite. After the offering of the sāṃnāyya the adhvaryu throws a yoke-pin (in eastern direction). There (on the spot where it comes down) they bring the Gārhapatya fire and on a distance of 36 strides (to the east) they fix the place for the Āhāvaniya.
13.29.3	The sadas is wheeled.
13.29.4	Likewise the agnīdhra.
13.29.5	The sacrificial post is moṛtar-shaped at the base.
13.29.6	They do not dig the resounding holes.
13.29.7	During this half month of waning moon they perform (day after day) the sacrifice of new-moon.
13.29.8	On the day of full-moon there takes place a go-day as ukthya, with the bṛhat saman.
13.29.9	Only this half of month of waning moon they perform the sacrifice of full-moon.
13.29.10	On the day of new-moon takes place an āyus day as ukthya with the rathantara saman.
13.29.11	During the first section of the year they move against the stream.
13.29.12	They prepare (and sacrifice) a mess of boiled rice for Apāṃnapāt.
13.29.13	The invīting-and offering-verses are RV.II.35.11 and II.35.14.
13.29.14	At the juncture of the Dṛṣadvatī.
13.29.15	They enter into the Sarasvatī (?).
13.29.16	To a hundred cows they admit a bull.
13.29.17	When these become a thousand, then they break up (finish).
13.29.18	Or when all are weakened (?).
13.29.19	Or when the Gṛhapati dies.
13.29.20	Or when they reach Plakṣa prasravaṇa; (in the latter case) they prepare and sacrifice an iṣṭi for Agni Kāma.
13.29.21	At this iṣṭi they give (as sacrificial fee) a mare and a female slave which have a young one. At Karapacava they descend into the Yamunā for the lustral bath.
13.29.22	This is the ‘course of Mitra and Varuṇa’.
13.29.23	An overnight rite, an abhijit and a viśvajit, a go- and an āyus day are the two flanks of Indra, and an overnight rite.
13.29.24	This is the ‘course of Indra and Agni’.
13.29.25	An overnight rite, a jyotis day, a go-day, an ay us day, an abhijit and viśvajit are Indra’s flanks and an overnight rite. This is ‘Aryaman’s course’.
13.29.27-29	During a year he should guard the cows of a brāhmaṇa, during a (second) year he should at Vyarṇa Naitadhanva kindle his fire (for domestic worship), during a year he should at Pāriṇah establish (and maintain) his fires (for Vedic sacrifices). Then he goes along the southern bank of the Dṛṣadvatī, offering a cake for Agni baked on eight kapālas each (day) on a distance of a yoke-pin’s throw.
13.29.30	At Triplakṣa they descend into the Yamunā for the lustral bath.
13.29.31	This is the sacrificial session at the Dṛṣadvatī.
13.29.32	An overnight rite, a thousand nine-versed years and an overnight rite: is the thousand years’ sacrificial session of Prajāpati.
14.1.1	The (points of) difference from the norm, which prevail at one-day-sacrifices and ahīnas (shall now be treated).
14.1.2	Which day or which service is prescribed on any day, that is combined with the functions of the hotṛ (and his assistants).
14.1.3	When nothing (particular) is mentioned, (the rite of the following sacrifices) is that of the (normal) one-day-rite.
14.2.1	He who is desirous to obtain priestly lustre, should perform the rite of establishing his sacred fires (as a one-day soma-sacrifice).
14.2.2	The lauds of this rite are performed each on eight verses.
14.2.3-4	The gāyatrī is eight-syllabic (and) the gāyatrī is splendour, (is) priestly lustre.
14.2.5-6	The first pṛṣṭha-stotra is the rathantara: the rathantara is the holy word.
14.2.7-8	The offer is an agniṣṭoma: the agniṣṭoma is the holy word.
14.2.9	By this thrice successful holy word he gets splendour (and) priestly lustre.
14.2.10-11	The śastra is arranged in triplets-threefold is food: what must be eaten, what must be drunk, what must be chewed-in order to reach all of this.
14.2.12-13	The sacrificial fees consist of twentyfour (cows): the year has twentyfour half-months: to reach the year.
14.2.14	In addition to the usual he-goat of the pressing day, at this rite three others must be immolated: (one) to Agni Pavamana, (one) to (Agni) Pāvaka, (one) to (Agni) Śuci.
14.2.15	In addition to the barren cow, one of the same kind must be immolated to Aditi.
14.2.16	The reason why these victims are thus tied (to the post and immolated) is the wish not to depart from the rite of establishing the sacred fires.
14.2.17	Immediately after the pressing-cakes of the morning-services of this rite he offers a cake, baked on eight kapālas, to Agni Pavamana.
14.2.18	After those of the midday-service, one to Agni Pāvaka.
14.2.19	After those of the afternoon-service, one to Agni Śuci.
14.2.20	The pressing-cakes, now, are an insertion; he thereby makes an insertion into the insertion.
14.2.21	And as to the fact that a barren cow must be immolated in addition to the regular one: the rite of establishing the sacred fires closes with Aditi.
14.2.22	So he adhibits the same lituṛgical form which belongs to the establishment of the sacred fires, at this sacrifice.
14.3.1	In this manner the victims and the sacrificial cakes are connected with those sacrifices of havis, which are combined with a sacrifice of Soma.
14.3.2	The recitation at this rite (after each stotra) (is the following):
14.3.3	The ājya-śastra consists of the triplet: "What is carrying best".
14.3.4	The praüga-śastra is that of Madhucchandas.
14.3.5	For the hotṛakas the laud-triplet, the corresponding triplet, and the concluding part are each a triplet.
14.3.6	The marutvatīya-śastra consists of the triplet: "O Indra, accompanied by the Maruts, drink here the Soma".
14.3.7	The niṣkevalya-śastra consists of the triplet: "Of men thou the most manly with praises and laudations".
14.3.8	The entrance of the śastra for the maitrāvaruṇa's (niṣkevalya) is the triplet: "O adhvaryu, O hero, bring to the great Indra".
14.3.9	For the brāhmaṇacchamsin the preceding one.
14.3.10	For the acchāvāka the next following one.
14.3.11	Of the concluding parts the last (triplets are applied) (for these three recitations).
14.3.12	Instead of the hymns at the vaiśvadeva- and the āgnimāruta śastras are applied the triplets: "Up that God with the golden"; "Rich in butter encompassing the worlds"; "Indra with the Ṛbhus rich in booty"; "May the Aśvins grant us hail"; "Agni Vaiśvānara by the mind"; "May the swift ones go forward"; "The enkindled Agni with fuel I invoke".
14.3.13	When it is ordained (in this work) 'arranged in triplets (is the śastra)' he should understand this (kind of) śastra.
14.3.14	Or the (śastra) arranged in triplets from the one-day-rite (may be applied).
14.3.15	By this rite the two agnihotṛas (of evening and morning) are explained.
14.3.16	At the first (day), milk dedicated to Agni is offered.
14.3.17	At the latter (day) (milk) dedicated to Sūrya.
14.3.18	And there are two victims.
14.3.19	In addition to the barren cow one of the same kind must be immolated to Prajāpati.
14.4.1	The repeated establishment of the fires combined (with a sacrifice of Soma) should be performed by one who wishes for splendour.
14.4.2	The lauds of this (rite) are performed each in five verses.
14.4.3-5	The paṅkti metre is of five feet (verse-quarters): the sacrifice is five-fold: (so this is done) in order to reach the sacrifice.
14.4.6	The recitation (after each stotra) is that of the agniṣṭut which is destined solely for Agni.
14.5.1	The sacrifice of full-moon and new-moon (performed as sacrifices of Soma) are destined for one who is desirous (of obtaining) food.
14.5.2-3	The iḍādadha, the āgrayaṇa, and the iṣṭi of Soma without pravaṛgya, the daksayana sacrifice, (these) four are destined for one who wishes to reach all.
14.5.4	Equally is the great sacrifice.
14.5.5	In this sacrifice the offerings of the caturmāsyas are inserted.
14.5.6	And the victims destined for the deities of the parvans of the caturmāsyas.
14.5.7	In addition to the barren cow, victims of the same kind destined for the deities of the single kapālas must be immolated.
14.5.8	The (kind of) sacrifice is an overnight rite.
14.6.1	Prajāpati being desirous of progeny, having performed ascetism, beheld that sacrifice: the vaiśvadeva caturmāsya. This he brought near, this he performed, having sacrificed with it he was procreated. One who is desirous of progeny should perform it.
14.6.2	In addition to the savana-victim a he-goat destined for the All-Gods is immolated.
14.6.3	In addition to the barren cow, a barren cow of the same kind must be immolated to Heaven and Earth.
14.6.4	The recitation (for each of the hotṛ and assistants) is the nine-versed one.
14.6.5	Or it is arranged in triplets.
14.6.6	Having come out of the lustral bath and having performed the iṣṭi on the newly chosen spot, the sacrificer constantly during four months day after day, in the intermediate time (between two caturmāsyas) performs the 'session of the sages' either with an iṣṭi for Agni, or for Agni-Viṣṇu.
14.6.7	This is, at this occasion, his consecration.
14.7.1	Prajāpati had created the beings (progeny) through the vaiśvadeva. These, being created, consumed without being permitted, the barley which belonged to Varuṇa. These Varuṇa fastened by means of his nooses. They went to their father Prajāpati and resorted to him (with the prayer): 'Find out that sacrifice through the performance of which we may be freed from Varuṇa's nooses and from all evil'. Thereupon Prajāpati in the fourth month beheld that two-day-sacrifice the varuṇapraghāsa. This he took unto him and after having performed it gratified Varuṇa. He being gratified freed the creatures from his nooses and from all evil. The creatures belong to him who thus knowing performs the Varuṇapraghasa, are freed from Varuṇa's nooses, and from all evil.
14.7.2	The two days are ukthyas.
14.7.3-4	On the first day a he-goat for Varuṇa must be immolated in addition to the savana victim, on the second day one to the Maruts.
14.7.5	A barren cow of the same kind destined for Ka is immolated in addition to the usual one.
14.8.1	Those creatures said to Prajāpati: "For which food, now, hast thou created us"? Thereupon Prajāpati beheld on the fourth month this three-day-rite, the sākamedha (caturmāsya). This he brought near. This he performed and by its performance he reached the food. This rite should be performed by one who desires food.
14.8.2	An agniṣṭoma, an ukthya and an overnight rite (are the three days).
14.8.3	On the first day a he-goat for Agni Anīkavat is immolated in addition to the savana-victim,
14.8.4	on the second day one for the Sāṃtapana Maruts,
14.8.5	on the third day one to Mahendra.
14.8.6	A barren cow is immolated to Viśvakarman in addition to the usual one.
14.8.7	The recitation is that of the one-day-rite in accordance with the (first three days of the) pṛṣṭhya (six-day-period).
14.8.8	Or the (first three days of the) pṛṣṭhya six-day-period (are) intertwined.
14.8.9	Or the recitation on the third day is taken from (= is identical with that of) the viśvajit of which the first pṛṣṭha-stotra is the bṛhat.
14.8.11	The same (rule prevails) at the 'great sacrifice' which is performed with the wish to reach the whole term of normal life.
14.8.12	Equally at the two one-day-rites: vinutti and abhibhūti,
14.8.13	at the svarjit,
14.8.14	and at the Indravajra.
14.9.1	These creatures said to Prajāpati: 'For which support, now, hast thou created us?' Thereupon Prajāpati beheld that rite, the śunāsirīya (caturmāsya). This he took unto him. This he performed. By performing it he got a firm support. This sacrifice should be performed by one who desires to get a firm support.
14.9.2	A (he-goat) for (Indra) Sunāśiriya must be immolated in addition to the savana-victim.
14.9.3	A barren cow for Sūrya of the same kind is immolated in addition to the usual one.
14.9.4	Twenty cows he gives at the vaiśvadeva,
14.9.5	thirty at the varuṇapraghāsa,
14.9.6	fifty at the sākamedha,
14.9.7	twenty at the sunāśiriya.
14.9.8	That makes one hundred and seventy.
14.9.9	An ṛtu comprises one hundred and twenty days.
14.9.10	Thereby he reaches the ṛtu.
14.9.11-12	By the ṛtu he reaches the year and the fulfillment of those wishes that are in the year.
14.10.1	At the caturmāsyas which are combined with victimal offerings (the rite is as follows).
14.10.2	On the preceding day the animal-rite takes place.
14.10.3	On the following day the victim for the All-Gods (is slaughtered).
14.10.4	Along with the victimal cake the deities of the caturmāsyas (come in) in accordance with each parvan.
14.10.5	The sviṣṭakṛt oblation is that of the animal-sacrifice.
14.10.6	With the exception of the places of insertion.
14.10.7	The (rite of the) whey (is performed) on its proper place.
14.10.8	It (each caturmāsya) finishes with the (rite of the) heart-spit.
14.10.9	At the varuṇapraghāsa (caturmāsya) there are two victims, one for Varuṇa and one for the Maruts.
14.10.10	On the second day, they erect a sacrificial post.
14.10.11	At the last two (caturmāsyas) (the victims are destined) for Mahendra and Indra Sunāśiriya.
14.10.12	The iṣṭis come in at their proper places.
14.10.13	Likewise the pitryeṣṭi.
14.10.14	Or the victims may be according to the deities.
14.10.15	This is explained by the set of eleven (victims).
14.10.16	At the 'great oblation', there are victims destined for Agni Anīkavat, for the Sāṃtapana Maruts, for the Gṛhamedhi Maruts, for the Krīḍin Maruts and for Mitra.
14.10.17	Or, at the end of each parva, a victim to Indra and Agni (is immolated).
14.10.18	The rest is the same.
14.10.19	Or even at one parvan and one single victim destined for Indra and Agni all the havis oblations of the different caturmāsyas (may be offered) one after another.
14.10.20	Having invoked the iḍā, (he performs) the pitryeṣṭi.
14.10.21	After the (offerings) to Tryambaka (follow) the rites beginning with the after-offerings, or the rites of the victimal offering beginning with the manotā.
14.10.22	The (caturmāsyas) with all the victims have the same sacrificial fees as those which are combined with sacrifices of Soma.
14.10.23	Those which are combined with victims have the same sacrificial fees as those of the caturmāsya victims.
14.11.1	The pratyavarohaṇīya one-day-rite is performed for him who wishes to get a firm support.
14.11.2	It is a jyotiṣṭoma in which only the saṃkalpa differs.
14.11.3	The paśubandha (as one-day-rite) prevails for one who wishes to get cattle.
14.11.4	Its lauds are eleven-versed.
14.11.5-7	The triṣṭubh is of eleven syllables, the cattle is of triṣṭubh nature: (so it serves) for obtaining cattle.
14.11.8	The two hymns into which the nivid is inserted are: "Drink the Soma which thou, O mighty one, hast opened"; and "Come, let us approach Indra, wishing for cows".
14.11.9	(These two hymns with their words): "Extolling the big stable of cows, O Indra"; and "Come, let us approach Indra, wishing for cows" contain praises of cows: this is the feature of this day.
14.11.10	And at the udbhid and valabhid and at the gosava.
14.12.1	Now the sautrāmaṇa (one-day-rite).
14.12.2	Indra being desirous of reaching the full measure of normal life, practised asceticism. Having practised asceticism he beheld that sacrifice; the sautrāmaṇa. This he took unto him, this he performed. After having performed he attained to long life. This rite he imparted to Bharadvāja who was aged (saying): 'I forsooth by performing this rite, have reached the whole duration of life. Do thou also perform it'. And Bharadvāja performed it and attained the whole duration of life. This whole life lives he who knoweth thus and who performs this rite.
14.12.3	Its (first) pṛṣṭha-(laud) is the rathantara.
14.12.4	The (kind of) sacrifice is the agniṣṭoma.
14.12.5	The sacrificial fee is according to gläubige Gesinnung (śraddhā).
14.12.6-10	It contains three lauds of nine, three of fifteen, three of seventeen, three of twentyone verses (each): for the constant increasing,
14.12.11	(as they wish): 'may we obtain a long life constantly increasing'.
14.13.1	At this rite two animals a grey he-goat to the Aśvins, a ewe to Sarasvatī, are immolated in addition to the savana victim.
14.13.2	To Indra Sūtraman a barren cow of the same kind is immolated in addition to the usual one.
14.13.3	The reason why these victims are thus tied (and slaughtered) is the wish not to depart from the sautrāmaṇī.
14.13.4	After the savana-cakes of the morning-(service) they put fuel to the fire outside and go on with the (i.e. pour out the libation of) surāsoma.
14.13.5-7	After the savana-cakes of the third (service) they prepare (and sacrifice) a cake baked on twelve kapālas for Savitṛ, one on eleven kapālas for Indra, one on ten kapālas for Varuṇa.
14.13.8	The pressing-cakes, forsooth, are an insertion: he thereby makes an insertion into the insertion.
14.13.9	Now, in that for Indra Sūtraman a barren cow is immolated in addition to the usual one, (the reason thereof is): along with Indra Sūtraman the sautrāmaṇī is completed.
14.13.10	He (thereby) applies the essential form of the sautrāmaṇī the form of this offering.
14.13.11-12	Some perform this (one-day-rite) as an overnight rite with twentyone-versed lauds, with the bṛhat as (first) pṛṣṭha-(laud) and with both the sāmans (rathantara and bṛhat).
14.13.13	Its recitation is that of the viśvajit with the bṛhat as (first) pṛṣṭha-(laud).
14.13.14	Here ends the description of the sacrifices of havis to be performed as sacrifices of Soma.
14.14.1	The Gods being desirous of getting cattle, having during four months observed a vow, beheld that sacrifice the udbhid. Having performed it they got cattle. This sacrifice should be performed by one who is desirous to get cattle. If, after having sacrificed with the udbhid, he thinks: 'the cows delay in coming to me', he should during four months observe the vow and then perform the valabhid. Then the cows will not delay in coming unto him.
14.15.1	The gosava should be performed by one who is desirous of getting cows.
14.15.2	The lauds consist each of thirty-six verses.
14.15.3	The bṛhatī is of thirty-six syllables.
14.15.4	Cow is of bṛhati nature.
14.15.5	So this is for reaching cows.
14.15.6	At the gosava sixty-three thousand cows are the sacrificial fee.
14.15.7	Or a myriad of cows.
14.15.8	The kind of sacrifice is ukthya.
14.16.1	The ṛtapeya should be performed by one who is desirous of lustre.
14.16.2	There are twelve dīkṣās, twelve upasads.
14.16.3	A quadrangular vessel of fig-wood of the measure (breadth and height) of the middle joint of the thumb (out of this) he should paṛtake of clarified liquid butter as his vrata-food (during the dīkṣā days).
14.16.4	At the odd (days of) dīkṣā he paṛtakes of a rice-mess prepared with sweet milk.
14.16.5	A vessel (filled) with pressed out (Soma) is the sacrificial fee.
14.16.6-7	From this (Soma) they should paṛtake whilst speaking a divine truth, or the words: bhūḥ, bhuvaḥ, svaḥ.
14.16.8	Or they should hand over (the vessel) to the brahman (priest), who belongs to the same gotra (as the sacrificer).
14.16.9	The two hymns into which the nivid is inserted are: "Thou, the terrible one, hast been born for great power"; and "How the great one has increased whose hotṛ's".
14.16.10	They contain the word ṛta (in the verse-quarter): "Delighted because of the ṛta"; and "Of the ṛta there are many invigorating drinks". This is the characteriṣṭic feature of this day.
14.17.1	Prajāpati, wishing to reach this world (the earth) performed asceticism and beheld this sacrifice (called) bhūḥ. Having performed it he reached this world. He who wishes to reach this world should perform it.
14.18.1	Prajāpati, wishing to reach the intermediate region, performed asceticism and beheld this sacrifice (called) bhuvaḥ. Having performed it he reached the intermediate region. He who wishes to reach the intermediate region should perform it.
14.19.1	Prajāpati, wishing to reach yonder world, performed asceticism and beheld this sacrifice (called) svaḥ. Having performed it he reached the yonder world. He who wishes to reach the yonder world should perform it.
14.19.2	The recitations (at these three one-day-rites) are those of the svarasāman (days) in accordance with the stoma.
14.19.3	And the hymns in which the nivids are inserted, are in anuṣṭubh (not in triṣṭubh) metre.
14.20.1	The sun being desirous of lustre, having performed asceticism beheld this sacrifice: the Śukra-stoma. Having performed it he got lustre. One who is desirous of lustre should perform it.
14.20.2	Twenty-one white horses are the sacrificial fees.
14.20.3	The rite is that of the viṣuvat day.
14.21.1	The one-day-rite called tīvrasava ('strong-soma') is destined for one who wishes to become strong by progeny, by cattle.
14.21.2	Before the hymn of the marutvatīya-śastra, in which the nivid is inserted, the verse (is inserted): "Here is strong Soma, O Indra, the strong one; drink of it, O God with the bay steeds, for the victory on Vṛtra. Sharpening thy vajra fill thy belly. The unassaiḍāble bull the strong Indra".
14.21.3	(The hymn in which the nivid is inserted) at the niṣkevalya-śastra is: "Drink of this strong, fresh Soma".
14.22.1	A jyotis day is the sava for a suta.
14.22.2	A go-day for a sthapati.
14.22.3	An āyus day for a grāmaṇī.
14.22.4	The (one-day-rites called) saṃdaṃśa ('pair of tongs') and anustoma, iṣu ('arrow') and vajra, śyena ('falcon') and ajira ('rapid one'), Death and Antaka (=Yama), kṣurapavi ('sharp edged') and śīrṣacchid ('head-breaker'), the mahas and the śyena are the rites for incantation (to bring about the death or misfortune of a personal enemy).
14.22.5	The two wrath-hymns are those in which the nivid is inserted, (they are applied) according to their characteriṣṭics.
14.22.6	He against whom abhicara is committed, (should take as his model that agniṣṭoma) which has the same (first) pṛṣṭha-(laud) as is that of his enemy.
14.22.7	At the 'arrow' the brahman's chant (third pṛṣṭha-stotra) is the bṛhat.
14.22.8	The abhīvaṛta at the other (abhicaraṇīya rite)s.
14.22.9	The sadas is covered with sharp-pointed (reed)s.
14.22.10	Bows made of karmuka-wood lie in the neighbourhood.
14.22.11	The agnīdhra-shed (is covered) with arrows.
14.22.12	Bows made of dhanvan-wood lie in the neighbourhood.
14.22.13	The strew consists of reeds.
14.22.14	The fuel and sticks laid around the fire are of bādhaka-wood.
14.22.15	The sacrificial post is of vibhiḍāka wood.
14.22.16	The clarified liquid butter is prepared from (the milk of) sick cows.
14.22.17	The hide of an anustaraṇī-cow serves for the pressing leather.
14.22.18	The two boards (beneath this leather) on which the pressing of the Soma is performed, are the two middle planks of the wheels of a cart that has served to convey a corpse to the place of cremation.
14.22.19	They mix the vaṣaṭīvari water with water that has flown together in the two camū of a corpse.
14.22.20	They should dischaṛge their functions, whilst wearing quivers filled with arrows, having the bow-string stretched, wearing red turbans and being girded with a sword.
14.22.21	Nobody shall be master over him and he (the other one) shall live only so long: not twelve days.
14.22.22	Nobody, forsooth, lays him low, who practises these counter-charms.
14.22.23	The (one-day-rite called) sada is (intended) for one who wishes to repel his bad lot and his personal enemies.
14.22.24	The last but one (verses of each śastra) are omitted.
14.22.25	The upasada is intended for one who wishes progeny and cattle.
14.22.26	The last but one verses of each śastra are added.
14.23.1	The Gods and the asuras contended. The Gods resorted to their house-chaplain Bṛhaspati (and said): 'Devise that kind of sacrifice, by which we may oveṚcome the asuras'. He beheld that sacrifice 'the Bull'. By performing it they oveṚcame the asuras. One who wishes to oveṚcome his haters, his rivals, should perform it.
14.23.2	Of this (rite) of which the lauds are fifteen-versed, the midday-pavamāna-laud alone is seventeen-versed. This is of this rite the characteriṣṭic feature of the bull.
14.23.3	The two hymns in which the nivid is inserted are: "Drink the Soma which thou, O mighty one, hast opened"; "Praise him, who having superior power".
14.23.4	In the verse-quarters: "He who is full-cheeked, who is the bull at the prayers"; and "By the songs do thou strengthen the bull of the peoples" they contain the word 'bull': this is the characteriṣṭic feature of this day.
14.24.1	The Sun being desirous of lustre, having practised asceticism, beheld that sacrifice (the one-day-rite called): 'Firmament' (vyoman). Having sacrificed with it he got lustre. This rite should be performed by one who desires lustre.
14.24.2	Of this (rite) at which the lauds are seventeen-versed, the ārbhava-pavamāna-laud is twentyone-versed.
14.24.3	The twenty-first is he who shines yonder. So he causes him to prosper by his own characteriṣṭic feature.
14.24.4	The hymns into which the nivid is inserted are: "These thee of many"; and "Indra I will praise".
14.24.5	They address the God Sūrya (in the verse-quarters): "By the Sun he has made clear"; and "This Sūrya may around the wide spaces". This is the characteriṣṭic feature of this day.
14.25.1	Vasiṣṭha being desirous of food performed asceticism and beheld that sacrifice the virāj. By performing it he got food. One who is desirous of food should perform it.
14.25.2	The first two pavamāna-stotras (bahiṣpavamāna and midday-pavamāna) are fifteen-versed, the others nine-versed.
14.25.3	This (rite) is equal to the virāj.
14.25.4	The virāj is splendour, is food: (so it is performed) in order to get splendour, virāj, food.
14.25.5	The hymns into which the nivid is inserted are the two syllabic-vairāja (hymns): "Thou, O Indra, even these coming great ones"; "Thou art, O Indra, the king of the Gods". This is the characteriṣṭic feature of this day.
14.26.1	Indra being desirous of sovereignty performed asceticism, beheld this sacrifice (the one-day-rite called): 'self-ruler' (svarāj). Having performed it he got sovereignty. One who desires sovereignty should perform this (rite).
14.26.2	The first two pavamāna-stotras are seventeen-versed, the other lauds are nine-versed.
14.26.3	The four laud-verses overstep the virāj.
14.26.4	Through these four verses he gets the sovereignty.
14.26.5	The two syllabic-vairāja hymns (are here) likewise (applied).
14.27.1-2	Uśanas Kāvya was the house-chaplain of the Asuras, he having paṛtaken of the food of the Gods became dropsical. He thought: 'How, now, might I perform that sacrifice, through the performance of which I might repel my evil?' He beheld that sacrifice (the one-day-rite called) uśanas-stoma. By its performance he repelled his evil. One who wishes to repel his evil, should perform this (rite), also one who suffers from a disease of the bowels.
14.27.3	The morning-service is nine-versed.
14.27.4	The nine-versed (stoma) is the holy word (brahma).
14.27.5	By the nine-versed (stoma), by the holy word, he repelled the evil from himself before.
14.27.6	Ten-versed is the midday-service.
14.27.7	This is the virāj.
14.27.8	By the virāj he repelled the evil from himself.
14.27.9	Nine-versed is the afternoon-service.
14.27.10	The nine-versed (stoma) is the holy word.
14.27.11	By the nine-versed (stoma), by the holy word, he repelled the evil behind.
14.27.12	The two (hymns) in which the nivid is inserted are: "Having three friendships"; "As the sky, O Indra".
14.27.13	They contain, in accordance with the characteriṣṭic feature of this day the word 'uśanas' (in the verse-quarter): "Uśanas, as with the mighty ones the two went"; and "Giving relief to Uśan Kāvya".
14.28.1	After he had repelled the evil, he thought: 'How, now, might I perform that sacrifice, by the performance of which I might get food?' He beheld that subsequent uśanas-stoma. Having performed that he got food. He who is desirous of obtaining food should perform this (rite).
14.28.2	The morning-service is nine-versed.
14.28.3	The nine-versed (stoma) is the holy word.
14.28.4	The midday-service is ten-versed.
14.28.5	This is the virāj, the food.
14.28.6	The afternoon-service is nine-versed.
14.28.7	The nine-versed (stoma) is the holy word.
14.28.8	Having by means of the nine-versed stoma, the holy word, in this manner encompassed the food on both sides, he put it into himself.
14.28.9	And so the sacrificer, having by the nine-versed stoma: the holy word encompassed on both sides the food, puts it into himself.
14.28.10	The two (hymns) mentioning Uśanas (are here) likewise (applied).
14.28.11	The (one-day-rite called) vividha consiṣṭing of the same stomas, is also destined for one who desires food.
14.28.12	The two syllabic-vairāja hymns are here likewise applied.
14.28.13	The sacrificial fee consists of one thousand (cows) and one hundred horses.
14.29.1	Indra and Agni, forsooth, would dispute about the superiority among the Gods. Those Gods said: 'If, forsooth, these two shall dispute in this manner, the asuras will oveṚcome us. Let us devise a sacrifice, by which we shall pacify them'. They beheld that (one-day-rite called) 'the nest (case) of Indra and Agni' (indrāgnyoḥ kulāya). Through this they pacified them.
14.29.2	This (rite) should be performed by a priest and a baron together, whom he is going to appoint as his house-chaplain.
14.29.3	The priesthood and the baronship even thereby join together their persons.
14.29.4	The stomas are alternatively nine-versed and fifteen-versed.
14.29.5	The nine-versed stoma is Agni, the fifteen-versed is Indra.
14.29.6	Indra and Agni thereby joined together their persons.
14.29.7	The (hymns) in which the nivid is inserted are: "Mount the two bay steeds"; and "Praise him, now".
14.29.8	By (the verse-quarters): "Drink the Soma, O Indra, by means of Agni's tongue"; "As Agni the dry wood, O Indra, the missile", they are addressed to Indra, addressed to Agni. This is the characteriṣṭic feature of this day.
14.30.1	Of Mitra and Varuṇa, forsooth, the one wished to obtain extended sovereignty, the other uncontrolled dominion. They beheld that (one-day-rite called) virāj and svarāj. By the performance of this (rite) the one reached extended sovereignty, the other uncontrolled dominion.
14.30.2	(Here) also the syllabic-vairāja (hymns are applied).
14.31.1	The (one-day rite called) 'sacrifice of the most excellent' (jyeṣṭha-stoma) is destined for him who belonging to a lower family wishes for excellence.
14.31.2	The out-of-doors-laud is seventeen-versed.
14.31.3	This is among the stomas the most excellent.
14.31.4	This even he yokes (applies) at the opening of the sacrifice.
14.31.5	The (hymns) into which the nivid is inserted are: "Thou the terrible one, hast been born for might and strength"; and "To the mightiest one I convey the good praise", mention the mightiness. This is the characteriṣṭic feature of this day.
14.32.1	The Gods and the Asuras contended. The Gods resorted to their house-chaplain Bṛhaspati: 'Devise that sacrifice by the performance of which the Asuras shall not be able to follow us'. He beheld that one-day-rite called durāśa ('difficult to reach'). By performing it the Asuras did not follow them. Thereupon the Gods throve, the Asuras were worsted. He himself thrives, his hater is worsted, who knows thus.
14.32.2-3	During the half month of waning moon an iṣṭi to the Sun is performed (day after day) at the forenoon, one to the Moon at afternoon.
14.32.4	(The invīting- and offering-verses for the iṣṭi to the Moon are): "Wandering alone"; "New and new".
14.32.5-6	At the first iṣṭi the sacrificial fee consists of a hundred gold mānas, at the latter of a hundred silver mānas.
14.32.7	The (recitation of the hotṛ which runs parallel to the first) pṛṣṭha-(laud) is that of Bhāradvāja.
14.32.8	Equally are the two hymns (in which the nivid is inserted).
14.32.9	After the performance of each laud he gives each time thirty pieces of gold weighing a hundred mānas.
14.32.10	Or as much gold as the sacrificer should wish (to give).
14.33.1	Indra being desirous of honour (apaciti) performed asceticism and thereupon beheld that (one-day-)rite called 'honour' (apaciti). By its performance he got honour. One who is desirous of honour should perform this (rite).
14.33.2	The first two pavamāna-stotras are twentyfour-versed.
14.33.3	The ājya-stotras are (alternately) nine- and fifteen-versed.
14.33.4	The pṛṣṭha-stotras are (alternately) seventeen- and twenty-one-versed.
14.33.5	The ārbhava-pavamāna is twentyseven-versed.
14.33.6	The agniṣṭoma-sāman is twenty-seven-versed.
14.33.7	The morning-service of this (rite) is equal to the gāyatrī.
14.33.8	The Vasus have the gāyatrī as their metre; thereby Indra got honour amongst the Vasus.
14.33.9	The brāhmaṇas have the gāyatrī as their metre; thereby he (the sacrificer) gets honour amongst the brāhmaṇas.
14.33.10	The midday-service is equal to the triṣṭubh.
14.33.11	The Rudras have the triṣṭubh as their metre; thereby Indra got honour amongst the Rudras.
14.33.12	The barons have the triṣṭubh as their metre; thereby he gets honour amongst the barons.
14.33.13	The afternoon-service is equal to the jagatī.
14.33.14	The Ādityas have the jagatī as their metre; thereby Indra got honour amongst the Ādityas.
14.33.15	The vaiśyas have the jagatī as their metre; thereby he gets honour amongst the vaiśyas.
14.33.16	By the voice he speaks the invīting-verse, by the voice he holds his recitation, by the voice he speaks the offering verse.
14.33.17	The anuṣṭubh is the voice.
14.33.18	The All-Gods have the anuṣṭubh as their metre; thereby Indra got honour amongst the All-Gods.
14.33.19	The śūdras have the anuṣṭubhs as their metre; thereby he gets honour amongst the śūdras.
14.33.20	The sacrificial fee is a horse-chariot, coated with rhinoceros hide, covered with tiger fell, with a quiver boar-hide, with a bow-case of panther-hide, drawn by brown horses.
14.33.21	'By a characteriṣṭic honour may I reach honour' (thus thinking he gives the fee).
14.33.22	The two hymns into which the nivid is inserted are: "O Indra, lord of the Soma"; and "Praise Indra", in these hymns Indra is addressed, this is the characteriṣṭic feature of this day.
14.34.1	Sūrya being desirous of brilliancy performed asceticism. Having performed asceticism he beheld that (one-day-)rite (called) 'brilliancy' (tviṣi). Having sacrificed with it he got brilliancy. One who is desirous of brilliancy should perform this (rite).
14.34.2-3	A horse-chariot coated with bell-metal and drawn by white horses is the sacrificial fee (as he thinks): 'May I be something brilliant, get brilliancy'.
14.34.4	The hymns into which the nivid is inserted, must be addressed to the Sun, that is the characteriṣṭic of this day.
14.35.1	Varuṇa wishing for rain performed asceticism and beheld that (one-day-)rite (called) 'raining' (vṛṣṭi). Having sacrificed with it he got rain. One who is desirous of rain should perform this (rite).
14.35.2	The hymns into which the nivid is inserted are: "Up, the lovely eye of you two, O Varuṇa"; and "Give, O Indra and Varuṇa, to our sacrifice", they mention Indra and Varuṇa, that is the characteriṣṭic feature of this day.
14.36.1	Bhānumatī wishing for lustre performed asceticism. Having performed asceticism he beheld that (one-day-)rite called 'āditya'. Having sacrificed with it he got lustre. One who is desirous of lustre should perform this rite.
14.36.2	The two (hymns) into which the nivid is inserted are: "The Sun which svarbhānu"; and "As thou, Indra, repellest from svarbhānu". They contain an allusion to the Sun.
14.37.1	Indraviṣṇu wishing for the heaven (svaṛga), performed asceticism. Having performed asceticism, he beheld that (one-day-)rite called 'svaṛga'. Having sacrificed with it he got heaven. One who is desirous of heaven should perform this rite. The hymns into which the nivid is inserted contain an allusion to Indra.
14.38.1	The Gods and the Asuras contended. The Gods resorted to their house-chaplain Bṛhaspati (with the words): 'Devise thou those two sacrifices by the performance of which we shall be able to oveṚcome the Asuras by repelling them. He beheld those two (one-day-)rites called 'repelling' (vinutti) and 'oveṚcoming' (abhibhūti). Having repelled them by the 'repelling', they oveṚcame them by the 'oveṚcoming'.
14.38.2	The 'repelling' has the first six stomas of the pṛṣṭhya (six-day-period) in rising order, the (last) six stomas in reversed order, turned in both directions,
14.38.3-4	(as they think) they repel them being turned in both directions, this is the characteriṣṭic feature of the vinutti.
14.38.5-7	Now the 'oveṚcoming' has the (first) six stomas of the pṛṣṭhya (six-day-period) in rising order, the (last) six stomas in reversed order, turned in one direction. Turning in one direction they oveṚcame, that is the characteriṣṭic feature of the 'oveṚcoming'.
14.38.8	The recitation of these two ekāhas is the same as that of the viśvajit, with the bṛhat as (first) pṛṣṭha-laud.
14.39.1	The two (one-day-rites) rāśi and marāya are destined for one who is desirous of food.
14.39.2-3	They are equal to the last two chandoma days in their samudha form.
14.39.4	At the southern (place of worship) he gives a thousand cows, at the northern a thousand bulls.
14.39.5	The ceremonies of consecration and the upasads (of both the sacrifices) are the regular paradigma.
14.39.6	Likewise the udayanīya iṣṭi.
14.39.7	Or these two may be performed by twin-brothers or by two brothers of whom the one is born immediately after the other.
14.39.8	The vighana is destined for one who wishes to repel evil and haters.
14.39.9	The hymns into which the nivid is inserted (are either the regular ones) or the 'with-what-array' hymn and the 'that-who-the-highest' hymn.
14.39.10	For one who wishes to repel his concurrent and his haters (serves the following ekāha).
14.40.1	The Ādityas and the Aṅgirasas contended: 'We shall first reach the world of heaven' (said) the Ādityas, 'We shall' (said) the Aṅgirasas. The Aṅgirasas announced to the Ādityas: 'We possess a rite (at which the sacrifice of Soma takes place) on the next day (after the introductory days). So perform ye the sacrifice for us (as our offering priests). Of them Agni was the messenger. The Ādityas now said: 'If these Aṅgirasas, now, shall be the first to sacrifice, they shall reach the world of heaven first. Let us devise that rite by which we shall sacrifice first'. They beheld that one day-rite called sādyaḥkra (a soma-sacrifice at which the buying of the Soma and the other preliminary rites take place on the day of the soma feast itself). By performing it they went first to the world of heaven. He who wishes to reach the world of heaven should perform this rite.
14.40.2	It is a trivṛt stoma.
14.40.3	The rathantara is the (first) pṛṣṭha-(laud).
14.40.4	The recitation (at each laud) is arranged in triplets.
14.40.5	The (kind of) sacrifice is agniṣṭoma. The 
14.40.6	(maha-)vedi is plough-land for barley (JB.).
14.40.7	The high altar (uttara-vedi) is the threshing floor for the barley.
14.40.8	The sacrificial post is the pole of a plough.
14.40.9	The ring on the top of the sacrificial post is a bundle of barley (strew).
14.40.10	The vaṣaṭivari water is taken from the house of one who has performed a (śrauta) sacrifice.
14.40.11-12	They carry hither and thither in leather bags (a quantity of) sour coagulated milk. The butter which therefrom results, with that they perform (the rites where butter is needed).
14.40.13	The Soma herald is seated on a chariot drawn by horses.
14.40.14	To the distance of a yojana (he rides) at last.
14.40.15	A horse is the sacrificial fee.
14.40.16	The iṣṭi of the dīkṣā takes place at forenoon.
14.40.17	The different parts of the rite are performed quickly.
14.40.18	The pravaṛgya misses its object.
14.40.19	They perform the three upasads, without repetition.
14.40.20	There is a cake for Agni and Soma.
14.40.21	At the moment(s) of (proceeding with the sacrifice of) the savana-victim, the animals form the same paradigma.
14.40.22-23	At the place of the anubandhyā cow a barren cow is immolated for the Aśvins, or he should sacrifice an amik sa to Mitra and Varuṇa.
14.40.24	But they sought also him, who had stepped on before them.
14.41.1	The same disposition prevails for the following (sadyaskra).
14.41.2	Only the stomas are otherwise.
14.41.3	The (three) pavamāna-(laud)s are eighteen-versed, the other (laud)s are nine-versed.
14.41.4	This is an ukthya shortened (shifted back?),
14.41.5	in order that both wishes that which is connected with it. He returns to it.
14.42.1	The same disposition prevails for the next following (sadyaskrī).
14.42.2	Only the stomas are otherwise.
14.42.3	The three pavamāna-(laud)s are twentyfour-versed, the other (laud)s are nine-versed.
14.42.4	This is a shortened (or shifted back?) vājapeya,
14.42.5	in order that both wishes, that which is connected with the ṣoḍaśimat and that which is connected with the vājapeya, may be fulfilled.
14.42.6	In case his enemy, his rival, performs the anukrī, he should perform the parikrī, in case he performs the parikrī, he should perform the utkrī.
14.42.7	The two one-day-rites called ekatrika and trikaika should be performed by one who wishes for priestly lustre.
14.42.8-9	The lauds of the first are chanted (alternately) on one and on three verses, of the second on three and one.
14.42.10	That makes twenty four laud verses.
14.42.11	The gāyatrī is of twentyfour syllables.
14.42.12	The gāyatrī is tejas and priestly lustre.
14.42.13	He reaches by these two rites tejas and priestly lustre.
14.42.14	The śastras (at each of these rites) are arranged in triplets.
14.42.15	The abhijit is destined for him who wishes to conquer.
14.42.16	The viśvajit is destined for him who wishes to conquer all.
14.42.17	And these two (one-day-rites) may be performed in a triple form of soma-sacrifice.
14.42.18	As agniṣṭomas they found a firm support in each other.
14.42.19	As ukthyas (they found a firm support) in each other.
14.42.20	As overnight-rites (they found a firm support) in each other.
14.43.1	Indra wishing to vanquish the heroes performed asceticism; having performed asceticism he beheld that one-day-rite: nṛjit. By performing it he vanquished the heroes. He who wishes to vanquish heroes should perform it.
14.44.1	Indra wishing to be victorious in battle (?) performed asceticism; having performed asceticism he beheld that one-day-rite: 'the battle-conquering' (pṛtanāja). By performing it he was victorious in battle (?). He who wishes to be victorious in battle should perform it.
14.45.1	Indra wishing to be throughout victorious, performed asceticism; having performed asceticism he beheld that one-day-rite 'the ever-conquering'. By performing it he became ever victorious. He who wishes to be ever victorious should perform this (rite).
14.45.2	The hymns into which the nivid is to be inserted at the midday-services are (for the last-mentioned three ekabas) those of the first three-day-period (of the prsthya six-day-period).
14.46.1	In wishing to conquer booty, Indra performed asceticism and beheld that one-day-rite: 'the booty-conquering' (dhanajit). By performing it he conquered booty. He who wishes to conquer booty should perform it.
14.46.2	It follows the rite of the caturviṃśa day.
14.47.1	Indra wishing to gain heaven performed asceticism and beheld that one-day-rite: svarjit. By performing it he gained heaven. He who wishes to gain heaven should perform it.
14.47.2	The svarjit, forsooth, is an obsolete sacrifice.
14.48.1	Indra wishing to conquer all performed asceticism and beheld that one-day-rite: 'all-conquering' (sarvajit). By performing it he conquered all. He who wishes to conquer all should perform it.
14.48.2	The (rite of the) day is that of the mahāvrata.
14.49.1	Indra wishing to acquire all by conquest performed asceticism and beheld that one-day-rite ujjit. By performing it he acquired all. He who wishes to acquire all should perform it.
14.49.2	The (hymns) into which the nivid is inserted are: "Thou the terrible one, hast been born for might and strength"; "Praise him, who, having superior power".
14.49.3	They contain the word ut (uj-jit) in the verse-quarter: "From the dark evening the foetuses arose (ud-aranta)"; and "Thou hast conveyed upwards the boldly overpowering one".
14.51.1	At him (Indra) the beings still cried out, either because he had been born on an unlucky day or because of his bad fortune. He handed over to Agni all the services, and Agni burned away his whole misfortune of being born on an unlucky day: all his bad fortune. He who has been born on an unlucky day or whom an inauspicious voice addresses, should perform the one-day-rite called agniṣṭut. Of him who knows this and who performs this sacrifice, Agni burns away his whole misfortune of being born on an unlucky day: his whole bad fortune.
14.51.2	One who wishes for priestly lustre should perform (the agniṣṭut) as a soma-rite, of which all the stotras are nine-versed, or as a rite with three stomas.
14.51.3	One who wishes a firm support, performs it with four stomas.
14.51.4	From the morning-litany on up to the hāriyojana-(graha) all is (destined for) Agni.
14.51.5	The adāptation must be made as wanted.
14.51.6	According to the indications the contrary determination.
14.51.7	The beginning-verse of the morning-litany is: "Agni I deem father".
14.51.8	If he strives to obtain the characteriṣṭic mark, he should put in the word agni into the last two sections (kratu).
14.51.9	Omitting the hymn: "Let go forth to the Gods" he takes the (first) twelve verses of (the hymn): "Of Soma me".
14.51.10	When the water is poured out, he recites (the verse): "This fruit was conceived by the herbs".
14.51.11	Omitting the verses beginning: "The mothers", (he recites instead of these) the three verses: "After the manner of Ūrva, Bhṛgu".
14.51.12	(Instead) of the verses which (usually) are applied for the churning of the fire comes the hymn: "Entering upon the worship" and (the verse): "Three hundred" and the first two verses and the last one (of the usual collection).
14.51.13	(Instead of the) verses (usually) applied for the savana-cakes are applied the first, fourth and fifth verses of (the hymn): "Agni accept our offering".
14.51.14	(The hymn): "The messenger of all knowledge" (is applied) for the (sacrifice of the draughts for the) pairs of deities.
14.52.1	The hymn: "Agni I praise, the house-chaplain" (serves) for the filling of the bowls.
14.52.2	(First) seven (verses of the hymn): "Agni, we choose as messenger" (serve as offering-verses) for the cups when they are advanced.
14.52.3	The next following four (verses) replace the hymn of the acchavāka.
14.52.4	The offering-verse for the ājya-(śastra) is: "Agni, thou art the son of the sky".
14.52.5	The triplets at the praüga-(śastra) are: "Unto thee the usual prayers" (for Vāyu); "Hither, O Agni, with all these Gods" (for Indra-Vāyu); "Who of men, O Agni, is thy relation" (for Mitra and Varuṇa); "Not the noise of horses" (for the Aśvins); "May Agni slay the foes" (for Indra); "Agni, come hither to drink of the Soma" (for the Viśvedevāḥ); "O Agni-to thee, of fixed law" (for Sārasvata).
14.52.6	The offering-verse is: "O Agni, together with all fires".
14.52.7	The laud-(triplet) and the corresponding-triplet for the (ājya-śastra of the) maitrāvaruṇa are: "Who of men, O Agni, is thy relation"; and "By which, O Agni angiras".
14.52.8	These two reversed at the midday-service.
14.52.9	(The two triplets) for the brāhmaṇacchamsin (are): "May Agni slay the foes".
14.52.10	(The two triplets) for the acchāvāka (are): "Agni, the head".
14.52.11	(The hymn at the same occasion, the ājya-śastra is) for the maitrāvaruṇa: "Lauding we call for thee".
14.52.12	(The hymn) for the brahman (is) the next following one.
14.52.13	The six verses: "Agni, to thee of fixed laws" (are the hymn) for the acchāvāka.
14.52.14	As offering-verse they take the last verse of each hymn.
14.53.1	The hymn for the filling of the bowls (at the midday-service) is "Agni the God".
14.53.2	The seven verses: "Bring ye to the bright" (serve as offering-verses) for the cups when they are advanced.
14.53.3	The two following verses are the invīting- and offering-verses for the marutvatīya-draught.
14.53.4	The opening and sequel (triplets) for the marutvatīya-draught are: "Of house on house"; "Thou art, O Agni, of the sacrifices".
14.53.5	The two pragāthas are: "O Agni come hither with the Agnis"; and "We come to the swift".
14.53.6	(Instead) of the isolated (verses are applied): "As the churned fire one"; and "O Agni, the first Aṅgiras, the seer".
14.53.7	The hymn for putting in the nivid is: "O Agni, may he dwell".
14.53.8	The last (verse of the hymn) is the offering-verse.
14.54.1	The laud- and the corresponding-triplet for the niṣkevalya-śastra are the two pragāthas: "Protect us, O Agni, by one"; and "Protect us, O Agni, from harm".
14.54.2	"I send to thee, O Agni" is the inteṚcalatory (verse).
14.54.3	The pragātha is: "By this homage I call Agni".
14.54.4	The hymn into which the nivid is inserted is: "Just as, O hotṛ".
14.54.5	"Agni the men" is the offering-verse.
14.55.1	The laud-triplet and the corresponding-triplet (for the niṣkevalya-śastra) of the brāhmaṇacchamsin are the pragāthas: "May we call Agni on Agni the irresiṣṭible"; and "O Agni, O singer".
14.55.2	"May our prayers fetch the sharp-rayed" (for the niṣkevalya) of the acchāvāka.
14.55.3	The pragāthas are successively (for maitrāvaruṇa, brāhmaṇacchamsin and acchāvāka): "Agni, convey the matutinal"; "Thou, Agni, art the houselord"; and "Thou art extensive, O Agni".
14.55.4	The hymns (are successively the three of which the first begins): "Worship, O hotṛ".
14.55.5	The last verse (of each hymn) is applied as offering-verse.
14.56.1	The invīting-verse for the Āditya-draught is: "Mentally we have gone", the next following one is the offering-verse.
14.56.2	The nine (verses): "Stand upright, O hotṛ of our sacrifice" serve for the cups being filled.
14.56.3	The last two (verses of the hymn) are for the hāriyojana-draught.
14.56.4	The seven (verses): "Thee, O Agni, the righteous" serve for the cups which are advanced.
14.56.5	"The hotṛ goeth forward" is the invīting-(verse) for the draught destined for Savitṛ, the next following verse is the offering-verse.
14.56.6	The opening and sequel triplets of the vaiśvadeva-śastra are: "This new prayer"; and "As a horse thee".
14.56.7	The (hymn) addressed to Savitṛ (is replaced) by the three verses: "Thou, O Agni, art treasure-bestowing".
14.56.8	(Instead) of the (hymn) to the Ṛbhus (are applied) the three next following verses.
14.56.9	(Instead of) the (hymn) addressed to Heaven and Earth, the four following (verses are applied).
14.56.10	The six (verses) from the beginning on replace the vaiśvadeva hymn.
14.56.11	The verse addressed to Vāyu is replaced by: "The paramour has been awakened".
14.56.12	The verse: "The maker of fair forms" is replaced by the verse: "Accept graciously our most extending".
14.56.13	The isolated (verses) are replaced by the three: "Agni, enkindled in the sky".
14.56.14	The five-folks-verse is replaced by the verse: "May I today that part of word".
14.56.15	The verse: "By sacrifice make ye grow" is applied as offering-verse.
14.57.1	(The offering-verse) for the clarified butter is: "They hasten near".
14.57.2	The next following (verse is the offering verse) for the (mess of rice) destined for Soma.
14.57.3	The (verse) addressed to Rudra is replaced by: "Hither the king of the sacrifice Rudra".
14.57.4	The (hymn) addressed to Maruts, is replaced by: "The good one who grants wonderful gifts".
14.57.5	The laud-triplet and the corresponding triplet are, instead of the agniṣṭoma saman, the pragāthas: "Hither to us the sacrifice touching the sky"; and "Come hither, O Vāyu".
14.57.6	Or the usual ones.
14.57.7	The three verses: "Ye waters are wonderful" are replaced by "In the waters, O Agni".
14.57.8	The verse addressed to the All-Gods is replaced by: "Him, O ye Gods, in the bottom".
14.57.9	The verses addressed to the Consorts of the Gods and to Rākā are replaced by the four: "This guest, who awakes at dawn".
14.57.10	The akṣarapaṅkti verses are replaced by the three: "I call the effulgent".
14.57.11	The (verses) addressed to the Fathers are replaced by the three "The three-headed".
14.57.12	The (verses) addressed to Yama by the three: "How of thee, O Agni, being bright, of Āyu".
14.57.13	The 'sweet-is this' verses are replaced by the three: "As Matarisvan had churned him".
14.57.14	The two subsequent (verses) are replaced by the two which follow immediately.
14.57.15	The closing-verse (of the śastra) is: "In this manner Agni has been lauded by the Gotamas".
14.57.16	In case the draughts remain unchanged, the two hymns for inserting the nivid are: "Mount the two bay steeds"; and "Praise him".
14.57.17	A draught-ox or gold are the sacrificial fee.
14.57.18	For this is the characteriṣṭic feature of Agni (of fire).
14.57.19	After he has finished (an agniṣṭut) only agniṣṭoma (should be performed).
14.57.20	He, forsooth, who performs the agniṣṭut, is cut off from all the (other) deities.
14.58.1	Indra being desirous of strength, performed asceticism; and beheld that sacrifice: 'the Indra-laud' (indrastut). Having performed it he gained strength. One who is desirous of strength should perform this (rite).
14.58.2	The hymns in which the nivid is inserted should mention Indra, this is the characteriṣṭic feature of this day.
14.59.1	Sūrya being desirous of lustre, performed asceticism; and beheld that sacrifice: 'the Sūrya-laud' (sūryastut). Having performed it he gained lustre. One who is desirous of lustre should perform this (rite).
14.59.2	The hymns into which the nivid is inserted should contain a mention of Sūrya, this is the characteriṣṭic feature of this day.
14.60.1	The All-Gods being desirous of progeny, performed asceticism, and beheld that sacrifice: 'the All-Gods laud' (vaiśvadevarstut). Having performed it they got progeny. One who is desirous of progeny should perform this rite.
14.60.2	The two hymns into which the nivid is inserted are: "Thee of many"; and "Strong in Indra is the intoxication".
14.60.3	Then (these hymns) contain a mention of the All-Gods in the verse: "Move for help Varuṇa, Mitra, Indra" and in the verse: "Mitra here and Varuṇa". This is the characteriṣṭic feature of this day.
14.61.1	Gotama, being desirous of priestly lustre, performed asceticism; having performed asceticism he beheld that sacrifice: the caturuttara stoma. Having performed it he reached priestly lustre. One who is desirous of priestly lustre should perform this (rite).
14.61.2-7	The out-of-doors laud is on four verses, the ājya-lauds each on eight, the midday-pavamāna-laud on twelve, the pṛṣṭha-lauds each on sixteen, the ārbhava-pavamāna-laud on twenty, the agniṣṭoma-saman on twentyfour.
14.61.8	It is a (rite) at which the ukthas, as far as concerns the sāmans, are taken up into (the agniṣṭoma-saman).
14.62.1	(Now) the pañcaśāradīya (one-day-rite).
14.62.2	The Maruts at first had no share in the soma-drink. When these Maruts purified Indra, then Indra gave them a share in the soma-drink. He who has no share in the soma-drink or he who wishes to reach the same space as the Maruts and unison with them, he should perform this (rite).
14.62.3	During five autumns (five years) five bulls roam about, after they have been sprinkled (as victims) for the Maruts.
14.62.4	These are to be immolated immediately after the savana-victim.
14.63.1	(Now) the ṛṣistomas (the one-day soma-sacrifices of the ṛṣis).
14.63.2	Gotama, being desirous of priestly lustre, having performed asceticism, beheld that sacrifice. Having performed it he got priestly lustre. One who desires priestly lustre should perform this rite.
14.71.1	The overnight (one-day-)rite (called) utkrānti ('passing up').
14.71.2	Indra and Viṣṇu being desirous of (reaching) heaven performed asceticism and beheld that sacrifice: the utkrānti. Having performed it they passed up to the world of heaven. He who is desirous of (reaching) heaven should perform this (rite).
14.71.3	The hymns for inserting the nivid are: "Those thee of many"; and "As the sky, O Indra".
14.71.4	(In their verse-quarters): "Pūṣan, Viṣṇu, Agni, Purandhi"; and "Thou Indra hast slain together with Viṣṇu" they contain the mention of Viṣṇu; that is the characteriṣṭic feature of this day.
14.72.1	(There are utkrāntis) of Mitra and Varuṇa, the Aśvins, the Vasus, the Maruts, the Sādhyas, the Āpyas, the Viśvasṛjs, the Bhūtakṛts, the Eldest, the Middle ones and the Youngest.
14.72.2	The stoma is fourteen-versed.
14.72.3	The sacrificial fee is a rough-vehicle provided with a goad and a bow with arrows.
14.72.4	For (the sacrifices of) these groups of Gods the śastra is that of the ten-day-period with settled metres.
14.73.1	For the vratya-stomas (the same prescriptions prevail).
14.73.2	Likewise for the nine nākasads.
14.73.3	Likewise for the (one-day-rites) caṣālamukhā, the one at which the cakes are prepared from meat, the vanisthu-sava, the brahmasava, the kṣatra-sava, the bhūmi-sava, the oṣadhi-sava, the odana-sava, and the vanaspati-sava.
14.84.1-2	The sacrifices of the intermediate quarters. The intermediate quarters being desirous of ananta performed asceticism and beheld those four sacrifices. Having performed them they got ananta. One who is desirous of ananta should perform them.
14.84.3	These one-day-rites should contain both the rathantara and the bṛhat.
14.84.4	This śastra is that of the (normal) one-day-rite.
14.84.5	The hymns for inserting the nivids are the kayāśubhīya and the tadiḍāsiya.
14.84.6	In the quarters are performed the sacrifices of the quarters, in the intermediate quarters those of the intermediate quarters.
15.1.1	In autumn the vājapeya is performed.
15.1.2	It is performed for one who is desirous of food.
15.1.3	When he intends to perform the vāja-sacrifice, he during a year before performs the peya-offerings.
15.1.4-6	The peyas are drink, the vāja is food. First comes drink, then food. (He does so) in order to gain both.
15.1.7	They consist of twelve agniṣṭomas.
15.1.8	Or they consist of Gotama's caturuttara sacrifice alternately with the ordinary one.
15.1.9	Some practise (the vājapeya) without the secondary sacrifice.
15.1.10	Indra and Bṛhaspati, forsooth, having performed this sacrifice reached food.
15.1.11	One who is desirous of (obtaining) food should perform this (rite).
15.1.12	But also Vāja, the son of Loka, having performed it, reached (the fulfilment of) all his wishes. Thence the name vājapeya.
15.1.13	There are thirteen dīkṣā days, three upasads, the seventeenth day is the day for pressing (and offering) the Soma.
15.1.14-15	Prajāpati, forsooth, the vājapeya, is the seventeenth (or consiṣṭing of seventeen?). So thereby he accomplishes him by his own characteriṣṭic.
15.1.16	The sacrificial post is four-cornered, provided with a caṣāla (top ring) (made) of wheat (flour), of bilva wood and seventeen aratnis (high).
15.1.17-18	Prajāpati, forsooth, the vājapeya, is the seventeenth (or consiṣṭing of seventeen?). So thereby he accomplishes him by his own characteriṣṭic.
15.1.19	There are seventeen (victims) destined for Agni and Soma.
15.1.20	These are treated together.
15.1.21	The victims to be slaughtered at the day of the soma-feast (the kratu pasus) consist of: a he-goat destined for Agni, a ram for Indra-Agni, a ram for Indra, a ewe for Sarasvatī and as fifth a spotted sterile cow for the victorious Maruts.
15.1.22	In addition to these must be immolated to Prajāpati seventeen dark-grey, hornless, bearded (he-goats).
15.1.23	The regular paradigm of the savana-victims (is now performed) up to the enciṚcling with the firebrand.
15.1.24	They are immolated at the time of the brahman's chant.
15.1.25	The adhrigu formula and the verses which are recited over the drops (of the omentum) should return.
15.1.26	(The words of the adhrigu-formula): "Bear ye the fire forwards for it" (up to): "Dig in the earth a hole for the undigested food" are the regular paradigm (are neither repeated nor altered although more victims than one are immolated), the same prevails for the last fore-offering and the two libations before and after the offering of the omentum.
15.1.27	After the (offering of the) hāriyojana-draught the offering of the victimal parts takes place.
15.1.28	The secondary parts of the sacrifice from the rite of Vanaspati on, should be taken out.
15.1.29-30	Or (the offering of the daivatāni) takes place after the performing of the after-offerings, or they occur at their normal moment.
15.1.31	The stoma is sāptadasa.
15.1.32	The (hymn of the) ājya-śastra is in virāj verses.
15.1.33	Or it is the ghṛta-lauding hymn.
15.1.34	The praüga śastra is that of Madhucchandas.
15.1.35-37	The virāj is food, ghee is food, sap is the praüga of Madhucchandas; through food he thereby brings sap (into him).
15.1.38	It (the morning-service as far as regards the hotṛ) may also be that of the one-day-rite.
15.1.39-40	The one-day-rite is a firm support. (So this serves) to give a firm support.
15.2.1	The marutvatīya-śastra begins with (a triplet) in aticchandas metre: "On the trikadruka the bull, the high-spirited, drank the barley-mixed Soma".
15.2.2-4	The aticchandas metre is of Prajāpati's nature; the vājapeya is (equal to) Prajāpati. Thereby he provides him with his own characteriṣṭic feature.
15.2.5	It may (rather) begin with (the triplet): "We make turn thee hither like a car, for aid".
15.2.6-8	The anuṣṭubh metre is of Prajāpati's nature, the vājapeya is (equal to) Prajāpati. Thereby he provides him with his own characteriṣṭic feature.
15.2.9	(The hymn) for the marutvatīya-(śastra) is: "With what array the comrade, the kindred".
15.2.10-11	The 'with what-array' hymn contains the word ka ('what, who'). Ka is Prajāpati, the vājapeya. Thereby he provides him with his own characteriṣṭic feature.
15.2.12	There is a (mess) of wild rice, of seventeen śarāvas, for Bṛhaspati.
15.2.13-14	Prajāpati, the vājapeya, is seventeen-fold: thereby he provides him with his own characteriṣṭic feature.
15.2.15	It falls between the marutvatīya- and the niṣkevalya-śastras; likewise at the bṛhaspatisava.
15.2.16	At this moment then he becomes consecrated (lit.: besprinkled) before the Sviṣṭakṛt (of the barhaspatya mess).
15.2.17	Of this (wild-rice mess) (only) the offering (proper, to Bṛhaspati) and the sviṣṭakṛt and the iḍā are performed.
15.2.18	The hymn: "That, forsooth, was the highest among beings" is the hymn for the niṣkevalya-śastra.
15.2.19-21	The highest among beings is the sacrifice; Prajāpati, forsooth, the vājapeya is the sacrifice. Thereby he provides him with his own characteriṣṭic feature.
15.2.22	The third service (as far as regards the hotṛ), from the corresponding triplet on, is that of the sixth (day of the prsthya six-day-period).
15.2.23-25	The sixth day is of Prajāpati's nature. The vājapeya is Prajāpati. Thereby he provides him with his own characteriṣṭic feature.
15.2.26	Or it is taken for the viṣuvat day.
15.2.27-29	The vișuvat day, forsooth, is an ascent. The vājapeya is an ascent. Thereby he provides him with his own characteriṣṭic feature.
15.2.30	Or it is that of the one-day-rite.
15.2.31-32	The one-day-rite is a firm standing, so (he makes it so) in order to get a firm standing.
15.3.1	In this case before the 'nay-to-us-come-favourable' hymn he should, according to the rite commended by Paiṅgya, intertwine the two 'honeycomb-cell' (hymns).
15.3.2	Verse by verse (the two hymns beginning): "The strength for the great solemnity"; and "Before the dawn".
15.3.3-4	In case they (the chanters) apply the agniṣṭoma-saman on verses containing the word 'wondrous', the laud- and corresponding-triplets (for the āgnimāruta-śastra) are the pragāthas: "Do thou, the wondrous one, to us with help"; and "O Agni, convey the matutinal":
15.3.4	After the soḍaśin(-stotra and corresponding śastra) follows the extra uktha(-stotra and corresponding śastra for the hotṛ).
15.3.5	Its laud- and corresponding (triplets) are: "This I praise today for thee, O Śipiviṣṭa"; and "Herefore Viṣṇu is being praised".
15.3.6	(Then follow the single verses:) the two: "The brahman, first born, hath of old".
15.3.7	(The one): "They who by meditation led the beginning of speech, or they who by mind spoke truths, they, united with the third brahman, peṚceived with the fourth the name of the milch-cow".
15.3.8	The five: "Vena saw that".
15.3.9	Or (the five): "This Vena".
15.3.10	Of the fourteen verses beginning: "Him of old" leaving over the last one, he utters the call and inserts the difficult ascent as at the viṣuvat rite.
15.3.11	Then he adjoins in his recitation the last verse, closes with the verse: "The sacrifice came to be" and applies as offering-verse: "Prajāpati".
15.3.12-14	He gives (as sacrificial fee) 1700 cows, seventeen clothes, seventeen yoked carriages, seventeen chariots, seventeen elephants, seventeen golden ornaments (niṣkas), seventeen drums.
15.3.15	This makes seven seventeens.
15.3.16	That is the full (āpta) vājapeya.
15.3.17	At the vājapeya as practised by the Kurus (are given as sacrificial fee) seventeen of each kind of cows.
15.4.1	After the performance of a vājapeya, the bṛhaspatisava (must be performed).
15.4.2	It is destined for one who is desirous of brightness or of priestly lustre.
15.4.3	The vājapeya is an ascent, the bṛhaspatisava is brightness, priestly lustre.
15.4.4	Thereby he is firmly established in (the possession of) brightness, of priestly lustre.
15.4.5	It is of nine-versed stoma.
15.4.6	The (first) prsthya-(laud) is the rathantara.
15.4.7	The śastra is arranged in triplets.
15.4.8	The sacrifice is an agniṣṭoma.
15.4.9	At the niṣkevalya and the following śastras the four verses: "He who propped" are put in, each of them in their sequence, before the hymns.
15.4.10	The sacrificial fee consists of thirty-three (cows).
15.4.11	At each service eleven (are given).
15.4.12	After the sacrifice of the omentum of the anubandhyā cow (he should give) to the brahman a mare together with its foal.
15.5.1	Prajāpati, having created the Gods, emitted for them as food and drink these sacrifices: first the agniṣṭoma, this did not satisfy them; then the atyagniṣṭoma, this did not satisfy them; then the ukthya, this did not satisfy them; then the ṣoḍaśin, this did not satisfy them; then the vājapeya, this did not satisfy them; then the overnight-rite, this did not satisfy them; then the aptoryāman, this satisfied them.
15.5.2-4	This comprises thirty-three lauds, thirty-three recitations, thirty-three libations accompanied by praise.
15.5.5-6	Thirty-three in number, forsooth, are all the Gods; all these he thereby gratifies singly by lauds, by recitations, by libations accompanied by praise.
15.5.7-9	It encompasses nine (different) stomas, nine pṛṣṭhas, six different kinds of soma-sacrifices.
15.5.10	These make, by summing up, twenty-four.
15.5.11-12	The year has twenty-four half-months; (he does so) in order to reach the year.
15.5.13	'Reached (or full, āpta) now, forsooth, is that end (yama) which satisfies the Gods and the year', hence the name aptoryama.
15.6.1-5	The three pavamāna-lauds are (as regards their stoma) those of the chandoma days; the ājya-lauds are nine-, fifteen-, seventeen- and twentyone-versed; the pṛṣṭha-lauds are twenty-seven-versed; the agniṣṭoma-saman is thirtythree-versed; the stomas of the ājyas prevail for the extra stotras.
15.6.6-7	Prajāpati, having on both sides encompassed all desires by these stomas of the agniṣṭoma (sacrifice of Somas) at both sides, put them into himself. And in the same manner does the sacrificer encompass all desires by these stomas of the agniṣṭoma at both sides, and puts them into himself.
15.6.8	The morning-service with the functions of the hotṛ is taken over from (is the same as that of) the viśvajit with all the pṛṣṭha-(sāmans).
15.7.1	The (hymn of the) marutvatīya is that of the one-day-rite preceded by the 'with-what-array' hymn and the two (hymns in the marutvatīya-śastra) of the fourth day of the prsthya six-day-period.
15.7.2	The pṛṣṭha of the hotṛ (i.e. the recitation corresponding with the first pṛṣṭha-laud; so here and in sūtras 3-5 the stotriya of the niṣkevalya-śastras is meant) is either the bṛhat or the rathantara with the vairāja at the inside of it.
15.7.3	Of the maitrāvaruṇa it is the vāmadevya with the śākvara at the inside.
15.7.4	Of the brāhmaṇacchamsin it is the śyaita with the vairūpa at the inside.
15.7.5	Of the acchāvāka the kāleya with the raivata at the inside.
15.7.6	Some say that first the inclosed part should be recited and then the body (the inclosing part).
15.7.7	But he should rather recite at the first place the 'body'.
15.7.8	(Because we can say:) "The garbha, forsooth, comes after the body' first the body of the mother comes into existence and then the foetus.
15.7.9	Having recited the laud-verses according to the one-day-rite they recite the laud-verses of the viśvajit with all the pṛṣṭhas.
15.7.10-11	In the same manner the corresponding triplets and the sama-pragāthas.
15.8.1	The (hymn of the) niṣkevalya is that of the one-day-rite preceded by the 'that-who-the-highest' hymn and the two (hymns) of the fourth day (of the prsthya six-day-period).
15.8.2	The three (hymns) of the fifth day (of the prsthya six-day-period) in the middle (inserted) before those of the two one-day-rites (are the) maitrāvaruṇa's (niṣkevalya).
15.8.3	The two of the third day are brāhmaṇacchamsin's (niṣkevalya).
15.8.4	The two of the sixth day are the acchāvāka's (niṣkevalya).
15.8.5	The (rite of the) third service is, from the corresponding triplets on, that of the sixth day (of the prsthya six-day-period).
15.8.6	After the āśvina-śastra follow the extra(-lauds and) recitations.
15.8.7	The laud- and corresponding-triplets for the hotṛ are: "O thou, who awakest to praise"; and "Approaching".
15.8.8	For the maitrāvaruṇa (they are): "Him of you, ever enduring".
15.8.9	For the brāhmaṇācchaṃsin (they are): "Whom followed thy gifts"; and "All whatsoever, that, O slayer of Vṛtra".
15.8.10	Or "Sing thou here"; and "Sing ye a praise for Indra".
15.8.11	For the acchāvāka (the laud-triplet is): "Here Vişnu strode".
15.8.12	The corresponding triplet consists of the last two verses and the first one (of the same triplet).
15.8.13	The complexes of nine verses (for the ukthamukhā) are successively: "There shines forth the dawn"; "From afar here"; "Fetch ye out"; and "Hither on my call".
15.8.14	(The hymn for the hotṛ is): "Agni shineth".
15.8.15	For the maitrāvaruṇa the next following one.
15.8.16	For the brāhmaṇacchamsin: "Hither with a chariot rich in cows".
15.8.17	For the adhvaryu the next following one.
15.8.18	The closing-verses for the three (adhvaryu, maitrāvaruṇa and brāhmaṇacchamsin) are the three (one for each śastra): "By the lord of the field".
15.8.19	For the acchāvāka it is: "May the God Savitṛ the helping one be good to us".
15.8.20	The offering-verses are (successively): "These soma-(draught)s belong to the over-night service", "These lovely"; "Do ye both pass over the depths", "Come ye on our call".
15.8.21	Or they are successively the four verses: "Your ancient home, your dear friendship".
15.9.1	The sacrifice of Yama.
15.9.2	Yama, forsooth, being desirous of (reaching) heaven, performed asceticism and beheld that sacrifice: the yama-stoma. This he brought near, and performed it. Having performed it he reached heaven. One who is desirous of (reaching) heaven should perform this (rite).
15.9.3-4	Taking out from the śastras (of the one-day-rite) the stotra- and corresponding-triplets and the saman-strings, there are added as many verses in the same metre (as the ones which have been taken out and) addressed to the same deities as in those (taken out).
15.9.5	At the midday-(service) each of them joins in before this hymn one of the five verses beginning: "Him who has gone".
15.10.1	The (one-day-rite) consiṣṭing of verses in gāyatrī metre, and being throughout ciṚcumflected, is intended for one who desires to die and to reach heaven.
15.10.2	The (one-day-rite) consiṣṭing of verses in triṣṭubh metre and having throughout a nidhana (at the end of the sāmans) is intended for one who wishes to get a firm standing.
15.10.3	The (one-day-rite) consiṣṭing of verses in jagatī metre and having throughout the iḍā (at the end of the sāmans) is intended for one who wishes for cattle.
15.10.4	The (one-day-rite) consiṣṭing of verses in anuṣṭubh metre and having throughout the word va(k) (at the end of the sāmans) is intended for one who wishes for fame.
15.10.5	(The stotras and the recitations) either (are) directly and visibly (in those metres), or (they are brought about) by computation.
15.10.6	The hymns for inserting the nivid are those of the nṛjit and the following ones.
15.11.1	The Word desired: 'May I get at preeminence among all beings, at uncontrolled dominion and at supremacy over them'. It beheld this sacrifice: 'the stoma of the word'. That it brought near, and performed it. By performing this sacrifice the Word got at preeminence among all beings, at uncontrolled dominion and at supremacy over them. In the same manner, now, the sacrificer, who performs the sacrifice of the Word, gets at preeminence over all beings, at uncontrolled dominion and supremacy over them.
15.11.2-4	The out-of-doors laud is on 100 verses, the (first) ājya-laud on 1000, (the following) lauds (successively) on 10,000, 100,000, 1,000,000, 10,000,000, 100,000,000, 1,000,000,000, 10,000,000,000, 100,000,000,000 verses.
15.11.5-6	All the verses are applied, by repetition in order to over-recite the stomas, likewise the sāmans and formulas.
15.11.7	Having finished it, an agniṣṭoma (should follow).
15.11.8	For the stoma of the word a thousand (cows) are the sacrificial fee.
15.11.9	The same at the 'great sacrifice'.
15.11.10	At the one-day-rites vinutti and abhibhūti.
15.11.11	At the sarvajit and dhanajit.
15.11.12	At the viśvajit and the abhijit.
15.11.13	At the svarjit and indravajra,
15.11.14	and at the aptoryāmas.
15.11.15	When no special prescription is made, the usual one about the sacrificial fees prevails.
15.12.1	Varuṇa wished: 'May I attain to preeminence, to sovereignty, to supremacy over all realms'. He beheld that sacrifice: the rājasūya and brought it near and performed it. Having performed it he attained to preeminence, to sovereignty, to supremacy over all realms. In the same manner, now, the sacrificer by performing the sacrifice of rājasūya attains to preeminence, to sovereignty, to supremacy over all realms.
15.12.2	The hotṛ (should belong) to the gotra of Bhṛgu.
15.12.3	Having slaughtered in honour of Indra-Pūṣan a he-goat, he should undeṛtake, one day after new-moon-day in Māgha, the consecration for the pavitra.
15.12.4	This is an agniṣṭoma with the four stomas and the rathantara (as first pṛṣṭha-stotra).
15.12.5	This (sacrifice) is a (means of) purifying. Purified by it he reaches the inauguration (sava).
15.12.6	On the eighth day falls the sacrifice of Soma (of this pavitra).
15.12.7	During the remaining part of this half of the month they perform (different) iṣṭis.
15.12.8	The seasonal offerings (caturmāsyas) are then performed, beginning at full moon in phālguna.
15.12.9	And the half-yearly victimal-sacrifice.
15.12.10	At the day of full-moon in Māgha the sunāśiriya.
15.12.11	The next following month they perform (different) iṣṭis.
15.12.12	On the day of full-moon in Phālguna he is consecrated for the abhiṣecanīya and the daśapeya.
15.12.13-14	These two days are preceded by twelve dīkṣā- and three upasad-days, the sixteenth day is destined for the sacrifice of Soma.
15.12.15	This whole universe consists of sixteen parts.
15.12.16	(So this is done) in order to reach this whole universe.
15.13.1	They buy the two (quantities of) Soma (for these two soma-feasts) together.
15.13.2	And of the daśapeya the regular paradigma up to the guest-işti (is performed) and (all what follows) after the lustral bath.
15.13.3	The (hymn for the) ājya(-śastra at the abhiṣecanīya) is one which contains a reference to Varuṇa: "Thou, O Agni, art born as Varuṇa".
15.13.4	For it is Varuṇa whom they (now) anoint as a king.
15.13.5	The midday-service is taken from (= is identical with that of) the caturviṃśa day.
15.13.6	Between the niṣkevalya and the marutvatīya an (amikṣā) destined for Mitra and Varuṇa is offered.
15.13.7	During this sacrifice, before its sviṣṭakṛt, he is anointed.
15.13.8	Of this āmikṣā (only) the offering (proper) and the svistakrt and iḍā (are performed).
15.13.9	The third service is taken from (= is identical with that of) the second day (of the prsthya six-day-period).
15.13.10	Thereby the ukthya is finished.
15.13.11-12	The ukthyas are (identical with) cattle: (so this is done) in order to gain cattle.
15.13.13	They go forth to the lustral bath.
15.13.14	The rite of the lustral bath is performed, but he does not enter into the water.
15.13.15	Having plunged the right fore-foot of the black antelope-hide in the water they draw it back-or the fringe of the upper garment.
15.14.1	He now settles down on a place of worship (devayajana) (sacrificial spot) to the left of the original one.
15.14.2	Here they perform the iṣṭis of the samsṛps.
15.14.3	Ten during a period of ten days.
15.14.4	Now (they are the following iṣṭis): "To Savitṛ prāsavitṛ; to Savitṛ āsavitṛ; to Savitṛ satyaprasava; to Sarasvatī, to vāc; to Tvaṣṭṛ, to the forms; to Pūṣan, to the paths; to Indra, to this one (the sacrificer?); to Bṛhaspati, to splendour; to the king Soma; to Viṣṇu śipiviṣṭa".
15.14.5	On the tenth day the daśapeya (is performed).
15.14.6-7	Or (instead of performing iṣṭis) they may either glide up into the sadas, or take food, with these ten deities saying: "In honour of Savitṛ prāsavitṛ I will glide up", or "In honour of Savitṛ asavitr I take food" (etc.).
15.14.8	They should perform as offering-priests, in whose family at both sides (paternal and maternal side) ten ancestors (are learned or have been) learned brāhmaṇas.
15.14.9-10	A hundred brāhmaṇas drink the Soma; ten from each cup.
15.14.11	Hence the name daśapeya.
15.14.12	When they have arisen (finished the soma-sacrifice) there is the five-holed pap.
15.14.13	When its sacrifice is completed, (they proceed with) two pregnant cows, four years old, one reddish white, one piebald; the first is immolated to Aditi or the All-Gods, the last to the Maruts.
15.15.1	Now the sautrāmaṇī.
15.15.2-4	(The victims at this occasion are): a red he goat for the Aśvins, a ewe for Sarasvatī, a bull for Indra the protecting (sūtraman).
15.15.5	After the enciṚcling with the firebrand has been performed on these, they proceed with the surāsoma.
15.15.6	Over the flowing (surā) they mutter whilst looking at it the (verse): "Clarify me with bright strainer, O shining God, O Agni for sacrifice on sacrifice".
15.15.7	Or the verses addressed to the Fathers.
15.15.8	The invīting (-verse for the libation of the surā is): "Ye both, O Aśvins, the cheering".
15.15.9	The formula of prompting is: "Let the hotṛ worship the Aśvins, Sarasvatī, Indra the protecting".
15.15.10	By some (lituṛgical authorities) all (these formulas of prompting) are handed down in (changed) adapted form.
15.15.11	But he should not proceed in that manner: it is the (practice) of the Asuras.
15.15.12	The offering verse is: "As a son".
15.15.13	The mantra to accompany the paṛtaking of the surā is: "The (Soma), which the Aśvins took from the asuric Namuci, which Sarasvatī pressed out to obtain strength, this king Soma the bright, sweet drop, I here paṛtake of".
15.15.14	If he starts from the meaning that a brāhmaṇa must be engaged for a reward to drink the (remainings of the) surā, the beverage (the rest of the surā) is poured out for him.
15.16.1	Then follows the (soma-sacrifice for) cutting the hair (kesāvāpaniya).
15.16.2	The rite of breaking up (udavasanīya) is (at this occasion) the traidhātavī (iṣṭi).
15.16.3	It is a (puroḍāśa) for Agni-Viṣṇu or for Indra-Viṣṇu.
15.16.4	Then (follows) the two-day-rite (called) vyuṣṭi (dawn).
15.16.5	(The days are) an agniṣṭoma (and) an overnight-rite.
15.16.6	For that brāhmaṇa it dawns, who recites the Veda.
15.16.7	For that baron it dawns, who reaches the inauguration.
15.16.8-9	Thereupon he performs the (soma-sacrifice called) 'wielding of power' (kṣatrasya dhrti): an agniṣṭoma with the four stomas and the rathantara as (first) pṛṣṭha-(laud).
15.16.10	Now Vṛddhadyumna, the son of Abhipratārin, performed this rite as (an agniṣṭoma) with three stomas.
15.16.11-12	Him a brāhmaṇa cursed: 'He has not sacrificed with the 'wielding of power'. In this battle the Kurus shall be driven out of Kurukṣetra'. And it came to pass even so as he had said to him.
15.16.13	Therefore now he should sacrifice with an (agniṣṭoma) of four stomas only.
15.16.14	The (rite) of four stomas is a firm standing among the sacrifices.
15.16.15	So this is done in order to get a firm standing.
15.16.16	Ten thousand (ayuta) cows are the sacrificial fee.
15.16.17	He, forsooth, who gives ten thousand, is not separated from this realm nor from this people.
15.16.18	Therefore the ten thousand is called ayuta.
15.16.19	Or he may give a hundred thousand (cows).
16.1.1	Prajāpati desired: 'May I obtain all desires, may I attain all attainments'. He beheld this three-day-sacrifice of Soma: the aśvamedha. He took it unto him and performed it; by its performance he obtained all desires, attained all attainments. In the same manner, now, the sacrificer who performs the aśvamedha sacrifice, obtains all wishes, attains all attainments.
16.1.2	For the principal priests he pours out (in order to prepare for them (a mess of boiled rice) four bowlfuls, four double handfuls, and four handfuls.
16.1.3-4	(This is) twelve-fold, the year is (equal to) twelve months.
16.1.5	(So this is done) in order to reach the year.
16.1.6	Now the adhvaryu fastens on him a gold ornament (niṣka).
16.1.7	When the offering of the agnihotṛa of the evening has been performed, he lies down with the favourite consort behind the Gārhapatya with his head turned towards the north.
16.1.8	He should lie in her lap without indulging in sexual inteṚcourse,
16.1.9	(thinking): 'May we by this act of asceticism reach successfully the year'.
16.1.10	That (niṣka) he gives (to the adhvaryu), when the offering of the morning-agnihotṛa has been performed.
16.1.11	Then he prepares a sacrificial cake baked on eight kapālas.
16.1.12	Agni is the mouth of the God: at the outset even he thereby gratifies the God.
16.1.13	Then he prepares a mess of boiled rice for Pūṣan the pathmaker.
16.1.14	Pūṣan is the overlord of the paths. He thereby secures successful progress to the horse.
16.1.15	The horse, which must have all colours and be endowed with swiftness, they let loose for a year, it may gratify all its desires with the exception of sexual inteṚcourse.
16.1.16	A hundred princes, clad in armours, (a hundred) nobles armed with swords, (a hundred) sons of heralds and headmen wearing the upper garment over their left shoulder, (a hundred) sons of attendants and charioteers bearing staves, guard the horse, not permitting it to return (before the end of the year).
16.1.17-20	Then, during a year (whilst the horse is roaming abroad) he performs daily three offerings to Savitṛ prasavitry, to Savitṛ asavitry, to Savitṛ satyaprasava, thinking: 'Savitṛ is the impeller, may he impel this my sacrifice. Savitṛ is the propeller, may he propel this my sacrifice. Savitṛ is the God of true impulse, may he impel by true impulse this my sacrifice'.
16.1.21	(The invīting and offering-verses for these three iṣṭis are): "He who all those beings"; "May God Savitṛ come hither treasure laden" "All troubles, O God Savitṛ"; "May that God Savitṛ unto us" "The All-Godly true lord"; "Indestructible is that".
16.1.22	During this same year the hotṛ tells the revolving legend.
16.1.23	The adhvaryu being addressed (by the hotṛ with the word): 'O adhvaryu!' answers everywhere: 'hoyi, O hotṛ!'
16.1.24	During the recitation by the hotṛ he (the adhvaryu) answers: "Yea (om) hotṛ, thus, hotṛ" (at each pause).
16.1.25	The adhvaryu directs the masters of lute-players with (the words): "Sing ye of him along with righteous kings of yore".
16.2.1-3	On the first (day of the ten the hotṛ recites): "Manu the son of Vivasvat: his people are the men; these are sitting here", (with the last words) he points to the householders (who are present). "The Veda of the verse is the Ṛgveda, this it is", and he should go over a hymn.
16.2.4-6	On the second (day): "Yama the son of Vivasvat: his people are the Fathers; these are sitting here", and he points to the old men (who are present). "The Veda is the Veda of the formulas, this it is", and he should recite a chapter of the Yajurveda.
16.2.7-9	On the third (day): "Varuṇa the son of Aditi: his people are the gandharvas, these are sitting here", and he points to handsome youths (who are present). "The Atharvaveda is the Veda, this it is", and he should recite a (hymn) of healing (from that Veda).
16.2.10-12	On the fourth (day): "Soma Vaisnava: his people are the nymphs. These are sitting here"; and he points to some handsome maidens (who are present). "The Veda is that of Aṅgiras", and he should recite a hymn of magic spell from the Atharvaveda.
16.2.13-15	On the fifth (day): "Arbuda the son of Kadru: his people are the snakes. These are sitting here"; and he points to some snakes or snake-charmers (who are present). "The Veda is the science of the snakes, this it is", and he should recite a (chapter of the) sarpavidya.
16.2.16-18	On the sixth (day): "Kubera the son of Vaiśravaṇa: his people are the raksis, these are sitting here" and he points to sebayas or evildoers (who are present). "The Veda is that of the Rakṣas, here it is", and he should recite a chapter of the raksovidya.
16.2.19-21	On the seventh (day): "Asita the son of Dhanvan: his people are the Asuras, they are sitting here" and he points to (some) usurers (who are present). "The Veda is the knowledge of the Asuras, this it is", and he should perform some magic trick.
16.2.22-24	On the eighth (day): "Matsya the son of Sammad: his people are the water-dwellers, these are sitting here" and he points to some fishes or fishermen. "The Veda is that of the itihāsas, this it is", and he should tell some itihāsa.
16.2.25-27	On the ninth (day): "Taṛksya the son of Vipāśyat: his people are the birds, these are sitting here" and he points to some birds or religious students. "The Veda is the one of the Purāṇas, this it is", and he should recite some purana.
16.2.28-30	On the tenth (day): "Dharma Indra: his people are the Gods and they are sitting here"; and he points to (some) young learned theologians, who do not accept gifts. "The Veda is the Sāmaveda, this it is", and he should chant a saman.
16.2.31-35	(In this revolving legend) he sums up all the Vedas, all the royalties, all peoples; the aśvamedha is (equal) to all. He does so thinking: 'By all I will reach all'.
16.2.36	In that it revolves again and again, therefore (it is called) the revolving (legend).
16.3.1	There are twenty-one sacrificial stakes, each twenty-one cubits long.
16.3.2-4	Eight of bilva wood, ten of khadira, of pitudru are the two which stand nearest (to the middle one), of rajjudala is the stake which stands opposite the (āhavanīya) fire.
16.3.5	There are twenty-one victims to be immolated to Agni and Soma.
16.3.6	For these there is one and the same performance.
16.3.7	The first of the days of sacrifice of Soma is Gotama's stoma which increases by four (stomas).
16.3.8	By it he reaches this world.
16.3.9-10	The second soma-day is twenty-one-versed (each stotra of twenty-one-verses). The twenty-first is he who shines yonder; this he makes thrive by his own characteriṣṭic.
16.3.11	Out of it the horse was formed.
16.3.12	This is mentioned in the verse: "Out of the sun, O Gods, did ye form the horse".
16.3.13	The victims to be immolated to Prajāpati are the horse, a hornless he-goat, a gomṛga (Bos gavaeus).
16.3.14	A Bos gaurus, a gayal, a śarabha, a camel, a māyu, and a kiṃpuruṣa are the victims for slaughtering after these.
16.3.15	And twenty-one victims, to be immolated to the deities of the seasonal sacrifices (are brought near): twenty-one to each sacrificial post.
16.3.18	The horse which has been adorned they make smell the spot where the out-of-doors-laud is performed.
16.3.19	If it does not smell at (it), he should cause the sacrificer to recite (the verse): "May the courser bestow on us wealth of Cows".
16.3.20	When it is standing before the sacrificial post (he praises) it with the eleven verses, not joining in the prāṇava, beginning: "When, first-born, thou didst neigh".
16.3.21	The āprī-verses are: "Enkindled, anointing".
16.3.22-23	Leaving over the word: "O Adhrigu" (he inserts) the hymn: "May Lot Mitra us"; and the last two verses of the following (hymn) without joining in the prāṇava.
16.3.24	Before the (passage: "Twenty-six are its) ribs" (he inserts the verse): "Thirty-four ribs".
16.3.25	Now they spread out for the horse a cloth, or upper-garment and gold.
16.3.26	This is mentioned in the verse: "The cloth they spread out for the horse, the upper-garment, the gold (ornaments) which (they spread out) for it".
16.3.27	Now they take hold of the sacrificial horse,
16.3.28	(and) of the (fifteen) (victims) surrounding the horse's body (and) of the numerous victims of the wild.
16.3.29	A (goat destined) for Pūṣan (is fastened) at the front (of the horse).
16.3.30	This is mentioned in the verse: "Here the share allotted to Pūṣan goes first".
16.3.31	At its navel a dark goat for Indra and Pūṣan.
16.3.32	This is mentioned in the verse: "He goes along the path dear to Indra and Pūṣan".
16.3.33	When the horse has been quietened (slaughtered) they cause the first consort of the king to lie down near (it).
16.3.34	They cover them both (horse and consort) with an upper-garment.
16.3.35	To these two the sacrificer addresses the obscene (verse):
16.3.36	"Put the penis (?) into (the space between the) thighs, bring the sleek one down, which is the life and delight of women".
16.3.37	No one addresses him in answer injurious words.
16.4.1	The hotṛ addresses her the obscene verse: "Thy mother and thy father sport on the top of the tree; saying I pass along. Thy father passed his first (!) to and fro in the cleft".
16.4.2	The brahman addresses an obscene verse to the favourite consort: "Raise her upwards, even as one taking a burden up a mountain, then may the middle (part of her body) thrive as one winnowing in the cool breeze".
16.4.3	The udgātṛ addresses the obscene verse to the discarded wife: "When into her narrow slit".
16.4.4	The adhvaryu addresses the fourth wife of the king with the injurious verse: "When the deer eats the corn, it thinks not much of the fat (one), when a Sudra woman is the Arya's mistress he seeks not riches for thriving".
16.4.5	A hundred female attendants of the same social status as each of the horses' guardsmen, these respond successively with injurious words the different priests.
16.4.6	The variations in the injurious addresses for answering are: "Thy thought is as of one longing for coitus; hotṛ do thou not say much"; "Raise him upwards"; "When the Gods favoured the lalamagu"; "When a śūdra is the husband of a female born from an ārya".
16.4.7	Within the sadas (takes place) the theological discussion (brahmodya).
16.4.8	The hotṛ asks the adhvaryu (with the first verse of XVI.5), he responds with the second (verse); with the third he (the hotṛ) asks, with the fourth he (the adhvaryu) responds:
16.5.1	"Which light, now, is equal to (that of) the sun? Which water is equal to (that of) the ocean? Who is greater than the earth? Of whom is no measure found?"
16.5.2	"The holy word is the light equal to the sun. The sky is the water equal to the ocean. Indra is greater than the earth. Of the cow no measure is found".
16.5.3	"Who is it that walketh singly? Who is it that is born (always) anew? What is the remedy for cold? What is the great envelopper?"
16.5.4	"It is the sun that walketh singly. It is the moon that is born anew. Fire is the remedy for cold. The earth is the great envelopper".
16.5.5	The brahman asks the hotṛ (with the first verse of the next khand), he responds with the second (verse); with the third he asks, with the fourth he responds:
16.6.1	"I ask thee, for the sake of knowledge, O friend of the Gods, if thou hast applied thy mind thereto; what are these three steps at which Viṣṇu is worshipped, on which he entered the whole universe".
16.6.2	"I too am at these three steps, on which he entered the whole universe, daily so I go round the earth and the sky and the back of this sky with one limb".
16.6.3	"Into what (things) hath the Puruṣa entered? What (things) are established in the Puruṣa? This, O brahman, we crave of thee. What answer dost thou give unto us thereto?"
16.6.4	"Into five (things) hath the Puruṣa entered. These are established in the Puruṣa. This I reply unto thee thereon, not superior in craft are thou to me".
16.6.5	He asks the sacrificer: "I ask them about the farthest end".
16.6.6	He answers with the next following verse.
16.7.1	The invīting-verse of the mahiman (cup of Soma) is: "The well-being, self-existent one conceived first within the great ocean, the right germ, whence Prajāpati was born".
16.7.2	The (formula for) prompting is "Let the hotṛ worship Prajāpati".
16.7.3	The offering-verse is: "O Prajāpati none other than thee".
16.7.4	Having proceeded with the omentum of the victim sacred to Prajāpati, they should thereupon offer the other omenta: some say. Behind Prajāpati forsooth, are the other deities. So he gratifies these in the proper order.
16.7.5-6	Or he should first proceed with the omentum of the victim destined for Indra-Agni, or with that for the All-Gods.
16.7.7	'Why, indeed, should they make haste': Indrota Śaunaka used to say.
16.7.8	Therefore they should proceed singly with the omenta for the different deities.
16.7.9-11	They should offer together the omenta belonging to victims destined for the same deities, when they are not contiguous, separately when they are contiguous. Thereby he gratifies them in due order.
16.7.12	For the second mahiman-(cup) he should reverse the invīting- and offering-verse.
16.7.13	He should recite together both ājya (hymns), that of the one-day-rite and that in paṅkti metre:
16.7.14	in order to obtain the objects of desire which are connected with the shastra of the one-day-rite and with the shastra in paṅkti metre.
16.7.15	He should intertwine both praüga-shastras that of the one-day-rite and that in bṛhati verses:
16.7.16	in order to obtain the objects of desire which are connected with the praüga-shastra of the one-day-rite and the praüga on bṛhati verses.
16.8.1	The mahānāmnī verses are the pṛṣṭha-(stotra).
16.8.2	The mahānāmnī verses are (equal to) all.
16.8.3	The sacrifice of the horse is (equal to) all.
16.8.4	He does so thinking: 'May I reach all through all'.
16.8.5	Having recited at the marutvatīya and the niṣkevalya-śastra first the hymns as they are used at the fifth day (of the prsthya ṣaḍaha) he inserts in each hymn the nivid of the hymns of the one-day-rite.
16.8.6-7	The one-day-rite is a firm support. (He does so) for getting a firm support.
16.8.8	Or there are (for the śastras of the hotṛ) a thousand verses at the (midday-service).
16.8.9	In the marutvatīya-śastra forty verses of each metre.
16.8.10	Gāyatrī, uṣṇih, anuṣṭubh, bṛhati, paṅkti, triṣṭubh, and jagatī. These are together 280 verses.
16.8.11	At the niṣkevalya-śastra there are 720.
16.8.12	That makes together a thousand.
16.8.13-15	A thousand is equal to all, the aśvamedha is equal to all; by all he gets all.
16.8.16	Having recited at the vaiśvadeva- and the āgnimāruta-śastras first the hymns as they are used on the fifth day (of the prsthya ṣaḍaha) he inserts the nivid in the hymns of the one-day-rite (in each hymn).
16.8.17-18	The one-day-rite is a firm support: (he does so) in order to get a firm support.
16.8.19	The ukthya (middle day of aśvamedha) is herewith finished.
16.8.20	By it he reaches the intermediate region.
16.8.21	The last (third) day is an overnight-rite with all the stomas.
16.8.22-24	The overnight-rite with all the stomas is (equal to) all, the aśvamedha is (equal to) all. By all he reaches all.
16.8.25	Through this rite he reaches yonder world.
16.8.26	The recitation (of the hotṛ) is that of the second abhiplava (six-day-period).
16.8.27	This sacrifice was once performed by Indrota Śaunaka for Janamejaya, the son of Parikṣit.
16.8.28	About this a sacrificial strophe is handed down:
16.9.1	"At Āsandīvat Janamejaya bound (= immolated) for the Gods a grain-eating horse, adorned with a golden ornament and with yellow garlands, a black spotted one".
16.9.2	(Variations of the above-described aśvamedha are the following) those same first two days and as third a jyotis one-day-rite as overnight-rite. Therewith (he sacrificed) for Ugrasena.
16.9.3	(As third day) a go (one-day-rite as overnight-rite). Therewith he sacrificed for Bhimasena.
16.9.4	As third day an āyus. Therewith he sacrificed for Śrutasena.
16.9.5	These all are (the aśvamedhas as performed) by Parikṣit's descendants.
16.9.6	About this a strophe is handed down:
16.9.7	"The righteous descendants of Parikṣit performing horse-sacrifices, by their righteous work did away with sinful work one after another".
16.9.8	(The same two first days and as third) an abhijit (one-day-rite). This sacrifice was performed by Ṛṣabha the son of Yajñatura.
16.9.9	About this the following strophe is handed down:
16.9.10	"As king Ṛṣabha the son of Yajñatura once performed the horse-sacrifice, Indra rejoiced in the Soma and the brāhmaṇas in the desired gifts (bestowed on this occasion)".
16.9.11	A viśvajit (one-day-rite as third day): this sacrifice was performed by Para Ahnara (sic) the king of Videha.
16.9.12	About this the following strophe is handed down:
16.9.13	"They fettered then and there the horse of Para Ahnara (sic); Hiraṇyanābha the Kausalya gave away the replete regions".
16.9.14	A mahāvrata day as overnight(-rite for the third day): this sacrifice was performed by Marutta the son of Avikṣit.
16.9.15	About this the following verse is handed down:
16.9.16	"The Maruts dwelt as guardsmen in the house of Marutta the son of Avikṣit. Agni was his chamberlain, the All-Gods were his counsellors".
16.9.17	Thereupon these deities became his counsellors.
16.9.18-22	The eastern region (is given) to the hotṛ, the southern to the brahman, the western to the adhvaryu, the northern to the udgātṛ: whatever property there is belonging to non-brāhmaṇas, with the exception of the land and the inhabitants.
16.9.23	In these same (sacrificial fees) those for the hotṛakas (are comprised).
16.9.24	On the middle part (of the conquered country) he should perform a sacrifice.
16.9.25	(It should be an animal) sacrifice of five victims, which are fettered to a branched stake.
16.9.26-32	During a year (afterwards) are immolated the victims to the seasons: six to Agni in spring, to Indra in summer, to the Maruts or Parjanya in the rainy season, to Mitra and Varuṇa in autumn, to Bṛhaspati in winter, to Indra and Viṣṇu in the dewy season.
16.10.1	Prajāpati, having performed the horse-sacrifice, beheld the human sacrifice. What was not reached by him through the horse-sacrifice, all that he reached through the human sacrifice. In the same way the sacrificer, when he performs the human sacrifice, reaches all that what by him was not reached by the horse-sacrifice.
16.10.2	The whole rite is simiḍār to that of the horse sacrifice.
16.10.3	But there is an addition.
16.10.4	Then there are sacrifices to Agni Kāma, (Agni) the Bestower, (Agni) the Pathmaker.
16.10.5-6	Agni Kāma is the ruler of the Gods: (he sacrifices to him) in order to please all the Gods.
16.10.7	Agni the Bestower: he gives him the sacrifice.
16.10.8	Agni the Pathmaker: he makes him reach again the sacrifice's path.
16.10.9	Having bought a brāhmaṇa or a baron for a thousand (cows) (and) a hundred horses they let him loose for a year, he may gratify all his desires with the exception of sexual inteṚcourse.
16.10.10	They guard him in the same manner (as the horse).
16.10.11	Then, during a year (whilst the man is roaming about) he performs (daily three) offerings to Anumati, Pathyā Svasti and Aditi.
16.10.12-13	They are performed alternatively with the iṣṭis to Savitṛ, and so are the nārāśaṃsa texts (recited) alternatively with those of the revolving legend.
16.10.14	(He performs those sacrifices, the one to Anumati, thinking): 'May I allowed by Anumati perform this sacrifice'.
16.10.15	(The one to Pathyā Svasti): Pathyā Svasti is the word. He thereby brings to the sacrificer success in this sacrifice.
16.10.16	(The one to Aditi): Aditi is the Earth, Aditi is a firm support; they thereby procure for him on her, bring undepressed, a firm support at the end.
16.11.1-3	The first nārāśaṃsa is that about Śunahsepa: how Śunahsepa the son of Ajigaṛta, fettered to the sacrificial post, was released, and he should repeat the first two hymns.
16.11.4-6	The second is that about Kakṣīvat: how Kakṣīvat the son of Uśij, obtained gifts from Svanaya the son of Bhāva, and he should repeat the last two hymns.
16.11.7-9	The third is that relating to Śyāvāśva: how Śyāvāśva son of AṚcanasas obtained gifts from the son of Viḍādasva, and (then he should repeat) the hymn: "Who are ye, O men".
16.11.10-12	The fourth is that relating to Bharadvāja: how Bharadvāja obtained gifts from Bṛbu Takṣan and Prastoka the son of Sṛñji, (and he repeats the) four verses: "Bṛbu stood at the head of".
16.11.13-15	The fifth is that relating to Vasiṣṭha: how Vasiṣṭha became the house-chaplain of Sudas the son of Pijavana, and the hymn is: "Two hundred from the descendant".
16.11.16-18	The sixth is that relating to Medhātithi: how Asaṅga, the son of Plāyoga, being a woman, became a man, and the hymn is "Praise thou, praise thou".
16.11.19-21	The seventh is that relating to Vatsa: how Vatsa the son of Kaṇva obtained gifts from Tirindara Paraśavyaya, and the hymn is "A hundred I received at Tirindara".
16.11.22-24	The eighth is that relating to Vaśa: how Vaśa Asvya obtained gifts from Prthusravas the son of Kanita, and the hymn is: "May he come hither, who".
16.11.25-27	The ninth is that relating to Praskāṇva: how Praskāṇva obtained gifts from Prsadhra Medhya Matarisvan, and the two hymns are: "The great strength of Indra".
16.11.28-30	The tenth is that relating to Nābhānediṣṭha: how Nābhānediṣṭha the descendant of Manu obtained gifts from the Aṅgiras, and the hymn is: "They who by sacrifice".
16.11.31	There are the nārāśaṃsa recitals.
16.11.32	Nārāśaṃsa is the purusa.
16.11.33	Thereby he makes him thrive by his own characteriṣṭic.
16.12.1-2	There are twenty-five sacrificial stakes, each twenty-five cubits long:
16.12.3-5	ten of bilva wood, twelve of khadira wood, of pitudru are the two which stand nearest to (the middle one); of rajjudāla vasarala the stake which stands opposite the (Āhāvaniya) fire. There are twenty-five victims to be immolated to Agni and Soma.
16.12.7	For these there is one and the same performance.
16.12.8	The first two days and the last day of the soma-days of the aśvamedha are practised here.
16.12.9	The second day is one on which all the lauds consist of twenty-five verses.
16.12.10	Puruṣa (or Man), forsooth, consists of twenty-five parts (or: is the twenty-fifth).
16.12.11	Thereby he makes him thrive by his own characteriṣṭic.
16.12.12	The victims to be immolated to Prajāpati are a man, a gomṛga and a hornless he-goat.
16.12.14	And twenty-five victims, to be immolated to the deities of the seasonal sacrifices (are brought near) twenty-five to each sacrificial post.
16.12.15-16	XVI.3.16,17.
16.12.17	The human victim, which has been adorned, they make smell the spot where the out-of-doors-laud is performed and (they praise it) with the eleven (verses) not joining in the prāṇava "Let the nearer ones arise".
16.12.18	The āprī verses are: "Agni, death".
16.12.19	The hymn: "Do not burn him" he should insert in the adhrigu formula in the same manner as (at the aśvamedha).
16.12.20	Now they spread out for the human victim a garment of kuśa-grass, a (cloth) of tṛpā bark, a red garment of silk threads.
16.12.21	When it is 'quieted', the udgātṛ sings over it standing near it the saman addressed to Yama.
16.13.1	And the hotṛ recites over it the puruṣa nārāyaṇa (hymn).
16.13.2	Now the principal priests: hotṛ, brahman, udgātṛ and adhvaryu address to it each two of the verses of the hymn: "Him who has gone hence".
16.13.3-4	Now they heal the sacrificer one after another with the (four) hymns: "Him, O ye Gods, who is put down"; "I free thee through the oblation that thou mayest live"; "From thy eyes, thy nose"; "May the wind convey hither medicine".
16.13.5	Then each of them (heals him by reciting) one of the verses addressed to Nirṛti: "Long life has been promoted".
16.13.6	And each with three of the verses beginning with the word "Hail".
16.13.7	When the human victim has been quieted, they cause the first consort of the sacrificer (king) to lie down near it.
16.13.8	They cover them both with the upper garment.
16.13.9	These two the sacrificer addresses in the same manner.
16.13.10	The injurious verses are: "A royal consort, who is rejected" (this verse the hotṛ addresses to the first consort, cf. XVI. 4.1); "A pond without water-supply" (this verse the brahman addresses to the vāvātā, XVI. 4.2); "He whose eyes are unanoin-ted" (this verse the udgātṛ addresses to the parivṛktā, XVI.4.3); "Not he is valid, whose hairy" (this verse the adhvaryu addresses to the pālāgalī).
16.13.11	They respond successively with the next following verses.
16.13.12	With the preceding one the adhvaryu.
16.13.13	The verses for making (the consort, who still rests near the victim) to arise are: "Arise, O woman"; "Arise from there, thou who hast a husband"; "Arise from there, O Viśvavasu"; "Rich in stones" (one verse for each of the four ṛtvijs).
16.13.14	They address her with the verses: "The mind now"; "O Asunīti, keep the mind in us"; "When thy mind hath gone"; "As they fasten the yoke".
16.13.15	But (of these it is) the brahman who makes (her) repeat the verses.
16.13.16	Within the sadas (takes place) the theological discussion.
16.13.17	With the verse: "The cows have eaten the barley" the hotṛ asks the adhvaryu, with the second verse he answers; with the third he asks, with the fourth he answers.
16.13.18	With the verse: "Two paths of the Fathers I have heard" the brahman asks the udgātṛ, with the second he answers; with the next but one he asks, with the last he answers.
16.14.1	(Then follow) the rites of the aśvamedha up to the ājya-śastra.
16.14.2	He should recite together both ājya-(hymns), that of the one-day-rite and that of the mahāvrata day:
16.14.3	in order to obtain the objects of desire which are connected with the ājya of the one-day-rite and with that of the mahāvrata day.
16.14.4	He should intertwine both praüga-śastras, that of the one-day-rite and that of the mahāvrata day:
16.14.5	in order to obtain the objects of desire which are connected with the praüga of the one-day-rite and with that of the mahāvrata day.
16.14.6	The midday-service is the same as that of the mahāvrata day.
16.14.7	The pṛṣṭha-laud is the rājana (chant).
16.14.8	The rājana is the chant which is Puruṣa-like; so he makes him thrive by his own chant.
16.14.9	From the anucara-triplet on the third service is the same as that of the sixth day (of the prsthya six-day-period).
16.14.10-12	The sixth day is nārāśaṃsa-like, man is nārāśaṃsa-like. So he makes him thrive by his own characteriṣṭic.
16.14.13	The agniṣṭoma-chant is the mahādivākīrtya.
16.14.14	The mahādivākīrtya is the chant which is Puruṣa-like. So he makes him thrive by his own chant.
16.14.15	(This day of soma-sacrifice) finishes with the ṣoḍaśin (śastra).
16.14.16	Of sixteen parts (consists) Puruṣa. So he makes him thrive by his own characteriṣṭic.
16.14.17	The fourth day (of the human sacrifice) is simiḍār to the fifth of the prsthya (six-day-period).
16.14.18	The land together with the inhabitants is given as sacrificial fee.
16.14.19	There should be a sacrifice of ten victims, which are fettered to a forked stake.
16.14.20	The victims to be immolated to the seasons are twelve in number for each.
16.15.1	The self-existent Brahman (n.) performed asceticism. Having performed asceticism it thought: 'There is, forsooth, no eternity in asceticism; well I will offer up myself in all the creatures'. Having offered itself in all the creatures, it offered at the all-sacrifice all the creatures. Thereupon it encompassed the supremacy, the sovereignty and the lordship over all the creatures. In the same manner, now, when the sacrificer performs the all-sacrifice, he offers himself in all the creatures and offers, at the all-sacrifice, all the creatures. Thereupon he encompasses the supremacy, the sovereignty and the lordship over all the creatures.
16.15.2	The beginning rite is (equal to) that of the human sacrifice.
16.15.3	(The days are :) an agniṣṭut, an indrastut, a vaiśvadevastut, a sūryastut; (on this day) they immolate a horse.
16.15.4	The fifth day is simiḍār to that of the human sacrifice.
16.15.5	On this day they immolate a human victim.
16.15.6	The sixth day is a vājapeya.
16.15.7	The seventh day an aptoryāma.
16.15.8	On this day they immolate: all (kinds of victims) meet for sacrifice: all which are animate.
16.15.9	Of those with omenta he offers the omenta.
16.15.10	Of those without omenta the skin.
16.15.11	They throw forth (into the Āhāvaniya) cuttings of herbs and trees.
16.15.12	The eighth and the ninth day are successively one of which all the lauds are twenty seven-versed and of which they are thirtythree-versed.
16.15.13	The last day is a viśvajit with all the stomas, all the pṛṣṭha-(sāmans), as an overnight-rite.
16.15.14	The all-sacrifice is (equal to) all.
16.15.15	(He does so thinking): that I may through all, reach all.
16.15.16	There should be a sacrifice of twenty victims, which are fettered to a forked stake.
16.15.17	The victims to be immolated to the seasons are twenty-four in number for each.
16.15.18	Here the all-sacrifice comes to an end.
16.15.19	Together with the land the vanquished realm is given as sacrificial fee.
16.16.1	Having thrown the nether part of the fire-drill into the Gārhapatya, the upper one into the Āhāvaniya and having made ascend the fires into himself, he should betake himself to the forest.
16.16.2	Viśvakarman the son of Bhuvana performed this as his last sacrifice.
16.16.3	Him the Earth addressed: "Let no moṛtal give me away; O Viśvakarman son of Bhuvana, thou hast wished to give me away. I shall dive into the midst of the ocean; vain is thy promise unto Kaśyapa".
16.16.4	Her (the earth) Kaśyapa lifted up (out of the ocean).
16.17.1	At the vājapeya the brahman mounts a wheel of udumbara wood with the mantra: "At the impulse of Savitṛ, the God of true impulse, may I ascend to the highest heaven of Bṛhaspati".
16.17.2-3	Instead of Bṛhaspati he uses: "Of Indra" in case the sacrificer is a kṣatriya, "of the Maruts" in case he is a vaiśya.
16.17.4-6	Having taken place on this wheel which is pieṚced he chants without having got any command, thrice (the) sāmans, or he should thrice mutter (the verse on which the saman is based) "In sight ye moṛtals, the coursers have come to swiftness. On the impulse of God Savitṛ gain ye heaven".
16.17.7-8	With the same mantra he descends, changing ("I ascend" into) "I have ascended" when descending.
16.17.9	Having smelled at a golden goblet filled with honey he (the brahman) takes the vessel unto himself.
16.17.10-11	With the mantra: "This sacrificer ascends to the sky", or "This sacrificer ascends to Heaven" they throw at the sacrificer when he ascends the sacrificial post, packets of salt.
16.18.1	At the rājasūya, the sacrificer when he has been consecrated addresses the brahman five times: "O brahman!"
16.18.2	Each time he answers: "Thou art brahman".
16.18.3	The first time: "Thou art Savitṛ of true impulse".
16.18.4	The second time: "Thou art Indra the all-mighty".
16.18.5	The third time: "Thou art Varuṇa, the lord of the law".
16.18.6	The fourth time: "Thou art Rudra the mild".
16.18.7	The fifth time: "Thou art Brahma" only.
16.18.8	Mentally he bestows on him (the brahman) two golden round (ornaments).
16.18.9	These he accepts mentally.
16.18.10-11	At the aśvamedha, the ṛtvijs, keeping straps in their hand, bathe the horse in two ponds, which flow together, saying: "Having offered this horse fit for sacrifice may this king be victorious, so as to subject (all others) than the brāhmaṇas".
16.18.12	And when they cause the sacrificer to touch it on the back he should mutter the verse: "I and thou".
16.18.13	When the middle day is brought to an end, they erect platforms around the Āhāvaniya in the (different) regions.
16.18.14	These they cover with fences, which have fensters at the upper side.
16.18.15	During the night the priests pour all kinds of herbs (into the Āhāvaniya fire).
16.18.16-17	At the time of the morning-litany they descend and the assistants ascend; these continue to pour out the herbs until the time of sunrise.
16.18.18	Then (at the moment of the lustral bath) they buy for one thousand cows a man of the family of Atri, who is whitish, yellow-eyed, wrinkled, furnished with maṛks, leprous, crippled, impotent, bald-headed; taking him along they go to a river.
16.18.19	He then makes him dive into the water and when the water flows near his face the adhvaryu pours over his head as a libation the blood of the horse, with the formula: "To the bhrūṇahatyā, svaḥa!"
16.18.20	Thereupon they drive him away.
16.18.21	'Those who have been expelled out of their community are by this final bath freed of their bad lot' (they say).
16.19.1	(Now shall be treated) the ahīnas which increase by one and one (day).
16.19.2	What is simple that he reaches by the one-day-rite.
16.20.1	What is twofold that (he reaches) by the two-day-rite.
16.20.2	Two in number are day and night, two in number are sky and earth; these are the two firm standings. So he reaches thereby all what is twofold in regard to the deity (and) in regard to himself.
16.20.3-5	A not-apparent series (of soma-sacrifice-days) should refer to the ten-day-rite; at the beginning the cutting-off (takes place). The last day has to be an overnight-rite.
16.20.6	Day after day the dakṣiṇas are given.
16.20.7	Those who have not undeṛgone the consecration, perform as priests for one who has undeṛgone it.
16.20.8	The ahīnas come to an end in a month.
16.20.9	When the days of soma-sacrifices are shortened, they should increase the (days of) dīkṣā.
16.20.10	He should not recite the mahāvrata-śastra for one who has not been initiated for a year,
16.20.11	nor for one who has not borne a year-long the ukhā (for the agnicayana).
16.20.12	"The first day (of a two day-rite) should be the usual agniṣṭoma" so say some.
16.20.13-14	The agniṣṭoma is the chief sacrifice: (he does so) in order not to miss the opening of the sacrifice.
16.20.15	Only (the two hymns) for inserting the nivid (are) the contiguous ones.
16.20.16	The hymns for inserting the nivid at the second day in the ārbhava (vaiśvadeva-śastra) and the jatavedasiya (āgnimāruta-śastra) are: "Stretched is the work"; and "By the sacrifice make ye grown".
16.20.17	(These) likewise (are to be used) at the (second day of the) three-day-rite.
16.20.18	The two-day-rite may also consist of a combination of abhijit and viśvajit, of a caturviṃśa day and a mahāvrata day, of a go-day and an āyus-day.
16.20.19	What is twofold, that he reaches by the two-day-rite.
16.21.1-2	What is threefold, that (he reaches) by the three-day-rite. Three are these worlds, three these lights, comprising three services is the sacrifice. So he reaches all what is threefold in regard to the deity (and) in regard to himself.
16.21.3	(Or the first three-day-rite now treated) the stomas of the first day are the three beginning with the nine-versed one.
16.21.4	Of the second day those beginning with the fifteen-versed.
16.21.5	The ājya-śastra of the brahman (alone) is of sixteen verses.
16.21.6	Of the third day the stomas beginning with the twenty-one-versed.
16.21.7-9	The first day is an agniṣṭoma, the second an ukthya, the third an overnight-rite.
16.21.10-12	The rathantara is the first pṛṣṭha-laud of the first, the vāmadevya of the second, the bṛhat of the third.
16.21.13-16	The rathantara is this world, the vāmadevya is the world of intermediate region, the bṛhat is yonder world: (so this serves) for reaching these worlds.
16.21.17	The ājya-śastras (of all the days) are those of the six-day-period with settled metres.
16.21.18	The praüga-śastra of the second day is that in triṣṭubh metre of the middle chandoma day.
16.21.19	The (hymn for the) marutvatīya (of the second day) is: "Three friendships".
16.21.20	The marutvativa which serves for the second day (of the prsthya six day-period) is applied on the third day.
16.21.21	'Thereby' (they say): 'he makes these worlds possessed of enjoyment; therefore these worlds are useful to each other'.
16.21.22	Or he may reverse the (last) two days.
16.21.23	The samapragātha of the niṣkevalya(-śastra of the second day for the hotṛ is): "Which moṛtal him, O Indra".
16.21.24	The land and corresponding pragāthas for the maitrāvaruṇa are: "Let not thee of the sacrificer", omitting the two-footed verses.
16.21.25	The (pragātha) containing the word 'what' is: "What newest".
16.21.26	The hymns (also for the niṣkevalya of the maitrāvaruṇa on the second day) are those of the second day (of the prsthya six-day-period).
16.21.27	The laud-pragātha for the brahmaṇacchamsin at the niṣkevalya śastra of the second day is: "A prayer has been chanted", and the corresponding pragātha is: "Let him hear both".
16.21.28	The pragātha containing the word 'what' is: "What is not performed by him".
16.21.29	The laud pragātha and its corresponding pragātha for the acchāvāka are: "Leaning, as it were, on Sūrya"; and "Aid thou, O lord of aid".
16.21.30	This pragātha containing the word 'what' is: "When, Indra, east, west, north".
16.21.31	Or the two hymns for inserting the nivid at the second day are the 'with-what-array' hymn and the 'that-who-the-highest' one.
16.21.32	From the anucara-triplet on the third service is simiḍār to that of the sixth day (of the prsthya six-day-period).
17.1.1	Now the rite of the mahāvrata (day).
17.1.2	Some days before it the hotṛ orders to pull out the plank for the swing.
17.1.3	(It is taken) from a fig-tree which stands (upright) (and has not fallen down by decay).
17.1.4	Before sunrise.
17.1.5	In case the fig-tree is not found at the east, then (they take the plank from one) in the north.
17.1.6-7	(It might also be taken from a tree) to the southern or western part.
17.1.8	Having caused it to be cut off at the root, (and) standing with his face directed to the east or the north, having pulled it out, if the fig-tree is a small one.
17.1.9	Or (instead of taking one plank, sūtra 2) they may also fasten together two or three planks.
17.1.10	It is of arms-length in easterly direction.
17.1.11	Of an ell transversely.
17.1.12	(It should be) fashioned by cutting.
17.1.13	The point should be well-noted.
17.1.14	He should have it pieṚced at the ends (made holes into it for the four ropes) fourfold.
17.1.15	Thus they make cut off from that same fig-tree or from another tree two forked poles,
17.1.16	of over a man's height.
17.1.17	and a cross-bar.
17.1.18	In case no fig-tree is avaiḍāble, it should be another fruit-bearing tree or one of an auspicious name and he should from this (tree) get ready (the part of the swing).
17.2.1-4	Then they cause to prepare two ropes of munja grass, they must be strong, of three strands, more than two fathoms long.
17.2.5	So much as for the hotṛ.
17.2.6	For the udgātṛ they frame together a throne-seat of figwood.
17.2.7	Its feet are a span high.
17.2.8	An ell in size are the head- and the cross-boards.
17.2.9	Having framed it together they interweave it with cords of munja grass which consists of two strands and one twisted to the right.
17.3.1	Now they get ready that lute with a hundred strings.
17.3.2-3	The body is of palāśa-wood, its handle of fig-wood.
17.3.4	Or its body of fig-wood, its handle of palāśa-wood.
17.3.5	They cover it with a red ox-hide, hairy side upmost.
17.3.6	At its basis (nether part) they make ten holes in the handle.
17.3.7	Then they attach ten strings in each (hole).
17.3.8	These they fasten separately at the upper part.
17.3.9	(So this is) the hundred-stringed lute together with the handle.
17.3.10	As plectrum a branch of vetasa, with the leaves on it, is got ready.
17.3.11	Or a reed-stalk bent of itself (i.e. naturally crooked).
17.3.12	The wives (of the participants of the sattra) get ready ghaṭakarkarī, avaghāṭarikās, reed lutes and flutes.
17.3.13	By means of the mouth-part she should play the flute.
17.3.14	By means of plectrum the reed-lute.
17.3.15	This they call (also) ghāṭarī.
17.3.16	If she blows the ghatari softly, this would be an adveṛṣity, it might engender an enemy.
17.4.1	The adhvaryu gets ready four drums with their drumsticks.
17.4.2-3	He has them fixed, together with their sticks, outside the sadas at either side of the doorposts of the eastern door at the point of connection; (the two others) together with their sticks, inside the sadas at either side of the doorposts of the western door, at the point of connection.
17.4.4	If there are six of them, then one must be fixed in the southern, one in the northern half of the sadas.
17.4.5	They make ready of munja or kuśa grass a bundle for the adhvaryu.
17.4.6	Standing on this he makes his responds.
17.4.7	The other consecrated (participants of the sattra) have got ready for each of them mats (cushions) (so high) that they reach a span above the ground.
17.4.8	Then for the (maidens) who will (later on) ciṚcumambulate the mārjalīya, for each of these they shall get ready new pitchers.
17.5.1-4	Now they get ready a horse-drawn chariot, on which is fastened a ledge (as defence against collision) and a bow and three arrows; a king or a person of royal authority who is to shoot at the race-course. If no king or royal authority is at hand, this (last act) should be performed by one who is acquainted with this science.
17.5.5	To the north of the agnīdhra-shed they erect two posts in eastern direction and slanting, (to serve) as taṛget.
17.5.6	Here, covering (its bases) with earth or digging up, they stretch a hide.
17.5.7	He should not shoot farther than this (hide) with his arrow.
17.5.8	Behind the agnīdhra-shed, outside the vedi, they dig a hole.
17.5.9	Over this hole they fix the hide of that bull which is to be immolated in addition, its neck-part is directed to the east or the north, its hairy side upwards.
17.5.10	On this earth-drum they strike with the tail of the same bull, when the moment for this has arrived.
17.6.1	Now they fetch an ārya and a śūdra, a man and a woman, crippled and bald one.
17.6.2	This antiquated (and) obsolete (rite) should not be performed.
17.6.3	When all this has been made ready, they erect, when (the rite of) the tenth day (of the twelve-day-rite at the end of a year's sattra) has been brought to an end, the havirdhāna-shed and the sadas,
17.6.4	and the shed of the āgnīdhra and the shed for the wives.
17.6.5	Then they spread a thick layer of fresh kuśa grass (over the mahāvedi).
17.6.6	Some loads of kuśa grass they lay down early for the mats (cushions).
17.7.1	Thus, when the night is far advanced, they undeṛtake the morning-litany of the mahāvrata,
17.7.2	so that he (the hotṛ) has the time to recite a full thousand verses.
17.7.3	Its stoma is the twentyfive-versed one.
17.7.4	The (first) pṛṣṭha-(stotra) is the rājana (chant).
17.7.5	The (kind of) sacrifice is the agniṣṭoma.
17.7.6	Then there are the (following) stomas, which must be chanted along (with the rājana): the nine-versed one, the fifteen-versed, the seventeen-versed and the twentyone-versed one.
17.7.7	The victim to be slaughtered during the day of the sacrifice of Soma is either destined for Indra-Agni, or it is one of the set of eleven.
17.7.8	A bull destined for Indra and a he-goat for Prajāpati must be immolated in addition (to the savana-victim).
17.7.9-10	The one for Indra is loudly, the one to Prajāpati is mutteringly performed.
17.7.11	When, after the omenta (of these victims) have been offered they enter into (the sadas), they bring those parts which constitute the swing, having washed them outside the vedi and entered along the passage, i.e. between catvala and utkara, they bring it around the dhisnya of the āgnīdhra to the north of it, make it enter the sadas through the eastern door and (bring it around) before the hotṛ’s dhisnya and put it down to the north of this dhisnya directed to the east.
17.7.12	In the same manner they bring what for each of them is (kept ready) outside the vedi, in accordance with his way in entering (the sadas) and deposit it to the north (of his place in the sadas).
17.7.13	The view of Paiṅgya (and) Śuṣkabhṛṅgāra is that the morning-service of it (of the mahāvrata) should be in triṣṭubh verses.
17.8.1	The ājya-(śastra) is (the hymn): "Of house on house the guest".
17.8.2	Having recited of this hymn (the first) twelve (verses) by half-verses, he adds to the recitation the twenty-five verses: "Agni, the men with devotion from the fire-drill".
17.8.3	This has the mode of recitation as has been pointed out.
17.8.4	The praüga-(śastra) is in triṣṭubh metre (composed as follows):
17.8.5	(The triplets): "Were not they, who were magnified by praise" are the ones addressed to Vāyu and Indra-Vāyu.
17.8.6	The (triplet) addressed to Mitra and Varuṇa is the same as at the viṣuvat day.
17.8.7	The one addressed to the Aśvins is: "Who will hear, who of those who merit worship".
17.8.8	The one addressed to Indra is: "How, what priest’s (worship) has magnified the great one".
17.8.9	The one addressed to the All-Gods is: "Who of you is the protector, O Vasus, who the guardian".
17.8.10	The one addressed to Sarasvatī is: "May this Sarasvatī gladly".
17.8.11	It (this praüga) is arranged in triplets.
17.8.12	Its recitation is by verse-quarters.
17.8.13	The morning-service may also be the same as that of the one-day-rite.
17.8.14	(So) arranged is the morning-service.
17.9.1	Now the midday-service.
17.9.2	The strophe of the marutvatīya-śastra is: "Thee as car for help".
17.9.3	The antistrophe is: "Here is the pressed out Soma".
17.9.4	This is the regular schema of the one-day-rite.
17.9.5	Having first recited the (hymn) of VaŚukra: "Fair has been the singer’s onset" he inserts the nivid in the triṣṭubh (hymn): "Great, hero-like, controlling men is Indra".
17.9.6	He should recite both hymns by verse-quarters as one whole.
17.9.7	So, then, is the marutvatīya-(śastra).
